Brewer & Anor v Martin & Ors [2013] FMCA 239 (11 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
BREWER & ANOR v
MARTIN & ORS
[2013] FMCA 239
CONSUMER LAW – Trade Practices
proceedings– application for summary dismissal of portion of claim –
uncertainty
– objection to subpoena – allegation of improper conduct
applicants and solicitor for applicants – cost consequences – abuse
of process – indemnity costs ordered –
stay of proceedings until
costs paid.
Federal Magistrates Act 1999
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
(Cth), r.1.03
Colgate-Palmolive Company v Cussons Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 536
(1993) 46 FCR 225
Thunderdome Racetiming & Scoring Pty Ltd & Anor
v Dorian Industries Pty Ltd & Anor
[1992] FCA 291
(1992) 36 FCR 297
Allstate Life
Insurance Company v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd
(unreported
decision of Lindgren J on 18 August 1995)
Life Air Bag Company of
Australia Pty Ltd v Life Air Bag Company (New Zealand) Ltd
(unreported
decision of Branson J on 22 May 1998)
Harris v Cigna Insurance Australia
Ltd (1995) ATPR 41 - 445
Wolton v Gardner
[1993] HCA 77
(1993) 177 CLR 378
First Applicant:
ALAN BREWER
Second Applicant:
BREWER FAMILY INVESTMENTS PTY LTD ACN 127 512 896
First Respondent:
KAYE MARTIN
Second Respondent:
AMICI CORPORATION PTY LTD
ACN 133 058 908
Third Respondent:
AMICI PROPERTY HOLDINGS PTY LTD ACN 132 050 296
File Number:
ADG 276 of 2010
Judgment of:
Hearing dates:
4 July 2011, 5 October 2011, 21 November 2011, 6 March 2012, 22 June 2012
and 17 July 2012
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Applicants:
At various times: Mr Finlayson, Mr Hoyle, Mr Dal Cin, Mr Burnett
Solicitors for the Applicants:
Allen Burtt Legal Services
Counsel for the Respondents:
Mr Robertson QC, with Mr C Abbott, Mr Stratton-Smith
Solicitors for the Respondents:
Foster Nicholson Jones Lawyers
(1) The Application in a Case filed on 14 June 2011 is
(2) The applicants shall forthwith pay the respondents their costs of the
proceeding on an indemnity basis for the period 20 April
2011 to 2 December 2011
to be agreed or taxed.
(3) If costs are not agreed they shall be taxed forthwith in accordance with the
Federal Court Scale of Costs.
(4) The proceedings be stayed until payment of the respondent’s costs as
provided for in these orders.
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
ALAN BREWER
First Applicant
BREWER FAMILY INVESTMENTS PTY LTD ACN 127 512 896
Second Applicant
KAYE MARTIN
First Respondent
AMICI CORPORATION PTY LTD ACN 133 058 908
Second Respondent
AMICI PROPERTY HOLDINGS PTY LTD ACN 132 050 296
Third Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
these reasons, a statement of fact is a finding of fact arrived at on the
balance of probabilities after a consideration of the
evidence and the
submissions made.
clarity, in these reasons Alan Brewer and Brewer Family Investments Pty Ltd will
be referred to as the applicants and Kaye Martin,
Amici Corporation Pty Ltd and
Amici Property Holdings Pty Ltd will be referred to as the respondents.
have before me an application seeking summary dismissal of a portion of the
applicants’ case. During the many lengthy hearings
that have taken place
over an 11 month period the issues have been reduced to the question of what
costs orders of the application
are appropriate.
The orders sought
respondents now concede that their application for partial summary dismissal
should be dismissed but, for reasons that will become
apparent in these reasons,
say that there should be orders as follows:
applicants and Greg Finlayson pay the respondent’s costs of this
proceeding on an indemnity basis forthwith upon
respondent’s costs be referred to taxation under Part 40 of the Federal
Court Rules 2011 to be calculated in accordance
with the Federal Court Scale of
proceeding is stayed until payment of the respondent’s costs as taxed in
accordance with order 2.”
applicants oppose the orders sought. They say the appropriate order for costs
is that costs be ordered in the applicants’
favour for costs incurred
after 2 December 2011 and that there be no order for costs incurred prior to
is necessary to look closely at the conduct of the applicants and their
solicitor, Mr Finlayson, to determine the cost orders that
appropriate.
The proceedings
applicants, Alan Brewer and Brewer Family Investments Pty Ltd (“Mr
Brewer” and “BFI” respectively), commenced
these proceedings
on 7 October 2010. The proceedings were brought against the first respondent,
Kaye Martin (“Ms Martin”)
a director of both the second respondent,
Amici Corporate Pty Ltd (“Amici Corporate”) and the third
respondent, Amici
Property Holdings Pty Ltd (“Amici Property”).
brief facts put forward in the Statement of Claim supporting the Initiating
Application were as follows: Mr Brewer became an
employee of Amici Corporate
for the period 2 February 2009 until 27 April 2010. His employment was
terminated summarily on 27 April
2010 with three months pay being paid in lieu
of notice. The principal claims were that during September and October 2009 BFI
to pay Amici Corporate the sum of $170,000 for shares in it. The
applicants’ case is that, firstly, the respondents made false
representations that resulted in Mr Brewer accepting employment with Amici
Corporate and that, secondly, the respondents made further
misrepresentations
resulted in BFI paying the sum of $170,000 earlier referred to.
applicants sought the following final orders:
“1. Judgment
for a debt of Amici Property to Brewer in the sum of $67,687.00.
as against Amici Property for breach of contract in the sum of
$18,707.17.
as against Martin, Amici Corporate and Amici Property for breach of certain
statutory provisions.
Restitution
of funds paid by Brewer Family to Amici Corporate in the sum of
injunction be granted and Amici Corporate be restrained from enforcing the
litigation did not proceed smoothly. On 24 November 2010, the respondents were
successful in having the applicants’ Statement
of Claim struck out. The
applicants were ordered to file and serve an affidavit annexing a proposed
amended statement of claim on
or before 21 January 2011. The respondents’
costs were reserved.
applicants made a number of attempts to put forward a Statement of Claim that
could be filed. Problems with the particulars provided
in these attempts
continued to occur. On 12 April 2011, judgment was reserved in relation to an
application by the respondents for
the Court to disallow the applicants from
filing its latest machination of the Statement of Claim.
Respondents’ Application in a Case
judgment could be delivered, on 14 June 2011 an Application in a Case was filed
by the respondents seeking the following
“1. Pursuant to
(rule 13.10)
Magistrates Court Rules
, or alternatively pursuant to the inherent jurisdiction
of the Court, the claim of the second applicant be dismissed summarily.
or alternatively, pursuant to Order 6 Rule 9(b) of the Federal Court Rules, that
the second applicant cease to be a party
to the proceedings.
second applicant pay the respondent’s costs of the proceedings and this
application on an indemnity basis.”
understand the reasons for this application, it is necessary to examine the
events that led up to the Application in a Case being
discovered that Mr Brewer and his wife, Louise Brewer (“Mrs
Brewer”), were directors of BFI, that Mr Brewer was Secretary of BFI and
that on 22 October 2010, BFI ceased to be a special
status proprietary company.
It is suggested on behalf of the respondents that if BFI is not a special status
proprietary company,
it can not be trustee of a superannuation fund.
for the respondents also conducted a search of a company named Ruthwill Pty Ltd
(“Ruthwill”) and discovered
that Ruthwill was incorporated on 22
October 2010, that the directors of Ruthwill were Mr and Mrs Brewer, that the
Secretary of Ruthwill
was Mr Brewer and that Ruthwill was classified as a
Superannuation Trustee Proprietary Company. Understandably, solicitors for the
respondents concluded that BFI was no longer trustee of the family trust and had
been replaced by Ruthwill. If this were the case,
BFI’s claim would
20 April 2011, solicitors for the respondents wrote a letter to solicitors for
the applicants attaching the company searches for
BFI and Ruthwill and
requesting that solicitors for the applicants
“... explain
(BFI’s) continued prosecution of the claim in light of its change in
corporate status”
for the applicants did not respond to the email.
27 April 2011, solicitors for the respondents sent a further email to solicitors
for the applicants requesting a response to their
email of 20 April 2011.
27 April 2011, solicitors for the respondents received a facsimile from
solicitors for the applicants requesting that an explanation
be provided about
the relevance of the company searches attached to the email of 20 April 2011
“... on the matters currently before the Court.”
9 May 2011, solicitors for the respondents sent an email to solicitors for the
applicants which stated in part (emphasis added):
you are aware, your clients are attempting to articulate two claims against our
clients. The first relates to Mr Brewer’s
employment and the second is
brought by Brewer Family Investments Pty Ltd as trustee for the Brewer Inc.
Super Fund relating to its
subscription for shares in Amici Corporate Pty
documents supplied to you in our email of 27 April indicate that Brewer Family
Investments, being the plaintiff in this proceeding,
that purports to make a
claim under the share subscription agreement (which agreement is specifically
pleaded in paragraph 33.2 of
the latest draft proposed statement of claim) no
longer has capacity to bring that claim.
Put simply, your client changed the
trustee of the Brewer Inc. Super Fund on 22 October 2011, prior to the first
directions hearing
in this proceeding, yet it has continued to pursue claims on
behalf of Brewer Family Investments as trustee of the Brewer Inc. Superannuation
Fund. This significant matter has never been brought to our attention or the
attention of the Court.
We consider
this matter to be fatal to the claim alleged by Brewer Family Investments and
accordingly, unless Brewer Family Investments
agrees to discontinue its claim
and pay our client’s costs on a party/party basis, our client shall make
application to strike
out the claim brought by Brewer Family Investments on this
basis and seek costs on an indemnity basis. In seeking those costs, our
shall rely on the rules of court and on cases such as Fountain Selected Meats
(Sales) Pty Ltd v International Produce Merchants
[1988] FCA 202
(1988) 81 ALR 397
Colgate-Palmolive Co. v Cussons Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 536
(1993) 118 ALR 248
, on the ground that
the claim was pursued contrary to the known facts and clearly established
We consider
these circumstances to raise serious questions about your firm having litigated
this matter, and you having signed a
certificate under the Federal Court Rules.
Accordingly, our client also reserves the right to seek costs against your
provide your response by noon on 12 May 2011.”
response was not provided within the time stated in the email as a result of
which, on 14 June 2011, the respondents filed their
Application in a Case with
supporting affidavit with a return date of 4 July 2011.
the matter came before the Court on 4 July 2011 solicitors for the applicants
appeared but, somewhat surprisingly, no-one appeared
for the respondents. The
Court noted before the orders were made that day that
decision on the interim argument in relation to the pleadings heard on 12 April
2011 will be postponed until the outcome
of the application lodged by email on
14 June 2011 is determined”
. The Court considered this to be an
appropriate course as the outcome of the application to summarily dismiss
BFI’s claim
would, if successful, at very least have a significant effect
on the content of the pleadings. The respondents’ Application
to summarily dismiss the claim brought by Brewer Family was adjourned and listed
for hearing on 11 October 2011. A regime
was set for the filing of affidavits
and outlines.
Respondent’s subpoenas
7 September 2011, the respondents had subpoenas issued directed to the proper
officers of Lachlan Wealth Management Limited and
Ruthwill Investments Pty Ltd.
The subpoena to Lachlan Wealth Management Limited sought production of the
following documents:
period 1 July 2010 to 31 August 2011, all correspondence relating to the Brewer
Inc. Super Fund passing between Mr Alan
Brewer and/or Mrs Louise Brewer, and any
(a) Peleton
Private Clients Ltd;
(b) Notolep
Private Clients Ltd;
(c) Lachlan
Wealth Management Ltd and any associated entity, as that term is described in
Corporations Act 2001
signed resolutions of the trustees for the time being of the Brewer Inc. Super
Fund in the period 1 July 2010 to 31 August
subpoena directed to Ruthwell Investments Pty Ltd sought the following
of the Brewer Inc. Super Fund Trust Deed and any amending deeds.
of the signed Financial Position Statement and the Operating Statement for the
Brewer Inc. Super Fund for the financial
year ending 30 June 2011.
of the Income Tax Return of the Brewer Inc. Super Fund for the year ending 30
of any resolution by which Ruthwell Investments Pty Ltd consented to becoming or
acting as the Trustee of the Brewer Inc.
Super Fund.”
for Ruthwell Investments Pty Ltd filed a Notice of Objection to Subpoena on 4
October 2011.
matter came before the Court on 5 October 2011 at which time the Court heard
submissions about Ruthwill’s objection. The
objection was dismissed and
the respondents’ costs were reserved. Further orders were made vacating
the interim hearing listed
for 11 October 2011 and the matter was re-listed for
interim hearing on 21 November 2011.
submissions at the hearing on 5 October 2011 Mr Finlayson, solicitor for the
applicants, informed the Court in response to
questions from the Court that
Ruthwell was not the current trustee of the Brewer Superannuation Fund and that
the current trustee
was BFI. As will be seen from my findings later in these
reasons, Mr Finlayson was not being frank and honest with the Court.
21 November 2011, substantial submissions were heard but not completed in
relation to the respondents’ application for summary
dismissal of
BFI’s claim. Issues arose during the hearing that required the
parties’ further consideration and submissions.
Documents produced by
subpoena by Lachlan Partners Advisory Service, and tendered by the respondents
included a document titled
“Brewer Inc. Superannuation Trust
and dated 13 September 2007. That deed indicated that BFI was
appointed trustee of the Brewer Inc Superannuation Fund (“Fund”).
further document subpoenaed and tendered in the summary dismissal application
was a document titled
“Brewer Inc Superannuation Fund Deed of Amendment
and Consolidation”
and dated 22 October 2010. It was in the following
terms (emphasis added):
“THIS DEED is made on 22 October
Ruthwill Investments Pty Ltd
ACN 146 982 603
8 Aquarius Court
DONVALE VIC 3111
Hereby known as “The New Trustee
Brewer Family Investments Pty Ltd
ACN 127 512 896
8 Aquarius Court
DONVALE VIC 3111
Hereby known as “The Resigning Trustee
deed made on 13 September 2007, to be referred to as the “Original
Deed” an indefinitely continuing superannuation
scheme was established to
provide superannuation benefits for the members.
Original Deed has been amended from time to time so that the Original Deed and
all its duly authorised amendments shall be referred
to as the “Original
Deed (as amended)”.
superannuation scheme referred to in Recital A is named as the Brewer Inc.
Superannuation Fund and for the purposes of this deed
shall be referred to as
“The Fund”.
operative provisions of the Original Deed (as amended) and any Rules attached to
the Original Deed (as amended) shall for the
purposes of this deed be known as
the “Governing Provisions” of The Fund.
Rules” shall mean the Rules as attached to this Deed.
the parties who execute this Deed hereby resolve and confirm that:
of the beneficiaries of The Fund have executed this Deed;
notwithstanding
any prior event or contrary term, condition, rule or requirements contained
within the Original Deed (as amended),
the Original Deed (as amended) is now
substituted and replaced by deleting all of the recitals, definitions, operative
schedules contained within the Original Deed (as amended) and
replacing same with the recitals, definitions, operative terms and
contained within this Deed; and
amendments made by this Deed are binding and effective notwithstanding any prior
event or contrary term, condition, rule or requirement
contained within the
Original Deed (as amended), including without limitation any requirement for
consent. The Trustee and members
now wish to replace the Governing Provisions
of The Fund by the adoption of the operative provisions and rules as contained
Resigning Trustee is the trustee of The Fund
Resigning Trustee is desirous of resigning as trustee and appointing a new
trustee. The New Trustee consents to act as trustee
NOW THIS DEED WITNESSES as follows:
Governing Provisions of The Fund are, without termination of The Fund, now
governed by the provisions of the Deed and the Rules
attached which incorporate
the Original Deed (as amended).
assets of The Fund will continue to be vested in the Trustee upon trust to apply
the same in the manner set out in The Rules.
Fund shall be managed and administered in all respects accordingly to The
power of appointing and removing Trustees shall be provided in The
provisions of this Deed may be amended in the manner set out in The
primary purpose of The Fund is to provide old age pensions to members upon
eligibility.
of The Fund, conflicts and issues of law or practice between the Original Deed
(as amended) and the Deed that may arise
with this Deed are to be settled by
reference to The Rules.
trustee hereby declares that the amendment of the provisions of the Trust Deed
and Rules affected by virtue of the Deed does not
prejudicially vary or affect
the benefits already accrued to any member of The Fund.
Deed and The Rules shall be governed by the laws of Victoria.
New Trustee is hereby appointed as trustee of The Fund. The Resigning Trustee
is hereby removed as trustee of The Fund.”
will be seen that the information in the deed of 22 October 2010 conflicted with
the statement made in open court by Mr Finlayson,
solicitor for the applicants,
on 5 October 2011 as the deed stated that Ruthwill became trustee of the Fund on
and from 22 October
Court advised the parties on 21 November 2011 that the Court’s existing
commitments prevented it from adjourning the matter
to a date earlier than
6 March 2012. The matter was adjourned to 6 March 2012 and orders were
made for a regime of filings further
affidavits and outlines of argument in
preparation for the resumption of the hearing on the adjourned date.
2 December 2011 a deed prepared by Mr Finlayson was executed by BFI, Ruthwill
and Mr and Mrs Brewer. A copy of the executed deed
was sent by Mr Finlayson to
solicitors for the respondents with a covering letter suggesting that the Deed
should remove any doubt
respondents to discontinue their application for summary judgment. The
in the following terms (emphasis added):
“Deed of Confirmation of Trustee of the
Brewer Inc Superannuation Fund
BREWER FAMILY INVESTMENTS PTY LTD (CAN 127 512 896)
8 Aquarius Court, Donvale in the State of Victoria
RUTHWILL INVESTMENTS PTY LTD (CAN 146 982 603)
(“Ruthwill”);
8 Aquarius Court, Donvale in the State of Victoria
ALAN WILLIAM BREWER and LOUISE RUTH BREWER (“the
8 Aquarius Court, Donvale in the State of Victoria
day of December 2011
Brewer Inc Superannuation Fund (“the Fund”) was established by a
deed poll entitled “Brewer Inc Superannuation
Fund Trust Deed”
(“the Fund deed”) executed by BFI on the
September 2007 (“the establishment
was appointed trustee of the Fund by the Fund deed.
Members are the only members of the Fund and have been the only members of the
Fund at all times since the establishment date.
document entitled “Deed of Amendment and Consolidation” was executed
by BFI and Ruthwill on or about 22 October 2010.
(“the 22 October 2010
22 October 2010 Deed purports to record the resignation of BFI as trustee of the
Fund and the appointment of Ruthwill as trustee
of the Fund and purports to
amend the terms of the Fund deed.
Recitals to the 22 October 2010 deed are inaccurate in that:
B records that the Fund Deed, referred to as the Original Deed, has been amended
from time to time, whereas the true position
is that is was not.
E records the attachment of Rules to the 22 October 2010 Deed whereas the true
position is that no Rules were attached.
F records that all the beneficiaries of the Fund executed the 22 October 2010
Deed whereas the true position is that they
F.3 records that the members of the Fund wished to replace the “Governing
Provisions” as defined in the 22 October
2010 Deed with the adoption of
the operative provisions and rules as contained in the 22 October 2010 Deed
whereas the true position
is that they did not.
no time prior to the execution of the 22 October 2010 Deed nor subsequent to its
execution have the Members voted to appoint Ruthwill
trustee of the
has continued to act as trustee of the Fund at all times since the execution of
the 22 October 2010 deed.
is an applicant in Federal Magistrates Court of Australia Action No. ADG 276 of
2010 (“Action No 276 of 2010”) in
which it has sought remedies upon
causes of action held by it in its capacity as trustee of the Fund.
has, since the commencement of Action No. 276 of 2010, conducted the proceedings
for the benefit of the Fund
of BFI, Ruthwill and the Members hold the view that the 22 October 2010 deed was
ineffective to cause BFI to cease to be the
trustee of the Fund and to appoint
Ruthwill as trustee of the Fund, to amend the terms of the Fund deed and in all
other respects.
of BFI, Ruthwill and the Members wish to eliminate any doubt as to the identify
of the trustee of the Fund and enter into this
deed for that
OPERATIVE PART
parties to this deed warrant the accuracy of the recitals to this deed.
parties to this deed agree and acknowledge that:
has at all times been and remains the trustee of the Fund.
2.2 The terms of the Fund deed and the terms upon which the Fund is held
on trust by the trustee of the Fund have at all times been
and remain those set
out in the Fund deed as at the date of its execution and any Rules made pursuant
BFI has conducted Action No. 276 of 2010 at all times for the
benefit of the Fund.
2.4 BFI is to be indemnified out of the assets of the Fund in respect of
all costs incurred in the conduct of Action No. 276 of 2010,
irrespective of
whether such costs or costs orders relate to any period before or after the date
of this deed.
as a matter of law, the 22 October 2010 Deed was effective to vary the terms of
the Fund deed, any Rules made under it, or the
terms on which the Fund is held
by its trustees, then:
variation to the Fund Deed or the terms on which the Fund is held by its trustee
as was effected by the 22 October 2010 Deed
is revoked.
parties agree that the terms on which the Fund is held by its trustee shall be
those set out in the Fund Deed in the terms
of that deed as at the date of its
parties agree that the terms of the Fund Deed shall be taken to have applied
unchanged for the whole of the period between
22 October 2010 and the date of
execution of this deed.
as a matter of law, the 22 October 2010 Deed was effective to record the
resignation of BFI as trustee of the Fund and to effect
the appointment Ruthwill
as trustee of the Fund in its place, then Ruthwill in its capacity as trustee of
Acknowledges that BFI has conducted
Action No 276 of 2010 as constructive trustee for the benefit of the
Ratifies and adopts all conduct by BFI in Action No. 276 of 2010 as
conduct for the benefit of the Fund.
4.3 Agrees to indemnify BFI in respect of all costs incurred and in
respect of any costs orders as may be against it in Action No.
276 of 2010,
irrespective of whether such costs or costs orders relate to any period before
or after the date of this deed.
as a matter of law, the 22 October 2010 Deed was effective to record the
resignation of BFI as trustee of the Fund and to effect
the appointment Ruthwill
as trustee of the Fund in its place, then the
Acknowledges that BFI has conducted
Action No. 276 of 2010 as constructive trustee for the benefit of the
5.2 Agree that BFI be indemnified out of the assets of the Fund in respect
of all costs incurred and in respect of any costs orders
as may be made against
it in Action No. 276 of 2010, irrespective of whether such costs or costs orders
relate to any period before
or after the date of this deed.
as a matter of law, the 22 October 2010 Deed was effective to record the
resignation of BFI as trustee of the Fund and to effect
the appointment Ruthwill
as trustee of the Fund in its place, then
to clause 4 hereof, Ruthwill resigns as trustee of the Fund.
BFI consents to its appointment as trustee of the Fund
The Members agree to the resignation of Ruthwill as trustee of the
Fund and to the appointment of BFI as trustee of the Fund
The Members agree that clause 6.3 shall have the effect of the
members of the Fund by a majority vote removing Ruthwill as trustee
of the Fund
and appointment BFI trustee of the Fund.
the extent that 22 October 2010 Deed may have any operation or effect following
execution of this deed, the 22 October 2010 Deed
is discharged and
fact that this Deed was prepared by Mr Finlayson makes it clear that he knew
that there was doubt about whether BFI was in truth
the current trustee of the
6 March 2012, the Court was advised that for unavoidable personal reasons,
Senior Counsel for the respondents was unable to appear.
The matter was
adjourned by consent to 15 June 2012 for further hearing with one day set
15 June 2012 Mr Brewer and Mr Finlayson were both cross-examined on their
affidavits and further lengthy submissions were put.
The matter was then
adjourned to 22 June 2012 for further submissions.
22 June 2012 Mr Burnett of counsel appeared for the applicants and made an
application for a short adjournment. He informed the
court that Mr Dal
Cin, who had been acting as counsel for the applicants, had recently informed
the applicants’ solicitors
that he would no longer be acting. Mr Burnett
sought an adjournment so that he could read the extensive materials involved and
for the continuation of the hearing. The interim hearing was adjourned
to 17 July 2012 for further hearing.
17 July 2012, final submissions were put and judgment was
Conclusions
find that Mr Finlayson was not being frank and honest with the Court when he
said on 5 October 2011 that the trustee of the Brewer
Superannuation Fund was
BFI and not Ruthwill.
am also satisfied that Mr Brewer knew of the importance and relevance of the
Deed of 22 October 2010 but decided to withhold the
document from the
respondents and from the Court.
note that the evidence before me indicates that Mr Finlayson’s conduct has
been referred to the Legal Practitioner’s
Conduct Board.
Court has an obligation to proceed without undue formality and to use
streamlined
must avoid undue delay, expense and technicality. The applicants and their
lawyers were obliged to provide the respondents
and the Court with the Deed of
22 October 2010 as soon as it became apparent that the respondents had concerns
capacity to bring the action.
document certainly should have been brought to the Court’s attention when
the Court asked Mr Finlayson on 5 October 2011
who the trustee of the Fund was.
Mr Finalyson could have responded to the Court’s question in a number of
ways, he could have
declined to answer. He could have said that he was
uncertain of the position. He could have said he would take advise and inform
the court at a later point in time if he had wished to do so. Instead he
decided to say that BFI was the trustee and to say nothing
October 2010. What is of particular concern is that neither the applicants nor
Mr Finlayson took immediate
steps to correct the false statement made.
conduct of Mr Finlayson and Mr Brewer has put the respondents to significant
extra expense and has delayed the proceedings. I
consider a cost order should
be made in the respondents’ favour.
Orders sought by the respondents
respondents seek costs orders on an indemnity basis, that there be payment
forthwith and that there be a stay until the costs
Indemnity costs
should only order indemnity costs if there is
“... some special or
unusual feature in the case to justify the Court in departing from the ordinary
The conduct of the applicants and Mr Finlayson provides, in my opinion,
sufficient cause to justify making an order for indemnity
Costs payable forthwith
respondents submit that costs should be payable forthwith. It is appropriate to
make an order for costs that are to be taxed
and payable forthwith where it is
in the interests of justice to do
, when the final
determination of the proceedings is far
or where there
is unreasonable conduct by the other party.
Life Air Bag Company of Australia Pty Ltd v Life Air Bag Company (New
Zealand) Ltd
referred to Kiefel J in
Harris v Cigna Insurance Australia
J’s] approach appears to reflect a view, with which I am in agreement,
that the demands of justice may well
require a departure from the ordinary rule
that costs are to be paid after the completion of proceedings, where a party has
required to incur significant costs over and above those which it would
have incurred had the opposing party acted in the handling
of the proceeding
with competence and diligence.”
the present case, the unreasonable conduct on behalf of the applicants and Mr
Finlayson justifies an order that costs be payable
Stay until costs paid
respondents submit that there should be a stay of proceedings until the costs
are paid as there has been an abuse of process of
the Court. It is submitted
that the abuse resulted in a waste of the Court’s time and the waste of
the respondents’
time and money and that the circumstances are a
sufficient abuse of process to order a stay.
the case of
Honours Mason CJ, Dean and Dawson JJ said:
abuse of process extends to all those categories of cases in which the processes
and procedures of the Court which exist
to administer justice with fairness and
impartiality, may be converted into instruments of injustice or
unfairness.”
take into account these further submissions put on behalf of the
respondents:
continuation of proceedings by the wrong party; a party which was, for some 14
months, not the trustee of Brewer Superannuation
Fund, for the benefit of which
the shares in the respondent were acquired ....
The deception
in the face of the Court (and thus allowing it to proceed under the
misapprehension) in stating, on numerous occasions,
that BFI was still the
trustee, at the hearing on 4 July 2011, in the Brewer first affidavit sworn on
31 August 2011, at the hearing
on 5 October 2011, and in the Finlayson second
affidavit sworn on 26 October 2011.
misleading of the Court in not providing a copy of the 22 October 2010 Deed for
some 13 months and after the issue was raised
in April 2011.
deliberate failure to provide a copy of the Deed in answer to the subpoena
issued to Ruthwell Investments Pty Ltd. The protestations
of the first
applicant and Mr Finlayson (albeit equivocally) to the contrary effect cannot be
accepted in view of the objective facts
abject failure of the applicants to abide by the most obvious and rudimentary
disclosure obligations would have led to the
deception of the Court if the
respondents had not subpoena Lachlan Advisory Services. This misconduct has
caused the respondent
to incur all the costs of the action from the date of the
October 2010 Deed until the present when a plain statement of the facts
production of the Deed would inevitably (have) led to either the joinder of
Ruthwell Investments Pty Ltd as an applicant, the
joinder of the second
applicant or the creation of a Deed purporting to have the effect of the
December Deed. If the applicants had been candid
with the Court, no application of the type issued by the respondents on
June 2011 would have been necessary. Because of
the deception, the case has not proceeded at all. There is no extant statement
of claim, and the Court is currently considering a 4
version of the statement of claim.
deception, having caused the respondents to have incurred their costs since the
date of the Deed can only properly be cured once
the respondent’s are
returned to the position they would have been in had this matter been prosecuted
properly and expeditiously
and in accordance with the applicant’s
obligations as a litigant in this Court.
respondent’s submit that the only way to restore their position, obviate
this misconduct and right the action is to order
that the matter be stayed
unless or until the applicant’s pay the respondents’
my view, the conduct of the applicants and their legal representative amounts to
an abuse of process of the Court that justifies
an order for costs in the
respondents’ favour. I propose to order costs on an indemnity basis for
the costs incurred by the
respondents for the period from 20 April 2011, at
which time solicitors for the respondents sent a letter to solicitors for the
requesting an explanation why the applicants continued to have BFI as
an applicant prosecuting a claim, until 2 December 2011, at
solicitors for the applicants sent a copy of the Deed of Confirmation of Trustee
to solicitors for the respondents. The
costs will be payable forthwith. I also
propose to make an order that there be a stay of action until the costs have
make the orders to be found at the beginning of these reasons.
will hear the parties and Mr Finlayson about any consequential
I certify that the preceding fifty-four (54) paragraphs
are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of Simpson FM
Date: 11 April 2013
Federal Magistrates Act
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
Colgate-Palmolive Co. v Cussons Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 536
(1993) 46 FCR 225
Thunderdome Racetiming & Scoring Pty Ltd & Anor v Dorian Industries
Pty Ltd & Anor
[1992] FCA 291
(1992) 36 FCR 297
Life Insurance Company v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd
(unreported decision of Lindgren J on 18 August
(unreported decision of Branson J on 22 May
[1993] HCA 77
RTF format (221 KB)
Signed PDF/A format