Kotaro & Hersch [2025] FedCFamC2F 1442 (24 September 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Kotaro & Hersch
[2025] FedCFamC2F
File number(s):
MLC 6 of 2025
Judgment of:
JUDGE O'SHANNESSY
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Interim parenting
– father seeking increased time with child – where family report
writer identifies attachment
issues and developmental trauma of child –
family report writer recommends increased time with father – where mother
highly critical of recommendations of family report writer – where mother
submits that the child’s young age contends
against increased time with
father until final hearing and the testing of evidence – applicable law on
interim hearing –
significant weight given to family report on interim
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
sections 60CA
Cases cited:
Benson & Jeffreys
[2024] FedCFamC1F
Eaby & Speelman
[2015] FamCAFC
Goode & Goode
[2006] FLC 93-286;
(2007) 36 Fam LR 422
Hidaka & Hidaka
[2025] FedCFamC1F 516
Huisman & Simonds
[2025] FedCFamC1F 489
Marvel & Marvel
[2010] FamCAFC 101
(2010) 43 Fam LR 348
[2010] FamCAFC 13
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Blackwood Family Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Williams
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Lawren Legal
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Victoria Legal Aid
MLC 6 of 2025
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
JUDGE O'SHANNESSY
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS UNTIL FURTHER ORDER THAT:
Saturday 27 September 2025,
the child, X (‘X’), live/spend
time with his parents, Mr Hersch (‘the Father’) and Ms Kotaro
(‘the Mother’)
as follows:
(a) X live with the mother and spend time with the Father on 3 consecutive
occasions from 10am Saturday until 8.30am on the following
Monday, each week,
(i) X to be returned to the Mother’s home, unless the Mother has advised
the Father in writing via Appclose by 8.30am on the
previous day that X is
attending childcare that day, in which case X must be delivered to his current
childcare facility, or
(ii) the parties have agreed to other changeover arrangements in writing via
(b) From the conclusion of the last occasion described in paragraph 1(a) herein,
X live with the Mother and spend time with the Father
on 4 consecutive occasions
from 5pm Friday until 8.30am the following Monday, each week, with;
(i) X to be collected from, and returned to the Mother’s home unless the
Mother has advised the Father in writing via Appclose
by 5.00pm on the previous
day that X is attending childcare the following day in which case X must be
collected and/or returned to
his current childcare facility, or
(ii) the parties have agreed to other changeover arrangements in writing via
(c) From the conclusion of the last occasion described at paragraph 1(b) herein,
X live in an equal time arrangement as follows:
(i) In week one: in the father’s care from 10am Sunday until the
conclusion of childcare/5pm (if X is not attending childcare
Wednesday, then in the Mother’s care from the conclusion of childcare/5pm
(if not a childcare day) Wednesday until
10 am Sunday; and
(ii) In week two: in the father’s care from 10am Sunday until the
conclusion of childcare/5pm (if X is not attending childcare
that day) Thursday,
then in the mother’s care from the conclusion of childcare/5 pm (if not a
childcare day) Thursday until
10am Sunday.
the purposes of facilitating the time set out in order 1, save as otherwise
agreed in writing between the parties via Appclose:
(a) The Mother shall deliver X to the Father’s residence at the
commencement of the Father’s time; and
(b) The Father shall return X to the Mother’s residence at the conclusion
of his time on the Wednesday in week one and Thursday
in week two, unless the
Father has advised the Mother in writing via Appclose by no later than 5.00pm on
the previous day, being
Tuesday or Wednesday as the case may be, that X will
attend childcare that day (if childcare is available) in which case the Mother
collect X at the conclusion of the Father’s time from childcare.
the time of the operation of order 1(c) herein, the Father have responsibility
for determining whether X attends childcare on
Monday and Tuesday in week one
and Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday of week two and the Mother have responsibility
of whether X attends
childcare on the other weekdays, if childcare is available.
parties be and are at liberty to apply as to difficulty with these orders and/or
AND THE COURT ORDERS BY CONSENT THAT:
orders of 21 January 2025 and 13 June 2025 are otherwise dismissed.
parent keep the other informed of their current residential address and mobile
telephone numbers and advise the other parent
of any change thereto within 48
hours of such change (previously order 3 of the orders of 21 January 2025).
parent is restrained from denigrating the other parent or the grandparents to
the child or in the presence of the child (previously
order 4 of the 21 January
2025 orders).
parent will enrol the child in any extra-curricular activities requiring the
attendance of the child during the time the child
is the care of the other
parent, without the other parent's written consent (previously order 6 of the 21
January 2025 orders).
parties communicate via Our Family Wizard regarding all matters concerning the
child, except for in case of an emergency, where
they shall communicate via a
telephone call (previously order 7 of the 21 January 2025 orders).
parent is restrained by injunction from discussing the family law proceedings
with the child and/or in the presence or hearing
of the child and/or showing the
child any documents relating to the family law proceedings. (previously order 8
of the 21 January
2025 orders).
parent will be at liberty to provide a copy of these Orders to any childcare
which the child attends, or any medical practitioner
treating the child
(previously order 9 of the 21 January 2025 orders).
parent will be entitled to receive all child care newsletters, notices, reports,
photograph order forms and other documents for
the child ordinarily provided to
parents and to the extent it may be necessary, each parent will authorise the
child care to provide
such documents to the other parent (previously order 10 of
the 21 January 2025 orders).
parties have equal shared decision-making authority and shall jointly make long
term decisions for the child,
born in 2022 (previously order 1 of the
13 June 2025 orders).
parties ensure that X is properly restrained at all times when they are driving
with X and are each restrained by injunction
from engaging in video calls whilst
driving (previously order 6 of the 13 June 2025 orders).
COURT NOTES THAT:
parties agree that at this time X’s childcare facility will not be
Family Law Act 1975
the particulars of the
obligations these orders create and the particulars of the consequences that may
follow if a person contravenes
these orders are set out in Annexure A and these
particulars are included in these orders.
in any proceedings there are allegations of family violence and the provisions
section 102NA
Family Law Act 1975
apply (see attached Family
Violence Information Sheet), any unrepresented party will not be permitted to
personally cross-examine
the other party/parties.
unrepresented parties may apply to the court and then to the Commonwealth Family
Violence and Cross-Examination of Parties
Scheme (“the Scheme”) for
representation but any such application must be made at least 12 weeks prior to
the final hearing.
information about the legislation and the Scheme can be found at
attached Family Violence Information Sheet.
applies and a party becomes unrepresented after trial directions have
been made, that party is required to promptly advise the Court.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
FOR JUDGMENT
Judge O’Shannessy
are the settled reasons of a judgment delivered
pursuant to
section 69ZL
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (‘the Act’).
These reasons were delivered orally. They have been corrected from the
transcript. Grammatical
errors have been corrected, citations and/or passages
of authorities and evidence added, and an attempt has been made to make the
orally delivered reasons easier to read, but the substance is
Introduction
matter of Kotaro and Hersch came before me on 19 September 2025, and I heard
detailed submissions from counsel on that day. I
was unable to deliver a
decision there and then and adjourned the matter until this morning (24
September 2025) for the purpose of
delivering oral reasons and decision.
basic background is not disputed and is as follows. The mother, Ms Kotaro
(‘the Mother’) is a community worker and
is aged 36. The father, Mr
Hersch (‘the Father’), is a professional, and is 33 years old. Both
are in full-time employment
and neither has re-partnered in the sense of living
with another partner. Also in the Mother’s household is the
mother, Mrs G ‘the Grandmother’, who has been
significantly involved in the child, X’s life.
have spent some time contemplating the matter, including considerable time this
morning re-reading evidence and considering the
parties’ submissions. I
have determined in this case that I will make orders that broadly follow the
scheme of the orders
as pressed by the Independent Children’s Lawyer
(‘the ICL’) and by the Father, but with some significant (to me)
effect of the orders is that I will make the orders as provided at 3(a), (b) and
(c) of the orders pressed by the Father, save
that changeover will not occur at
a child care as pressed in 3(a) on the return of the child to the Mother’s
care, but the
child is to be returned on the Monday morning to the Mother. The
same applies at (b), that is, rather than the child being returned
to the Aldi
in Suburb C on the Monday morning, he will be returned to the Mother’s
change. Otherwise, I will make
orders in accordance with paragraphs 3(c), (ii) and (iii), but not (iii),
because changeovers are
to occur with the Father collecting the child from
childcare or the Mother’s home. In fact, the start of the Father’s
time is 10 am on Sunday, when he will collect the child in accordance with the
Mother’s orders.
am concerned that what to lawyers can be matters of minor import can be of
enormous importance to the parties and to the child because
of the practical
consequences of a minor aspect of the orders. The other difference from the
orders the Father proposes is that
the changeover order, as specified at
paragraph five of the Mother’s orders, will be in place. That is, the
Mother shall deliver
the child to the Father’s residence at the
commencement of the Father’s time, which effectively means Sunday at 10
and the Father shall return the child to the Mother’s residence at the
conclusion of his time. However, that will have the
otherwise agreed in writing
”. The further order that will be inserted
is that from the time of the operation of order 3(c), the Father will have
responsibility
for determining whether the child attends childcare on a Monday
and Tuesday in week one, and the Father will have responsibility
for determining
whether or not the child attends childcare on a Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday in
the circumstances of the drafting of the orders and the uncertainty about what
my decision is, the exact date of the move from
the regime described in
paragraph 3(b) to the regime described in paragraph 3(c) is not clear to me.
However, for clarity, the new
regime is to commence this coming Saturday from 10
am. The orders will also have liberty to apply.
am satisfied that the Grandmother is a reliable backup and support person for
the day-to-day practical arrangements of caring for
X. The Father asserts that
he is able to call on family support from time to time were he to need that. At
this point I am unable
to make a finding that the Father has family support to
the same degree of reliability as the Mother has from the Grandmother.
parents married in 2014. X was born in 2022. The parties separated under the
one roof in about August 2023, when X was only
an infant. The Father then moved
out of the matrimonial home following a confrontation in December 2024. It is
also common ground
that the Grandmother moved to live in the former matrimonial
precise time of that move of the Grandmother living with the parents and X is
disputed in regard to some months, but it is common
ground and in any event
crystal clear that the Grandmother has lived in the home, formerly the
matrimonial home, since 2023 and,
including after separation under the one roof,
has supported both parents in day-to-day activities and care of X. Following
confrontation in December 2024, X remained in the former matrimonial home
with the Mother and the Grandmother.
Mother issued proceedings on 2 January 2025 and the first return of the matter
was merely two and a half weeks later, on 21 January
2025. Orders were made
partly by consent and partly by the Court. The learned Senior Judicial
Registrar, as she then was, ordered
by consent until further order that X would
live with the Mother and the Court determined specific interim arrangements for
arrangements were that he spend time with his father each alternate
weekend from 10 am to 3 pm on Saturday and Sunday and each Wednesday
pm until 7.30 pm. That is, no overnight time. Other property orders were made,
and it was also noted at that time that,
based on the Father’s
communication with the Australian Federal Police, the child’s name had
been placed on the airport
watch list.
Court further made orders for the preparation of a child impact report or
rather, a short form family report where, sensibly,
the parties had agreed that
an expert witness, Ms B, would prepare a report for the Court. Ms B duly
prepared a report following
interviews with the family over 7 February and 14
B’s observations included:
assessment identifies [Mr Hersch] as [X]’s primary attachment figure. It
thus advocates that [X] be immediately placed
within the primary care of his
father to eliminate [X]’s emotional distress and cognitive uncertainty.
Due to the distress
and developmental decline [X] has experienced over the last
10 weeks, it is suggested that he requires increased, emotional consistency
stability, which is essential for his emotional, cognitive and physical
development.
assessment suggested that [X]’s care be immediately transferred to his
father and that regular overnight time is established
for him to spend time with
his mother, and particularly his maternal grandmother, who has played a
significant caring role since
October 2023. It is therefore suggested that [X]
spend time with his mother each Wednesday from the conclusion of childcare until
the commencement of childcare on Thursday morning and each alternate weekend
from the conclusion of childcare until Sunday afternoon.
Furthermore, it is
suggested that, if possible, [X]’s childcare days are reduced to enable
[X] to re-establish and stabilise
his relationship with his father over the next
approximately 18 months.
parents’ share of decision-making authority for [X]
lives primarily with his father
spends time with his mother and maternal grandmother, during school
Wednesday, from the conclusion of childcare on Wednesday until the commencement
of childcare Thursday
alternate Friday from the conclusion of childcare until 6.30 pm
spends time with his mother and maternal grandmother, during school
a. Three consecutive nights each fortnight
note that Ms B determined that X should live with the Father and spend more
limited time with the Mother. The matter came back
to the Magistrates’
Court, in the meantime, in mid-2025. The family violence applications in the
Magistrates’ Court
were resolved by the Father making an undertaking not
to commit family violence and otherwise applications for family violence orders
were either struck out or dismissed.
matter returned to this court on 13 June 2025, now assisted or equipped with Ms
B’s report, and also assisted by the ICL
who had previously been
appointed. The parties collectively had some unhappiness or circumspection with
aspects of Ms B’s
report. That should not be regarded as a criticism by
me of Ms B or her report as it appears to me that she performed the exercise
was requested to perform. There is one aspect to that report that is common
ground is a factual error, and that is that when
the Mother and Grandmother
travelled to China for a period of about two weeks after separation, X went with
them rather than remained
with the Father as Ms B understood it.
I understand it, it was agreed that rather than rely upon Ms B’s short
form report (or what could be regarded as a private
child impact report), the
parties would retain another expert to undertake a full family report.
Notwithstanding
the agreement that a further or different report was required, further orders
were made on 13 June 2025. Those orders
were made by consent and provided that
X spend time with the Father each Wednesday from 4 pm until 7 pm and each Sunday
until before childcare on Monday, or until changeover close to
where the Father lives. The effect of that order is that from 13
Father then was able to spend one night in each week overnight with X.
D interviewed the parents and the Grandmother over 30 June to 7 July, that is
soon after the orders of 13 June. Dr D then released
her report to the parties
at the end of August 2025. The reasons will go to substantial parts of Dr
D’s report in due course.
Hopefully assisted by that report, but in any
event informed by it, the parties then returned for an interim hearing before me
19 September 2025.
APPLICABLE LAW ON AN INTERIM HEARING
will now turn to the law to be applied on an interim hearing, and on an interim
hearing in the circumstance of a significant change
in the law on 6 May 2024. I
take some care not to uniformly simply adopt past statements of the law as to an
interim hearing.
I am satisfied that the law still regards the seminal authority of
[2006] FLC 93-286;
(2007) 36 Fam LR 422
[2006] FamCA 1346
“Goode & Goode”
) as the manner in which an interim
hearing is to be undertaken. However,
Goode & Goode
, in particular
at paragraph 82, went on to define a procedure after considering the matters
section 60CC:
[81] In making interim decisions the Court will still often be faced with
conflicting facts, little helpful evidence and disputes
between the parents as
to what constitutes the best interests of the child. However, the legislative
pathway must be followed.
[82] In an interim case that would involve the following:
(a) identifying the competing proposals of the parties;
(b) identifying the issues in dispute in the interim hearing;
(c) identifying any agreed or uncontested relevant facts;
(d) considering the matters in
that are relevant and, if possible, making
findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested
evidence to
enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take
decision required matters to be taken into account that are no longer the law.
However, I am satisfied that
Goode & Goode
at paragraphs 81 and 82(a)
through to (d) remains the settled law, but with reference to
section 60CC
the Act as those provisions now are.
long and the short of it is the Court should be circumspect about making factual
findings of disputed matters on an interim hearing.
This case it is not one of
those cases where there is little helpful evidence and only disputes between the
parties. In this case,
there is an abundance of helpful evidence, though
significant factual disputes remain. I acknowledge now that, notwithstanding
abundance of evidence, there has been limited opportunity for the testing
of evidence and in particular the expert evidence of Dr
D and the opinions
expressed in her report.
I acknowledge the recommendations of an expert, although important, have less
weight than the actual expert observations
of relationships including, in this
case, attachment. Ultimately, the decision as to what orders are to be made and
whether or not
the recommendations are followed is a matter for, or a burden
upon, the presiding judge.
Goode & Goode
, I also rely upon the settled law as recited in
Eaby & Speelman
[2015] FamCAFC 104
Eaby & Speelman
”), a decision of the Full Court in
2015, and in particular the judgment of Ryan J in that decision. That decision
picks up and applies the decisions in the case of
[2010] FamCAFC 101
(2010) 43 Fam LR 348
and the decision of the Full
[2010] FamCAFC 13
, and includes the following:
It is true that in
Goode & Goode
, at [68], the Full Court said that
the circumscribed nature of interim hearings means that the court should not be
drawn into issues
of fact or matters relating to the merits of the substantive
case where findings are not possible. However, that does not mean that
because the facts are in dispute the evidence on the topic must be disregarded,
and the case determined solely by reference
to the agreed facts. Rather, the
proper approach to contentious matters of fact in the determination of interim
hearings is as explained
Marvel v Marvel
, at [122] and [123], as
[122] In SS v AH
[2010] FamCAFC 13
the majority (Boland and Thackray JJ)
discussed at [88] of their reasons the care necessary to be exercised in making
findings in
interim parenting proceedings. Their Honours said:
[88] In our view, findings made
at an interim hearing should be couched with great circumspection, no matter how
firmly a judge’s
intuition may suggest that the finding will be borne out
after a full testing of the
[123] Later, at [100] their Honours amplified their comments and said:
[100] The intuition involved in
decision-making concerning children is arguably of even greater importance when
a judge is obliged
to make interim decisions following a hearing at which time
constraints prevent the evidence being tested.
Apart from relying upon the
uncontroversial or agreed facts, a judge will sometimes have little alternative
than to weigh the probabilities
of competing claims and the likely impact on
children in the event that a controversial assertion is acted upon or rejected.
not always feasible when dealing with the immediate welfare of children
simply to ignore an assertion because its accuracy has been
would be immediately apparent, this approach enables the court to appropriately
and carefully deal with contentious issues relevant
to the welfare of the child,
and for those issues to not be ignored.
emphasis added
point is that Parliament has significantly changed central aspects of the
parenting orders regime since the decision of
Goode & Goode
a number of decisions of Division 1 of this Court dealing with the extent to
Goode & Goode
applies under the current regime of legislation.
Benson & Jeffreys
[2024] FedCFamC1F 709
, Smith J on 2 October
2024, dealt with the issue of the pathway under
Goode & Goode
the Act and so the specific pathway has changed, the general principles guiding
interim decision-making remain substantially
the same. I note what was said in
Goode & Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346
particular, at [81]–[82], and as I’ve said, noting that the
particular pathway has changed, but the principles which
indicate the Court must
be careful in dealing with untested evidence but, nevertheless, must do the best
it can, remain the same.
[2010] FamCAFC 101
(2010) 43 Fam LR 348
note that I am required to make a risk assessment, see
[2010] FamCAFC 13
in particular, at
[88] and [100], and also see what was said in
Eaby & Speelman
FLC 93‑654 at [18] in particular, where the Full Court said of the
difficulty faced by judges in dealing with interims
in which there are competing
allegations, limited common ground and the material is limited by reason of the
fact that it is an interim
hearing and there has been no opportunity to test the
evidence, in effect, that the Court cannot make findings of fact and should
very cautious, as the authorities I have just quoted say, in the weight to be
However, that does not mean that merely because the facts are in dispute the
evidence on the topic must be disregarded, and the
case determined solely by
reference to the agreed facts.
[citation as original]
23 July 2025, Austin J, in the matter of
Huisman & Simonds
FedCFamC1F 489
, dealt with the issue of the extent to which
was or was not good law.
an interim hearing in respect of parenting orders, the procedure is that
established by the Full Court in
Goode & Goode
(2006) FLC 93-286,
where it was said (at [68]):
...the procedure for making
interim parenting orders will continue to be an abridged process where the scope
of the enquiry is “significantly
curtailed”. Where the Court cannot
make findings of fact it should not be drawn into issues of fact or matters
relating to
the merits of the substantive case where findings are not possible.
The Court also looks to the less contentious matters, such as
the agreed facts
and issues not in dispute and would have regard to the care arrangements prior
to separation, the current circumstances
of the parties and their children, and
the parties’ respective proposals for the future.
Banks v Banks
[2015] FamCAFC 36
(2015) FLC 93-637
–[50], the Full Court
observed how a paucity of uncontested evidence means only limited consideration
may be given to the factors
prescribed by s 60CC of the Act. Interim disputes
should be confined to only those issues which, in the best interests of the
require determination prior to a
determination at trial.
The trial is the time and place to settle factual controversies. Interim
hearings ought not be used for that
purpose unless circumstances are urgent and
there is no alternative.
recently, in the matter of
Hidaka & Hidaka
[2025] FedCFamC1F
, Schonell J dealt with the issue of the extent to which
remained a matter of law that should be followed.
Full Court in
Goode and Goode
(2006) FLC 93-286
”) set out the procedural steps in an interim
application, noting that in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested
evidence. Consistent with the guidelines outlined in
extent relevant and necessary, I have in these reasons identified the competing
proposals of the parties, the issues in
dispute, and the contested facts.
Marvel v Marvel
[2010] FamCAFC 101
(2010) 43 Fam LR 348
(which has been cited with approval
by the Full Court in
Eaby & Speelman
[2015] FamCAFC 104
(2015) FLC 93-654)
, the Court
[2010] FamCAFC 13
the majority (Boland and Thackray JJ)
discussed at [88] of their reasons the care necessary to be exercised in making
findings in
interim parenting proceedings. Their Honours
[88] In our view, findings made
at an interim hearing should be couched with great circumspection, no matter how
firmly a judge's
intuition may suggest that the finding will be borne out after
a full testing of the
123. Later, at [100] their Honours amplified their comments and said:
[100] The intuition involved in
decision-making concerning children is arguably of even greater importance when
a judge is obliged
to make interim decisions following a hearing at which time
constraints prevent the evidence being tested. Apart from relying upon
uncontroversial or agreed facts, a judge will sometimes have little alternative
than to weigh the probabilities of competing
claims and the likely impact on
children in the event that a controversial assertion is acted upon or rejected.
It is not always
feasible when dealing with the immediate welfare of children
simply to ignore an assertion because its accuracy has been put in
not directly binding on me, a first instance decision of Division 1 of this
Court is regarded, and must be regarded, as highly
persuasive and to be followed
unless clearly wrong. Each of those first instance decisions recited above are
entirely consistent
with each other and consistent with the prior statements,
and repeated statements, of the Full Court as to the law to be applied
interim hearing.
of submissions of one of the parties pressed slower progression of time than
proposed by the single expert family report writer.
This case involved
submissions that could be interpreted as being consistent with an intention to
take into account the importance
of settled circumstances for a child on an
interim hearing, as identified in
Goode & Goode
our view, it can be fairly said there is a legislative intent evinced in favour
of substantial involvement of both parents in
their children's lives, both as to
parental responsibility and as to time spent with children, subject to the need
to protect children
from harm, from abuse and family violence and provided it is
in their best interests and reasonably practicable. This means where
status quo or well settled environment, instead of simply preserving it, unless
there are protective or other significant
best interests concerns for the child,
the Court must follow the structure of the Act ...
is not to say that stability derived from a well-settled arrangement may not
ultimately be what the Court finds to be in the
child's best interests,
particularly where there is no ability to test controversial evidence, but that
decision would be arrived
at after a consideration of the matters contained in s
am satisfied that the decisions to which I have referred should be followed, and
I will do so.
also take into account sections 60CA and 60CC of the Act as they are now, which
are as follows.
60CA Child’s best interests paramount consideration in making a
parenting order
In deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child,
a court must regard the best interests of the child
as the paramount
consideration.
60CC How a court determines what is in a child's best interests
Determining child's best interests
(1) Subject to subsection (4), in determining what is in the child's best
interests, the court must:
(a) consider the matters set out in subsection (2); and
(b) if the child is an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander child--also
consider the matters set out in subsection (3).
General considerations
(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(a), the court must consider the
following matters:
(a) what arrangements would promote the safety (including safety from being
subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, abuse,
neglect, or other harm) of:
(i) the child; and
(ii) each person who has care of the child (whether or not a person has
parental responsibility for the child);
(b) any views expressed by the child;
(c) the developmental, psychological, emotional and cultural needs of the
(d) the capacity of each person who has or is proposed to have parental
responsibility for the child to provide for the child's
developmental,
psychological, emotional and cultural needs ;
(e) the benefit to the child of being able to have a relationship with the
child's parents, and other people who are significant
to the child, where it is
safe to do so;
(f) anything else that is relevant to the particular circumstances of the
(2A) In considering the matters set out in paragraph (2)(a), the court must
include consideration of:
(a) any history of family violence, abuse or neglect involving the child or a
person caring for the child (whether or not the person
had parental
responsibility for the child); and
(b) any family violence order that applies or has applied to the child or a
member of the child's family.
Documents relied upon
documents relied upon by each party on this interim hearing are set out at
‘Appendix A’ to these reasons.
THE FATHER’S CASE
Father’s case was supported by the ICL. The gist of the Father’s
case, and the ICL’s, was that the recommendations
of Dr D should be
followed and applied.
The further
substance of that does not need to be reported, save that the substance of the
Father’s and the ICL’s position
was that what Dr D’s
recommendations meant was that there should be over the next couple of months
what can be described as
a gradual or a too rapid change of arrangements,
depending whether your glass is half full or half empty.
Essentially,
the Mother sought a very gradual increase in time for the Father with X, and
reaching a final point of a 5/9 plus half
school holidays arrangement from 2029,
when it is anticipated X will be in grade one. The ICL and the Father’s
proposal was
much more rapid and ending in an equal time arrangement, described
by his counsel as a 3/4 4/3 arrangement between the parents.
That is, an equal
arrangement but with a number of changeovers. The Father’s case on this
interim hearing does not press that
the time arrangements for X move to a week
is a significant and perhaps unusual aspect of this case that the Mother’s
quite senior position in a childcare centre, encompasses
arrangements put in
place whereby the child now attends the same childcare centre as where his
mother works. The Father had been
critical of that and previously sought to
change the child’s enrolment to another childcare centre more convenient
It is important to note that at the hearing before me, he did not press
such a change.
geography of the parties is that the Mother remains in the former matrimonial
be described as being a middle
suburb of Melbourne. The Father resides in a suburb that could be described as
a little bit more
outer but still middle suburban Melbourne. The practical
effect is that the parents do not live that far apart from each other at
point in time. It is significant that the childcare centre at which Mother
works and X attends is some distance (and disputed
travel time) from each of
those homes, in the Suburb E. That could be described as a more outer suburb of
Nevertheless,
I am satisfied that with some trouble and occasional inconvenience of being
stuck in traffic, road repairs, traffic
accidents, whatever else happens on a
daily commute, that the parties will, for the time being at least, manage those
I make no finding in this decision as to whether or not the
childcare arrangement should be changed or that the travel for the child
Suburb C to Suburb E and back again on a frequent basis is too much, or
adequate, or otherwise. It is significant that both
of the parents work
full-time and, as thousands of other parents do on a daily basis throughout
Australia, need to arrange childcare
arrangements around the fact that they need
to work to earn a living and support themselves and their child or children.
THE MOTHER’S CASE
Mother’s counsel was highly critical of the recommendations of Dr D in the
family report. The Mother’s case was that
the recommendations of the
family report and the case of the Father and the ICL was unrealistic in the
circumstances. It was emphasised
that X is not yet three and still in nappies.
I accept that latter proposition. I accept that X’s young age requires
Court to proceed with great care.
was also emphasised that, since separation, the Father has only spent overnight
time with X from the 13 June 2025 orders. The
orders made in January that were
in place until June did not provide for overnight time. X spent time with his
father on three days
in each week, but not overnight. Following the 13 June
orders, he was able to spend time on one night in each fortnight, but would
spend time with his father on six days in each fortnight.
was also critical of Ms B’s report, and in the circumstances where the
recommendations in that report have been overtaken
by the family report, I
acknowledge the contents as part of the history of this matter but place limited
weight on Ms B’s report.
Mother’s counsel also points out what was regarded as a serious deficiency
of the orders made on 13 June 2025 and the orders
pressed by the Father in that
such orders would mean that the Mother does not have a complete weekend with X
and, being a working
mother, that time is important to her and to X to have
non-working/non-childcare days together. There is substance in that but,
nonetheless, the orders that the Father proposed effectively provide for a
splitting of the weekend with the Mother arguably having
the greater weekend
time. That is, the Friday night, all day Saturday, Saturday night and the
Sunday morning until 10 am. The unreasonableness
of the circumstance of
the Mother not having a complete weekend was regarded as a given.
Mother’s case was powerfully and persuasively put by Mr Williams of
counsel and had what were described as a number of “
or as I understood it, matters said to be certainties.
first “given” referred to by Mr Williams was that the Grandmother
had resided at the former matrimonial home before
and after separation. That
is, for either all or almost all of X’s life.
next “given” in the case was that this was a relationship of high
conflict with no cooperation. Counsel for the Mother
pointed to the
circumstance of the Father unilaterally installing cameras within the former
matrimonial home as a matter that indicated
high conflict and lack of
cooperation and the potential for that to be found to be coercive or controlling
behaviour. It was certainly
a matter that troubled the Mother. The Father
has his own regime of explanation as to why, in the circumstances of separation
the one roof, he felt that was necessary at the time.
other matter that was pointed to by counsel for the Mother was the observations
of the former husband of the Grandmother. The
long and the short of that is
that the Grandmother’s former husband, Mr F, has opined on affidavit that
at separation, whilst
the parties were residing under the one roof, he was
that he and the Father duly met at a neutral location. Therein, the Father
discussed the family dynamics. Mr F’s position
is that he was requested
to assist the Father in the looming matrimonial or parenting orders dispute by
promoting, with the relevant
immigration authorities, the idea that his marriage
to the Grandmother had been some kind of fraud or miscarriage of justice, and
that by pressing that he would be able to obtain the deportation of the
Grandmother, and that this would assist the Father to obtain
what was described
as “full custody” of X and that when the Father had full custody,
the Mother and the Grandmother would
have no or little interaction with X.
matter was put to me from the bar table by counsel for the Father as not being
the full story. That matter was not expressly
denied or engaged with in the
Father’s consolidated affidavit. The explanation given from the bar table
by his counsel was
that the order of 13 June 2025 had been interpreted by the
Father’s side as meaning that
only one affidavit in totality
could be relied upon as opposed to one affidavit from a witness to be
relied upon. That order was as follows.
parties each have leave to rely on a single consolidated affidavit of no more
than 20 pages (double spaced), to be filed and served
by no later than 4.00 pm
on the day that is 21 days prior to the interim hearing.
was informed by counsel that that was the explanation for why the Father had not
engaged with that allegation. I entirely accept
what I am told by experienced
counsel as to that circumstance, notwithstanding that it is from the bar table.
The Mother’s
contention was that the order clearly meant that the
consolidated affidavit of each parent was to be relied upon, that is, one
of each parent, but that there was no preclusion of affidavits from
other witnesses. I note that the Mother also relied upon the
affidavit of the
Grandmother, Mrs G, in these proceedings.
determined that, whether or not the order was intended to limit the parties to
reliance upon only one affidavit in total, as opposed
to one affidavit from a
parent, I would have regard to Mr F’s affidavit on the interim
hearing. That was partly informed by
the circumstance that it was a document
that was before Dr D and she had expressly referred to it in her report,
although it appears
placed little weight on it. Nonetheless, there is the
allegation.
as I understand it, it is not denied that following that meeting, Mr F wrote a
letter or handwritten note of some length
to the Mother and/or the Grandmother
explaining his version of the meeting. Hence, whether or not that letter is
accurate, it is
apparent that at a particular point in time while the parties
were separated, the Mother received a letter reciting those matters
from someone
of significance to her. That is, her Mother’s former partner.
there is substance in counsel’s submission that it is a
“given” that this is a case of high conflict with
no cooperation.
Nonetheless, having regard to the Grandmother’s affidavit and the orders
that each party seeks, I am not satisfied
that this is a case with
cooperation. Rather, it may be that this is a case where cooperation is
difficult and strained.
fourth “given” was that notwithstanding Ms B’s recommendation
of an abrupt change of residence, there was no
diagnosis or opinion of any
expert that X was at risk in the Mother’s care. To a degree, the
“no risk” hypothesis
was embraced by counsel for the ICL. Counsel
for the ICL pointed to the circumstance that both parties provided for overnight
with the other parent in the orders they sought, including increasing
overnight time for the Father, and that supported and went
to the issue that
this was not a risk case.
was raised that the next “given”, or serious matter to be
considered, was that it was conceded that the child needed
more time with his
Father but that X, the child, was not yet three and that that necessarily slowed
down or limited the time he should
spend with his father.
was submitted that it was likely a trial and reasons and orders resulting from
the trial on final hearing would occur within the
next 12 months or so. Hence,
it was emphasised that the decision was only for the next year or so.
was also then submitted on what could be regarded as the sixth point, or
“given”, of the argument was that the regime
sought by the Father
was a flawed concept in the sense of practicalities and that the Mother’s
proposal of a more gradual increase
was to be preferred and would be in
accordance with the usual practise of the Family Law courts.
next matter, which could be regarded as the seventh matter, or seventh
“given”, was that the Mother’s proposal
of home-to-home was a
more sensible arrangement and allowed and accommodated for a party being stuck
in traffic, or late, or held
up at work, or some such matter.
was also emphasised by counsel that in this case, when living with the Mother,
it was the child who chose, on a particular day,
as to whether the child would
remain at home with the Grandmother or attend childcare. It is apparent that Dr
D was troubled at
the responsibility being placed on the child for such matters.
was emphasised by counsel for the Mother that a move over seven weeks to an
equal time regime without the testing of the evidence
and witnesses would be
untenable. It is in that context that I have looked very carefully at the
authorities. It was also emphasised
that the Father’s attitude to the
child and the Mother, demonstrated by the cameras and demonstrated by the
attempt or alleged
attempt to have the Grandmother deported, was a matter that
was entirely contrary to an equal time regime.
was also submitted that the observations of Dr D of promoting stability and in
particular her observations at paragraph 123 and
124, were discordant with the
overall theme of her report. Those paragraphs are recited below.
the father, being the most attuned of the three caregivers available to [X],
could possibly emotionally support
aspects of such an abrupt
transition, there remain limitations in the family unit as a whole. The current
assessment indicated a
more cautious, sensitive, approach is warranted, that
takes into account the strengths and vulnerabilities of the family unit as
whole, ideally, with a further review and oversight of [X] and the caregiving
arrangements.
Recommendations for time-spent
[X] needs to continue a relationship with all three key caregivers. [X] does
require much increased time with his father, his preferred
caregiver. Any
changes must be gradual and developmentally appropriate, and sensitive to his
existing vulnerabilities, whilst managing
the strengths and weaknesses of adults
in his caregiving system.
was put that those observations flew in the face of the recommendations made at
the end of the report.
THE ICL’S CASE
ICL’s position emphasised that all caregivers needed professional help
with their parenting style. The ICL emphasised that
the child had significant
relationships with each of the caregivers and that the Mother’s proposal,
albeit a slower one, was
to move to an ultimate 5,/9 plus half school holidays
arrangement rather than an equal time arrangement. The ICL’s point was
that whether a 5/9 plus half school holidays or whether an equal time
arrangement, both versions of time were of significantly shared
care. I accept
that submission.
ICL’s position was that both proposals being of significantly shared care
meant there was a common ground position that
the issue of risk, and hence
conflict, was not central to the case. The ICL emphasised that this was not a
risk of care case.
Expert evidence: Dr D’s report
now turn to significant aspects of the evidence. I acknowledge again that Dr
D’s report cannot be, or has not been, tested
in cross-examination as
would be available at a final hearing.
regard to Dr D’s report, it is important that I refer to significant
parts, including the following:
assessment indicated that [X] shares a strong and important attachment bond with
all three adults (the mother, the father,
and the maternal grandmother).
However, [X] has experienced a range of disrupted attachments, and possesses an
anxious attachment
to all three important adults. He has reduced emotional
competencies, and difficulties being separated from important adults in his
life. He can be considered to have experienced developmental trauma. The family
require urgent professional intervention and support.
A gradual shift to a
fifty-fifty caregiving arrangement is recommended (initially, three nights in
either parents’ care, rotating
between). The family will likely require an
updated family report regarding longer-term living and time-spent
arrangements.
way of brief background, the parents commenced a relationship in November 2013,
were engaged in [early] 2014, and married in [...]
(according to mother) or
[...] (according to father) 2014. Their one child of the relationship, [X], was
born [in] 2022. They separated
under the one roof in August/September 2023, when
[X] was [an infant], at which point the mother left the family home for
approximately
6-8 weeks, with the family remaining residing together, reasonably
amicably, in the home upon her return. Around August/September
2023 (according
to the father), or earlier in 2023 (according to the mother) the maternal
grandmother, [Mrs G], commenced residing
full-time in the family home, although
had been heavily involved in [X]’s care and upbringing prior to this
point. The father
left the family home around mid-December 2024, when [X] was
two-years [...] of age, with [X] remaining in the mother’s and
grandmother’s care, in the family home, since this point.
was a gap in contact between [X] and his father from around this time (December
2024), until Court Ordered commencement of
time around the 21st January 2025
(approximately 36 days). [X] had also experienced a previous gap in contact with
his father around
22 months of age, of about ten days, when [X] was on an
overseas trip (with his mother and maternal grandmother). There has been
in [X]’s contact with his mother and maternal grandmother around this same
age when he travelled interstate with the
father for one week. There has been a
gap in [X]’s contact with his maternal grandmother of approximately one
month in February
2024, when he was approximately 16 months of age. Whilst the
exact specifications remain in dispute, all three important adults in
[X]’s life agree that the mother, the father, and the maternal grandmother
have all been actively involved in [X]’s care
and upbringing. It is not
disputed that the maternal grandmother is an important attachment figure for
Police have applied for an intervention order on [Ms Kotaro]’s behalf,
after [Ms Kotaro] making complaints about an altercation
between her and [Mr
Hersch] in December 2025, and, again, about the discovery of cameras in the
to have provided an undertaking not to
commit family violence on 30.05.2025. There are no intervention orders in place.
Police documents have been made available for the purpose of this
assessment.
was observed to be physically developmentally on track. He was kempt, and
dressed appropriate for the temperature, in comfortable
clothing. His verbal
output varied, depending on the adult he was with. He was observed to speak
English and Chinese, switching fluently
between the languages, depending on the
context. There were no major observable developmental delays with [X]’s
presentation,
although he possessed some observable delays in his emotional
regulatory competencies. Specifically, [X] lacks an age-appropriate
of self-regulation tools, heavily reliant on adults to regulate and soothe. It
was apparent through observations and interviews
that [X] holds an
age-inappropriate amount of power in decision-making.
mother presented as most comfortable with adult-led and task focussed play. [X]
was required to enter her play/world, often at
the cost of his free exploration.
They remained in close proximity when engaged in a task-oriented activity, but
[X] was ‘alone’
in other child-directed play, with the mother
displaying difficulties entering his ‘world’/child-led interests.
the mother was observed to show physical affection (kissing) it was
transactional in nature, and typically only offered when [X]
had achieved a task
well. There was a noticeable dearth of other forms of physical affection for a
child of this age.
mother struggled with transitions (normally conducted non-verbally). She was
able to gain compliance form [X] with the task of
cleaning up. Her interactions
could be described as somewhat performative in nature (which potentially felt
dis-ingenuine to [X]),
lacking in synchrony between the pair. She allowed some
autonomy with task achievement, at times, scaffolding his
‘achievement’,
offering the minimal amount of support as required
for [X] to achieve mastery – however, on other occasions, she was quick
take over the tasks and do things herself, without [X] being afforded
opportunity to try and/or achieve at an appropriate developmental
showed bursts of sharing in [X]’s joy and excitement, however, for the
most part, she was unable to follow his lead,
appearing uncomfortable, with
these bursts short-lived, quickly returning to her ‘task-focussed’
approach, with a misalignment
in feelings state between the pair for the
majority of the session. When [X] begun to blow bubbles on the mother, she was
to set a boundary that allowed for both, her not to be wet, and for [X]
to continue with the pleasure of the bubbles. [X]’s
mood was somewhat
blunted for activities that typically provide children with immense joy and
the point of separation and reunification, the mother displayed limited capacity
for mind-sight, without age-appropriate sufficient
scaffolding of his
experience. [X] was observed to display attachment behaviours (demanding for her
return, crying, kicking, screaming),
with a noticeable deficit in
self-regulatory abilities. Upon her return, [X] initially sought comfort from
the mother, but quickly
shifted to anger and rejection of her. The mother
oscillated between dismissing and minimising his emotions/experience (when he
attempting to seek comfort), and then attempting to providing a level of
comfort that, by the time it was offered, was mismatched
(i.e., once he’d
shifted to anger/rejection). [X]’s play eventually returned, but to a
muted version of his initial play.
In the mother’s presence, [X] was
observed to have limited speech.
father arrived, and [X] followed the assessor, greeting the father excitedly at
the top of the stairs. His father greeted him
with enthusiasm, picking him up
and cuddling him. [X] presented as comfortable and content with this level of
physical proximity
and interaction. Neither parent acknowledged the other. The
mother asked if she was able to leave, and was informed she was. The
informed [X] that she’ll wait outside and see him soon. [X], still in the
father’s arms, nods, and the father
directs [X] to say goodbye to the
mother, and [X] does. He separates fine from the mother, and doesn't protest her
departure at all.
The father instructs [X] that they are going to play, and [X]
stated that he did not want to – the mother then pauses her departure,
rubs [X]’s face (whilst in the father’s arms) and waits –
although [X] was content with the father and she’d
already said goodbye
(she appeared to be unnecessarily elongating her departure). ...
the most part, there was synchrony between the father’s and [X] play. The
father was observed to be responsive to [X],
showing joy and pride, with
spontaneous provision of warmth and affection (for example, cuddling, tousling
hair, rubbing his back),
with [X] seemingly enjoying such displays of affection.
The father was process focussed in majority of the tasks, and was child-focussed
in his play. He was observed to show a high-level of interest in [X] and his
engagement with tasks. There was adequate scaffolding
and instruction and
assistance with regards to majority of tasks. [X] was observed to show a much
greater level of cooperation throughout,
often engaging in tasks
collaboratively, with the father skilled at adapting tasks to [X]’s
developmental level, and at gaining
[X]’s engagement, particularly when it
was waning. [X] was able to show increased (age appropriate) autonomy, with
comparatively
more child-led play. The father was observed to scaffold
[X]’s play well, allowing age-appropriate autonomy. When cooperation
not gained, the father tended to take over (particularly with ‘cleaning
up’), with low expectation on [X] in such
moments. [X] stated often
throughout that he wished to go to “daddy’s house”. [X] was
observed to seek the father’s
to display a comparatively greater level of joy, excitement and happiness when
father’s presence.
directed to do so - the father was unable to separate from [X]. The attempts to
do so highlighted a particularly problematic
interaction style, where the father
provided [X] with age-inappropriate control over this situation, with low
expectation on X. Whilst
he scaffolded his departure well (showing capacity for
mind-sight), the father repeatedly missed his opportunities for departure,
failing to instil a sense of safety in [X] about the separation, and, seemingly
waiting for [X]’s approval prior to his exit.
This happened repeatedly,
with [X] protesting the father’s departure (telling him he didn't want him
to leave, physically climbing
on the father, grabbing on to him, crying). [X]
became increasingly anxious about the father’s departure, with
increasingly
greater protests of his departure. The father was unable to effect
the separation. A reunification was thus unable to be observed,
essentially, as
[X] did not permit it. [X] became increasingly dysregulated over
maternal grandmother arrived, and the father had his back to the door at the
time, facing [X]. [X] was observed to look for the
grandmother, and the father
physically moved, essentially blocking [X] from eye-contact with the
grandmother. Their physical positioning
meant [X] was somewhat physically
limited also, not able to see a clear path to the grandmother, should he have
wanted it. The maternal
grandmother verbally greeted [X] and sat down. She begun
to make many verbal, loud and active attempts to have X come to her. [X]
into the father, and wouldn’t let go of him. The father was observed to
verbally support the transition, but not at
all physically, elongating the
departure. This exchange continued on for a significantly extended period of
time, with [X] remaining
in the father’s arms, and the grandmother making
verbal attempts to engage [X]. Similar to the attempted separation with only
father, [X]’s distress continued to escalate over time, where he was
observed to display increasing resistance to separating
from the father. The
grandmother too, did little to physically or emotionally support [X]’s
separation. [X]’s protests
included physically cuddling into the father,
saying that he wanted to go to the father’s house, that he wanted Daddy,
he wanted “[...]”.
grandmother physically takes [X] off the father, and [X] protests, but
physically transitions to be in the grandmothers arms,
and she is seated on the
couch with him. The father then gets physically close (bent down next to couch,
directly in front of [X])
and [X] climbs off his grandmother, into the
father’s arms, and the father takes him again. The maternal grandmother
the father that it was not healthy for [X] to cry so much, and that it
was similar to [...] where the father needs to place him on
the ground and
depart quickly. The father attempts, unsuccessfully, to place him down on the
ground. He then hands him to the Maternal
grandmother. The maternal grandmother
takes [X], and he thrashes about, in her arms, crying and screaming. She tells
him to stop
crying. The father departs, with [X] hysterical.
is a child who presents as physically developmentally on track. His verbal
abilities differed in either adults care, but appeared
roughly on track,
developmentally. However, [X] has a deficit in his emotional competencies.
Specifically, he has delayed age appropriate
repertoire of self-regulatory
abilities, and difficulties shifting between other- and self-regulation,
depending on the context.
He remains heavily reliant on adults’ physical
presence to regulate his emotions. He lacks a sense of safety when adults are
not physically present. In addition, [X] holds age inappropriate power in
decision-making (which is impacting important matters such
as changeover of care
arrangements, and attendance upon childcare). [X] has also had multiple
experiences of disrupted attachment
relationships. He can be considered to have
experienced developmental trauma.
likely experience of his mother is one of misattunement, where, to share a
connected relationship with her, he is required
to join her in her world/mind,
with physical affection transactional. He would experience her as inconsistent
in her parenting, oscillating
between authoritarian, and permissive (giving him
age/developmental inappropriate authority over important decisions). The mother
has limitations in her child-reading system, and is emotionally dismissive in
her parenting. [X] is insecurely (anxiously) attached
likely experience of the father is, for the most part (when the father is
physically present), one of comparatively greater
attunement, with the father
most attuned of all three adults. [X] displayed increased autonomy and
development in the father’s
presence (although this was inconsistent). [X]
received the most warmth, physical affection and nurturing from his father. It
that the father’s style of parenting was the one preferred by [X].
However, the father’s ability to be attuned was inconsistent,
father having limitations in his ability to convey to [X] a sense of safety when
away from him, rendering [X] reliant on
him, at the cost of all others. Similar
to the mother, [Mr Hersch] allows [X] age-inappropriate decision-making, with
difficulties
in limit-setting, projecting his emotions on to [X]. [X] is
insecurely (anxiously) attached to him.
is insecurely (anxiously) attached to all three caregivers. Whilst their
caregiving approaches differ significantly (emotionally
dismissive (in the
mother and grandmother) versus laissez-faire (in the father)), the experience
for [X] is the same – none
of his attachment figures are able to scaffold
separations (and his emotional experiences more generally) adequately, unable to
a sense of safety in their physical absence. Each adult struggles in
their ability to sufficiently support his development of age-appropriate
self-regulatory skills, with all caregivers struggling to calm and regulate [X]
at points of distress. All three caregivers afford
[X] age-inappropriate control
over decisions around separations. For [X], ‘negative’ emotions are
experienced as overwhelming.
Changeovers/separations
are particularly problematic, due to multiple converging factors, including, (i)
[X]’s insecure attachment
style, (ii) [X]’s preference for his
father’s care (experiencing him as more attuned and more nurturing), (iii)
difficulties
in the adults’ ability to scaffold separations adequately,
and; (iv) [X]’s disrupted attachments (which can be considered
in these circumstances).
anxious attachment is an insecure attachment style characterised by a strong
desire for closeness and intimacy, coupled with a
fear of abandonment and
rejection. Essentially, [X] will seek to remain in close physical proximity to a
caregiver, experiencing
anxiety at points of separation. This is particularly
observable when departing the father’s care. Anxious attachments can
to a host of difficulties in the development of emotional competencies and in
interpersonal relationships.
anxious attachments are relatively common (about 25% of the adult population),
they are particularly problematic for [X] in
this instance, in light of the
parenting styles of key attachment figures, and, his earlier disrupted
attachments. [X] experienced
his first disrupted attachment from his maternal
grandmother at 16 months of age, when she travelled to China for one month. He
experienced
his second disrupted attachment around 22 months of age from his
father, when the mother and maternal grandmother travelled to China
days. He experienced his third disrupted attachment shortly after, from his
mother and maternal grandmother, when his father
travelled interstate with him
for a week. He experienced his fourth disrupted attachment when his father
departed the family home.
He potentially experienced a further disrupted
attachment when his mother initially left the home, although the facts are
around this gap in contact.
is highly unlikely (in light of parenting approaches) that these experiences
would have been sufficiently scaffolded for [X].
He is lacking resilience to
such disruptions, and he struggles to hold a sense of permanency and security in
his relationships, when
the adults are not physically present. The separations
would have likely been experienced by [X] as a complete severing of the
relationship.
These experiences would have further entrenched [X]’s
anxiety about separations, and fear of abandonment. This issue has likely
further complicated by [X]’s numerous changes in childcare settings. [X]
can thus be considered to have experienced developmental
trauma. It is important
that parenting arrangements are suitably sensitive to this issue, ensuring
[X]’s sense of permanency
in relationships is preserved.
Views about [Ms B]’s recommendations contained in her short from family
the Courts were to make parenting Orders aligned with the recommendation
contained in [Ms B]’s report, of an immediate shift
to the father’s
care, with significantly reduced time with the mother and maternal grandmother
(without this being done in
a gradual manner), then [X] would likely experience
this as a further disrupted attachment, likely causing him further psychological
harm. Such a recommendation does not appear to adequately consider [X]’s
other key attachment relationships, nor is it sufficiently
sensitive to
[X]’s existing vulnerabilities (where he’s experienced developmental
trauma, and possesses insecure attachments).
Such a dramatic move would likely
further entrench issues already in existence, and would significantly impact on
[X]’s sense
of permanency in relationships.
the father, being the most attuned of the three caregivers available to [X],
could possibly emotionally support some aspects
of such an abrupt transition,
there remain limitations in the family unit as a whole. The current assessment
indicated a more cautious,
sensitive, approach is warranted, that takes into
account the strengths and vulnerabilities of the family unit as a whole,
with a further review and oversight of [X] and the caregiving
arrangements.
Recommendations for time-spent
needs to continue a relationship with all three key caregivers. [X] does require
much increased time with his father, his preferred
caregiver. Any changes must
be gradual and developmentally appropriate, and sensitive to his existing
vulnerabilities, whilst managing
the strengths and weaknesses of adults in his
caregiving system.
is noted that the mother wants [X] to attend child care for socialisation, and,
culturally, there appears a preference for engagement
with scheduled activities.
Without offering judgement on such a parenting approach, it is clear that
current primary developmental priority
– is that of his
attachment relationships. It seems sensible then, if it is financially feasible
for the family, to reduce
[X]’s childcare days to allow [X] greater time
with key important adults. This would also allow for increased opportunity for
professional therapeutic input as required. Perhaps 2-3 days of care might be a
more adequate expectation on [X], in light of the
(underlining in original)
regard Dr D’s report as very significantly helpful.
central issue for me in this case is the balancing of risk. On this interim
hearing, I must balance the risk that a move to the
regime pressed by the
Father, a not precisely equal but short blocks of time with each parent, is too
rapid for the child and contrary
to his interest in the circumstances of the
significant matters put by the Mother’s counsel. The matter of the
cameras and
the meeting and what appears to be a planned meeting with Mr F are
troubling. Nonetheless, Dr D’s report exhibits great care
observations balanced with the conclusions are not just of great weight, but are
compelling. The significant risk of the
Mother’s proposal is that Dr
D’s observation at paragraph 133 that, “
it is clear that
current primary developmental priority
– is that of his
attachment relationships
Dr D’s perspective, as I understand it, and as recited at paragraphs 111,
112 and 114, X is insecurely (anxiously) attached
to each of his caregivers. I
accept that there are likely significant long-term consequences for that.
Notwithstanding Dr D’s
observation that about 25 per cent of the adult
population has or has had such anxious attachment, it is clear when combined
Dr D’s observation that X can be considered to have experienced
developmental trauma, that there is a real risk that not to
immediately address
the issue of his attachments with each of the significant parties would run
significant consequences for X’s
SECTION 60CC FACTORS
turn to section 60CC. Of course, I apply section 60CA. I must consider what
arrangements promote the safety of all concerned but
in particular of X.
terms of section 60CC(2)(a), this provision neither contends for or against any
party’s orders as they contend for them.
In regard to any views expressed
by the child, that is, by X, I am not satisfied that X is of an age where any
weight could be placed
upon his views. In any event, X has, according to Dr D,
strong connections with each of those caregivers. I must consider the
developmental,
psychological, emotional and cultural needs of X. No issue was
raised about the cultural needs of X and it is apparent that he already
grasp of his mother’s first language as well as his father’s first
language, and no party contended that anything
turned on that aspect. X will
have the benefit of exposure to a wide cultural and linguistic experience.
I am satisfied that X’s developmental, psychological and emotional need is
most likely to be as expressed by Dr D.
That is his primary developmental
priority is his attachment relationships. I must consider the capacity of each
person who has
or is proposed to have parental responsibility for X. The
parties now agree that each of the parents should have equal responsibility
long-term decisions relating to X. I am satisfied that each of the parents have
a sound and appropriate parental capacity.
extent to which one might be preferred to the other, to the extent it is
necessary to determine that at final hearing, is not
a matter that I will
attempt to predict or determine at this point. There are aspects of what (is
alleged) the Father has done (the
cameras in the house and the meeting with Mr
F) that might be significant. I am unable to determine on this interim hearing
weight should be placed upon them, but nonetheless I do not dismiss them as
inconsequential or irrelevant. It is common ground in
this case that there is a
benefit to X having a relationship with each of his parents and it is common
ground that it is safe to
the Mother’s caveat to the safe to do so carries the concern of the
potential for coercive and controlling behaviour,
as demonstrated by the cameras
matter, the Mr F exhortation matter and the false statements about who had the
financial control and
unreasonable financial control within the relationship.
must take into account anything else that is relevant in the particular
circumstances of the child. In that regard, one of the
significant matters is
the force and compelling nature of the expert observations and opinions of Dr D,
and that is so notwithstanding
that the parties cannot test those observations
as could be tested at a final hearing, which includes the cross-examination and
to the expert witness matters which could be established in the evidence
of which the expert witness was not aware.
must take into account any history of family violence, abuse or neglect and any
family violence order that applies. In this case
there is not a family violence
order applying but there is an undertaking. I am unable to make findings in
regard to the controversial
allegations of family violence that each parent
makes of the other. Nonetheless, it is significant that it is a common ground
that for more than a year the parties resided, while separated, in the
one home and with the grandmother supporting the practical
day-to-day needs of
both parents.
in the end, balancing the limitations of an interim hearing where evidence or
opinion adverse to a party cannot be significantly
tested, on the one hand,
balanced with the consequential risk to X of the issue of his attachment and
primary developmental priority
not being immediately dealt with, I am satisfied
that it is in X’s interests, in accordance with section 60CA and 60CC,
there be such a move, notwithstanding that it is understandable why
X’s mother would see that as a drastic or even radical
priority or move.
I refer to and again acknowledge the issue addressed in
, and that is, apart from relying upon uncontroversial or agreed
facts, a judge will sometimes have little alternative but to weigh
probabilities of competing claims and the impact on children in the event that a
controversial assertion is acted upon or rejected.
In this case, the
controversial assertion that is to be acted upon or rejected are the
observations of Dr D and her opinions about
the anxious attachment.
is also significant to me that Dr D, as recited in the parts of the family
report I have recited, observed that what she regards
as X’s attachment to
his father is his preferred attachment. I understand that to mean the nature
and quality of the attachment,
not whether or not such a matter is up to X to
decide. That is an important matter that I take into account, and there is a
that I have no alternative but to weigh the risk that to not immediately
have regard to that will have significant consequences for
those reasons I have determined that there should be a move to the arrangement
broadly as proposed by the ICL and the Father,
noting that that does not move to
equal block times of a week about. Ultimately, what is determined at trial is
not a matter that
I need to engage in. It is clear enough that the
authorities compel me not to shy away from grasping the nettle of balancing
on an interim hearing and that the pathway must be followed.
you, they are my reasons.
I certify that the preceding seventy-seven (77)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Judgment of Judge
O'Shannessy
Dated: 15 October 2025
Documents relied upon by the Father
Application in a Proceeding filed 17 April 2025
Affidavit of Dr
D filed 26 August 2025
Affidavit of the
Father filed 28 August 2025
Documents relied upon by the Mother
Response to an Application in a Proceeding filed 3 June 2025
Affidavit of the
Mother filed 3 June 2025
Affidavit of the
Mother filed 28 August 2025
Affidavit of Mr
F filed 3 June 2025
Affidavit of Dr
D filed 26 August 2025
Affidavit of Ms
B filed 28 May 2025
Documents relied upon by the ICL
of Dr D filed 26 August
Eaby & Speelman
(2015) FLC 93-654
[2015] FamCAFC 104.
In response to the
Mother’s submissions that the Father’s case and the recommendations
of Dr D’s report were unrealistic
and proposed unacceptably rapid change,
counsel for the Father pointed out that that submission rested upon an
assumption that the
time regime that evolved after the parents’ separation
and as ordered in June of 2025, were appropriate, when the expert report
demonstrated those arrangements were inappropriate. Further, it was submitted
that what was contended as an appropriate status quo
since separation was
actually “gatekeeping”. I acknowledged the submission, but it is
unnecessary that I make a finding
as to that issue.
RTF format (610 KB)
Signed PDF/A format