Calpis v Fleming [2025] FCAFC 154 (6 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Calpis v Fleming
[2025] FCAFC 154
Appeal from:
Fleming v Calpis
[2025] FCA 347
File number(s):
NSD 696 of 2025
Judgment of:
BANKS-SMITH, CHEESEMAN AND STELLIOS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
BANKRUPTCY AND INSOLVENCY
– where the
appellant has same legal representation as in primary proceeding – where
no substantive steps taken in compliance
with timetabling orders to ready the
appeal for hearing – where appellant on notice of the hearing –
where appellant
purported to terminate instructions of legal representatives on
eve of hearing – where appellant did not attend hearing of
person – where respondent applied for the appeal to be dismissed –
whether in the interests of justice to
dismiss the appeal – Held:
appeal dismissed
Legislation:
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) r 36.75(1)(a)(i)
General Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Commercial and Corporations
General and Personal Insolvency
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Green & Associates Solicitors
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Farrar Lawyers
NSD 696 of 2025
LUKE CALPIS
GEORGE FLEMING
BANKS-SMITH, CHEESEMAN AND STELLIOS JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appeal be dismissed.
respondent’s costs be taxed and paid from the appellant’s bankrupt
estate as a priority in accordance with the
Bankruptcy Act 1966
respondent provide a copy of these orders to the trustee of the
appellant’s bankrupt estate.
appellant’s solicitors (who remain on the record) provide a copy of these
orders to the appellant.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR
is an appeal from the decision in
Fleming v Calpis
[2025] FCA 347
J) in which, amongst other things, an order was made sequestrating the
estate of the appellant, Luke Calpis, under the
Bankruptcy Act 1966
notice of appeal was filed on 6 May 2025. An interlocutory application and
affidavit in support affirmed by Christopher D’Netto
Associates Solicitors on 10 June 2025 were filed on 13 June 2025.
appellant is represented on the appeal, as he was in the primary proceeding, by
Mr D’Netto of Green & Associates Solicitors.
2 September 2025, the Court emailed the legal representatives of the parties
notifying that the appeal was listed for hearing before
the Full Court and the
details of today’s hearing.
5 September 2025, orders were made for the conduct of the proceedings including
for the filing of an outline of submissions by
the appellant.
appellant has not filed submissions nor taken any steps in accordance with the
chambers of the presiding judge has written on at least two occasions to the
parties seeking to ascertain the status of the appeal,
October 2025. On the eve of the appeal, the appellant’s solicitor emailed
the Court and informed the Court
We had been seeking instructions from the Appellant for some time regarding
timetabling and preparation for hearing. Our retainer,
and that of counsel
briefed in the matter, has now been terminated. We have also attempted to firm
our instructions regarding the
status of tomorrow’s appearance, although
the status quo remains that we are instructed not to appear before the Court
and the indication is that our former client does not intend to appear
proceedings were listed for hearing today and the appellant has not appeared. A
representative of the appellant’s solicitors
attended Court and confirmed
that the position was as communicated in the email sent to the Court on the eve
of the appeal. In those
circumstances, the matter was called outside the Court
to ascertain if the appellant was present in person. The appellant did not
respondent moves the Court for the appeal to be dismissed.
into account the circumstances which we have outlined above, it is appropriate
to dismiss the appeal pursuant to r 36.75(1)(a)(i)
Federal Court Rules
are satisfied that it is appropriate to make an order dismissing the appeal by
reason of the appellant’s failure to appear.
In the circumstances which
have arisen, we infer that the appellant does not intend to pursue the appeal
and for that reason has
instructed his solicitors not to appear. The
appellant’s stance is confirmed by the fact that there has been no
positive step
taken by the appellant to comply with the Court’s orders to
ready the appeal for hearing and by the fact that he has not appeared
are satisfied that the appellant being on notice of the hearing date has
abandoned this appeal. Accordingly, it is a proper exercise
of discretion and in
the interests of justice that the appeal be dismissed with costs. We will make
orders accordingly.
I certify that the preceding twelve (12)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justices
Banks-Smith, Cheeseman and
Dated: 6 November 2025
RTF format (294 KB)
Signed PDF/A format