Australian Industry Group - re s.576H - Commission may vary modern awards - application to vary the Manufacturing and Associated Industries and Occupations Award 2010 [2009] AIRCFB 996 (30 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Commission may vary modern awards
Australian Industry Group
(AM2009/36)
MANUFACTURING AND ASSOCIATED INDUSTRIES AND OCCUPATIONS AWARD 2010
JUSTICE GIUDICE, PRESIDENT
VICE PRESIDENT LAWLER
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT ACTON
COMMISSIONER SMITH
MELBOURNE, 30 DECEMBER 2009
This decision concerns an application by the Australian Industry Group (AiGroup) to vary the definitions and coverage clauses of
Manufacturing and Associated Industries and Occupations Award 2010
(Manufacturing Modern Award), with consequent amendments to other clauses of the Manufacturing Modern Award. The Manufacturing Modern
Award is a modern award made during the priority stage of the award modernisation process being conducted by the Commission in accordance
Workplace Relations Act 1996
The variations sought to the definitions clause of the modern award are to include a definition of “agricultural implements,
machinery and appliances” and a reference to the
Professional Employees Award 2010
(Professional Employees Award) in the definition of “professional field”.
The variations sought to the coverage clause of the award are to include:
the treatment of coal and the production of coke (other than where such work is covered under another modern award);
the printing and processing of photographs from film;
(agricultural) machinery and appliances;
fungicides, insecticides, vermin destroyer and weed destroyer (except for spraying, fumigating, poisoning or otherwise applying such
substances);
fibre cement; and
non-food grocery products including candles, soap, soap powders and extracts, soda, blue (washing), boot blacking, boot polish, boot
paste, boot stains, blacklead, charcoal, coal dust, cloudy ammonia, dubbo, ebonite shine, furniture polish, glycerine, greasers,
harness dressing, harness compounds, ink, knife polish, kindlers, linoleum and oilcloth polish, metal polish, moulders, blacking,
oils, phenyle, plumbargo preparations, stove polish, and vaseline.
The variations also seek to delete the phrase “the production of polypropylene/polyethylene” from the exclusions to the
coverage clause of the Manufacturing Modern Award.
The variations further seek to delete the classification levels C1(a) and C1(b) and their minimum wage rates from the adult employee
minimum wages clause of the Manufacturing Modern Award and to note in Schedule B to the award that professional engineers and scientists
in Level C1 are covered by the Professional Employees Award.
Only one part of the application is opposed, the variation to include the words “the treatment of coal and the production of
coke (other than where such work is covered under another modern award)” in the coverage clause.
The AiGroup largely seeks the inclusion of a specific reference to the treatment of coal and the production of coke in the Manufacturing
Modern Award having regard to our statement of 22 May 2009
and our decision of 4 September 2009.
In our 22 May 2009 statement we said:
At present coal treatment in Australia consists of processing done at wash plants, coke works and in the production of briquettes
from brown coal for burning in coal-fired power stations. All existing wash plants are integrated into black coal mining operations
and are covered by the
Black Coal Mining Industry Award 2010
. All briquette production occurs in conjunction with the mining of brown coal for use in electrical power generation and will be
covered by the proposed Electrical Power Award 2010. The only operative coke works in Australia is the Bowen coke works and it is
covered by an enterprise NAPSA which is excluded from the award modernisation process. The Illawarra Coke Company has two coke works
on the New South Wales South Coast. Both of those plants were closed earlier this year. In summary, it appears that there is no coke
works or other coal treatment operation in Australia that would be covered by a coal treatment industry modern award and that such
an award would cover new entrants only.
In all the circumstances we are inclined to deal with this residual area by extending the scope of the Manufacturing Modern Award
to include coal treatment not covered by another modern award. Parties who oppose such a course and who wish to argue for the creation
of a coal treatment industry modern award should make a submission in support of that position. In the event that we are dissuaded
from our provisional view that there should be no separate modern award for the coal treatment industry we will issue an exposure
draft of such award as part of Stage 4.”
In our 4 September 2009 decision we said:
In our statement of 22 May 2009 we noted, in summary, that there is no coke works or other existing coal treatment operation in Australia
that would be covered by a modern award for the coal treatment industry and that such an award would cover new entrants only. We
indicated an inclination to amend the scope of the Manufacturing Modern Award to include coal treatment not covered by another modern
Following the publication of our statement of 22 May 2009 we received no submission urging the Commission to make an award for the
coal treatment industry or challenging the appropriateness of placing the production of coke within the scope of the Manufacturing
Modern Award. The CFMEU(M&E) objected to the production of ‘Syngas’ being placed within the scope of that award.
Syngas is a term that refers to a gas produced from coal processed on site through a number of technologies. It appears that those
technologies remain experimental and that no commercial Syngas enterprise has yet been established (albeit that the CFMEU(M&E)
has pointed to material suggesting that a commercial Syngas operation will be developed in the near future). The fact remains that
we have almost no information on how commercial production will be undertaken or the nature of the work that will be performed by
employees in the commercial production process. We are not inclined at this stage to apply black coal mining industry conditions
to any Syngas industry that may emerge in the future. Nor are we persuaded that the production of Syngas should necessarily find
a permanent home in the Manufacturing Modern Award. Rather, we think that this matter should be revisited if and when a commercial
Syngas industry has been established. Parties can make appropriate application(s) if and when that circumstance comes to pass.”
The Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union opposes the inclusion of coal treatment and the production of coke in the coverage
clause of the Manufacturing Modern Award on the bases that:
coal treatment associated with steel or the manufacture of artificial fertilisers is already covered by the Manufacturing Modern
Award, as are coal samplers to the extent they are not covered by other modern awards;
coal treatment can include established technologies already covered by the
Black Coal Mining Industry Award 2010
Coal Export Terminals Award 2010
Electrical Power Industry Award 2010
and, perhaps, the
Hydrocarbons Industry (Upstream) Award 2010
coal treatment also encapsulates new technologies and evolving industries including the manufacture of char, coal to liquids and
the syngas industry and, to the extent they are not embraced within the coverage clause of a modern award, it is more appropriate
that the award coverage of those new technologies and evolving industries is further considered once they become commercially viable;
the production of coke would only cover new employers and their award coverage should be further considered if and when new employers
commence coke production.
The Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union (AMWU) specifically supported the AiGroup variations.
It submitted that the Manufacturing Modern Award provided, at least, appropriate temporary award coverage for the new and evolving
industries.
We have decided not to include a specific reference to the treatment of coal and the production of coke in the Manufacturing Modern
Miscellaneous Award 2010
has emerged as the appropriate award to temporarily cover new and evolving industries, to the extent they are not covered by another
modern award. It can also temporarily cover the production of coke to the extent it is not covered by another modern award.
We will, however, vary the Manufacturing Modern Award as otherwise sought by the AiGroup. As we have indicated, there was no opposition
to these other variations.
An order reflecting this decision is issued in conjunction with it.
BY THE COMMISSION:
[2009] AIRCFB 450
[2009] AIRCFB 826
[2009] AIRCFB 450
at paras 50 and 51.
[2009] AIRCFB 826
at paras 54 and 55.
MA000001, MA000045, MA000068 and MA000062.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code A, PR992239>
No downloadable files available