Kruger v Thompson [2025] FCAFC 143 (17 October 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Kruger v Thompson
[2025] FCAFC 143
Appeal from:
Kruger v Thompson
[2024] FedCFamC2G 883
File number:
QUD 603 of 2024
Judgment of:
COLVIN, ABRAHAM AND MCELWAINE JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
HUMAN RIGHTS
– alleged breaches of
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
(Cth) – appeal by way of rehearing
– challenges to factual findings of the primary judge – held: appeal
– redetermination or remittal – matter to be remitted to
another trial judge to conduct a new trial
Legislation:
Anti-Discrimination and Human Rights
Legislation Amendment (Respect at Work) Act 2022
Human Rights Commission Act 1986
Evidence Act 1995
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
Explanatory Memorandum, Anti-Discrimination and Human Rights Legislation
Amendment (Respect at Work) Bill 2022
Cases cited:
Aldi Foods Pty Ltd v Moroccanoil Israel
[2018] FCAFC 93
(2018) 261 FCR 301
ASIC v Wilson (No 3)
[2023] FCA 1009
(2023) 171 ACSR 1
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Construction, Forestry,
Mining and Energy Union
[2006] FCA 1730
Branir Pty Ltd v Owston Nominees (No 2) Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 1833
; (2001) 117 FCR 424
Cubillo v Commonwealth (No 2)
[2000] FCA 1084
(2000) 103 FCR
Dearman v Dearman
[1908] HCA 84
(1908) 7 CLR 549
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Holloway v McFeeters
[1956] HCA 25
(1956) 94 CLR 470
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 9
(1959) 101 CLR 298
[2019] HCA 28
(2019) 266 CLR 129
Lehrmann v Network Ten Pty Ltd
[2024] FCA 369
Manly Council v Byrne
[2004] NSWCA 123
Papakosmas v The Queen
[1999] HCA 37
(1999) 196 CLR 297
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa
[1968] HCA 62
(1968) 119 CLR
Queensland v Masson
[2020] HCA 28
(2020) 94 ALJR 785
Rhesa Shipping Co SA v Edmonds & Another: The Popi M
Richardson v Oracle Corporation Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC
(2014) 223 FCR 334
Robinson Helicopter Co Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 331 ALR 550
Shizas v Commissioner of Police (Obh of Commonwealth)
[2017] FCA 61
(2017) 268 IR 71
South Pacific Resort Hotels Pty Ltd v Trainor
[2005] FCAFC 130
(2005) 144 FCR 402
Taylor v August and Pemberton Pty Ltd
[2023] FCA 1313
; (2023) 328 IR
The King v Ryan Churchill (a pseudonym)
[2025] HCA 11
Weir v Telstra Limited
[2023] FCAFC 196
(2023) 301 FCR
General Division
National Practice Area:
Administrative and Constitutional Law and Human Rights
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr D Mahendra with Ms M Wallis
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Maurice Blackburn Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondents:
Solicitor for the Respondents:
Donnelly Law Group
QUD 603 of 2024
JANA KRUGER
ALAN STANLEY THOMPSON
FLAXTON GARDENS PTY LTD
Second Respondent
COLVIN, ABRAHAM AND MCELWAINE JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appeal is allowed.
proceedings are remitted to the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Division 2) for a new trial before a court that
is differently
constituted.
or before 31 October 2025, any party seeking an order for costs consequent on
the appeal being allowed shall file submissions of
no more than 3 pages
specifying the order sought and the submissions advanced in support of the
or before 11 November 2025, the parties shall file any submissions in response
on the question of costs.
otherwise ordered, the question of any order as to costs shall be determined on
the papers.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
COLVIN AND ABRAHAM JJ:
case involved alleged breaches of the
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
(SDA), whereby the first respondent, Mr Alan Thompson, was said to have engaged
in unwelcome sexual advances within the workplace
towards Ms Jana Kruger, his
stepdaughter at the time, contrary to
The second respondent, the
employer of Mr Thompson and Ms Kruger, Flaxton Gardens Pty Ltd, was alleged to
be vicariously liable for
Mr Thompson’s conduct, contrary to
alleged conduct occurred at a wedding venue in Flaxton, Queensland, where the
second respondent conducted its business (the Premises).
The primary judge
dismissed the claim:
Kruger v Thompson
[2024] FedCFamC2G 883
judgment (PJ)).
Kruger alleged Mr Thompson sexually harassed her at the Premises physically and
verbally between 12 and 13 January 2019, and verbally
on 19 January 2019. The
respondents admitted to Mr Thompson making sexual advances (being two kisses on
the mouth and sexual intercourse
on the night/early morning of 12/13 January
2019) which occurred on the stairs in front of and inside the Bridal Suite of
the Premises,
but advanced that it was consensual conduct. The respondents
denied the verbal sexual advance on 19 January 2019. The focus of the
first instance and in this Court, was on the events of 12 and 13 January 2019.
primary judgment is summarised below in the reasons of McElwaine J and is
unnecessary to repeat. Suffice to say the primary judge
rejected the evidence of
Ms Kruger and Mr Thompson with both being found to be unsatisfactory
witnesses, such that the primary judge
concluded he was unable to determine what
happened in the Bridal Suite. As a result, his Honour found that Ms Kruger had
not discharged
her onus to establish her claim.
the reasons below, the appellant has established ground 2 of the appeal.
However, we consider that the appropriate order is that
the matter is remitted
for a new trial by another trial judge.
appeal is by way of rehearing and concerns challenges to factual findings made
by the primary judge. Our task in conducting an
appeal by way of rehearing is to
conduct a “real review” of the evidence given at first instance and
of the judge’s
reasons for judgment to determine whether the trial judge
has erred in fact or law:
[2019] HCA 28
(2019) 266 CLR 129
(Bell, Gageler, Nettle and Edelman JJ), citing
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ) and
Helicopter Co Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 331 ALR
Robinson v McDermott
) at [43]. As described in
Appellate restraint with respect to interference with a trial judge’s
findings unless they are “glaringly improbable”
or “contrary
to compelling inferences” is as to factual findings which are likely
to have been affected by impressions
witnesses formed by the trial judge as a result of seeing and hearing them give
their evidence.
It includes findings of secondary facts which are based on a
combination of these impressions and other inferences from primary facts.
Thereafter, “in general an appellate court is in as good a position as the
trial judge to decide on the proper inference to
be drawn from facts which are
undisputed or which, having been disputed, are established by the findings of
the trial judge”.
(citations omitted)
is clear that error must be established, in the sense of showing that some
aspect of the trial judge’s reasoning, or conclusions
reached, are wrong:
Branir Pty Ltd v Owston Nominees (No 2) Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 1833
(2001) 117 FCR 424 at
Aldi Foods Pty Ltd v Moroccanoil Israel
[2018] FCAFC 93
(2018) 261 FCR 301
Moroccanoil
see also [4]-[7]. The identification of error remains indispensable, whether
that be in relation to a step in the reasoning process,
or even just by reason
of the result arrived at:
Moroccanoil
at [56]. If the Full Court concludes that a judge has erred in
fact, it is required to make its own findings of fact and to formulate
reasoning based on those findings:
Fox v Percy
appeal is based on alleged factual errors identified in ground 2. Although the
appellant alleges three grounds of appeal, to
succeed it is necessary (although
not necessarily sufficient) to establish ground 2. The parties accepted this
ground as the focus
of the appeal.
is helpful to recite ground 2 in its entirety.
reaching the ultimate conclusion that the Appellant was not a credible witness
at J[46] and J[85] and had not discharged her onus
at J[86] and failing to find
the matters set out in Appeal Ground 1, the primary judge erred:
finding that the Appellant was not extremely affected by medication/intoxication
at J[37], J[41], and J[42], and by expressly finding
at J[44] that the Appellant
most likely a willing participant in her entry into the Bridal
” the First Respondent, in circumstances where:
was no challenge to the Appellant’s evidence that she had
2. Diazapam (10mg);
3. Melatonia; and
4. Stilnox;
was no challenge to the Appellant’s evidence that she had been drinking
alcohol throughout the evening;
evidence of Ms Mariana Kruger and Mr Benjamin Connolly (who were found by the
primary judge to be witnesses of truth (PJ at [64])),
was to the effect that the
Appellant became inebriated as the evening wore on and that by about 1:00 am or
1:30 am (which is when
Mr Connolly last saw her), she was struggling to walk
properly, struggling to stand up and was slurring her words (PJ at [20]);
evidence of Dr De Leacy, psychiatrist, was to the effect that:
combination of the Appellant’s medication with alcohol “
have a significant additive effect and a person in this situation would become
extremely sedated, mentally, but physically compromised
as well as because the
blood pressure would have dropped...the person would feel weak, probably dizzy,
as well as fatigued and possibly
slightly confused
Appellant could have “coped” with climbing the stairs by using the
b. by finding:
J[22] that none of the physical interaction between the Appellant and the First
Respondent that was observed by Mr Connolly was
unwanted, not appreciated, or
not accepted, and
[57] that the conduct between the Appellant and the First Respondent was
“highly sexualised and consensual”,
relying entirely on Mr Connolly's opinion and his feelings of being made
unconformable [sic] and there being no evidence from Mr
Connolly that the
alleged conduct was “highly sexualised”;
finding at J[25] that the Appellant’s conduct towards he [sic] mother, Ms
Mariana Kruger, was sexualised in nature relying
entirely on Ms Mariana Kruger's
evidence that she was feeling uncomfortable;
finding at J[29] to J[34] that the Appellant’s evidence as to her
movements after she returned to the residence, and her
stated reason for
returning to the Winery, was false;
finding at J[45], that nothing which occurred between the Appellant and the
First Respondent up until the time they each entered
the Bridal Suite was
considered unwelcome;
in effect, finding that the matters set out at J[47](a) to J[47](k) were
relevant to the question of whether the Appellant consented
intercourse with the First Respondent in the Bridal Suite on 12-13 January
drawing an adverse inference against the Appellant at J[47](m) for not calling
her treating doctor to give expert evidence in the
proceedings in circumstances
where there was no proper basis to draw such an inference;
finding at J[58] that the Appellant and the First Respondent had the joint
intention to go into the Bridal Suite with an amorous
i. by finding at J[61] that:
the events of 12-13 January 2019 had been traumatic or stressful to the
Appellant, then “her memory of all claimed events
would have been
indelible or approaching indelible” based on a selective and narrow
assessment of the evidence relevant to
that issue;
“whatever transpired in the Bridal Suite was neither stressful nor
traumatic” to the Appellant and was not
“unwelcome”;
finding at [65] that it was “implausible” and “bizarre”
that the Appellant “would have agreed to
have held her wedding reception
at Flaxton Gardens if she had in fact been raped by” the First Respondent
“at that very
venue”; and
rejecting at J[79] and J[84], the evidence of Ms Salome Kruger that the
Appellant informed Ms Salome Kruger on 13 January 2019
(almost immediately after
the events in the Bridal Suite) that the First Respondent had sex with the
Appellant and the Appellant
had had [sic] told the First Respondent
“no” and told him to “stop” but that she eventually gave
she had no idea what was happening, when there was no proper basis
for rejecting such evidence.
1 and 3 are of a different nature. They assert error by the primary judge in
failing to find the contraventions of the SDA
established on the factual bases
the appellant contended. The appellant submitted that if error is established in
relation to ground
2, it necessarily leads to a finding of error in relation to
grounds 1 and 3. We return to this below.
CONSIDERATION
summary, by ground 2 the appellant identified what she described as a series of
glaringly improbable factual findings or findings
contrary to incontrovertible
facts, that caused the primary judge to conclude that Ms Kruger was not a
reliable witness, and as such
had not discharged her onus of proof in relation
to her claim: PJ [46]-[47], [85]-[86]. She submitted, inter alia, that the
judge, without any proper basis: (1) rejected that Ms Kruger was as
affected by medication/intoxication as she claimed; (2) found
that on 12 January
2019, Ms Kruger engaged in conduct with Mr Thompson that was “highly
sexualised” despite the evidence
relied on not supporting that conclusion;
and therefore, (3) found at [44] Ms Kruger was most likely a willing participant
in entering
the Bridal Suite with Mr Thompson with “such entry being
consistent with both of them having accelerated to a higher level
the already
sexualised tensions evident between them that had made Connolly feel so
uncomfortable” despite there being no evidence
from Mr Connolly to support
that finding.
the appellant argued this ground on the basis the impugned factual findings were
glaringly improbable or contrary to incontrovertible
facts, her submissions
reflected she was also contending the primary judge did not approach his task by
assessing all the relevant
evidence when assessing Ms Kruger’s
is not necessary to address each of the identified errors in ground 2 seriatim.
Intoxication
primary judge found that Ms Kruger “was not as affected by medication or
alcohol as she claimed” (which was that she
was “extremely affected
by medication/intoxication, or a combination of both”): PJ [41]-[42]. In
his reasons, the primary
judge did not refer to the detail of Ms Kruger’s
evidence of her intoxication or the amount she had to drink. His Honour made
finding by reasoning that because Ms Kruger was able to climb the stairs to the
Bridal Suite first (before Mr Thompson) without
assistance, that suggested she
was in control of her actions: PJ [41]-[42]. In making that finding, the primary
judge appeared to
dismiss Ms Kruger’s evidence that she took four
different types of medication that night when she went to her room to get ready
to go to bed, being Zoloft, Valium, Melatonia and Stilnox because there was no
corroboration of her having taken the medication:
appellant identified the evidence which she submitted was to the contrary. She
submitted that in making the impugned finding the
primary judge “ignored
or failed to address incontrovertible evidence that clearly demonstrated that Ms
Kruger was in fact
inebriated”.
the appellant referred to her own evidence of the amount of alcohol she had
consumed throughout the evening and of her having taken
Zoloft, Valium,
Melatonin and Stilnox that night. The appellant relied on the fact her evidence
as to those matters was unchallenged.
That may be accepted in so far as it
relates to the amount of alcohol consumed and the fact of taking the medication.
However, there
was cross-examination of Ms Kruger on what medication she took
that night with there being an issue as to whether she had taken Quetiapine.
primary judge acknowledged that she was “not seriously challenged”
her evidence on the medication
she took was “vague and confusing”.
her mother, Ms Mariana van der Westhuizen (whose evidence was accepted by the
primary judge) gave evidence of the alcohol she saw
her daughter consume. Ms van
der Westhuizen said that at about 12.30 am or closer to 1.00 am on 13 January
2019, she told Ms Kruger
it was time to go to bed, at which time she
noticed Ms Kruger “seemed very tipsy but could walk by herself”: PJ
This evidence was only referred to by the primary judge when he quoted
part of Ms van der Westhuizen’s evidence.
the evidence of Mr Connolly was that Ms Kruger was consuming alcohol, becoming
heavily intoxicated and that by about 1.00 am or
1.30 am on 13 January 2019
(which is when Mr Connolly last saw her), she was struggling to walk properly,
struggling to stand up
and was slurring her words: PJ [20]. Mr Connolly accepted
in cross-examination this was his evidence as recorded in his police statement
dated 25 July 2020, despite it being inconsistent with his affidavit filed in
the proceedings. Although this evidence is referred
to by the primary judge, it
was in a general description of Mr Connolly’s evidence (which was accepted
by the primary judge),
and not in any consideration of the topic of Ms
Kruger’s intoxication.
Ms Salome Kruger (Ms Kruger’s younger sister) also gave evidence that
either late at night on 12 January or early in the morning
on 13 January 2019,
Ms Kruger came into her bedroom, appeared to be intoxicated, and Ms Salome
Kruger had said to her words to the
effect of that she “needed to go to
bed and that she was drunk”. This evidence is not referred to in the
primary judgment.
Mr James Lindsay (Ms Kruger’s husband) gave evidence: Ms Kruger took
Zoloft, Quetiapine and Diazepam (also known as Valium)
every day; she also took
Stilnox as needed and not every night; and she took those medications as
prescribed and weaning until 2019.
Again, this evidence is not referred to by
the primary judge. Rather, the only aspect of Mr Lindsay’s evidence that
was referred
to by the primary judge was that he had told Mr Thompson that Ms
Kruger took medication to help her sleep, but that the evidence
of Mr Lindsay
“was otherwise of little weight”: PJ [72]-[73]. We note also Mr
Lindsay’s evidence is that Ms Kruger
was prone to falling asleep after
having taken her medication, including sometimes accidentally falling asleep on
the couch. That
evidence is consistent with what Ms Kruger describes occurred on
12 January 2019.
Dr De Leacy, a psychiatrist who was called as an expert witness, also gave
evidence that in January 2019 Ms Kruger was taking Stilnox,
Sertraline (also
known Zoloft), Diazepam and Melatonin, and on 12 January 2019 she was still
prescribed those drugs. His evidence
was that the alcohol in combination with Ms
Kruger’s medication would have a significant additive effect, and
a person in this situation would be extremely sedated, mentally, but physically
compromised as well as because the blood pressure
would have dropped. The person
would feel weak, probably dizzy, as well as fatigued, and possibly slightly
De Leacy’s evidence was that in those circumstances, by 1.00 am or 1.30 am
after taking her medication, Ms Kruger “would
have been ready to go to
sleep”. As to Ms Kruger’s capacity to climb the stairs leading to
the Bridal Suite considering
her consumption of prescription medication and
alcohol, Dr De Leacy opined that “she would have needed to use the railing
but probably could have made it with – could have coped with that with
using a railing”. This evidence was not challenged.
The evidence was the
stairs had a railing. This evidence is not referred to by the primary judge in
his reasons. However, this evidence
has particular importance given Ms Kruger
climbing the stairs without assistance was the basis of the primary
judge’s finding
as to her level of intoxication at [42].
leaving aside Dr De Leacy’s expert opinion, it is difficult to understand
how the primary judge could make a finding that
Ms Kruger “was not as
affected by medication or alcohol as she claimed she was”, based on the
fact she ascended the stairs
by herself: PJ [42].
Kruger’s evidence was that she left the Winery to go to bed but later
returned looking for her mother. By that time, Ms Kruger
had taken her
medication in preparation for going to bed. Ms Kruger’s evidence is that
after she returned to the Winery at
the Premises where Mr Thompson and Mr
Connolly were, and having taken her medication, she fell asleep on the couch.
After awakening,
she felt extremely affected by the medication, disoriented, her
vision was blurred, and her body felt heavy. She was physically and
compromised. Ms Kruger’s evidence is that she remembers being at the
top of the stairs. That description given by
Ms Kruger of her condition is
consistent with Dr De Leacy’s evidence (recited at [
] above) of the impact the combination
of alcohol and medication would have on her. The primary judge did not refer to
this aspect
of Dr De Leacy’s evidence.
the primary judge only referred to one aspect of Dr De Leacy’s evidence,
being how stressful events are more readily
registered and retained, to conclude
at [61] that “had the events of 12-13 January 2019 been traumatic or
stressful to Kruger,
then Kruger’s memory of
claimed events
would have been indelible or approaching indelible” (emphasis added). His
Honour relied on that, in the context
of his findings (e.g. that Ms
Kruger’s evidence was unsatisfactory, vague and imprecise), to conclude
“that whatever
transpired in the Bridal Suite was neither stressful nor
traumatic to her. It was not unwelcome”: PJ [61]. It is trite to observe
that not all events that evening were traumatic or stressful, nor does that
passage from the primary judgment accurately reflect
the opinions expressed by
Dr De Leacy. Rather, this aspect of Dr De Leacy’s evidence was
considered by the primary judge in
isolation of the remainder of his evidence,
and other opinions expressed. Nonetheless it is apparent the primary judge
Ms Kruger’s evidence in that context and through that prism.
His Honour did so, without apparent regard to the evidence of
the level of Ms
Kruger’s intoxication (and the effect of the medication). That was plainly
there. Even this brief recitation of other evidence from the trial reflects that
there was evidence before the primary judge
consistent with Ms Kruger’s
evidence that she was extremely intoxicated and affected by her medication at
the time of the events
in the Bridal Suite. It is helpful to return to the
primary judge’s findings in relation to intoxication, the extent of which
is at [41] to [42]:
[41] Fourth, if Kruger at the time was extremely affected by
medication/intoxication, or a combination of both, as claimed by her,
finds that it was improbable that Kruger would have climbed the two (2)
reasonably steep flights of stairs for any purpose
other than to pursue
something private with Thompson associated with the Bridal Suite.
[42] Fifth, the evidence of Kruger was that it was she who first arrived at the
top of the stairs, and that Thompson had followed
her. Having found that Kruger
had ascended the stairs for a purpose related to entry into the Bridal Suite,
the Court finds that
Kruger was not as affected by medication or alcohol as she
claimed she was. The fact that Kruger was able to ascend the stairs by
– there was no evidence that she needed assistance to do so – points
to her being in physical control of what
she was doing at the time.
is no properly articulated basis by the primary judge for not accepting Ms
Kruger’s evidence of her intoxication. Ms Kruger’s
ability to climb
the stairs being the only reason provided. Otherwise, the reasoning appears to
be based on findings about Ms Kruger’s
conduct (and reasons for her
conduct) which occurs without any consideration of Ms Kruger’s
intoxication (with the medication),
and what impact, if any, it may have had on
her conduct. There also appears to have been no consideration by the primary
the other evidence of Ms Kruger’s intoxication/medication
supporting Ms Kruger’s evidence of her intoxicated state, in
this portion
of the judgment, or elsewhere. The appellant has established that in making the
finding about Ms Kruger’s medication/intoxication
at [41] and [42], the
primary judge failed to address relevant evidence, much of which was
unchallenged. The finding is inconsistent
with the evidence.
are other issues in relation to the impugned finding. Although the primary judge
found that Ms Kruger’s level of intoxication
was not as she claimed, there
is no finding as to her level of intoxication (including the combined effect of
the medication). Intoxication
is relevant to the assessment of Ms Kruger’s
evidence. There is no reference to it being considered by the primary judge in
assessing her evidence, or when his Honour made findings as to her evidence of
the events she said occurred on 12/13 January 2019.
respondents submitted that in the trial, the evidence of intoxication was only
relevant to the objective limb of
of the SDA, not the subjective limb. It
was said, in that context, it was not surprising that intoxication did not
feature heavily
in the primary judge’s reasons. It is entirely unclear
from the transcript of the hearing below what the purported limitation
evidence was said to be. The appellant said the concession below only related to
Ms Kruger not contending that she was so
intoxicated that she could not consent
to the conduct. That said, the evidence of intoxication was before the primary
judge, cross-examined
on, the primary judge accepted both Ms Kruger and Mr
Thompson were intoxicated at the time of entering the Bridal Suite at [52] and
made a finding (albeit limited) on Ms Kruger’s intoxication at [42]. Given
the circumstances, the relevance of the evidence
could not be limited in any
manner other than that identified by the appellant. It was plainly
is well understood that intoxication can affect, inter alia, decision-making. It
can affect memory. It can affect a person’s
actions. It is relevant to the
primary judge’s conclusions as to whether certain acts were, as he
concluded, improbable or
implausible. Although the respondents during the appeal
ultimately accepted that intoxication was relevant to the assessment of Ms
Kruger’s credibility, they stopped short of accepting it was relevant to
the assessment of Ms Kruger’s actions on the
basis that relates to her
intent. The submission as to intoxication not being relevant to intent cannot be
accepted. That submission
was made ostensibly to overcome the apparent lack of
consideration by the primary judge of this evidence. The ultimate factual
conclusions
reached by the primary judge (which led to the conclusion that the
appellant had not discharged her onus), as highlighted by the
respondents in
their submissions, are matters which largely involved an assessment of Ms
Kruger’s evidence. Resolution of those
matters necessarily should have
been in the context of and in consideration of the evidence as to Ms
Kruger’s level of intoxication
(including the combined effect of the
medication taken). Despite the primary judge’s conclusions about Ms
Kruger’s intoxication/medication
at [42], his Honour did not otherwise
refer to this evidence. Given its relevance, that evidence would have been
expected to have
been referred to by the primary judge if it had been considered
in assessing Ms Kruger’s evidence and actions. It is apparent
of intoxication (with the medication) was not considered by the primary judge in
assessing Ms Kruger’s evidence
and reaching the various factual findings
he made. The failure to do so infects other factual findings relating to Ms
her evidence.
error established in the factual finding at [42], and the primary judge’s
failure to consider the evidence of intoxication
(with the medication) is
significant.
Highly sexualised conduct
primary judge found that Ms Kruger engaged in “highly sexualised”
conduct with Mr Thompson: PJ [57]. This was based
on the evidence of two
witnesses, Ms van der Westhuizen and Mr Connolly: PJ [21], [25]. Properly read,
the evidence does not support
that conclusion.
van der Westhuizen’s evidence, at its highest, was that she felt
uncomfortable as Ms Kruger was getting “sexy”
“inappropriate” when she was dancing with her. Ms van der
Westhuizen’s evidence does not relate to any conduct
by Ms Kruger towards
Mr Thompson. Ms van der Westhuizen does not give evidence of observing any of
the conduct that Mr Connolly described
had occurred.
Connolly gave evidence he felt uncomfortable due to Ms Kruger briefly sitting on
his lap, and her and Mr Thompson’s interactions
which he perceived to be
consensual and sexualised. He referred to there being a “sexual
element” particularly when Mr
Thompson’s hand was on Ms
Kruger’s leg. But, as accepted by Mr Thompson’s counsel, Mr
Connolly’s evidence
was not that the conduct was “highly
sexualised”. Nonetheless that evidence led the primary judge to conclude
and [57] that:
[44] ... Kruger was most likely a willing participant in her entry into the
bridal suite with Thompson ... such entry being consistent
with both of them
having accelerated to a higher level the already sexualised tension evident
between them that had made Connolly
feel so uncomfortable.
[57] The evidence of Connolly was significant, in that he gave credible
independent evidence that the interactions between Kruger
and Thompson on the
sofa in the Winery before he left to drive home were both highly sexualised and
consensual.
conclusion at [44] was also based on other findings his Honour had made (i.e.
those relating to Ms Kruger ascending the stairs
to the Bridal Suite).
Notwithstanding that, the evidence before the primary judge could not properly
be characterised as establishing
a sexual tension or there having been
“highly sexualised” interactions between Ms Kruger and Mr
it was conceded during the appeal hearing that the evidence was not of
“highly sexualised” conduct, the respondents
nonetheless advanced in
written submissions that there had been ample evidence before the primary judge
to find the conduct was “highly
sexualised” referring to the
affidavit evidence, police statements and oral evidence of Mr Connolly and
Ms van der Westhuizen.
They submitted the finding was open on a combination
of the impressionistic evidence about the sexual element, the discomfort of
witnesses and their observations. That submission misconceives the nature of the
evidence which does not provide a proper foundation
for the primary
judge’s conclusion.
the basis of the primary judge’s finding, the appellant has established
his Honour erred in finding Ms Kruger engaged
in “highly sexualised”
conduct with Mr Thompson”: PJ [57]. This finding was critical to the
reasoning of the primary
judge to then conclude that before entering the Bridal
Suite, it was the joint intention of Ms Kruger and Mr Thompson to enter the
suite “with ... amorous intent”: PJ [58].
leaving Mr Connolly’s evidence on this topic, it is appropriate to observe
that during the cross-examination of Mr Connolly
Kruger’s intoxication (which is recited by the primary judge at [20] in
his consideration of Mr Connolly’s
evidence), he gave evidence
... when I witnessed Jana, when I saw her – and the only
exposure I had to her was on that couch, and at that point, she seemed
Afterwards, right at the end – because she was in and out all night, like,
and I was talking to Alan the whole time.
Later on, right at the end, then she
– she seemed more intoxicated, but I’m not an expert, and I
can’t say how
intoxicated she was ...
That answer read in context reflects there is a time difference. That is, the
acts Mr Connolly described that made him uncomfortable
were not at the end of
the night, but earlier. That is also consistent with Mr Connolly’s police
statement, which was in evidence
before the primary judge. The primary judge
does not refer to this time difference, but rather the implication in his
that Mr Connolly’s observations of Ms Kruger and Mr Thompson
occurred at a time shortly before he left the Premises (or at
the very least,
when Ms Kruger returned to the Winery after her mother had left).
Salome Kruger
appellant challenged the primary judge’s approach to the evidence of Ms
Salome Kruger. The primary judge generally concluded
that the evidence of Ms
Salome Kruger was of little weight: PJ [84]. There are three aspects to the
, that Ms Kruger entered Ms Salome Kruger’s room and
took away a pillow, which is when she observed Ms Kruger’s level
inebriation (discussed above at [
, that at “about 4.30 am, Salome said that Kruger again
entered her room and lay on the bed next to her. She said that Kruger
shaking and crying”: PJ [76].
, that thereafter Ms Kruger made
a complaint to Ms Salome Kruger of what occurred with Mr Thompson.
first two topics, of which there is no dispute, are significant. The
, getting the pillow, supports Ms Kruger’s evidence in
relation to going to bed at an earlier time in the night/following morning
(before looking for her mother). It is also consistent with Ms Kruger’s
evidence that it was her intention to do so at the
evidence of Ms Kruger’s distress, without more, is consistent with what Ms
Kruger described in evidence as having occurred.
A traumatic event. Despite
neither of those matters being in issue, the primary judge did not take them
into account in assessing
what had occurred that evening. More particularly, it
is inconsistent with the primary judge’s conclusion as to the
circumstances
in which Ms Kruger entered the Bridal Suite (i.e. with
amorous intent). It is probative of what occurred in the Bridal Suite. This
in a context where Mr Thompson’s evidence was that not only was Ms Kruger
a willing participant in the act, but it was she
who raised the topic of the
conduct between them going further.
the High Court recently observed in
The King v Ryan Churchill (a
[2025] HCA 11
Though it is conceivable that circumstances might exist in which evidence of
distress on the part of a complainant when making a
complaint [of sexual
assault] is not relevant, those circumstances must be rare.
complainant may, but will not necessarily, display outward signs of distress
after the assault. Evidence of distress tends to prove
that the complainant had
been sexually assaulted:
Papakosmas v The Queen
[1999] HCA 37
at [25] and [27]. So too, evidence of a
topic, Ms Kruger’s statement to her sister, the primary
judge placed no weight. His Honour found this aspect of Ms Salome Kruger’s
evidence “was not probative of anything that Kruger said had occurred in
the Bridal Suite earlier that morning”: PJ [83].
There was a note written
by Ms Salome Kruger of that conversation in the form of a diary entry to post to
a private page on her Tumblr
account. The accuracy of the content of the Tumblr
post was the subject of cross-examination. The primary judge’s limited
of the conversation fails to grapple with the distressed state that Ms
Kruger was in at the time the conversation occurred. Even
if the Tumblr post is
not verbatim of the conversation that took place, it is consistent with Ms
Salome Kruger’s evidence that
Ms Kruger was in a distressed state at that
point in time.
primary judge concluded at [79] that:
though she [Ms Salome Kruger] italicised the words “
Alan had sex with
”, she did not italicise the words “
She said no & told
him to stop
”. The Court is unconvinced that those words were in fact
said by Kruger. Even if they were said, the Court is not prepared
to accept that
what Kruger said was truthful.
appears to be a reference to Ms Salome Kruger’s affidavit. However, the
Tumblr post annexed to the affidavit has no text
in italics. That limited
reasoning is artificial. Further, this conclusion reflects that the evidence of
Ms Salome Kruger was not
considered together with other evidence in assessing
what had occurred on 12/13 January 2019 but rather was considered after the
primary judge had already made factual findings about relevant matters,
including the circumstances in which Ms Kruger went into
the Bridal Suite (i.e.
with amorous intent). That is because there is no other basis on the evidence
(or in the reasons) to conclude
that if said, Ms Kruger was not being truthful.
That approach is incorrect.
Tumblr post is detailed. It is dated 5.50 am on 13 January 2019. Ms Salome
Kruger’s evidence was that she wrote this about
an hour after her sister
came into her room. Although it was put to Ms Salome Kruger that the entry has
been edited by her to include
other details after that day, she denied it. There
is no evidence of the post having been altered. The primary judge notes Ms
Kruger’s police statement in his reasons at [81] and that it does
“not state that Kruger had said to her words to the
effect that the sexual
intercourse between her and Thompson was non-consensual”. However, her
police statement refers to the
fact she can produce the Tumblr post, and so the
content of the statement is to be considered in that regard. The primary judge
not address the fact she said she was able to produce the Tumblr post.
noted above, the primary judge’s conclusion about Ms Salome Kruger at [83]
[her evidence about] what she said Kruger said to her at about 4.30 am on the
morning of 13 January was not probative of anything
that Kruger said had
occurred in the Bridal Suite earlier that morning.
conclusion is difficult to understand in the circumstances. The evidence of
recent complaint about what had occurred between
Ms Kruger and Mr Thompson, and
Ms Kruger’s distress, is significant in assessing Ms Kruger’s
evidence of the events in
the Bridal Suite. That is particularly so when there
is also a contemporaneous record that supports that complaint occurring (being
the Tumblr post). The appellant has established the primary judge erred in
rejecting the evidence of Ms Salome Kruger.
Failure to call Dr Martin
primary judge drew an adverse inference against Ms Kruger for failing to call
Dr Martin (her treating doctor at the time) to give
evidence: PJ [47]. Ms
Kruger had called an independent expert psychiatrist, Dr De Leacy, to give
evidence about her psychiatric injury
arising from Mr Thompson’s
conduct. That is relevant because the primary judge states that the relevance of
Dr Martin would
be he could give cogent evidence about the medication prescribed
for Ms Kruger (dosages, frequency etc), the effect of a combination
drugs and alcohol, and her conditions. These are all matters on which Dr De
Leacy gave evidence. The rule in
Jones v Dunkel
does not require a party
to give repetitive or cumulative evidence and accordingly, it was not open to
the Court to draw any such
inference simply because Dr Martin was not called to
give evidence about the same issue:
Manly Council v Byrne
[2004] NSWCA
. Moreover, the primary judge has not grappled with the concept
Jones v Dunkel
. The rule is that the unexplained failure of a
party to give evidence may, in appropriate circumstances, lead to an inference
the uncalled evidence would not have assisted that party’s case, so
entitling a court to more readily draw an inference against
that party:
[1959] HCA 9
(1959) 101 CLR 298
at 308, 312, 320-321;
Commonwealth (No 2)
[2000] FCA 1084
(2000) 103 FCR 1
. The primary
judge has not identified the inference that could be more readily drawn.
Wedding reception
primary judge found at [65], that “the Court finds as implausible, and
bizarre, the proposition that Kruger would have agreed
to have held her own
wedding reception at Flaxton Gardens if she had in fact been raped by Thompson
at that very venue”. There
was a dispute in the evidence as to why the
wedding was held at the Premises. Ms Kruger’s evidence was that it was at
her mother’s
insistence, and she felt that she had to agree. Her mother
gave evidence that Ms Kruger wanted the wedding to be held there. Ms
evidence is not referred to by the primary judge. His Honour only
referred to the evidence of Ms van der Westhuizen. The dispute
ought to have
been resolved, given the primary judge relied on the location of the reception
to make an adverse finding against Ms
Kruger. The reason for the location of the
wedding was relevant to determining that issue. Regardless, the conclusion at
[65] appears
to be based on the proposition that a victim of rape would not act
that way. That is to act on a preconception of how a victim would
act, not on
any evidence in the hearing. That approach is incorrect.
Remaining bases
the appellant referred to several other findings relied on in support of this
ground (see [
] above). It suffices to
refer to one example. The primary judge found that Ms Kruger’s explanation
for her movements after
she returned to the residence and her reason for
returning to the Winery as implausible, and that her motive for returning to the
Winery was to continue socialising: PJ [29], [34]. However, that finding was
reached without a consideration of Ms Kruger’s
intoxication or
medication. In that context, the timing analysis undertaken by the primary judge
from [30] to [33] in support of
those conclusions does not withstand scrutiny.
Further, Ms Kruger’s evidence of having taken medication in preparation of
to sleep puts her actions in a different context (noting it was not
challenged that she took the medication). We also observe that
while Ms Kruger
was criticised for going to look for her mother, Ms van der
Westhuizen’s affidavit evidence was that she went
looking for Ms Kruger,
including in the Winery area (without finding her).
is unnecessary to address each of the complaints identified in ground 2. The
matters referred to above are sufficient to establish
error in the primary
judgment. The errors impacted the assessment of Ms Kruger’s evidence. The
appellant has established ground
2. In circumstances where the assessment of Ms
Kruger’s evidence was central to the determination of her claim, the
should be allowed.
REDETERMINATION OR REMITTAL
referred to above, the appellant submitted that if error is established in
relation to ground 2, it necessarily leads to a finding
of error in relation to
ground 1. In that circumstance, it was submitted the Court should redetermine
the matter in favour of Ms
Kruger. That is because the consequence of ground 2
being established is said to be that Ms Kruger’s evidence would not be
treated as unreliable. In a context where the primary judge’s findings in
relation to Mr Thompson’s evidence being unreliable
would remain (as
there is no notice of contention on that topic challenging them), the appellant
submitted that Ms Kruger’s
account must be accepted. That is, the Court is
left with her evidence, and that of Mr Connolly, Ms van der Westhuizen, and Ms
Kruger, as to the events that occurred on the 12/13 January 2019. The
appellant submitted that:
if one examines that evidence, in the absence of anything from Mr Thompson,
it’s abundantly clear that the findings set out
in ground 1 of the amended
notice of appeal ought to have been made. Because once you accept Ms Kruger as
being a credible witness,
and there being no challenge to Mr Thompson not being
a credible witness, Ms Kruger must succeed on appeal ground 1.
1 alleges the primary judge erred in failing to find that certain conduct of Mr
Thompson occurred that constituted contraventions
of the SDA. The conduct listed
is based on the evidence of Ms Kruger and is framed as one of the declarations
sought by the appellant
in her claim. That conduct is confined to the acts of Mr
Thompson relied on to establish that sexual harassment occurred.
approach is simplistic and fails to grapple with the consequences of ground 2
being established. To establish ground 2, the appellant
must satisfy the Court
that errors occurred. It can readily be accepted, as explained above, that
errors occurred in the primary
judge’s approach to assessing Ms
Kruger’s evidence. It does not necessarily establish the affirmative,
being that Ms
Kruger was a credible
reliable witness, or that each of
the facets of Ms Kruger’s evidence must be accepted. That involves an
assessment of Ms Kruger’s
evidence, in the context of all the
relevant evidence.
appellant’s submissions (and amended notice of appeal) do not detail the
factual findings sought, or the basis of the reasoning
process sought to be
undertaken by the Court to make those findings. That includes the approach to be
taken in respect of witnesses’
evidence (i.e. if the Court is to accept
the primary judge’s findings or make alternate findings). The Court is
only referred
to the ultimate findings of fact the appellant contends should
have been made to determine the first respondent contravened the SDA.
submission appears to be premised on the basis that after accepting Ms
Kruger’s evidence, the Court then relies on the
other factual findings
made by the primary judge (which are said to be unchallenged). However, those
findings include, inter alia,
an acceptance of the evidence of Mr Connolly and
Ms van der Westhuizen, which at times is inconsistent with the evidence of Ms
It may be that ultimately is of no moment, but again, that involves an
assessment of all the relevant evidence. The facts are not
undisputed. Rather,
the appellant simply submitted:
In conducting its “real review” of the evidence, it is respectfully
submitted that the Court should conclude that: (a)
Ms Kruger was a witness of
credit; (b) the matters set out in Appeal Ground 1 occurred, were unwelcome and
constituted contraventions
of SD Act; and (c) the factual findings
relied on to find against Ms Kruger on the question of her credit are glaringly
and inconsistent with incontrovertible established facts.
Significantly,
the Court does not have all the material from the trial before it, nor any
submissions by the parties as to its assessment.
It is trite to observe that if
an appellant seeks to have the Court redetermine a case, it is necessary to
provide the basis to enable
the Court to do so.
it was accepted by the respondents during the appeal that if the Court were to
redetermine the issues, it would approach
the issues in the context of there
being an adverse finding in relation to Mr Thompson, the submission was less
than clear. There
was an attempt by the respondents to limit that finding to
what occurred in the Bridal Suite, but the primary judge does not do so.
only needs to refer to Mr Thompson’s evidence as described and quoted by
the primary judge in relation to who first raised
the sexual interactions
“going further”: PJ [51(d)]. His evidence on that topic was
inconsistent, with his explanation
for that being unsatisfactory and
unconvincing. It is not surprising there was no notice of contention.
as will have been evident from the discussion of ground 2 above, at its heart,
the primary judge’s reasoning demonstrates
that his Honour did not
consider relevant evidence in his assessment of Ms Kruger’s evidence. That
includes the evidence of
Ms Kruger’s intoxication combined with the effect
of her medication and the evidence of Ms Salome Kruger. This is a case where
error of the primary judge in assessing Ms Kruger’s evidence was central
to the outcome of her claim. Whether Ms Kruger’s
version of events is to
be preferred to Mr Thompson’s in respect of the relevant issues requires a
proper consideration of
all the relevant evidence.
Regrettably,
in our view, that is a task we are unable to undertake for the following three
as we have mentioned, the factual appeal was conducted on a very limited basis.
The Court was not taken to all of the evidence that
might bear upon the findings
that the Court would be required to make, in lieu of the findings by the primary
judge, if the declarations
sought were to be made on appeal. Nor were any
submissions made as to the assessment of the underlying evidence. Instead, in
it was contended that error in the factual findings as to the
credibility of Ms Kruger would be a sufficient basis to conclude that
account as to key events must be accepted. For reasons we have given, that
approach was not correct. What follows is to be considered
in that context.
as we have explained, the resolution of the issues requires views to be formed
testimony of a number of
witnesses, including Ms Kruger. Whilst we have concluded that the approach by
the primary judge as to fact
finding was in error in fundamental respects,
including as to the foundation for reaching conclusions as to the credibility of
Kruger (and by disregarding other evidence), we have not concluded that the
rejection of Ms Kruger’s account was glaringly
improbable or contrary
to incontrovertible facts. We accept that there is much to support the
credibility of Ms Kruger’s account
of her level of intoxication at the
time. There is also the evidence of recent complaint given by
Ms Kruger’s sister, together
with the contemporaneous record in the
form of the Tumblr post, with much to indicate that such evidence should be
accepted. Coupled
with the flaws in the reasoning by the primary judge as to his
finding of highly sexualised conduct and the absence of any case beyond
events of that evening that is said to provide a rational basis for
Mr Thompson, as Ms Kruger’s stepfather, to conclude
Ms Kruger would be a willing participant in sexual activities between them,
these are all matters which point powerfully to
an absence of consent by
Ms Kruger. Further, there was no real attempt on appeal to support the
credibility of Mr Thompson’s
account, so his evidence as to consent
may be taken to have been rejected. However, despite this, we are unable to
reach the affirmative
conclusion on appeal that the critical evidence of Ms
Kruger must be accepted as credible and reliable. In part, that is because
conclusion of that kind would require acceptance of the testimony of other
witnesses in respect of whom the primary judge provided
no reasoning as to their
credibility, most notably Ms Salome Kruger, but also Mr Lindsay. However, it is
principally because a conclusion
of that kind would require a finding on appeal
that the oral testimony of Ms Kruger as to key events must be accepted in
circumstances
where her case depends upon the credibility and reliability of
that account.
the seriousness of the findings that the Court is invited to make must be kept
in mind and is a matter that counts against the Court
being able to find on
appeal without having heard the oral testimony of Ms Kruger, that her account
ought to be accepted.
follows that, given the errors established, the matter should be remitted to
another judge to conduct a new trial. The Court will
hear from the parties as to
the terms of any order as to costs.
I certify that the preceding sixty-three (63) numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Justices
Dated: 17 October 2025
MCELWAINE J
Kruger is the daughter of Ms
Ven Der Westhuizen. In
the time period relevant to the events in this matter, Mariana was married to Mr
Stanley Thompson, with the consequence that he was the step-father
of Jana. In the evening of 12 and the early hours of 13 January
claims that she was raped by Alan in the Bridal Suite of a wedding reception
business known as
Flaxton Gardens
operated by Flaxton Gardens Pty Ltd,
when she had the status of a workplace participant within the meaning of
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
) as it was at the
time. (Each reference to a provision of the SDA is to the statutory form as at
January 2019). Alan was a director
and agent of Flaxton Gardens Pty Ltd at the
my reasons I mean no disrespect to any of the family members by referring to
each by their first name only. In addition to Jana,
Mariana and Alan there is
) Kruger who is the younger sister of Jana and
Lindsay who is the husband of Jana. I likewise refer to Mr Benjamin
) Connolly, an independent witness, by his first name.
December 2022, Jana commenced a proceeding against Alan and Flaxton Gardens Pty
Ltd in the Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia (the
) on the basis that she had suffered unlawful discrimination within the
Human Rights Commission Act
Commission Act
). Jana sought declaratory relief that
Alan and Flaxton Gardens Pty Ltd had contravened ss 28B and 106 of the SDA and
in consequence
she claimed compensation pursuant to s 46PO of the Commission
broad summary, Jana claimed that she attended Flaxton Gardens on 12 January 2019
to perform work duties for an event known as the
Summer Showcase and her
responsibilities included the taking of photographs of the event. The premises
at Flaxton Gardens comprised
multiple areas, including a function room known as
the Winery, the Bridal Suite, and the residence, where Alan and Mariana resided
at the time. Jana intended to sleep in the residence at Flaxton Gardens that
evening. At the time, Jana was on a course of prescribed
medication to assist
her with insomnia and to address the sequelae of childhood sexual abuse that had
been inflicted on her by a
family member. The consumption of alcohol featured
prominently as part of the Summer Showcase event and continued well after its
conclusion. Jana consumed alcohol, as did Mariana and Alan, amongst others.
Late in the evening of 12 January 2019, Jana found
herself seated at the top of
a flight of stairs within Flaxton Gardens, to which there was a door leading to
the Bridal Suite. She
was intoxicated at the time. She alleges that Alan sat
next to her and expressed, in various ways, his love for her and his desire
she be his “lover on the side”. On her case, she resisted
Alan’s amorous advances.
further claimed despite that she was not a willing participant in the conduct of
Alan, he then without her consent kissed her
on the mouth. On her case, Alan
ignored her resistance and went further. He opened a locked door leading to the
Bridal Suite and
led her to the bed therein. Jana contends that she further
resisted, but once again Alan ignored her. There was more unwanted kissing
Alan and then, without her consent, he undressed her, performed oral sex on her
and had intercourse with her, despite her telling
him on more than one occasion:
“I don’t want this” and “I just want to go to
further claimed that there was other unwanted conduct engaged in by Alan in the
early hours of 13 January 2019, and in the days
thereafter.
various ways, Jana contended that the conduct of Alan amounted to an unwelcome
sexual advance, unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature
and/or sexual harassment
within the meaning of s 28B of the SDA. She pleaded the vicarious liability of
Flaxton Gardens Pty Ltd pursuant
to s 106(1) of the SDA, on the basis that Alan
was a director and agent of it.
denied that he engaged in oral sex with Jana, but admitted having had
intercourse with her. On his version of the events, the
intercourse was
consensual; as was the foreplay and he denied that any statement had been made
by Jana to the effect that she did
not consent to his advances or, ultimately,
to the act of intercourse.
was ultimately charged by officers of the Queensland Police Service with the
rape of Jana. He was arraigned before a jury trial
in the District Court of
Queensland in November 2021. He did not give evidence at his trial. The jury
returned a verdict of not
proceeding in the Circuit Court was heard by Judge Egan over four days in May
2024. For reasons published on 13 September
2024, his Honour dismissed the
proceeding:
Kruger v Thompson
[2024] FedCFamC2G 883
Honour was not satisfied that Jana had discharged her onus of proof.
11 October 2024, Jana filed a notice of appeal against the dismissal of her
proceeding. Later she sought and was granted leave
to rely on an amended notice
of appeal. For the detailed reasons that follow I also would allow the appeal
and set aside the order
of the primary judge. Differing from the reasons of
Colvin and Abraham JJ, I would also uphold ground 1 of the appeal, grant
declaratory
relief and award compensation in favour of Jana. I explain in detail
why I consider that the evidence permits this Court to make
the required
material findings of fact to grant that relief.
The material issues before the primary judge
and Alan filed detailed pleadings and affidavits which set out their respective
versions of the events.
pleaded her case in the form of her Amended Statement of Claim dated 20 May
2024. The essential facts that she relied on to
establish her case of sexual
harassment within the meaning of s 28A of the SDA may be summarised as follows.
On 12 January 2019,
Jana performed work at Flaxton Gardens as a contract worker
and was a workplace participant: s 28B of the SDA. Following the
of the of the Summer Showcase event she remained at Flaxton Gardens
and socialised with Mariana and Alan. Another person, Ben also
remained at
Flaxton Gardens. Jana consumed some alcohol. She departed the venue at around
midnight, went to the residence and took
her prescribed medication. The
medications were taken to assist her to sleep and in consequence of childhood
sexual abuse perpetrated
by a family member that she had suffered. She then
returned to the venue where Ben and Alan remained.
Ben left Flaxton Gardens, Jana was seated at the top of a flight of stairs.
Alan sat next to her and said to her words to the
effect of: “I’m in
love with you”, “I wish things turned out differently and I could be
“we’re perfect for each other”, that he
wanted her to be his “lover on the side”, and that “I
loved you for a very long time and I have wanted this for years now” and
that he wanted her “on the side”.
responded with words to the effect of: “If you’re wanting a
relationship with me, you will end up like your stepfather”
(a reference
to the stepfather of Alan having sexually abused Alan’s sisters);
“What! I don’t agree”; “obviously
you don’t mean
that” and “you should go back to your wife”. Thereupon,
without consent, Alan kissed her
on the mouth.
then guided Jana into the Bridal Suite and sat her down on the bed and said to
her words to the effect of: “I want to go
further with this”, to
which she responded: “I just want to go to sleep”.
then closed and locked the door to the Bridal Suite and sat next to Jana on the
bed. He again kissed her on the mouth without
her consent. She responded with
words to the effect: “I don’t want this”. Alan then removed
her dress and her
underwear, leaving Jana naked. He removed her tampon. He
then performed oral sex on her. Again, Jana said words to him to the
“I don’t want that” and to which he responded “I just
want to make you feel good”.
then had sexual intercourse with Jana without her consent. When he was done he
fell asleep and Jana dressed and went to her
bedroom in the residence. Alan
followed her and said words to the effect: “I want to tuck you
13 January 2019, Jana returned to Flaxton Gardens for work and Alan greeted her
with: “Morning Gorgeous”. Jana did
not stay at the workplace for
very long that day.
or about 19 January 2019, Jana, at the request of Mariana, engaged in a
discussion with Alan to the effect that he said to her:
“Well this is
tough. Honestly, I was disappointed when you told your mum. We could have had
something between us”,
to which Jana replied: “She deserved to know.
What did you tell her?” and he responded: “Obviously I had to play
the I don’t remember card”.
pleads that the conduct of Alan amounted to an unwelcome sexual advance or
unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature in circumstances
where a reasonable person
would have anticipated that she would be offended, humiliated or intimidated and
that in consequence, he
engaged in unlawful sexual harassment contrary to s
28B(6) of the SDA.
admits that he had intercourse with Jana, denies that he performed oral sex on
her and pleads his case to the effect that Jana
consented. In his defence dated
8 March 2023, he pleads a positive case which may be summarised as follows.
Prior to 12 January
2019, he and Jana enjoyed an emotionally intimate
relationship during which they would confide in each other. When Jana returned
to Flaxton Gardens at approximately 12:45 am on 13 January 2019, she sat in his
lap when Ben was still present. They then cuddled
in “a physically
intimate way”, including placing his hand in her lap and her placing her
hand on top of his.
departed at approximately 1:30 am and thereupon Alan and Jana were alone.
During that period they were seated on a couch, at
times Jana was seated in his
lap; they engaged in intimate conversations; he massaged her shoulders; she
removed her shoes and rested
her legs in his lap, he massaged her feet and Jana
said words to the effect that she was enjoying the massages “a lot”.
Later, Jana rearranged her dress to allow Alan to massage her legs and thighs.
Jana then said words to the effect that she was “feeling
very excited by
the massage”; “are you actually intending to create a sexual
feeling” and “are you wanting
this to go further sexually”, to
which Alan responded with words to the effect that he was “comfortable
going further
if [she] was happy to”.
engaged in a conversation about the possible consequences of proceeding further
sexually, each acknowledged that they were adults
and they “kissed for
some time”, engaged in intimate fondling and Jana opened or rearranged her
dress to expose her breasts
and underwear and made comments to the effect that
“the kissing and fondling felt good”.
engaged in that conduct, they then ascended a set of stairs leading to the
Bridal Suite and sat on the top rung. They engaged
in more kissing and intimate
fondling. Alan asked Jana if she was “sure she wanted to go into the
Bridal Suite”, and
she said that she was. They entered the Bridal Suite
and undressed. Alan noticed that Jana had a tampon inserted in her vagina
which he said words to the effect: “looks like you have a rat tail hanging
out” and she responded to the effect: “it
is okay as I am finished
bleeding” and “it is clean”. Jana then entered the ensuite
bathroom and placed the tampon
into a rubbish bin.
her return, Alan said to her words to the effect: “are you comfortable
with this” and “do you want this”,
to which she responded:
“yes” and “I need this”. They then got into bed. They
engaged in sexual intercourse.
Alan had difficulty and said words to the
effect: “I’m sorry but I cannot finish” to which Jana
responded to the
effect: “that’s okay”. Alan then rolled over
and fell asleep. He awoke at approximately 4:00 am, walked back
residence and entered the bedroom that he shared with Mariana and went to
UNDERSTANDING THE EVIDENCE
unsatisfactory aspect of the reasoning of the primary judge is that he made
findings as to why parts of the evidence of Jana and
Alan could not be accepted
and ultimately concluded that he could not make findings congruent with the
evidence of either, but did
not set out their respective evidence-in-chief. To
understand his Honour’s reasons and the grounds of appeal, I commence with
the cases in chief.
Jana’s evidence
follows is taken from Jana’s primary affidavit made on 29 August 2023. In
2019, she was 25 years of age and Alan was 49.
He had married Mariana later in
life. Jana has two siblings, Sam and Mr Johan Kruger. When Jana was between the
ages of four and
seven years, she was subjected to sexual abuse when in South
Africa by the husband of Mariana’s sister. She did not disclose
abuse for many years. She did in 2013, when she first met her future husband,
James. Ultimately, she was diagnosed as suffering
from post-traumatic stress
) with anxiety and depressed mood symptoms in consequence
of the sexual abuse.
was employed by a third-party contractor and, in that capacity, she attended
Flaxton Gardens to perform work on 12 January 2019.
Appreciating that the
Summer Showcase event may run late, she intended to sleep in a bedroom at the
residence at Flaxton Gardens
which is something that she had done on previous
occasions. Alan and Mariana occupied the residence.
in the evening of 12 January 2019, and after completing her work duties, Jana
entered her bedroom at the residence and took her
medication comprising Zoloft
(150 mg), Diazepam (10 mg), melatonin and Stilnox. Zoloft was prescribed for
depression, Diazepam for
sleep and melatonin and Stilnox to induce sleep. On
Jana’s case, Alan was aware of the abuse she had suffered, that she took
her medications every evening and of the side-effects of the medication,
including drowsiness.
was Jana’s habit to take this mix of medication every night prior to
retiring to bed. Within a period of between 30 and
60 minutes, the medication
would cause her to feel extremely drowsy, dizzy and to have decreased
first met Alan in 2015, at an early point in his relationship with Mariana. On
initial assessment, Jana found Alan to be polite
and that he and Mariana enjoyed
a happy relationship. Alan had three children from a previous marriage. After
a while Jana and
Alan became close, which she described as: “a father
figure in my life”.
commenced working as a model when she was 16 years of age. She continued that
work, albeit on a part-time basis, until January
2019. In 2017, she commenced
undertaking some part-time work at Flaxton Gardens. Initially, her duties
focused upon assisting Mariana
with administrative tasks and management of the
social media platforms of the business. Sam also worked in the business.
time to time, Jana would speak with Alan about “significant or difficult
things that were going on in our life”.
She recalls an early conversation
where he disclosed that Mariana had informed him about Jana’s childhood
sexual abuse, and
he explained that he understood her pain because his
step-father had abused him and his sisters. There were other conversations
Alan in which Jana disclosed that she was receiving psychiatric treatment and
had been prescribed various medications. In 2018,
Alan disclosed to Jana
difficulties that he was experiencing in his relationship with Mariana and that
he was stressed. In that
conversation, Jana suggested that Alan might receive
benefit from prescribed medication, in the way that it had “really
accepts that at times she would speak to Alan about “difficult things in
my life” of which she gave one example:
being the mother of a young
Summer Showcase event of 12 January 2019 was held to promote the business of
Flaxton Gardens to other business owners in the community.
Jana began her work
shift at approximately 10 am. At approximately lunchtime, she noticed that Alan
had commenced consuming alcohol.
The Summer Showcase event was scheduled to
begin at 6 pm and concluded at 8 pm. During the event, Alan gave a speech at
Jana noted that he was “slurring his words and his body
demeanour indicated that he was intoxicated”. Commencing at
approximately
7 pm, Jana consumed one glass of champagne and approximately two further glasses
until 9 pm. The Summer Showcase event
concluded at somewhere between 8 and 8:30
pm and by 9 pm, “most of the suppliers and staff had departed the
At that point the only persons who remained were Alan, Ben, Sam,
Mariana and Jana. At the time, Sam was residing in the residence.
She left the
venue shortly after 9 pm and returned to the residence. The others stayed at
the venue and over a period of time consumed
espresso martinis which were
prepared by Ben. Jana consumed one or two glasses of that cocktail.
some point, the remaining group members moved into the kitchen area of the
venue, which was set up with a couch and some chairs.
Music was played, people
danced and some engaged in karaoke. Jana danced with Mariana. Alan and Ben
remained seated engaged in
conversation. Whilst in the kitchen area, Alan
prepared several whiskey and Coke drinks for Jana. She does not recall how many
she consumed; although she does recall that whilst making the drinks Alan was
“continuing to slur his words”.
Unsurprisingly,
during or after having consumed the whiskey and Coke drinks, Jana felt
intoxicated. In particular, when dancing with
Mariana she was nearly
“falling over when twirling around”. Whilst in the winery area,
Alan removed his trousers and
was wearing only his boxer shorts on the lower
part of his body. That was something that he had done in the past; at least
family members.
the evening progressed, Mariana took steps to wind up the socialising such as by
advising: “this is the last song”.
Jana walked back to the
residence, believing that Mariana had already left or was close behind her. On
arrival at the residence,
she engaged in her nightly routine of consuming her
medications. She took Zoloft (150mg), two 5mg tablets of Diazepam, one
tablet and one Stilnox (low-dose) tablet. She went to the bedroom
next door to hers where Sam was sleeping and she removed a pillow.
She recalls
Sam saying words to her to the effect of: “Jana, you need to go to bed
you’re so drunk”. At that
time the effect of the taking of her
medications had not caused her to feel drowsy. As she had not noticed that
Mariana had returned
to the residence, she went to look for her. She returned
to the venue. She checked the office area within. Her mother was not
Alan and Ben were still in the kitchen area engaged in conversation. She
enquired as to the whereabouts of her mother and
was advised that she had
departed with her.
this time, Jana began to feel drowsy. She sat down on the couch. She drifted
in and out of sleep. At one point she noticed Alan
walking out of the room with
Ben. Thereafter her memory is fragmented due to the effect of her medication.
Her next recollection
is that she was at the top of the stairs in the mezzanine
area where she recalls having blown out candles to assist Alan in the procedures
for locking up the venue. She sat down on the stairs. Her vision was blurred
and she felt disoriented. Alan sat next to her.
began to confide in her about the financial issues affecting the business and
his marriage. Alan then said words to the effect:
“I’m in love with
you. I wish things turned out differently and I could be with you”;
We’re perfect for each
other” and “I want you to be my lover
on the side”. Jana responded to the effect: “What! I don’t
and “Obviously you don’t mean that”. At this
time Jana was slurring her words. Alan engaged in further conversation
saying words to the effect: “I’ve been thinking about this for a
long time”, to which she replied with
words to the effect: “You
should be going back to your wife”. Alan did not provide an audible
response to that last
statement, but instead kissed Jana on her lips and she
recalls: “feeling his tongue heavily in my mouth”. She pulled
and said: “No”. Alan apologised, but then again kissed Jana on her
thought that the level of intoxication had caused Alan to do these things and
that he would not repeat his behaviour. Jana had
difficulty controlling her
limbs as they felt “very heavy”. After the second kiss, Alan said
words to the effect of:
“I have loved you for a very long time and I have
wanted this for years now”. Jana did not respond. She states that
“was entering shock and my mind and body began shutting down”. Alan
continued the conversation saying words to the
effect that he wanted Jana
“on the side”. Jana responded with words to the effect:
“What... If you’re wanting
a relationship with me, this will make
you end up like your stepfather”. Alan responded with words to the
effect: “it’s
not the same”.
unlocked the door behind where they were sitting. Jana had never observed that
this door had been opened. It was a door to
the Bridal Suite. There was a bed
inside the room. She noticed that the blackout curtains were closed. She felt
tired” and “found it hard to move”.
then guided her into the room and she recalls sitting on the bed. Alan then
said words to the effect of “going further
with this”, such as
“I want to go further with this”. Jana responded to the effect:
“I just want to go to
sleep”. At that point she was struggling to
process what was occurring and was concerned that she would be unable to remove
herself from the situation. She noticed Alan lock the door. He then sat next
to her on the bed and kissed her. She recalls telling
On her assessment Alan “really looked like he was enjoying himself”.
Once again, Jana said to
Alan something to the effect of: “I don’t
want this”. She was laying on her back on the bed. She was wearing
denim dress that had one zip down the front. Alan unzipped her dress and
removed her underpants. She was not wearing a bra.
When this occurred, Jana
described her state as: “I remember feeling mortified and completely
shocked. I felt frozen and paralysed
with fear. I felt completely powerless. I
remember thinking, this is not what I want. I felt completely powerless and
disassociated.”
removed Jana’s tampon. In doing so he said words to the effect of:
“It’s no problem. It’s really nice
and clean.” Alan
then placed the tampon in a bin in the ensuite. When he returned, he performed
oral sex on Jana. She felt
his head near her vagina and at least one finger was
inserted into her vagina. She told Alan, words to the effect of: “No,
don’t want that”. Alan responded with words to the effect of:
“I just want to make you feel good”. At
that point Jana considered
that Alan was not listening to her.
then moved on top of Jana. She was lying on her back. She could feel his erect
penis. He then penetrated her vagina with his
penis. She could feel his entire
body weight on top of her. She did not know what she could do as she was:
“Too weak and
affected by the medication to push him off”. She no
longer expressed her lack of consent, having concluded that, because Alan
not earlier listened to her, he would not whilst having intercourse. She
reached the point where she just wanted the event “over”,
words: “I felt disassociated. I just laid there. I felt the trauma of
the previous childhood abuse, and recall
thinking: now this is happening
a short while, Alan concluded having intercourse, but she does not know whether
he ejaculated. She does recall him saying words
to the effect of:
“Don’t worry about getting pregnant, I’ve had the snip”.
She did not respond to Alan.
When she could, she got up from the bed and walked
to the toilet in the ensuite. She noticed that her tampon was in the bin. She
decided that she needed to exit the Bridal Suite as fast as she could. When she
returned to the Bridal Suite, she noticed that Alan
“was kind of fluffing
around” and he then said words to the effect of: “You sleep here.
Your mum won’t question
it” to which she replied with words to the
effect of: “I would rather go to the room in the house”. She
further eye contact with Alan, tried to display no emotion, dressed
herself and went downstairs. She ran back to the residence in
the dark. She
recalls that she was “shaking and I think I was crying”.
she reached the residence she went to the bathroom. She did not switch any
lights on. She used the light on her mobile phone.
She dressed into her
sleeping clothes and washed her face and mouth. Shortly thereafter, Alan
entered the residence and enquired
with words to the effect of: “Where are
you?”. Jana attempted to hide behind the bathroom door. She was shaking
did not respond to Alan. After a little while, she emerged from the
bathroom believing that Alan had gone to bed, but he noticed
her and said:
“Here you are”. She responded “Yep” and walked towards
the bedroom in order to sleep. Alan
enquired of her well-being with words to
the effect of: “Are you all right” to which she responded
Alan responded with words to the effect of: “I want to
tuck you in”. Jana did not consider that to be appropriate and
“No”, went into the bedroom and closed the door behind her.
did not get into bed. She knelt down between the twin beds in the room and
cried in the dark. In her affidavit she described
her thought process at that
I tried to process and work out what had happened. It was too much for me to
deal with. There were so many things running through
my head, like “this
is my mum’s husband and he believed there was nothing wrong with
professing his love for me”.
I remember thinking “after all my progress in healing, how am I possibly
supposed to do it all over again?”. I started
thinking dark thoughts about
killing myself because I did not want any part of it.
I also thought about how he has children, and I have a partner and a child and
my life was happy.
I began having suicidal thoughts.
I knew I could not deal with the rest of the night alone, so I went next door
into Sam’s room. I lied down next to her on her
bed and began crying
hysterically. I could not breathe and I could not say anything.
entering Sam’s room, she woke her. Sam asked questions of her with words
to the effect of: “What’s wrong?”.
Jana could not respond
fully and kept saying: “something bad happened”. On further
questioning, Jana said: “Alan
had sex with me”. To this Sam replied
with words to the effect of: “What happened? How?” Jana responded
something like: “It just happened”. She was too upset to give
a more detailed explanation. Eventually, she fell asleep
next to her
approximately 11 am on 13 January 2019, Sam woke Jana from her sleep. She said
to her words to the effect: “You’ve
got to go to work. We will tell
mum later.” They spoke briefly about telling Mariana later that day.
Jana got dressed and
walked over to the office. Alan was in the office. Upon
entering, he said words to her to the effect of: “Morning Gorgeous”.
This made Jana feel sick. She did not want to converse with Alan. She looked
to find her mother, without success. She had another
conversation with Sam
tell her that night, at a meeting
at Jana’s home.
worked for approximately two hours that day. She was too upset to keep working.
She did not know at the time, but subsequently
became aware, that Sam approached
Mariana later that day and told her to come over to the house that evening and
not to advise Alan
where she was going or why. Before Jana met her mother, she
began receiving text messages and a telephone call from Alan. She did
answer. One of the messages stated: “Can we talk?”. Jana did not
pre-arranged meeting occurred between Jana, Sam and Mariana. Jana said words to
her mother to the effect of: “Alan had
sex with me last night”. She
did not use the word “rape”. She explained why in her affidavit as
[B]ecause it was very confronting. For a long time after 12 January 2019, I did
not use that word. I found it too upsetting to talk
or think about having been
raped. It was unimaginable that I had to say that word out loud. Instead,
whenever I explained what happened,
which was not often, I said that Alan had
sex with me without my consent.
disclosing this to Mariana, Jana’s evidence was: “My mother sat
there and did not react. I told my mother that he had
taken me to the Bridal
Suite from the mezzanine. My mother then started asking me questions, implying
that she did not believe me.
She asked me how Alan kissed me and other
questions about Alan’s penis. I think she was trying to catch me out
mother said words to the effect of: “He would never do
that”. I replied to my mother with words to the effect of: “I
never consent”. I further stated words to the effect of: “If you
need proof, there is a tampon in the ensuite bin”.
I told my mother that
Alan is not a good man, and that he needs to stop drinking.
was further discussion between Jana and Mariana which concluded with Mariana
stating words to the effect of: “We will
never speak of this again”;
to which Jana replied with words to the effect of: “Okay, but only if you
get yourself out
of that situation”, meaning her relationship with
or about 19 January 2019, Mariana requested Jana to attend the business to speak
had a further conversation with
her mother, who told her that she had felt “really affected” by what
had happened and
that “Alan and I had “messed up”, and that we
“need to sort your shit out”, referring to Alan and I”.
Mariana then said words to the effect that Jana needed to “sort it
out” with Alan and that he was waiting to discuss
the matter with
walked outside of the building and spoke to Alan. Her affidavit evidence as to
what occurred was:
Alan said to me words to the effect of: “well... This is tough. Honestly,
I was disappointed when you told your mum. We could
have had something between
I replied with words to the effect of: “she deserved to know. What did you
tell her?”.
Alan replied stating words to the effect of: “obviously I had to play the
I don’t remember card”.
I then told Alan that I would be working from home and that I was not coming
intermittently attended Flaxton Gardens for the purpose of undertaking work
until September 2019. Within that period her evidence
was that she felt
uncomfortable at the workplace, particularly because, on each day that she
worked, Alan would greet her with: “Hello
30 August 2019, James asked Jana to marry him, and she accepted. Jana agreed to
have the wedding ceremony at Flaxton Gardens at
the insistence of Mariana,
because she and Alan could not otherwise afford to contribute to the wedding.
Jana did not want to have
her wedding at Flaxton Gardens. Jana was annoyed that
her mother would suggest it, but she was insistent and Jana “felt like
had to agree”. The date of 12 December 2019 for the wedding was
determined.
September 2019, Jana had decided that she could not continue working at Flaxton
Gardens. She had another conversation with Mariana
and told her how unhappy she
was at the prospect of being wed at Flaxton Gardens and that Mariana
“needed to leave” Alan
and acknowledge what had occurred. Mariana
responded that she did not want to leave Alan. Jana told Mariana that she was
her job, to which Mariana replied with words to the effect that she had
to tell Alan in person. Jana then approached Alan, informed
him that the
workplace was too stressful for her and that she would no longer continue
working in the business. She also told him,
using words to the effect: “I
am worried that I am leaving [another female employee] in a dangerous situation
working in an
office alone with you”, to which Alan responded with words
to the effect of: “Of course you don’t trust me with
her. As if I
would be that stupid.”
wedding occurred at Flaxton Gardens on 12 December 2019. Jana says that the
event ran smoothly, and that she tried not to think
occurred in January 2019. She gave a wedding speech, acknowledging that she was
tipsy, and accepts that
she thanked Alan and Mariana because “it would
have been strange not to, given they had hosted the wedding at the
3 June 2020, Jana made a complaint of rape to officers of the Queensland Police
Alan’s evidence
following is taken from Alan’s primary affidavit made on 6 December 2023.
On his case, he and Jana developed a close personal
relationship during her
period of employment at Flaxton Gardens, which he described as
“emotionally intimate, to the point
of having an emotional affair”.
many occasions, Jana and Alan drank alcohol together (to the point of being
drunk), and it was common for each to talk about personal
issues; including in
their respective relationships. On some occasions they had talked about wanting
to run away and escape from
their responsibilities. On several occasions they
had spoken about their relationship as not being one of father and daughter and,
on at least one occasion, Jana had made comments to Alan to the effect that
“she guessed I found her sexy”, to which
he replied to the effect
that “of course she was”.
were occasions on which Alan would put Jana to bed when she had too much to
drink. Once when he did so, Jana kissed him on
12 January 2019, the Summer Showcase event concluded at approximately 8.30 pm.
Alan, Mariana, Sam and Jana worked until approximately
9 pm. When they finished
working Alan, Ben, Mariana and Jana sat in the bar area of Flaxton Gardens.
While seated each had one
or more drinks. Ben made a batch of espresso martinis
for the group. Alan and Ben each drank one espresso martini; Mariana drank
espresso martini and a glass of champagne and Jana drank “champagne and
two cocktails”. Sam dropped in briefly but
did not stay.
a short while, the group moved into the winery area adjacent to the bar. Alan
and Ben were seated and engaged in deep conversation.
Mariana put on music and
Jana sang karaoke and danced with Mariana. Alan observed Jana’s dancing
becoming “more sexually
suggestive”. Mariana asked Jana to stop and
said words to the effect of: “You can’t dance like that”.
and Ben remained in deep conversation while the dancing and karaoke
some point during the evening, Alan removed his trousers as he suffered from
eczema and itchiness. He would sometimes do so among
family and friends. He
asked everyone whether they were okay with him doing this and they said that
they were. He was wearing loose
boxer shorts.
and Jana sat on a sofa in the area where Alan and Ben were sitting. Jana sat
with her legs across Mariana’s lap, which
was revealing as Jana was
wearing an above-the-knee skirt. Mariana said words to the effect of:
“Stop being like this”
and slapped Jana on the leg. Jana responded
to the effect of: “Don’t you know that will turn the boys on”.
appeared to be annoyed by Jana’s response and said words to the
effect that it was time for bed and told Jana to come with
her. Mariana and
Jana exited the winery area and Alan and Ben continued their conversation.
short time after leaving the winery, Jana returned. Alan cannot recall how long
she was she was away. Jana said that she wanted
whiskey and Alan took her to
the restaurant bar where they selected a bottle before returning to the winery
with the whiskey. Jana,
Ben and Alan sat together and resumed their conversion.
Alan recalls Jana participating in the conversation and that she was awake
alert. Jana continued to drink, including some drinks that she poured herself
and some poured by Alan.
and Ben resumed their conversation about Ben’s relationship breakdown.
Jana was sitting close to Ben and may have been
sitting on his knees or over his
legs. To an extent, Jana participated in the conversation. Alan did not notice
that Jana was asleep
or dozing at this point. To his observation, she was awake
and alert. From time to time she went outside, he assumed to have a
or to vape. She continued to consume alcohol.
approximately 1.30am, Ben said that he was going home. Jana was not present at
that time. Alan walked Ben to his car and returned
to the venue. Jana joined
him. Alan recalls that Jana said words to the effect that she wanted more
whiskey and he had the impression
that she was keen for further conversation.
They continued drinking and talking. Their conversation eventually turned to
respective relationship difficulties; during which each said to the other
words to the effect that they wished to “run-away”.
their conversation, Jana was sitting on Alan’s lap while he massaged her
shoulders. At some point Jana removed her shoes,
turned around and put her legs
on his knees and he massaged her feet. He noticed that she was “a bit
ticklish around her toes”.
To his observation Jana was “very
comfortable and relaxed” and said words to the effect that she was
the massage a lot”.
was wearing a denim dress that zipped up at the front. Alan does not recall
whether it was zipped from the bottom up or the
top down, but he does recall
that Jana partially opened the zip to expose more of her legs. At that time, he
felt “very comfortable,
and as it appeared to me that Jana was clearly
enjoying the massage, I slowly began to massage further up her legs.” In
Jana asked Alan if he “was actually intending to create a sexual
feeling” and that she “was feeling very excited
massage”. He responded to her that: “I was okay with that if she
was”, she said that she was and he continued
to massage her feet and legs
including her thighs. Jana then repositioned her legs and asked Alan if he
“was wanting this
to go any further”, to which he responded that he
was comfortable in going further “if she was happy to” and they
discussed the consequences of “going further sexually”. He recalls
that they then spoke about “being adults”,
at which point he
informed her that his relationship with Mariana “was looking pretty bad
both then “kissed and fondled one another for some time on the sofa in the
winery”. Alan cannot recall how long
they did so, but on his estimate it
was around two hours. During that encounter Jana’s dress “was
completely open”
and he noticed that she was wearing G-string underwear
without a bra. They continued kissing, and each made “several comments
decided to go upstairs and into the Bridal Suite.
Alan cannot recall who first
suggested doing so.
got up from the sofa and walked the stairs to the door to the Bridal Suite.
Alan recalls tripping on the stairs whilst Jana
was waiting for him at the top.
They sat down at the top of the stairs and “kissed and fondled one another
some more there”.
At this point he recalls asking her “if she was
sure she wanted to go into the apartment” to which she responded that
was. Thereupon, they entered the Bridal Suite.
sat on the bed and removed his shirt. Jana stood in front of him and removed
her dress and underwear. Alan noticed that she
had a tampon in and said:
“looks like you have a rat rail hanging out”. Jana responded:
“oh fuck! It’s ok”.
She then removed the tampon, showed it to
him and said: “it’s clean”. Alan said words to the effect of:
you comfortable with this?”. Jana responded:
“yes”. He watched her go into the ensuite bathroom, sit on the
and put the tampon in the bin. While Jana was in the ensuite, Alan
removed his boxer shorts and got into the bed.
returned from the ensuite and got into bed with Alan. He asked her: “do
you want this?”, to which she responded:
“I need it”. They
then had sex. Alan was on top and she guided his penis into her vagina with her
hand. He stopped
and asked her: “are you ok” to which she
responded: “it’s good”. Alan cannot recall exactly how long
the sexual intercourse lasted for, but it was not long as he became lightheaded.
He said words to the effect that he was sorry but
couldn’t finish, to
which Jana responded that: “it was ok”. He then fell asleep and
when he awoke Jana was gone.
left the Bridal Suite, turned off the lights in the venue and closed all the
doors. He estimates this took approximately five
to ten minutes. He then
walked to the residence. Upon arrival, he saw Jana and Sam standing in the
doorway to Sam’s bedroom
and asked them if everything was ok. They both
responded that it was. Alan then entered the bedroom he shared with Mariana and
accidentally woke her by turning on the light. He got into bed and went to
the morning of 13 January 2019, Alan woke at approximately 7 am and began
preparing for the second day of the Summer Showcase event.
Jana came into the
office late, although he cannot recall what time. He said words to her to the
effect that: “if she needed
to, she could go home” and left the
office and went about his work. He did so because he thought Jana may need some
after the events of the previous night. That afternoon, Mariana told Alan
that she had received a text message from Jana asking
her to attend Jana’s
house as she needed to talk. Mariana asked Alan if he knew what was going on
and he told her that he
did not. Mariana then left Flaxton Gardens.
returned to Flaxton Gardens sometime later and did not want to speak to Alan.
She did not stay at the residence.
6.49 pm on 13 January 2019, Alan sent Jana a text message asking if he could
call her. He had the intention of discussing the
previous night. He believes
that he attempted to call her at least twice, but does not recall if that was on
13 January 2019, or
later. Jana did not respond to the text message.
in the evening of 13 January 2019, Mariana asked Alan what had happened the
previous night. He responded to the effect that
he: “Was having
difficulty remembering but thought that Jana and I had crossed a line”.
14 January 2019, Mariana asked Alan further questions about what had happened
with Jana the night before. He stated that he: “Felt
like a line had been
crossed” but could not remember much. During the conversation, Mariana
suggested that Jana and Alan had
had sex and he agreed that they had.
did not see Jana until approximately one week later, around 19 or 20 January
2019. Jana did not work in the intervening period.
He was sitting on the
veranda of the residence and observed Jana arrive and enter the office, where he
knew Mariana to be. A short
time later Mariana and Jana walked over to Alan.
Mariana was initially present, but left when requested to do so by Jana so that
she and Alan could speak.
and Jana spoke for approximately half an hour. Alan’s affidavit evidence
as to the content of that conversation was that
he said words to the effect
that: “The events of 12 and 13 January 2019 were a mistake that we were
both responsible for”;
“That mistake should never have
happened”; “I was sorry for my part in that mistake”; “I
was very concerned
as we had both made a bad choice” and; “I would
be willing to talk with a counsellor with her if she thought it would
speaking to a counsellor together was not necessary
and that she said: “I
don’t have an issue with what we did” and she was “all
good” and would work through
it with her counsellor.
then said words to the effect that he: “was ok to tell James”. That
comment upset Jana and she stated that she did
not want to tell James and he was
never to find out. She said that she was afraid that, if James found out, he
would take her son
away from her. They hugged and Alan had the impression that
the conversation ended in a civil manner.
Mariana and Jana continued to work at Flaxton Gardens. He recalls that after
the events of 12 and 13 January 2019, Jana worked
mostly from home. He removed
his office from the commercial premises to the residence in an effort to
“ease tensions”.
recalls that Jana attended a number of events at which he was present throughout
2019. At each of those events they were cordial
and sociable towards one
another. In early August 2019, Jana stopped working for Flaxton Gardens.
12 December 2019, Jana and James were married at Flaxton Gardens. Alan recalls
that during the wedding, Jana gave a speech in
which she thanked him and Mariana
for making the event possible and specifically thanked him for all his
assistance and “being
a good person”.
Jana’s response
is apparent from the Comprehensive Reference Index, Part B of the Appeal Book,
that Jana filed an affidavit of evidence in response
to Alan’s version
dated 13 February 2024, but it has not been included in Part C of the Appeal
Book. However, I have the benefit
of her reply pleading in which she accepted
the general contention that Jana and Alan each enjoyed an emotionally intimate
relationship
prior to 12 January 2019, during which they would confide in each
other as to difficulties they were experiencing in their relationship
respective partners, which discussions included details as to their respective
mental health. She denied however that
they discussed any singular or mutual
desire to “run away from life”.
denied a series of contentions (pleaded as the Winery Pre-Sexual Conduct) as to
what occurred on her return to the winery at
approximately 12:45 am on the
morning of 13 January 2019, save that she accepts that once Ben left the winery,
she and Alan were
alone. She accepts at some point he massaged her
Specifically,
Jana denied that Alan massaged her legs; that they engaged in intimate fondling
or kissing “for some time”;
that she rearranged her dress to expose
her breasts and underwear or that she made comments to Alan to the effect that
kissing and fondling felt good”.
further denied each of Alan’s contentions that they agreed to ascend the
stairs to the Bridal Suite, engaged in more pre-sexual
conduct and then, upon
entering the Bridal Suite, engaged in consensual sexual intercourse. Finally,
Jana denied the balance of
the contentions of Alan as to what occurred after the
act of sexual intercourse.
Jana commenced her evidence before the primary judge, she corrected/clarified
some statements in her primary affidavit. Relevant
for present purposes is the
following evidence. Although she recalled there being a door at the top of the
stairs to enter the Bridal
Suite, with a key in it, she did not “really
remember” Alan pulling the key out and placing it in the door. As to the
placement of her tampon in the bin in the ensuite, she said that she remembered
“thinking” that her tampon was in the
bin but “not seeing it
physically”. After the act of intercourse, when she called on her sister
Sam, she could not say
whether she woke Sam up or whether she was asleep at the
time. As to who approached Mariana the following day, in order to initiate
discussion, she clarified her evidence that both she and Sam made the approach.
As to what happened during the speech given on
her wedding day, she said that
when she thanked those present, it was addressed generally to everyone and not
particularly to Mariana
and Alan. With those alterations, she confirmed the
accuracy of her affidavits.
The other witnesses and evidence before the primary
and Sam made affidavits and Dr De Leacy, a psychiatrist, provided a report in
Jana’s case. Ben made an affidavit for
Alan. Mariana made an affidavit
in which she expressed reluctance about her involvement, disclosed that she had
received a subpoena
from Alan’s lawyers and recorded that she was not
acting on his behalf.
witness gave oral evidence before the primary judge. In addition, there was
documentary evidence in the form of an agreed Court
Book and a number of
separately tendered exhibits. Each witness was cross-examined.
REASONS OF THE PRIMARY JUDGE
Honour commenced by setting out almost the entirety of Jana’s amended
statement of claim and the substantial parts of Alan’s
defence where he
pleaded his positive case. His Honour then set out the civil standard of proof
at s 140 of the
Evidence Act
(Cth), together with
paragraphs [90]-[111] and [126]-[132] from the judgment of Lee J in
v Network Ten Pty Ltd
[2024] FCA 369
, where his Honour was concerned with
the burden and standard of proof in a civil proceeding involving claims of
serious wrongdoing.
his Honour extracted a number of very long passages from the speech of Lord
Rhesa Shipping Co SA v Edmonds & Another : The Popi M
[1985] 2 All ER 712
at 717-719, a case about proximate cause in a shipping
collision, but said by his Honour to be presently relevant on the process
judicial reasoning when there is doubt as to who should be believed on critical
questions of fact. To this reference his Honour
then added the decision of
Jackson J in
ASIC v Wilson (No 3)
[2023] FCA 1009
(2023) 171 ACSR 1
where his Honour addressed the civil burden and standard of proof,
the drawing of inferences, circumstantial proof and how to assess
reliability of witness evidence.
relevance of these citations was ultimately made clear by the primary judge when
stating his conclusions at PJ [85]-[88]. His
Honour doubted the
“version” of events of Jana and Alan, stated that he was
“unable to come to any concluded view”
as to whether the conduct in
the Bridal Suite was “unwelcome” and for that reason concluded that
Jana failed to discharge
her onus of proof.
the primary judge correctly reasoned to that conclusion is the focus of the
appeal grounds.
to the disclosed pathway of his Honour’s reasons, he next set out s 28A of
the SDA and framed as the central issue
whether Alan had made an unwelcome
sexual advance or had engaged in unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature: PJ [13].
His Honour also
recorded the agreement of counsel that Jana would fail in her
claim if the Court was unable to make a finding one way or the other
whether the conduct was unwelcome: PJ [13].
Honour turned to a consideration of the evidence commencing at PJ [15]. With
respect to his Honour, the reasons are haphazard
and lack logical structure. At
PJ [16]-[17], his Honour made an entirely peripheral observation (the
intercourse did not constitute
the crime of incest) and then recorded the
obvious fact that was not an issue: that Jana was present at Flaxton Gardens on
2019 for purposes related to the Summer Showcase event and when it
had concluded, the remaining participants retired to the winery
consumed alcohol.
PJ [18]-[22], his Honour addressed the evidence of Ben, whom he described as
“an important witness”. At PJ [19], his
Honour reproduced verbatim
almost the entirety of Ben’s affidavit made on 8 December 2023. Ben is a
professional photographer
and attended the Summer Showcase event as an invited
guest. When the event had concluded, at approximately 8:30 pm, he remained
engaged in conversation with Alan and Jana in the bar area. He made some
espresso martini cocktails. He consumed two of them
until he departed at
somewhere between 1 and 1:30 am on 13 January 2019. To his observation, Jana
was drinking, but he made no observation
as to how many drinks she consumed. He
did observe that she was: “a bit tipsy and was in a relaxed, bubbly mood.
describe her mood and behaviour as someone who had three or four
drinks”. Alan was also drinking, he did not observe how many,
but he also
described his state as: “someone who had three or four drinks”.
Whilst he was conversing with Alan he did
not notice that he had difficulty in
doing so or in understanding what was discussed.
some point the group moved from the bar area into the main function area and
they sat either on a sofa or on a range of chairs
that had been set up. Ben
engaged in conversation with Alan about difficulties that he (Ben) was having in
his relationship with
his partner. During this discussion he noticed that
Mariana was “up and down” between the sofa area and an adjacent
space where she was singing and dancing. He noticed, at an unspecified time,
that Mariana left the function area and did not return.
He also made
observations of Jana whilst she was in the function area. He noticed that she
was “moving between the inside
and outside of the venue”.
the departure of Mariana, Jana continued to move between the sofa area and the
outside of the venue. His evidence was then:
[S]he was largely sitting with Alan. She sat next to me once or twice and
briefly sat on my lap once. The way she sat on my lap made
me feel uncomfortable
and I did not respond. When Jana was sitting with Alan, she sat on his lap once
or twice. The remainder of
the time, Jana was sitting up against Alan, with her
body leaning on him and snuggling into him, with Allen’s arm around her
shoulder. I estimate that there were about a dozen occasions when that occurred.
I noticed on a few occasions that Alan had his hand
on Jana’s leg. On some
of those occasions I noticed that Jana had her hand on top of Alan’s.
I took particular notice of Jana and Alan’s physical interactions because
they made me feel uncomfortable. It seemed to me
that there was a sexual element
in those interactions, particularly when Alan’s hand was on Jana’s
leg. It also seemed
to me that none of the physical interaction between Jana and
Alan was unwanted or not appreciated or accepted. Those things seemed
inappropriate in the context of their relationship as stepfather and
stepdaughter, which left me feeling uncomfortable.
continued to engage in conversation with Alan. To his observation Alan did not
seem to be affected by alcohol: “to an extent
that I would be concerned
observations of Jana; concluding
that: “it did not seem to me that Jana
was intoxicated or affected by drugs or alcohol in any way that made me
concerned about
her ability to function or make decisions”.
did not much participate in the conversation, but when she did to Ben’s
observation: “she seemed to be conversing
normally”. When she
walked between the sofa area and the outside of the venue she “seemed to
be walking normally”.
He did not notice her dozing or sleeping.
further expressed the view that “in lay terms, neither Alan nor Jana
seemed “drunk drunk to me at any point”
before he departed.
PJ [20], his Honour found that the evidence of Ben was “largely consistent
with” a police statement that he made on
25 July 2020, save that his
affidavit in the proceeding did not mention his belief that by the end of the
night, Jana and Alan “were
heavily intoxicated, and that they were
slurring their words, or that [Jana] was not walking properly”. That
difference was
pursued in cross-examination and his Honour set out the relevant
extract in the balance of his reasons from PJ [20]. Ben could not
satisfactory explanation as to why that evidence was not included in his
affidavit, concluding with the answer: “I
don’t know”.
Despite this, his Honour at PJ [21] stated that he accepted the evidence of Ben
“in all respects”,
placing emphasis on his evidence about Jana
behaving “in such a sexualised way while sitting on [Alan’s] lap
was made to feel uncomfortable”. At PJ [22], the primary judge
found it “significant” that Ben had “deposed
that it seemed to
him that there was a sexual element to the interaction between [Jana] and
[Alan], and that none of the physical
interaction between the two was either
unwanted, not appreciated, or not accepted”.
I explain, a difficulty with his Honour’s findings about the evidence of
Ben is that he failed to bring to account and grapple
with his inconsistent
evidence about Jana’s state of intoxication, which is the only topic on
which he was cross-examined.
primary judge next dealt with the evidence of Mariana from PJ [23], whom he
described as “an important witness”.
His Honour set out the
entirety of her affidavit evidence as to her relevant observations by extracting
21 paragraphs from it. Mariana
commenced her affidavit by stating that she was
not well and had received advice that participating in the proceeding would
be detrimental to her physical and mental well-being to the extent that
“it may affect my ability to recollect events and or
witness” (sic).
She also stated that she was not “participating out of free will or by my
own choice”, was attending
in obedience to a subpoena, was concerned that
by giving evidence it may destroy any chance of reconciling her relationship
her daughter, that the events in question have caused her deep trauma and
hurt and that she was not giving evidence on behalf of
to those matters, her affidavit evidence was as follows. Following the
conclusion of the Summer Showcase event, she, Jana
and Alan sat in the bar area
with Ben. To her observation Jana had consumed “a few glasses” of
champagne during the
afternoon and may have had at least one espresso martini.
She was in a lively and sociable “party” mood. Alan had been
drinking earlier in the afternoon and seemed “to be a bit tipsy, but not
drunk”. The party moved into the winery area,
where she observed Alan and
Jana drinking whiskey. Alan and Ben sat on the sofa and were engaged in
conversation. Mariana put on
some music and danced with her daughter.
noticed that her daughter’s dancing “became more wild and made me
feel uncomfortable”. She left the dance
floor and returned to the sofa
area and then noticed that Alan had removed his trousers. When she was seated
on the sofa, Jana approached
her and sat down next to her. While seated next to
her, Jana put her legs over her lap and played with her hair. This made Mariana
feel uncomfortable and she requested Jana to cease. Mariana then slapped Jana
on her leg in an effort to stop her behaving as she
had, to which Jana
responded: “Mum, don’t do this – it turns men on when you do
this”. At this point Mariana
felt uncomfortable and decided to leave the
venue and go to bed. She did so between 12:30 am and 1 am on 13 January
initially protested but eventually agreed that she would also retire to bed and
each got up and headed towards the residence.
To Mariana’s observation
Jana then “seemed very tipsy but could walk by herself”. On their
journey towards the
residence, Mariana detoured to use the bathroom in the
office area and to attend to a printing task. Jana did not follow her. When
she exited the office, Jana was nowhere to be seen. She turned back to the
winery area to look for her, without success. Alan and
Ben were still engaged
in conversation. Mariana then returned to the residence and noticed that the
door to Jana’s bedroom
was closed. This caused her to assume that Jana
had gone to bed. Mariana then went to her bedroom and fell asleep.
next event she recalls is that at approximately 4 am Alan came into the bedroom,
woke her up and to her observation he was “quite
undressed and got into bed. She went back to sleep. This is the extent to
which the primary judge extracted passages
from the affidavit of Mariana, at
least in this section of the judgment, although the substance of other evidence
was mentioned by
his Honour when considering the credit of Alan at PJ
is important to note that Mariana’s affidavit evidence went further which
the primary judge did not mention. On the evening
of 13 January 2019, Jana
telephoned her and requested that she pack an overnight bag and go to
Jana’s house because: “She
wanted to talk to me about something
serious”. Mariana did as requested. When she arrived at Jana’s
house, Sam was
also present. She noted that each was visibly upset. Her
evidence continued:
Jana said words to me to the effect that “something happened”. My
first thought was that something had happened between
Jana and Ben, but then
Jana said that she and Alan “slept together and had sex”.
I asked Jana a few times she was sure it was Alan, and not Ben. I asked that
because, having seen Jana’s behaviour and mood
the night before, my first
thought was that she had gone to bed with Ben. Jana said that she was sure it
was Alan. She described
shortly that they went to the apartment by the internal
stairs and described what Alan looked like naked.
I was shocked by what Jana said. I asked her what she wanted me to do and
whether she wanted me to leave Alan. She responded to the
effect “nothing,
and I don’t want you to tell anyone. We will sort it out (meaning Alan
& Jana)”. Jana said
words to the effect that nobody can ever know, and
especially that her partner, James, could never know.
At no point during that conversation did Jana say anything to the effect that
Alan had raped her, or that the sex between her and
Alan had been
non-consensual.
did not stay at Jana’s residence that evening. She went back to the venue
and entered the Bridal Suite. She looked
in the rubbish bin in the ensuite and
noticed a clean tampon. She took it out, wrapped it up and put it in a
different rubbish bin.
that evening she received a text message from Alan enquiring as to her
whereabouts. She told him that she needed to speak with
him. Alan came to the
residence. Her evidence continued:
I said words to him to the effect: “Is there something you want to tell
me?”. He responded to the effect that he could
not remember exactly, as he
was still drunk or hung over, but that something had happened between him and
Jana. I cannot recall the
exact words he used, but it was something like
“I think I crossed a line”.
gave evidence about her daughter’s wedding plans. To her recollection in
the middle of 2019, Jana approached her at
Flaxton Gardens, told her that she
and James were to be married on 12 December 2019 and that they wanted to have
the wedding at Flaxton
Gardens. Mariana agreed. During the wedding speeches
she recollects that Jana thanked Alan with words to the effect: “Thank
for all your assistance and for being a good person”.
ceased working at Flaxton Gardens in August 2019. On or about 5 January 2020, a
social function was held at Flaxton Gardens
which Jana attended. Jana explained
her attendance as an opportunity to say goodbye to other staff members. On 10
January 2020,
they conversed by telephone. As to what was said, Mariana
During that conversation, Jana said words to me to the effect that Alan had
raped her. This was the first time Jana had said anything
to me to the effect
that Alan had raped her, or that the sex between them was not consensual.
PJ [68], the primary judge set out the more detailed evidence as to this
conversation given by Mariana in her police statement,
together with relevant
extracts from her cross-examination. He did so as part of his assessment of the
credit of Jana. That is
a matter that I return to in detail in these
primary judge at PJ [29]-[34] focused on evidence as to the movements of Jana
from the time when she first left the winery area
with her mother to her
mother’s later assumption, that because the door to her daughter’s
bedroom at the residence was
closed, she must have been asleep inside. The
evidence focused on questions that his Honour put to Mariana about the movements
each. His Honour was concerned about timing the pathway of travel in
minutes. It would seem that his Honour was concerned to understand
was true that Jana, upon returning to the residence, had looked for her mother
without success. His Honour obtained evidence
from Mariana, that by reason of
her diversion into the office on the journey to the residence, Jana must have
been three or four
minutes ahead of Mariana. When questioned as to whether, if
Jana had checked to see if her mother was in the residence she would
noticed her, Mariana agreed. This was put by his Honour on the assumption that
Jana had remained in the residence for 10 minutes
before returning to the winery
and had during that period checked to see if Mariana was in her bedroom. This
evidence caused his
Honour to conclude at PJ [33] that Jana had given false
evidence that she left the residence and returned to the winery in order
locate her mother. The difficulty with that speculative reasoning is the large
assumption that Jana spent 10 minutes in the residence
coupled with imprecise
evidence as to the time spent by Mariana in the office and the walk time to the
residence. His Honour was
after all concerned with events that occurred some
five years and four months earlier where the participants were alcohol
primary judge from PJ [35] next dealt with whether there were candles on the
staircase leading to the Bridal Suite. Jana’s
evidence was that she
recalled that she ascended the stairs to extinguish candles, and having done so,
Alan sat next to her. His
Honour rejected her evidence: photographs taken on 12
January 2019 did not show any candles on the stairs (PJ [38]), Mariana gave
evidence in the District Court trial that no candles had been placed there since
2017 (PJ [39]), Alan gave evidence to similar effect
(PJ [40]) and it was
improbable that if Jana “was extremely affected by
medication/intoxication, or a combination of both”,
that she climbed two
sets of stairs for any purpose other than “to pursue something private
with [Alan] associated with the
Bridal Suite” (PJ [41]).
primary judge then undertook an assessment of the credibility of Jana from PJ
[46]. The analysis is significantly challenged
in her appeal grounds and
submissions, which I later address. For the present, a high level summary is
sufficient. His Honour found
Jana to be an unsatisfactory witness, building
upon “aspects” of her evidence that he had earlier concluded were
“implausible
and unsatisfactory”: PJ [46]. At PJ [47], his Honour
concluded that Jana’s memory of the events which led to her entering
Bridal Suite was poor, relying on:
(a) His rejection of the candles evidence;
(b) Her denial that she sat on laps of Alan and Ben;
(c) His finding that her evidence as to what she said to Alan and Ben was
“vague and unconvincing”, for which his Honour
relied on a
substantial extract from the cross-examination;
(d) His finding that she gave “vague and confusing” evidence as to
what medication she took and the dosages;
(e) His finding that she falsely denied arguing with Mariana about leaving the
winery and retiring to bed, combined with inconsistent
evidence about that in
her police statement dated 3 June 2020;
(f) His finding that she gave inconsistent evidence about the conversations
between her and Alan at the top of the stairs, for which
his Honour reproduced a
short extract from the cross-examination;
(g) His finding that in her evidence she “failed to make reasonable
concessions”, which his Honour justified by a single
reference: in her
first affidavit she deposed that she only took Stilnox when she considered that
she needed it, but in cross-examination
was “adamant that she took that
drug every night”;
(h) Whether Jana informed her mother on the morning of 13 January that she had
non-consensual sex or, according to the evidence of
Mariana, that non-consent
was not mentioned. His Honour preferred the evidence of Mariana;
(i) His finding that the amendments that Jana made to her first affidavit when
she commenced her evidence-in-chief were “significant”
and made for
the purpose of achieving consistency with her earlier statements in the criminal
proceeding;
(j) Implausibility in Jana’s evidence as to whether she had discussed
intimacy issues with Alan before 12 January;
(k) That she first consulted a psychiatrist Dr Martin in 2013 and was then
diagnosed as suffering from PTSD, anxiety and depressed
mood symptoms. Dr
Martin was not called as a witness and his Honour concluded that there was no
good reason as to why, which led
to drawing the adverse inference: “that
the evidence which could have been adduced through Dr Martin would not have
her case, either on the question of liability, or in respect of
compensation/damages issues”.
Honour next addressed the credibility of Alan. The reasons commence at PJ
[Alan] was visibly unsettled and anxious when giving his evidence at trial. He
was a person under extreme stress considering the
possible consequences of
[Jana’s] case being made out against him – namely that he had had
non-consensual sexual intercourse
with [Jana], and that he had therefore raped
her. He was already in the position of one who had incurred the moral wrath of
the community
at large by his having had sexual intercourse with the daughter of
his then wife.
[Alan] was also a person whose responses to uncomplicated questions put to him
were sometimes clumsy, verbose and initially unresponsive.
surprising, then, that under the skilful cross-examination of Senior Counsel,
[Alan’s] evidence was in many respects
unsatisfactory.
Honour then provided examples by extracting large portions of Alan’s
cross-examination at PJ [50] and [51]. Within PJ [51]
his Honour found that
Alan was “at times evasive”, “on occasion gave contrary
evidence”, admitted that he
was dishonest when speaking about the incident
with Mariana and gave “conflicting evidence about him being awake and
on the one hand and “of how both he and [Jana] were affected
by alcohol on the other”.
PJ [52], the primary judge turned to his analysis of what occurred between Jana
and Alan in the Bridal Suite. Perplexingly,
his Honour did not analyse the
competing evidence of Jana and Alan. Rather, his Honour proceeded by a series
of stepped value judgements
commencing at PJ [52] with this:
When two intoxicated people first enter a bedroom after having shortly
beforehand engaged in sexualised conduct toward each other,
this Court holds
there are no hard and fast rules as to what will necessarily next transpire
between them behind closed doors. A
Court ought not to invoke outdated
historical or moral preconceptions for the purpose of making positive findings
probably next occurred. That is particularly so where the
consequences of making a finding of sexual misconduct are grave.
that premise, his Honour reasoned at PJ [53] that he was not assisted by
“academic treatises concerning what was typical
or atypical behaviour of a
sexual assault victim” in the task of “determining whether the truth
lies in accepting [Jana’s]
version of events; whether it lies in accepting
[Alan’s] version of events; or whether the Court has been left in doubt as
to which version of events ought to be accepted”. Just what academic
material his Honour had in mind was not disclosed.
PJ [54] his Honour generalised that a court could not “be persuaded”
by the evidence of one unsatisfactory witness
in preference to the evidence of
“another unsatisfactory witness” if there was no “compelling
accept either version as more probable. His Honour’s
explanation of what he had in mind references CCTV, documentary evidence
evidence of eyewitnesses. A perplexing aspect of that reasoning is the
unlikelihood that CCTV would be installed in a bridal
suite at a wedding venue
or that those inside would document their encounters. In any event, at PJ [55],
his Honour determined that
the case turned on drawing inferences, rather than
making findings based on the direct evidence of Jana and Alan, in part reasoning
Alternatively, factual evidence giving rise to competing inferences as to what
might have happened behind closed doors is only compelling
if one inference is
more logical, rational and probable than the other.
that proposition his Honour referred to
Holloway v McFeeters
(1956) 94 CLR 470
at 480-481, where Williams, Webb and Taylor JJ were
concerned with drawing inferences where direct proof of a fact is not
PJ [56], his Honour, in conclusionary terms, said:
The Court finds that it is in doubt as to what happened in the Bridal Suite
between [Jana] and [Alan] on the question of whether
their sexual intercourse
was consensual or not. [Jana’s] evidence as to what happened in the room
was unpersuasive, as was
[Alan’s]. Of the two inferences open to the Court
on the question of consent, the Court finds that neither inference was more
probable than the other.
PJ [57], his Honour characterised the evidence of Ben as
“significant” as to the interactions between Jana and Alan
they were on the sofa in the winery, attributing to Ben that they “were
both highly sexualised and consensual”.
In turn this led his Honour to
reason that:
[Alan’s] evidence about the sexualised conduct between him and [Jana]
having continued between them whilst they were on the
sofa after [Ben] left was
contextually plausible based upon [Ben’s] evidence.
PJ [58], his Honour concluded that there was “no reasonable
explanation” given by Jana as to how she came to be at
the top of the
stairs. Her explanation about ascending the stairs to extinguish candles
“was a fabrication intended to justify
her having gone first to the top of
the stairs”. From that finding his Honour concluded that:
[I]t was the joint intention of both [Jana] and [Alan] to go into the Bridal
Suite with amorous intent.
PJ [59], his Honour expressed “real doubt” about Jana’s
evidence that Alan had removed her tampon, because:
None of the evidence about the placement of the tampon into a bin after its
removal assisted the Court in determining whether it
was [Alan] or [Jana] who
removed the tampon. The respective cross-examinations of each of [Jana] and
[Alan]on point was not elucidating.
Honour then turned to the medical evidence from Dr De Leacy, commencing at PJ
[60]. Dr De Leacy appeared as an independent expert
witness for Jana, and in
that capacity authored a report, at the request of Jana’s solicitors,
dated 12 April 2023. The purpose
of his evidence was to set out Jana’s
history of psychiatric illness and symptomology, whether she was suffering from
a recognised
psychiatric illness and the effect of any such illness upon her and
her capacity to engage in full-time employment. In broad summary,
Dr De Leacy
concluded that Jana was suffering from complex PTSD, originating in her
childhood in consequence of sexual abuse, aggravated
by her sexual intercourse
with Alan. Her prognosis was guarded; the condition described as: “Quite
difficult to treat and
will be long lasting. There will be significant
impairment for a considerable period of time, both in terms of work capabilities
and enjoyment of day-to-day activities.”
primary judge did not conduct an analysis of the content of Dr De Leacy’s
evidence. Rather, he focused upon answers given
in his examination-in-chief,
for which he extracted a portion, as relevant to whether the consumption of
“a substantial amount
of alcohol” over a period of four hours
combined with the taking of medication may have affected Jana’s memory
a stressful or traumatic event”. The extract at PJ [60]
MR O’GORMAN: But what if, at the time of – or within a couple of
hours of taking those four medications and the alcohol
we’ve spoken of,
there was a stressful or traumatic event? Would that – would memory be
impaired equally?
DR DE LEACY: Actually, stressful events are more
readily registered and retained.
MR O’GORMAN: Remembered?
DR DE LEACY: Registered and remembered. Registered means the brain takes notice
of it and processes it. Without getting too technical,
there’s two
different pathways in the brain for memory. Ordinary memory goes through a part
of the brain called the hippocampus
and then gets redistributed to the temporal
lobe, but traumatic memories go through the anterior part of the hippocampus
called the amygdala, and this becomes far more indelible. That’s
why people with PTSD have indelible memories.
MR O’GORMAN: Right.
Yes. Thank you, Doctor. Thank you, your Honour.
Honour then found at PJ [61]:
The above evidence of Dr De Leacy leads the Court to conclude that had the
events of 12-13 January 2019 been traumatic or stressful
to [Jana], then
[Jana’s] memory of all claimed events would have been indelible or
approaching indelible. To the contrary,
[Jana’s]memory of events leading
up to entering the Bridal Suite, and the events within the Bridal Suite and
following, was
imprecise and vague. That feature, along with the other aspects
of unsatisfactory evidence given by [Jana], has persuaded the Court
whatever transpired in the Bridal Suite was neither stressful nor traumatic to
her. It was not unwelcome.
next topic addressed by his Honour from PJ [62] was the wedding between Jana and
James on 12 December 2019 at Flaxton Gardens.
His Honour commenced by noting
that Mariana withdrew her affidavit evidence that Jana had thanked Alan during
the formal speeches,
when video evidence was presented to her and which
confirmed that Jana had said no such thing. However, from PJ [63], his Honour
reasoned that: “Mariana nonetheless was adamant that [Jana] had said these
things about [Alan]” and for that proposition
set out an extract from the
cross-examination of Mariana, which was to the effect that having conceded that
Jana did not thank Alan
during the formal speeches, Mariana maintained:
“If it’s not in the speech, she definitely did say that. I stand by
PJ [64], the primary judge reasoned that Mariana was an independent witness, was
not motivated to give false evidence and was credible.
From this finding, his
Honour stepped to a general implausibility conclusion at PJ [65]:
Further, the Court finds as implausible, and bizarre, the proposition that
[Jana] would have agreed to have held her own wedding
reception at Flaxton
Gardens if she had in fact been raped by [Alan] at that very venue. [Alan] was,
at the time of [Jana’s]
wedding, central to the business operations of
Flaxton, and assisted [Jana] in planning for the reception.
from PJ [66], the primary judge dealt with when Jana first made a rape
allegation. His Honour preferred the evidence of Mariana:
that on 13 January
2019 Jana said only that she and Alan had sex. She did not say it was without
consent and did not use the word
rape. According to Mariana it was not until
sometime in early January 2020, that Jana informed her during a telephone
conversation
that she had been raped by Alan. The reaction to hearing that news
was shock. The conversation became heated and Jana was distraught.
setting out a significant portion of the transcript of the cross-examination of
Mariana on this issue, during which she
confirmed her evidence, the primary
judge did not reveal why, in his reasoning process, the delayed complaint of
rape was significant
despite describing the lapse of time as “important
for the purpose of assessing” Jana’s evidence: PJ [66]. It
be recalled that Jana in her primary affidavit stated that when she first
revealed to her mother on 13 January 2019 what had
occurred, she said that the
intercourse was without her consent but did not use the word rape. She further
explained in her evidence-in-chief,
that she refrained from using the word rape
for some time after the event because she felt a sense of shame and: “I
just wanted
to try and rephrase it in any way I can that would still have the
same meaning”.
primary judge dealt with the evidence of James at PJ [71]-[73]. He noted
James’ evidence that he first became aware of the
allegation of rape when
Jana made her police complaint in June 2020 and that he had told Alan that Jana
took medication to assist
with sleep. Apart from those two matters, his Honour
concluded that the evidence of James was “otherwise of little
and that he was not “central to any of the events of 12 or
13 January 2019”.
his Honour addressed the evidence of Sam at PJ [74]-[84]. Sam was an important
witness. She made an affidavit on 11 October
2023. She gave evidence as to
what occurred when Jana returned from the Bridal Suite to the residence at
approximately 4:30 am on
13 January. Her evidence as to that was:
Some hours later, at approximately 4:30 am, Jana again came into my room, but
lay on the bed next to me. This time she was shaking
and crying. I asked Jana
what was wrong, and she said words to the effect of, “something has
happened”. I asked her what
had happened, and she told me she did not want
to tell me. I tried to calm her down but she was hysterical. Eventually, she
the words: “Alan had sex with me”. I remember feeling like my
whole body felt disgusted at him.
Jana told me that Alan had taken her upstairs from the Winery, to the Bridal
Suite. She told me that she had said no, and told him
to stop, but that she
eventually gave in because she had no idea what was happening.
Jana told me she had said to Alan that she did not want him to be like his (sic)
step-dad, who I understand molested Alan’s
sister. Jana kept saying that
Alan told her he was in love with her and kept kissing her.
Jana told me words to the effect that she was going to kill herself because she
could not deal with that type of pain again, and
I understood her to be
referring to the sexual abuse she experienced as a child.
Jana told me that she felt she could not tell her partner, James, and she did
not want to tell our mother because it would hurt her.
When Jana told me, I was shocked and then became angry at Alan. I was angry that
he had done that to Jana and to my mother. I immediately
felt like I could never
let Jana be alone at Flaxton Gardens again.
Jana eventually fell asleep.
I could not go back to sleep after what Jana had told me. Instead of sleeping, I
drafted a diary note in the form of a post to a
private page on the blogging
website “Tumblr”.
Annexed hereto and marked SK-01 is a true and correct copy of that draft Tumblr
primary judge did not address the detail of this evidence. Rather, he reasoned
at PJ [76]-[81]:
At about 4.30 am, Salome said that [Jana] again entered her room and lay on the
bed next to her. She said that [Jana] was shaking
and crying. At [35] of her
affidavit filed on 11 October 2023 (the first affidavit), she said that in
response to her having asked
[Jana]what was wrong, [Jana] said words to the
“... Something has happened.”
her first affidavit, Salome recorded that [Jana] said
sex with me.”
At [47] – [48] of her first affidavit, Salome deposed that after [Jana]
had eventually fallen asleep, she couldn’t get
said that she drafted a diary entry in the form of a post to her private Tumblr
account. That post was
Annexure SK-01 to her first affidavit.
Rather than recording in her post that [Jana] had only first said the
“Something has happened”
as per [35] of her
first affidavit, her post recorded that those words were followed by the
“Something bad. Something unspeakable and that she
doesn’t want to tell me what happened.”
The inclusion of
those words indicates to the Court that Annexure SK-01 was not intended to be a
verbatim recording of what was said
between she and [Jana] at the time, but
rather was an attempt to record what she said [Jana] had said to her, as well as
recorded what her own personal feelings were. So much is evident from
a reading of the post.
Of further note is that though she italicised the words
sex with me”
, she did not italicise the words
no & told him to stop”
. The Court is unconvinced that those words
were in fact said by [Jana]. Even if they were said, the Court is not prepared
that what [Jana] said was truthful.
On page 2 of annexure SK-01, after recording her thoughts about what she said
she had been told, she recorded
“I am lost, confused & so
ducking mad I could kill Alan tonight. How could he do this to her & to my
It is clear from that post that Salome was convinced
an impartial witness.
Salome was a witness in the District Court rape trial. Her Police statement is
Exhibit 9. It is of note that in such statement she
did not state that [Jana]
had said to her words to the effect that the sexual intercourse between her and
[Alan] was non-consensual.
PJ [82] his Honour turned to the evidence of Sam that she recalled there being
candles at the top of the stairs when she worked
at Flaxton Gardens between 2017
and 2019. Although she was not cross-examined on that evidence, his Honour
rejected it in favour
of evidence to the contrary that had been given by Mariana
and Alan. His Honour then stated his conclusions about Sam’s evidence
PJ [83]-[84]:
Salome’s evidence about what she said [Jana] said to her at about 4.30 am
on the morning of 13 January was not probative of
anything that [Jana] said had
occurred in the Bridal Suite earlier that morning.
No expert evidence was called on behalf of [Jana] to comment upon what was
recorded in SK-01. The Court finds that the evidence of
Salome was of little
Honour’s reference to expert evidence in that conclusion requires an
explanation that is not revealed in the reasons. In
cross-examination, it was
put to Sam that her note was not contemporaneous but created after the relevant
events and had been edited
by her more than once. She denied doing so. That was
explored in re-examination. She produced for the Court her mobile telephone
on it she opened the Tumblr App. She explained that within the App there was a
record of the post that she made at 5:50 am on
13 January. For that purpose,
she handed her mobile telephone to his Honour and to counsel for Alan. A type
of in-court demonstration
was then engaged in, despite the objections of counsel
for Alan. During one of the objections, his Honour invited counsel for Alan
call expert evidence to contradict what Sam had said. Counsel responded that he
would take “that one on notice”.
Sam demonstrated in her evidence is that the Tumblr App records the time of
making the post, by pressing a particular button,
as 5:50 am on 13 January. An
edit was then made to the Tumblr post by adding the words “this was typed
in for the purpose
of the Court”. By saving the edit and re-accessing
post, it was demonstrated that the timestamp had not changed and still
5:50 am on 13 January. Sam confirmed that her understanding of editing a Tumblr
post was that the timestamp would be updated
to reflect the time of the edit
rather than the original post, and further denied that she had altered the post
at a later date.
Thereupon, the case for Jana was closed.
primary judge then stated his conclusions at PJ [85]-[89]. In part, his Honour
The Court has not been persuaded that it should make findings consonant with
either of the two versions respectively advanced by
[Jana] and [Alan].
The Court has doubts concerning each version. The Court was unable to come to a
view that inferences able to be drawn from adduced
evidence were such that one
inference was more probable than the other. The Court has found, however, that
at all times leading up
to the time that [Jana] and [Alan] entered the Bridal
Suite, [Jana] did not find any of [Alan’s] conduct toward her unwelcome.
The Court is also unable to come to any concluded view, and is in doubt about,
whether any post Bridal Suite conduct was unwelcome,
based upon the
Court’s doubts about what in fact occurred in that Suite. The onus in that
regard has failed to have been discharged.
The applicant [Jana] has failed to discharge the onus of proof which she bore.
Accordingly,
he dismissed the originating application.
crux of Jana’s complaint is that the primary judge failed to bring to
account material evidence before reaching his ultimate
conclusion that Jana was
not a credible witness (PJ [46]) which then led to the ultimate finding that his
Honour was unpersuaded
that he could make findings consistent with her evidence:
PJ [85]. Jana’s written submissions identify as the central issue
the credit findings of the primary judge were glaringly improbable, contrary to
compelling inferences, incontrovertibly established
facts or uncontested
testimony. However, as the oral submissions were developed, the real point of
complaint is that the primary
judge simply failed to undertake an assessment of
all of the evidence, misunderstood material evidence, overlooked that Jana in
respects had given uncontradicted evidence and, most importantly, failed
to appreciate the significance of the evidence of Sam that
Jana made a complaint
of non-consensual sex in a hysterical state a short time after her encounter
with Alan in the Bridal Suite.
on Jana’s case the demeanour findings of the primary judge are infected by
anterior error.
contrast, the central argument for Alan is that the credit findings cannot be
reviewed on Jana’s appeal unless the glaringly
improbable or contradiction
by incontrovertible facts threshold is met:
[2019] HCA 28
(2019) 266 CLR 129
. In each challenged
respect, on analysis, the findings of the primary judge were open.
reasons to be explained in detail below, the central conclusions of the primary
judge cannot be sustained, and it follows that
the dismissal of the proceeding
is the result of error. The appeal must be allowed.
amended appeal grounds contend that the primary judge committed multiple errors.
They provide:
(1) The primary judge erred by failing to find that the following conduct of the
First Respondent on 12 - 13 9 January 2019 occurred,
was unwelcome, and
constituted contraventions of s.28B(6) of the SDA:
(a) stating to the Appellant, words to the following effect:
I’m in love
I wish things turned out differently and I could be with
We’re perfect for each other
(iv) That he wanted the Applicant to be his “lover on the side”;
I have loved you for a very long time and I have wanted this for
(vi) That he wanted the Applicant “
(b) kissing the Appellant on the mouth without her consent;
(c) leading the Appellant to a room known as the Bridal Suite, sitting the
Appellant down on the edge of a bed, and stating words
to the effect of:
“I want to go further with this”
before closing and locking
the door to the Bridal Suite and returning to sit next to the Appellant
Bridal Suite Conduct
(d) after engaging in the Bridal Suite Conduct, kissing the Appellant on the
mouth without her consent;
(e) removing the Appellant’s clothing including her underwear without her
(f) removing a tampon from the Appellant’s vagina without her consent;
(g) engaging in non-consensual oral sex and digitally penetrating the
Appellant’s vagina with one of his fingers; and
(h) engaging in non-consensual sexual intercourse with the Appellant;
(i) stated to the Appellant, words to the effect “I just want to tuck you
(j) stated to the Appellant, words to the effect “morning gorgeous”;
(k) stated to the Appellant, words to the effect “honestly I was
disappointed when you told your mum. We could have had something
(2) In reaching the ultimate conclusion that the Appellant was not a credible
witness at J[46] and J[85] and had not discharged her
onus at J[86] and failing
to find the matters set out in Appeal Ground 1, the primary judge erred:
(a) by finding that the Appellant was not extremely affected by
medication/intoxication at J[37], J[41], and J[42], and by expressly
J[44]that the Appellant was
“most likely a willing participant in her
entry into the Bridal Suite with”
the First Respondent, in
circumstances where:
(i) there was no challenge to the Appellant’s evidence that she had taken:
2. Diazapam (10mg);
3. Melatonia; and
4. Stilnox;
(ii) there was no challenge to the Appellant’s evidence that she had been
drinking alcohol throughout the evening;
(iii) the evidence of Ms Mariana Kruger and Mr Benjamin Connolly (who were found
by the primary judge to be witnesses of truth (PJ
at [64])), was to the effect
that the Appellant became inebriated as the evening wore on and that by about
1:00 am or 1:30 am (which
is when Ben last saw her), she was struggling to walk
properly, struggling to stand up and was slurring her words (PJ at [20]);
(iv) the evidence of Dr De Leacy, psychiatrist, was to the effect that:
combination of the Appellant’s medication with alcohol “
have a significant additive effect and a person in this situation would become
extremely sedated, mentally, but physically compromised
as well as because the
blood pressure would have dropped... the person would feel weak, probably dizzy,
as well as fatigued and possibly
slightly confused
Appellant could have “coped” with climbing the stairs by using the
(b) by finding:
(i) at J[22] that none of the physical interaction between the Appellant and the
First Respondent that was observed by Ben was unwanted,
not appreciated, or not
(ii) and at [57] that the conduct between the Appellant and the First Respondent
was “highly sexualised and consensual”,
relying entirely on Ben’s
opinion and his feelings of being made unconformable and there being no evidence
from Ben that the
alleged conduct was “highly sexualised”;
(c) by finding at J[25] that the Appellant’s conduct towards he mother, Ms
Mariana Kruger, was sexualised in nature relying
entirely on Ms Mariana
Kruger’s evidence that she was feeling uncomfortable;
(d) by finding at J[29] to J[34] that the Appellant’s evidence as to her
movements after she returned to the residence, and
her stated reason for
returning to the Winery, was false;
(e) by finding at J[45], that nothing which occurred between the Appellant and
the First Respondent up until the time they each entered
the Bridal Suite was
considered unwelcome;
(f) by, in effect, finding that the matters set out at J[47](a) to J[47](k) were
relevant to the question of whether the Appellant
consented to sexual
intercourse with the First Respondent in the Bridal Suite on 12-13 January 2019;
(g) by drawing an adverse inference against the Appellant at J[47](m) for not
calling her treating doctor to give expert evidence
in the proceedings in
circumstances where there was no proper basis to draw such an inference;
(h) by finding at J[58] that the Appellant and the First Respondent had the
joint intention to go into the Bridal Suite with an amorous
(i) by finding at J[61] that:
(i) if the events of 12-13 January 2019 had been traumatic or stressful to the
Appellant, then “her memory of all claimed events
would have been
indelible or approaching indelible” based on a selective and narrow
assessment of the evidence relevant to
that issue;
(ii) that “whatever transpired in the Bridal Suite was neither stressful
nor traumatic” to the Appellant and was not
“unwelcome”;
(j) by finding at [65] that it was “implausible” and
“bizarre” that the Appellant “would have agreed
to have held
her wedding reception at Flaxton Gardens if she had in fact been raped by”
the First Respondent “at that
very venue”; and
(k) by rejecting at J[79] and J[84], the evidence of Ms Salome Kruger that the
Appellant informed Ms Salome Kruger on 13 January
2019 (almost immediately after
the events in the Bridal Suite) that the First Respondent had sex with the
Appellant and the Appellant
had had told the First Respondent “no”
and told him to “stop” but that she eventually gave in because she
had no idea what was happening, when there was no proper basis for rejecting
such evidence;
(3) As a consequence of the errors identified in Appeal Ground 1 above, the
primary judge further erred by failing to find that the
Second Respondent was
liable for the First Respondent’s conduct (as set out in Appeal Ground 1)
by reason of
of the SDA.
grounds and the arguments may be conveniently grouped. The starting point is
ground 2. It is unnecessary to interrogate each
ground to explain why the
conclusion of the primary judge is untenable.
should also be understood that there is no Notice of Contention from the
respondent and no submissions were put on Alan’s
behalf in the course of
the appeal, to the effect that the primary judge erred in finding that he was
not a credible witness: PJ
[10], [48]-[51], [53] and [54].
The recent complaint evidence: ground 2(k)
left Flaxton Gardens between 1 and 1:30 am on 13 January 2019. Jana and Alan
were then alone. Sam’s evidence, which was
not challenged in
cross-examination, was that Jana entered her bedroom at approximately 4.30 am,
laid on the bed next to her and
was shaking, crying and hysterical. I have set
out part of her evidence above. The Tumblr post that she made at 5:50 am reads
in original):
It breaks my heart that this is one of the first things I write in here about my
It was 4:30 am when she came into my room. I was awake. She was shaking &
crying. She was moving like she was blind. She cried
& told me something has
happened. Something bad. Something unspeakable & that she doesn’t want
to tel me what happened.
I tried calming her dam. She was historical. When she
got the words “Alan had sex with me” my whole body curled with
disgust. Not at her but with him. What the fuck. Like what the fuck! She said he
took her upstairs through the winery & she said
no & told him to stop
but eventually gave in because she had no idea what was even happening. When she
came into my room earlier
in the night she was fucked. I could tell she was well
& truely not in the state to make any rational decisions. She said they
taped after & she told him she doesn’t want him to be like his step
that milested his sister. She kept saying he told her
he was in love with her
& kept kissing her. She told me she was going to kill herself because she
could not deal with this type
of pain over again. She said she can’t talk
to James about this because he will just blame her. How she didn’t want to
hurt mum. How could this happen again God? Why her! Why would you let her go
through all this again? She thinks the only way out
of this is to leave &
let everyone get on with their lives that she is wrong. This will kill everyone
more than finding out what
happened. I don’t know what to do. I am lost,
confused & so ducking mad I could kill Alan tonight. How could he do this
her & to my mum? Alcohol & stress is not an excuse and I will never look
at him the same way. Our lives have never been
normal but this is just fucked up
on a whole other level. Why her? Why her? Hasn’t she been through
I will never look at this house the same again & I never want to leave her
alone. Not even for a second. If she leaves me. What
cross-examination of Sam was relatively brief. She was first asked a series of
questions about a statement that she had given
to the Queensland Police Service
dated 18 June 2020. The document was received in evidence before the primary
judge. Sam was invited
to read paragraphs [22]-[27] which provide:
Jana came into my room at 4:30AM on 13 January 2019. I checked the time on my
phone when she came in. When Jana walked into my room,
it was like a blind
person trying to see. She was patting for everything trying to feel around the
room and she was just sobbing
hysterically. I had never seen her in such a state
in my life. Jana couldn’t talk. She had tears coming out snot everywhere
and she was crying these silent cries where nothing was coming out.
I was trying to get Jana to talk. Jana kept saying “Something bad has
happened. Something bad happened. I can’t tell
I just kept trying to push her and get it out and she was just crying saying
“Not again. I can’t do this again. I can’t
go through all this
That’s when Jana said “Alan had sex with me”. I remember I
just went numb.
I didn’t know how to respond. I was just holding her as Jana was telling
me “I’m going to kill myself. I can’t
Jana was then talking about mum and how she couldn’t tell her husband. I
then remember trying to get Jana in bed. I was just
holding her the whole time
when she was crying. I didn’t sleep. I kept watching her not wanting to
leave her. I was filled
with rage towards Alan.
cross-examination simply confirmed that in the statement Sam did not mention
non-consensual sex. She was next taken to an extract
from her evidence in the
trial in the District Court which the primary judge also received in evidence.
Her attention was directed
to evidence that she gave under cross-examination.
In that evidence, she did not mention that her sister had said that the sex was
non-consensual. Her answer to the question was: “I didn’t elaborate
on the conversation any more than that”.
was then taken to the Tumblr post. It was put to her that the document was in
part amended at a later point in time. The question
and answer was:
Now Ms Kruger, I’m going to suggest to you that, in fact, that’s
what has happened with this post, that you have created
that post at some point,
but then, subsequently, you’ve gone in and edited it to change up the
contents so that it now reflects
the proposition that your sister Jana did tell
you, “I kept saying no, and he kept going”? --- That’s not
other questions were put to Sam about the authenticity of her Tumblr post. I
have set out her evidence in re-examination about
how the Tumblr App records the
time of making her post.
I have noted, the primary judge at PJ [84] concluded that Sam’s evidence
“was of little weight”. That is a conclusion
her evidence. I am unable to accept that his Honour’s process of
reasoning supports his conclusion.
reasons at PJ [78] fix on a difference in wording between Sam’s affidavit:
“Something has happened” and “Alan
had sex with me” and
the wording of part of the Tumblr post: “Something bad. Something
unspeakable & that she doesn’t
want to tell me what
difference led his Honour to the conclusion that the Tumblr post: “Was not
intended to be a verbatim recording of what
was said between she and [Jana] at
the time, but rather was an attempt to record what she said [Jana] had said to
her, as well as
her having recorded what her own personal feelings were”:
reasoning is unsupported by a rational foundation and misunderstands the Tumblr
post. It is plainly evident from reading the
entirety of the post that it
records deeply personal observations that Sam made of her sister from 4:30 am;
statements that her sister
made to her in the course of their conversation and
the reaction of Sam to what she had been told, including her own thoughts and
feelings. It is a heartfelt, raw and authentic account of a young woman,
herself in a state of distress. It does not purport to
be a “verbatim
recording” of a conversation. Sam in her evidence did not say that it
was. But this hardly detracts
from the fact that it is in part a
contemporaneous documentary record of a recent complaint of sexual assault and
the observations
made of the state of distress of Jana. It was erroneous for
the primary judge to put aside the entire Tumblr post based on his
misunderstanding
of what it is and records.
Honour’s misunderstanding is compounded by the confused reasoning in the
second sentence at PJ [78], where he said that
the document “was an
attempt to record what she said [Jana] had said to her”. There is no
analysis by his Honour which
supports that conclusion. Sam rejected the
proposition put to her in cross-examination that the Tumblr post had been edited
it was made in order to align with Jana’s evidence that the sex was
without consent. It was not put to her that the Tumblr
post was inaccurate in
any other respect or was not a contemporaneous note. There was no basis for the
primary judge to conclude
that the document was “an attempt” to
record what was discussed, rather than a document created from actual
recollection
as to what was said.
primary judge at PJ [79] focused on a difference he asserted in the punctuation
of part of the text: Sam italicised “Alan
had sex with me” but did
not italicise the words “she said no & told him to stop”, which
led his Honour to
conclude that he was “unconvinced that those words were
in fact said” by Jana and, even if they were, he did not accept
Sam’s evidence as truthful: PJ [79].
conclusion rests on a misreading of the document and exposes a further error.
No portion of the text is italicised. Quotations
are used once:
Alan had sex with me
. Assuming his Honour meant to
refer to any inconsistency in the use of punctuation marks for direct quotes, no
question was put
to Sam in cross-examination about the significance of her
punctuation. The document is replete with grammatical infelicities, misplaced
full stops, misuse of ampersands and spelling errors. The document contains
other evidence of Jana’s direct speech which do
not have quotation marks.
The task of assessing the probity of this evidence did not call for a
syntactical dissection of Sam’s
grammar, punctuation or spelling.
primary judge at PJ [80], reached another conclusion from the Tumblr post: it
evidences that Sam was then convinced about Alan’s
guilt and therefore she
was not an impartial witness. There is no support for that reasoning in the
evidence. Sam was only challenged
in cross-examination about one statement in
the Tumblr post: whether she had “created that post at some point, but
then, subsequently,
you’ve gone in and edited it to change up the contents
so that it now reflects the proposition that your sister Jana did tell
“I kept saying no, and he kept going”. Sam denied that she had
later altered the post to include this statement.
The cross-examination then
concluded without further exploration of Sam’s evidence that the post was
a contemporaneous record.
The primary judge did not resolve that issue.
Rather he chose a new pathway that was not put to Sam when she gave evidence.
was an error.
was a further error for his Honour to cast aside the entirety of Sam’s
evidence because he concluded she was a partisan witness.
His Honour failed to
undertake any assessment of the extent to which her evidence was consistent with
that of Jana. He overlooked
that her credit was not put in issue in her
cross-examination. He failed to reveal why Sam’s recording of her
personal feelings
upon being told by her sobbing, hysterical sister that her
stepfather had raped her affected her credibility. The reasoning at PJ
illogical. That Sam believed her sister and was mad at Alan is an entirely
understandable reaction to what she had been
told. That in consequence she
believed Alan to be guilty of rape does not make her evidence of what she was
told by her sister,
or what she observed, to be untrue. The fact in issue was
whether Jana entered her room at 4:30 am in a distressed state and made
complaint of having been sexually assaulted by her stepfather. Sam’s
angry reaction bears no logical connection to his Honour’s
conclusion that
she was not an impartial witness. It is utterly implausible that Sam would have
reacted differently.
is a further error in this component of the analysis of the primary judge. The
entirety of the evidence of Sam, including the
Tumblr post, should have been
brought to account as relevant and highly probative of what occurred between
Jana and Alan in the Bridal
Suite. Rather than proceed in that orthodox way,
the primary judge at PJ [83], found that what Jana said to Sam “was not
of anything that [Jana] said had occurred in the Bridal Suite”.
That reasoning is indefensibly contrary to principle.
first with Jana’s appearance and emotional state, evidence of distress is
always relevant in sexual assault cases. In
[1999] HCA 37
(1999) 196 CLR 297
Evidence of distress on the part of a complainant is always relevant, within the
meaning of [s 55 of the
Evidence Act
], to a charge of sexual
assault. A complainant who has been sexually assaulted may, but will not
necessarily, display outward signs
of distress after the assault. Evidence of
distress tends to prove that the complainant had been sexually assaulted.
High Court very recently approved that passage in
The King v Ryan Churchill
(a pseudonym)
[2025] HCA 11
where the issue concerned jury
directions about distress evidence. Chief Justice Gageler, Gordon, Gleeson,
Jagot and Beech-Jones
JJ continued at [27]:
Ordinarily, like evidence of the complaint itself, evidence of distress on the
part of a complainant at the time of making a complaint
is evidence that is
relevant in the trial within the meaning of
Evidence Act
on either or both of two bases: first, as
evidence that, if accepted, could support the credit of the complainant if the
to find a causal connection between the distress and the making of the
complaint, and second, as evidence that, if accepted, could
support the
occurrence of the offending if the jury were to find a causal connection between
the distress and the offending. On either
basis, the evidence could rationally
indirectly affect the assessment of the probability of the existence of a fact
namely, whether the offending occurred – and is therefore
relevant within the meaning of
the primary judge was not dealing with a criminal case of sexual assault, that
does not detract from Sam’s evidence
as to her sister’s state of
distress, which was clearly probative as to what occurred between her and Alan
in the Bridal Suite.
An extraordinary aspect of the reasoning of the primary
judge is that he paid no attention to the obvious question that arose from
evidence: if Jana had entered the Bridal Suite with the joint “amorous
intent” (which the primary judge attributed
to her at PJ [58]), how is
that consistent with her state of distress shortly thereafter? What rational
reason could explain this?
The primary judge’s reasons cannot be
reconciled with the obvious answer that Jana had been raped by her
stepfather.
Sam’s evidence of what Jana said is plainly relevant for the same reasons.
Recent complaint evidence in a criminal
proceeding is relevant to credibility
and as to the truth of what is asserted where the conditions in
Evidence Act
. The evidence was admissible in the
civil proceeding before the primary judge pursuant to
. In any event, no admissibility objection was taken. The primary judge
overlooked this. In doing so he failed to appreciate the
significance of recent
complaint evidence in this case.
the facts in
where the accused and the complainant attended a
work-related Christmas function. Each became affected by alcohol and engaged in
conversation about sexual matters. The complainant was intercepted by the
accused upon leaving a toilet. She was taken into a room
where he attempted to
kiss her and unsuccessfully attempted to persuade her to perform fellatio. He
then forced her to have intercourse.
When he was done he left the room, she
vomited and then went to the bathroom and washed her face and her underwear.
When she left
the bathroom she encountered a workmate, Ms Ovadia. She was
crying. Ms Ovadia asked her what was wrong and she responded that she
raped by the accused. Ms Ovadia took the complainant outside where she made the
same complaint to other persons. Relevant
for present purposes are the
observations made by Gleeson CJ and Hayne J generally and as to this evidence at
It is possible to imagine circumstances in which evidence of the fact that a
complaint of an alleged crime has been made might be
evidence that could not
rationally affect (directly or indirectly) the assessment of the probability of
the existence of a fact in
issue. For example, the nature of the complaint, the
circumstances in which it was made, or matters personal to the complainant,
might provide a reason why that could be so. However, the present case does not
raise an issue of that kind. As the trial judge warned
the jury, the fact that
an assertion is repeated does not make it any less untrue if it were untrue to
begin with. Furthermore, some
complaints may be made in circumstances which
require particular attention to be given to the danger of fabrication. However,
the circumstances of the present case, it is impossible to deny that the
evidence of the complaints made to the three witnesses in
question could be
regarded by the jury as affecting their assessment of the probability that there
was no consent to the intercourse.
primary judge did not reason that the evidence of Sam could not rationally
affect the probability that Alan had raped her sister.
A consequence is that it
was wrong for the primary judge to cast aside the evidence of Sam as not
probative as to what occurred
in the Bridal Suite.
these reasons, this ground succeeds.
The intoxication and medication evidence: grounds 2 (a)
is necessary to revisit portions of the evidence for emphasis.
affidavit evidence was that, at approximately 7 pm during the Summer Showcase
event, she poured herself a glass of champagne.
She consumed two more glasses
to 9 pm. From 9 pm she consumed one or two espresso martinis. Alan then made
for her several whiskey
and Coke drinks. She does not recall how many of those
she consumed. This consumption caused her to feel intoxicated; so much so
when dancing with Mariana the two of them “were nearly falling over when
twirling around”. She does not recall
what time it was when she left the
winery area and proceeded to her bedroom at the residence. On arrival she began
her nightly routine
of taking her medication: 150 mg Zoloft, two 5 mg tablets of
diazepam, one melatonin tablet and one low-dose Stilnox tablet. She
the residence to look for her mother.
confirmed that evidence in cross-examination and was not challenged on it.
returned to the winery and sat down on a couch. At that point she began to feel
drowsy. She drifted off to sleep. She felt
“extremely affected by the
medication”. This affected her recollection of subsequent events which
she described as “in
pieces and fragments”. She next recalls being
at the top of the stairs of the mezzanine area where she was blowing out
She sat down, “because I was really feeling the effects of the
medication” and described her vision as “blurred
disoriented”.
she entered the Bridal Suite with Alan her evidence was: “My body felt
really tired and I found it hard to move”.
She was not able to resist
Alan. She said: “I was too weak and affected by the medication to push
affidavit evidence was that when Jana entered her bedroom to retrieve a pillow,
she said to her sister “that she
was drunk”. Sam also stated in her
affidavit that she had observed her sister take her medications “nearly
every night
that we spent together, which was sometimes as often as two or three
nights per week”.
in his affidavit said that Jana took her medications every day, which he listed
by name and dosage. He was not cross-examined
on that evidence.
in his affidavit said that to his observation Jana was drinking, he did not
notice how many drinks she had but she “was
a bit tipsy and was in a
relaxed, bubbly mood” – and described her behaviour as a person who
had consumed between three
and four drinks, but not to the extent that he was
concerned about her ability to function or to make decisions.
cross-examination Ben was challenged about a statement he had made for the
criminal proceeding which included that Jana was slurring
her words and
struggling to stand up, which he did not include in his affidavit in the
proceeding before the primary judge. Ben
confirmed that his police statement
was correct when he made it in July 2020. He could not give any explanation as
to why he had
not included that evidence in his affidavit. His police statement
was admitted into evidence.
in her affidavit stated that she noticed that Jana and Alan were drinking
whiskey. When she left the winery with her daughter,
Jana “seemed very
tipsy but could walk by herself”.
cross-examination, Mariana said that she did not notice any occasion when, after
consuming her medication, Jana was unsteady on
her feet or had fallen asleep.
She gave as the reason that Jana would normally take medications just before
retiring to bed. She
had not observed any occasion when Jana mixed her
medication with alcohol with consequential adverse effects.
De Leacy in evidence-in-chief said that diazepam is Valium, melatonin is a
natural type of sleeping tablet, Stilnox is a sedative
and Zoloft is an
antidepressant. He was asked for his opinion as to the effects of this
medication if taken in addition to the consumption
of alcohol. He
Well, the alcohol would have a significant additive effect, and I think a person
in this situation would be extremely sedated, mentally,
but physically
compromised as well because the blood pressure would have dropped. The person
would feel weak, probably dizzy, as
well as fatigued, and possibly slightly
primary judge asked him to assume that Jana had consumed between six and eight
glasses of champagne before 12:30 am followed by
a whiskey or two. When asked
Physical effect of lowering blood pressure, making the person weak, tired, quite
confused, likely and – yes. Could be quite
questioning then returned to counsel for Jana. He asked whether combining the
medications with alcohol would have an impact on
a person’s memory. Dr De
Leacy responded:
Well, this is an interesting point. Alcohol – look, diazepam, Valium, is
well known to have a marked effect on memory in high
doses. The dose she took
would not have been the type of dose that would have a significant effect on
memory. It’s usually
the level that is done with intravenous diazepam in
an operation or something like that, and people wake up with no memory.
unlikely to occur with a therapeutic dose to have a significant
memory loss. I think the alcohol could have an effect on memory.
Often the day
after drinking, the memory is somewhat hazy, to use a common expression.
questions and answers continued in chief:
But what if, at the time of – all within a couple of hours of taking those
four medications and the alcohol we’ve spoken
of, there was a stressful or
traumatic event? Would that – would memory be impaired
equally?---Actually, stressful events are
more readily registered and
Remembered?--- Registered and remembered. Registered means the brain takes
notice of it and processes it. Without getting too technical,
there’s two
different pathways in the brain for memory. Ordinary memory goes through a part
of the brain called the hippocampus
and then gets redistributed to the temporal
lobe, but traumatic memories go through the anterior part of the hippocampus
called the amygdala, and this becomes far more indelible. That’s
why people with PTSD have indelible memories.
evidence-in-chief then concluded, and he was not relevantly cross-examined on
this opinion evidence.
primary judge at PJ [19], in his reproduction of almost the entirety of the
affidavit of Ben, included his evidence that Jana
“did not seem to
me” to be affected by drugs or alcohol in a way which caused Ben to be
concerned about her ability to
function or to make decisions. At PJ [20] the
primary judge reproduced the cross-examination of Ben about the evidence
in his earlier police statement and the inconsistency between it and
his affidavit evidence. Without any reconciliation of the inconsistency,
primary judge at PJ [21] accepted the evidence of Ben “in all
respects”. It was plainly a mistake for his Honour
to proceed in that
way, without resolving the inconsistency.
that mistake, the primary judge then moved, when considering the candles at the
top of the stairs evidence from PJ [35], to reject
Jana’s evidence that
she was “extremely affected by medication/intoxication, or a combination
of both” (PJ [41]).
Subsequently, his Honour moved to the finding at PJ
[42] that Jana “was not as affected by medication or alcohol as she
she was”, because “she was able to ascend the stairs by
herself – there was no evidence that she needed assistance
– points to her being in physical control of what she was doing at the
time”. In that reasoning, the primary
judge found that Jana “was
most likely a willing participant in her entry into the Bridal Suite with
[Alan]”: PJ [44].
reasoning and conclusion is untenable. It overlooks critical aspects of the
evidence. It ignores all of the unchallenged evidence
from Jana that she took
her medications, she felt drowsy shortly after doing so and was significantly
affected by the combined effects
of her medication and alcohol consumption. It
ignores the evidence of Sam that when her sister entered her bedroom to retrieve
pillow, she was drunk. It ignores the evidence of Ben in cross-examination
that Jana, before he left the winery, was slurring her
words and was struggling
to stand up. It ignores the evidence of Mariana that her daughter seemed
“very tipsy”. It
ignores the evidence of Dr De Leacy that the
medication in combination with alcohol would likely have the effect of sedation,
and confusion.
Honour’s conclusions depend on speculative reasoning and lack any rational
foundation in the evidence.
ground succeeds.
The sexualised conduct findings: grounds 2 (b), (c) and
PJ [21], in accepting the evidence of Ben, the primary judge concluded that when
Jana sat in the lap of Alan, Ben felt uncomfortable
because she behaved
“in such a sexualised way”. At PJ [25], his Honour found that
Mariana felt “uncomfortable
because of the sexualised nature” of
Jana’s conduct whilst they were dancing and then sitting next to each
other on the
sofa. At PJ [44], his Honour in describing the conduct as
“tawdry”, found that Jana was a willing participant upon entry
the Bridal Suite, which in his view was consistent with “both of them
having accelerated to a higher level the already sexualised
tensions evident
between them” which caused Ben to feel uncomfortable. At PJ [52], his
Honour characterised the conduct of
Jana and Alan before entry to the Bridal
Suite as “sexualised”, which then caused his Honour to reason that
are no hard and fast rules as to what will necessarily next
transpire between them behind closed doors”. At PJ [57], his Honour
returned to the evidence of Ben, concerning the interaction between Jana and
Alan on the sofa in the winery, which his Honour found
was “both highly
sexualised and consensual”.
of these conclusions can be accepted as founded in the evidence. The findings
mischaracterise the evidence of Ben and Mariana.
Ben in his affidavit went no
further than stating that the physical interactions between Jana and Alan made
him feel uncomfortable
and, to his assessment, there was “a sexual element
in those interactions”. In his police statement he said that on
occasion Jana sat briefly on his lap and that “she seemed likely she was
having fun and seemed quite flirtatious”
(sic). In his evidence in the
criminal trial, he was asked a very leading question by the prosecutor and gave
evidence that:
Your' re saying that she was snuggling up to Alan and, in fact, sitting on his
lap?--- Yes.
--- On occasion?---Yes.
Yeah. That snuggling up and sitting up: did that look like it had a sexual
element to it?---Yes, it did, and it stuck out to me,
because it made me feel
uncomfortable because it was...
I understand?---The relationship – the – the stepfather –
stepdaughter relationship.
in her affidavit went no further than stating that Jana’s conduct made her
feel uncomfortable. In her police statement,
Mariana said that Jana was
touching her which caused her to feel uncomfortable and that she was
“getting sexy” and Mariana
became embarrassed. In her evidence in
the criminal proceeding, in answers to the cross-examination of counsel for
Alan, she accepted
that Jana was dancing and her behaviour became “more
and more playful”, (which made her feel uncomfortable) and then:
You were uncomfortable with her behaviour---? ---Yeah.
Because it was sexualised-tight behaviour, wasn’t it?---Yeah. You
Yeah? --- As a – as a mother, I didn’t enjoy that.
Yeah. Very flirtatious? ---Yeah.
On the dance floor, she was flirtatious to you? --- Yes.
Grinding up against you and---? ---Yes.
--- Things like that. Yeah. So the sofa seating area, there was a time –
and you’ve actually scolded her for it in a
way an adult mother could to
an adult daughter, I expect? --- Yeah. Yeah.
evidence does not support the findings of the primary judge that Jana’s
behaviour towards Alan was sexualised or highly
sexualised. That was another
grounds are made out.
The medical evidence: grounds 2 (g) and (i)
PJ [47(m)] the primary judge was critical of the fact that Jana did not call Dr
Chris Martin in support of her case. Dr Martin
was Jana’s long-term
treating psychiatrist. In around 2013, after telling James about the childhood
abuse she had suffered,
Jana consulted her general practitioner, then a
psychologist and ultimately Dr Martin. Initially at least, she had fortnightly
consultations
with Dr Martin. Her evidence was that he diagnosed her with PTSD
and anxiety with depressed mood symptoms. Following the events
in question, Dr
Martin continued to be Jana’s treating psychiatrist until approximately
2021. In her support of her case, her
lawyers requested an assessment and
independent expert report from Dr De Leacy.
primary judge reasoned that “in the ordinary course of events” one
would expect Dr Martin to have been called in support
of the compensation case,
describing him as a person who would “reasonably be perceived as a person
in [Jana’s] corner”.
His Honour also found:
Dr Martin would reasonably be perceived as someone who could have given cogent
evidence about the medication prescribed for [Jana],
the recommended dosages of
such medication, and the frequency with which such medication was to be
Dr Martin would reasonably be perceived as someone who could have assisted the
Court in assessing what effect the combined consumption
by [Jana] of any
medication prescribed for her together with alcohol consumption would have had
Honour next found, because Dr De Leacy had only once consulted Jana using remote
technology, that:
His opinions concerning [Jana] hold far less gravitas than what the opinions of
Dr Martin would have been had he been called as a
witness (sic).
those premises his Honour concluded:
The Court is satisfied that no good reason has been advanced on behalf of
[Jana]as to why Dr Martin was not called as a witness on
[Jana’s] behalf.
The Court has accordingly drawn an adverse inference against [Jana] that the
evidence which could have been
adduced through Dr Martin would not have assisted
her case, either on the question of liability, or in respect of
compensation/damages
again, the reasoning is untenable. As I have noted, Jana gave uncontradicted
and unchallenged evidence as to the medication
and the dosage that she consumed
on the evening of 12 January, which evidence the primary judge overlooked. His
Honour had the benefit
of expert opinion evidence from Dr De Leacy as to the
combined effect of Jana’s medication with alcohol, but overlooked that
evidence as well. His Honour failed to explain why it was open to cast aside
the opinions of Dr De Leacy as having less weight than
any opinion that may have
been expressed by Dr Martin. His Honour did not explain how any evidence from
Dr Martin may have assisted
Jana on her liability case.
primary judge made another mistake at PJ [61] when he considered the evidence of
Dr De Leacy as to the effect on memory of Jana’s
medications when combined
with her alcohol consumption, which I have set out above at [200] and
[255]-[256]. His Honour’s
finding at PJ [61] (set out above at [201]) was
to the effect he disbelieved Jana because her recollection of events prior to
to the Bridal Suite was imperfect.
manifest error is that this reasoning misunderstands the evidence of Dr De
Leacy. His opinion was that alcohol could have an
effect on memory. That is a
commonly understood phenomenon, which he described as “memory is somewhat
hazy” a day after
drinking alcohol. He then distinguished between
stressful and ordinary memories; the latter tend to be indelible. Erroneously,
the primary judge bundled together all of the “events” of 12 and 13
January without distinguishing between ordinary and
stressful events and without
acknowledging the impact that alcohol consumption has on memory recall.
also explains why the primary judge was wrong to draw an adverse inference from
the evidence given by Jana that she went to this
top of the stairs to extinguish
candles, whereupon she sat down and Alan sat next to her. His Honour found this
evidence unconvincing
for five reasons. None is satisfactory. Jana was in
error in believing that she ascended the stairs to extinguish candles; she
contradicted by photographs and the evidence of Mariana and Alan: PJ [38]-[40].
However, that does not lead to the conclusion
that her evidence should be
rejected on other issues. His Honour did not bring to account the likelihood
that Jana’s memory
was imperfect by reason of the combined effect of her
medication and alcohol consumption. He repeated that error at PJ [47(a)] when
giving it as a reason why he found Jana to be an unsatisfactory witness.
Honour also erred when he engaged in impermissible speculation at PJ [41], in
giving as his fourth reason for rejecting Jana’s
evidence, that if she was
affected by her medication and her alcohol consumption as claimed then it was
improbable that she would
have been capable of climbing two flights of stairs.
The error as explained, is in overlooking the uncontradicted evidence of
intoxicated state before consuming her medication and the combined
effect of each when she returned to the winery. The speculative
element is that
his Honour reached that conclusion on the implicit assumption that there was no
stair railing. There was stair railing
according to the photographic evidence
put to Dr De Leacy in cross-examination. Dr De Leacy’s opinion was then
that Jana “probably...could
have coped with that using a
further error is that his Honour, as I have explained, overlooked the evidence
of the state of distress and of the making of a recent
complaint of rape by Jana
to her sister at 4:30 am on 13 January. This makes untenable the conclusion
that the Bridal Suite event
was neither stressful nor traumatic.
grounds are made out.
The wedding reception findings: ground 2(j)
Honour made findings about the wedding reception of Jana and James on 12
December 2019 at Flaxton Gardens at PJ [62]-[65]. He
commenced by acknowledging
that Mariana under cross-examination accepted that her affidavit evidence, to
the effect that during the
formal speeches Jana referenced Alan as “a good
person”, was wrong. At PJ [63] his Honour set out a portion of the
of Mariana under cross-examination where, to use his Honour’s
description, she was “adamant” that if this was not
said during the
speeches, it was at some other point during the reception.
that his Honour made that finding, which is unclear from the structure of the
reasons, there was no attempt to reconcile
the mistake that Mariana admitted to
in her affidavit where she deposed, without equivocation, that it was during the
formal speeches
made at the wedding that Jana said words about Alan to the
effect: “Thank you for your all your assistance and for being a
person”. At PJ [64] his Honour said that there was “no reason why
Mariana would have given false evidence to the
Court under oath”, but that
is not to the point. The question that his Honour should have addressed is
whether her evidence
PJ [65], his Honour found as “implausible and bizarre” that Jana
would have agreed to hold her wedding reception at
Flaxton Gardens if she had
been raped by Alan at the venue. It is difficult to understand why that
characterisation of Jana’s
conduct flows from the fact that her wedding
was held at Flaxton Gardens almost 12 months after the events in issue.
any event, there was an explanation that his Honour overlooked. Jana in her
primary affidavit said that on 30 August 2019, James
asked her to marry him.
Her evidence continued:
I was so happy, but I knew that my mother would want us to get married at
Flaxton. When I spoke to her about it, she insisted that
we get married at
Flaxton and she said that she and Alan would give us a discount.
My mother said she wanted us to get married at Flaxton because she and Alan
could not afford to contribute to our wedding otherwise,
like many parents
typically did. She said that if we had the wedding at Flaxton, it would be her
and Alan’s gift, and she could
I was annoyed that she was insistent, and I felt like I had to agree. I
suggested the date 12 December 2019, because it was the anniversary
of James and
I’s (sic) first date.
At this time, I just wanted to put the Sexual Harassment out of my mind. I
focused on my wedding to James and spent a lot of time
planning it.
evidence continued that by September 2019, she could not continue working at
Flaxton Gardens. She discussed that with
her mother, told her how unhappy she
was and that her mother needed to leave Alan and acknowledge what had happened.
She told her
mother that she did not want to have her wedding at Flaxton
Gardens, her mother told her that she did not want to leave Alan and
in response
Jana advised that she was quitting her employment. For the balance of 2019,
Jana avoided contact with Alan “as
much as I could”. When she could
not, she was polite but “tried to ignore him as much as possible. I was
uncomfortable around him.”
her affidavit, Mariana said that in the middle of 2019, Jana approached her and
told her that she wanted to get married on 12 December
at Flaxton Gardens. She
also said that Jana had already checked the booking system and was aware that 12
December 2019 was available.
was cross-examined on her evidence but was not directly challenged as to the
conversation that she said occurred with her mother.
She was taken to the
transcript of the criminal trial in the District Court, where it was put to her
a version of the events broadly
consistent with Mariana’s evidence, and
she gave a non-responsive answer. She was not further pursued. It was not
put to her that Mariana’s version of the events was correct or
that Jana’s affidavit evidence was incorrect.
was not cross-examined about her recollection of this conversation.
primary judge failed to make a rational finding based on the evidence about why
Jana held her wedding at Flaxton Gardens. On
that basis it was erroneous for
his Honour to conclude that the fact of holding the wedding at the venue was
both implausible and
ground succeeds.
THE APPEAL SUCCEEDS
has not been necessary to deal seriatim with every appeal ground in order to
demonstrate why the primary judge misused his advantage
and materially erred in
ordering that the proceeding be dismissed. Whilst the primary judge reasoned
that he was not satisfied that
Jana had discharged her onus of proof, because he
concluded that she was an unsatisfactory witness and aspects of her evidence
also implausible and unsatisfactory (PJ [46], [85]-[87]), those were not
demeanour findings. The primary judge made no pure adverse
demeanour finding of
Jana. As I have demonstrated, the ultimate findings arise from multiple
anterior errors “in the comprehension,
recollection and evaluation of the
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118
, Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ.
appeal must be allowed and the order made set aside.
RETRIAL OR REDETERMINATION?
primary submission is that this Court should proceed to determine the claim and
enter judgment in her favour in the form
of declaratory relief and compensation.
As formulated in her amended notice of appeal, she claims:
(a) A declaration that the First Respondent contravened s 28B of the SDA in
respect of each of the matters identified in Appeal Ground
(b) A declaration that, by reason of
of the SDA, the Second Respondent
contravened s 28B of the SDA in respect of each of the matters identified in
Appeal Ground 1.
(c) An order pursuant to s 46PO of the Commission Act that the First and Second
Respondents pay compensation in the amount of $300,000
in general damages to the
(d) An order that the First and Second Respondents pay the Appellant’s
(e) An order that the First and Second Respondents pay the Appellants costs of
this appeal.
respondents submit that if the appeal succeeds, the proceeding should be
remitted to the Circuit Court for a new trial before
a different judge.
However, and quite properly, their counsel put submissions that if this Court
proceeds on a redetermination,
the proceeding should still be dismissed.
Jana and Alan can give direct evidence whether the foreplay on the sofa and on
the stairs and the sexual intercourse in the Bridal
Suite was with consent.
Where credit looms as a large and potentially decisive issue, it is a reason to
be cautious in deciding
whether I should embark on my own assessment of the
evidence and make findings accordingly. I have decided that I should proceed
conduct my own examination of the evidentiary record as contained in the Appeal
Books. What may otherwise have been a significant
obstacle to that course does
not arise due to the manner of the conduct of the appeal. As I have noted, the
primary judge found
the evidence of Alan “in many respects
unsatisfactory” (PJ [49]), such as to bring “his credibility into
(PJ [51]) and that he could not “make findings consonant
with” his evidence (PJ [85]). More particularly, his answers
cross-examination were “sometimes clumsy, verbose and initially
unresponsive” (PJ [49]), exampled by the transcript
extract at PJ [50],
concerning his evasive admission to Mariana on 14 January.
more adverse credit findings are set out at PJ [51]; including evasiveness in
cross-examination, giving contradictory evidence
and admitted dishonesty in the
account he gave to Mariana.
noted, the respondents do not by Notice of Contention submit that the primary
judge erred in his assessment of Alan’s credit.
In the course of oral
argument, we invited their counsel to respond to the submissions of Jana that,
because there is an unchallenged
finding that Alan’s evidence could not be
accepted, if we proceed to the task of determining the claim afresh we should
aside the evidence of Alan to the extent that it is inconsistent with
Jana’s case. In response, counsel submitted: “It’s
contended that Alan’s evidence should be accepted”. Counsel then
qualified this with a submission to the effect
that nonetheless the evidence
cannot be ignored because it is “in the mix”. When we sought
clarification of that submission,
counsel initially accepted that on a
redetermination we should not have regard to the evidence of Alan. However, the
that submission then dissipated when counsel distinguished between
Alan’s evidence as to what happened before entry to the
Bridal Suite and
what occurred therein. In counsel’s submission, it is only the latter
evidence that the primary judge rejected
as unsatisfactory.
respect, that distinction is not open on the findings made by the primary judge.
The adverse credit findings concern evidence
given by Alan as to what occurred
before entry to the Bridal Suite (PJ [51 (c), (d) and (f)]) and thereafter (PJ
[51 (a) and (e)].
inevitable consequence of the manner in which the respondents conducted the
appeal, doubtless for sound forensic reasons, is that
the evidence of Alan must
be put to one side in my redetermination of the case based on the written record
of the material included
in the Appeal Books.
Colvin and Abraham do not consider that this Court is able to make the findings
that Jana contends should be made in order
to grant to her declaratory relief
and to award compensation. With respect, I disagree. In my view this is a case
where the evidence
permits the Court to give judgment as in all the
circumstances it thinks fit: s 28(1)(b)
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
). I accept that success on ground 2 does not
establish Jana’s affirmative case. What is required is consideration of
evidence that the parties have forensically chosen to place before this
Court. If the evidence is incomplete, the result may be
that Jana does not
obtain from this Court relief and there must be a retrial. Conversely, if there
is enough evidence to find the
material facts in her favour as to what occurred
between her and Alan, she is entitled to relief despite gaps in the evidence
to this Court. Her entitlement pursuant to s 27 of the FCA Act is to
a rehearing; a “real review” of the record of
the evidence as
presented where this Court is “not excused from the task of weighing
conflicting evidence and drawing [its]
own inferences and conclusions, though
[it] should always bear in mind that [it has] neither seen nor heard the
witnesses, and should
make due allowance in this respect”:
at [25], Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ, quoting
[1908] HCA 84
(1908) 7 CLR 549
at 564. See also
at [55], Bell,
Gageler, Nettle and Edelman JJ.
is not to overlook the reasoning of Colvin and Abraham JJ at [60] that “we
have not concluded that the rejection of Ms
Kruger’s account was glaringly
improbable or contrary to incontrovertible facts”. As I have explained at
[213]-[214],
that is not how the error was developed in argument. I have
accepted in my detailed analysis of ground 2 that the primary judge committed
many anterior errors which caused him to conclude that he could not accept the
account of Jana. Those errors undermine the conclusions
of the primary judge
that Jana was an unsatisfactory witness which led to his erroneous conclusion
that Jana’s evidence as
to what occurred in the Bridal Suite was
unpersuasive (PJ [56]) and then, by the mechanism of further cascading multiple
his Honour navigated to the ultimately indefensible conclusions at PJ
[85]-[87] that he could not make findings of fact conformably
with her evidence.
In my view this is not a case that requires appellant restraint unless the
conclusions of the primary judge are glaringly improbable
or contrary to
compelling inferences. Here, the primary judge misused his trial advantage.
His conclusions are erroneous, quite
independently of his credit assessment of
Jana. My analysis of ground 2 demonstrates that his Honour comprehensively
misunderstood
the evidence, overlooked important evidence and made findings of
fact that were not open. In consequence, in my view this Court
decide for itself whether on review of all the evidence as presented
Jana’s case is made out:
at [55]-[56];
Queensland v
[2020] HCA 28
(2020) 94 ALJR 785
, Nettle and Gordon
also, with respect, disagree with Colvin and Abraham JJ at [60] that it is not
open to this Court to “reach an affirmative
conclusion on appeal that the
evidence of [Jana] must be accepted as credible and reliable”. In my
view, when all of the evidence
is considered and weighed there is compelling
support for her account. I now explain why.
THE EVIDENCE
do not repeat Jana’s evidence-in-chief that I have extensively set out
above. The question is whether her evidence should
be accepted considering the
gravity of the matters alleged:
Evidence Act
s 140(2)(c).
of the Appeal Book contains the full transcript of Jana’s
cross-examination. She commenced her evidence at 2.25 pm in the
session on 20 May 2024. Apart from some brief matters in examination-in-chief,
making the corrections to her affidavit
that I have referred to, the
cross-examination commenced 15 minutes later. Jana was cross-examined for the
balance of that day until
the Court adjourned at 5 pm. The cross-examination
resumed at 9:11 am on 21 May 2024, and continued until the luncheon adjournment
which commenced at noon. Upon resumption at 1 pm, the cross-examination
continued until 1:37 pm. She was then re-examined.
Regrettably
the cross-examination was not sequential and was often interrupted by a
requirement that Jana leave the witness box when
counsel put submissions to the
primary judge.
was first asked questions about a witness statement that she provided to the
Queensland Police dated 3 June 2020. She confirmed
that the copy produced to
her was a true copy and the statements contained in it were true. For reasons
that are not clear, cross-examining
counsel did not then tender the document: it
was marked for identification. Eventually however, it became Exhibit 6 in the
proceeding.
Another statement made by Jana to the Queensland Police Service
dated 18 June 2020 was then identified, as an attachment to her
affidavit in the
proceeding. No further direct questions were put about either statement.
was then questioned about her personal relationship with Alan. She accepted the
following. From time to time, they would share
an after-work drink together and
on occasion they would drink to excess. That during “drinking
sessions” it was not
unusual for each to discuss problems in their
personal lives. She denied however that they would discuss “intimacy
She could not recall if Alan had discussed with her the fact
that he was not having regular sex with Mariana, but accepted there
been a discussion to that effect. She accepted the following matters. She had
disclosed to Alan the fact that she had
consulted a psychologist, they each
spoke about the fact that each had suffered abuse as children and they discussed
their mental
health. In “some contexts” she discussed her
relationship with James and that at times she considered his mother to
overbearing. Sometimes they discussed wanting to “escape from
life’s problems”. The conversations extended
to problems that Alan
was having in his relationship with Mariana. However, she qualified the last
answer by stating that the problems
were “not necessarily” with
Mariana, but extended to his unhappiness in general.
considered Alan as a person she could relate to, they had in common their family
relationship and their mental health issues
arising from childhood trauma. She
denied, however, that she felt able to confide in Alan by discussing matters
that she would not
raise with anyone else.
questions then moved to the Summer Showcase event. There was produced a bundle
of photographs taken at the event, which his Honour
received in evidence as
Exhibit 2. The photographs comprise images of individuals, in an apparently
relaxed and jovial atmosphere.
Jana accepted that she had “a couple of
drinks” before the event concluded. She could not remember precisely how
She was then questioned about matters that were not an issue: that she
and Mariana remained at the venue upon conclusion of the
event at approximately
8:30 pm with Alan and Ben. The participants moved between the winery and the
main function area, and more
alcohol was consumed. Alan and Ben were engaged in
separate conversation. Jana and Mariana were singing and dancing. They were
having a good time.
denied that there was a “sexual element” to her playfulness with
Mariana. In her evidence they were dancing happily
together and at times they
were contacting their bodies. She accepted that at least once she sat down and
put her legs on top of
her mother’s and ran her fingers through her
mother’s hair. She accepted that at some point her mother asked her to
stop doing so because it made her feel uncomfortable.
announced late in the evening that: “It’s time to go”, and
Jana took that as her cue that it was time to
leave the venue and she walked
towards the residence. She denied that she resisted to the extent of arguing
with her mother. She
did not find it shocking when Alan removed his trousers
and retained only his underwear because of his eczema.
was not sure whether she spent something less than one hour sitting on the couch
with her mother before they departed for the
residence. In any event she
accepted that she proceeded alone to walk to the residence, a distance of
approximately 50 metres, even
though she initially departed in the company of
Mariana. A plan of the venue was produced and Jana marked on it connecting
in her pathway of travel. Although that document became an exhibit, it
has not been included in the Appeal Books. In any event,
the cross-examination
on the document is not illuminating as to any fact material fact in issue.
arrival at the residence, Jana entered Sam’s bedroom for the purpose of
retrieving a pillow. She was questioned about
her consumption of her medication
and confirmed her evidence-in-chief. Jana was not challenged about the drugs
taken or the dosages.
In the course of the cross-examination, she gave
confirming evidence that she habitually consumed her medications every evening
before retiring to bed.
taking her medications, she became concerned as to the whereabouts of Mariana.
She first checked within the residence, including
noticing that the door to her
mother’s bedroom was open but she did not see her mother inside. Having
determined that her
mother was not in the residence, she went outside in search
of her. The cross-examiner then interrupted the sequence of the evidence
the winery. Jana could not recall exactly the
words used by her mother, whether
they were directed specifically to her or to all of the individuals who were
questions then returned to the reason why Jana left the residence. She again
denied that she had earlier argued with her mother
the party and leave the winery. She denied that she had given false evidence as
to her reasons for leaving
the residence. Upon returning to the winery, she
accepted as possible that she might have said to Ben and Alan that she had taken
her medication. Somewhat confusingly, a few questions later, it was put to her
that she had not made a statement to that effect,
to which she responded that
she did not remember whether she did.
accepted that upon returning to the winery she sat down on a couch with Alan and
Ben. She leant back on the couch and at times
drifted off to sleep. She was
alert to notice that Alan walked Ben out of the winery. It was then put to her
that she had given
inconsistent evidence in the criminal trial about being
asleep on the couch. A portion of the transcript was produced and Jana was
invited to read some of the evidence. In the criminal trial Jana had given
evidence to the effect that upon returning to the winery,
she sometimes sat on
the couch and at other times went outside to have a smoke or vape. An objection
was taken to the cross-examination
on the basis that the passages put to Jana
were selective and failed to identify the time point of that evidence. The
primary judge
ultimately did not rule on the objection on the basis that a more
detailed portion of the transcript would be put to Jana.
evidence continued. More of the transcript from the criminal trial was produced
to her and she was given an opportunity
to read the relevant pages. The
transcript for 23 November 2021 was received as Exhibit 4. It is included in
of the Appeal Book. However, cross-examining counsel did not then put
more questions to Jana about any asserted inconsistency in
her evidence. The
transcript references that were put to the witness are at page 38, lines 25-40,
which comprised part of her cross-examination
in the District Court. There is
no material inconsistency between that evidence and her evidence in the Circuit
Court proceeding.
That she at times left the winery area and went outside to
have a smoke, is not inconsistent with her evidence that when she sat
couch she drifted off to sleep from time to time.
established that Jana remembered watching Alan walk Ben out of the winery, the
questions turned to whether her next memory
was of sitting at the top of the
stairs with Alan. For that purpose Jana was taken to Exhibit 3, a floor plan of
the venue. That
exhibit is not included in
of the Appeal Book. Jana was
invited to mark on that document the location of the staircase, which she did.
She was questioned
as to the location of other features, such as the function
bar, the entrance, the location of wine barrels and the Bridal Suite.
purpose of these questions is not apparent in that it was common ground between
the parties that there was a stairway leading
from the winery area to a door
which was an entrance to the Bridal Suite.
was then produced to Jana a bundle of photographs depicting the Bridal Suite
door and the stairway, which was received as Exhibit
5. That document is not
included in
of the Appeal Book.
questions then returned to Jana’s memory of noticing the departure of Ben.
She accepted that Alan returned to the winery
area alone. She confirmed that
her next memory was of being at the top of the stairs. She had no memory of any
intervening event.
She could not recollect the time when Ben departed or when
Alan returned. She could not recollect how long Alan was outside bidding
goodbye to Ben. She said that she thought “maybe 10 minutes”
elapsed between Alan’s return and finding herself
on the stairs. Upon
reaching the top of the stairs, Jana initially stood but later sat down.
number of direct propositions were then put to Jana. She denied that she was
outside the venue vaping when Ben departed. She denied
that when she returned
to the winery she sat next to Alan on a couch. She denied that she told him
that she wanted to drink more
whiskey and that she poured some mixed with Coke
for herself. She denied that she continued a discussion with Alan concerning
difficulties
in her personal relationship. Her evidence continued:
And then at some point you sat on Alan’s lap and Alan massaged your
shoulders? --- No.
MR HENRY: And then, at some point after that you took your shoes off, and you
turned on the couch so that you could put your feet
up on Alan’s lap? ---I
did take my shoes off at some point. I can’t tell you when though.
And Alan started to give you a foot massage? --- No.
No. You said something to the effect that you were enjoying the foot massage - -
- - - and at some point you rearranged your dress so that more of your legs were
exposed, and Mr Thomson began to massage higher
up your calves? --- No.
And after some massaging you said, Alan that you were excited by the massage and
something of the effect that, “Are you actually
wanting to create a sexual
feeling here”? --- No.
Alan responded to the effect that he was okay with that if you were? --- No.
You told Alan that you were okay with that. Alan continued to massage your feet
and legs including your thighs? --- No.
After a little while you asked Alan if he was wanting this to go any further?
He responded that he was comfortable going further if you were? --- No.
You spoke briefly about both being adults and Alan said something to the effect
that his relationship with your mum was looking pretty
bad anyway? --- No.
That you and Alan then kissed, cuddled one another on the couch for a lengthy
period, something like two hours? --- No.
But at some point your dress was unzipped and open and you each commented on how
good you felt? --- No
I put to you that after a while one or the other of you suggested that you go
upstairs together to the apartment? --- No.
You got up from the couch. You walked up the stairs. Alan tripped on his way up,
and you were waiting for him at the top? --- No.
And Alan sat down next to you at the top of the stairs, and you kissed and
cuddled some more? --- No.
That Alan asked you if you were sure you wanted to go into the apartment, and
you responded that you did? --- No.
Now, I appreciate that you’ve said those things didn’t happen, but
isn’t it your evidence that you don’t
remember that period? --- I
remember that – that – no. I do remember it.
Sorry. I thought your evidence earlier was that you had no memory of that
period, but you – the next thing you remember you
found yourself at the
top of the stairs? --- Okay. So I’ll clarify that the next thing –
by saying the next thing I remember
is being at the top of the stairs is that
was the next thing I did - - -
Yes? --- - - - when we were getting ready to shut down the venue.
Yes. But I’ve suggested to you that a number of things happened between Mr
Thompson coming back into the venue and you finding
yourself at the top of the
stairs. And you’ve said you – those things didn’t happen, but
you’ve also said
you don’t have any other memories. I mean,
you’ve said you have no memory between that period. So are you saying that
you do remember, and that they didn’t happen? --- I’m saying I do
remember, and that they didn’t happen.
objections were taken in Jana’s absence and eventually the primary judge
adjourned Court for that day without Jana returning
to the witness box.
evidence resumed on the morning of 21 May 2024. She was first questioned about
the corrections that she made to her
affidavit in her evidence-in-chief. She
confirmed that the changes were made to reflect her “most accurate
the time of giving her evidence. Questions were then directed
to evidence that Jana had given in the District Court by reference
to Exhibit 4.
Jana denied giving inconsistent evidence about falling asleep on the couch in
the winery: she accepted that she did
go outside to smoke, but whilst on the
couch she was drifting in and out of sleep. She accepted that she engaged in
some conversation
with Ben and Alan. She could not recall whether she talked
mummy’s boy” and did not provide her with support. She did not
recall whether Alan poured her “a drink
or two” whilst sitting on
the couch or whether it was whiskey.
it was put to her that she sat in the lap of Ben she answered: “That
doesn’t sound like something I would do”.
When pressed further, she
said she did not remember doing so. When asked whether it was possible that it
happened, again she answered
that she did not remember doing so. She initially
denied sitting in Alan’s lap. When pressed further about that, she
“I don’t remember. It is possible”. Similarly, she
did not remember Alan resting his hand on her leg. She denied
that she placed
her hand on top of his. Rather than pursue these answers, the cross-examiner
then moved to another topic: Jana’s
recollection of what happened when Ben
and Alan left the winery and whether she recalled Alan and Ben proceeding
upstairs to the
Bridal Suite. To that question, Jana answered that she observed
them walking towards the stairs. Her attention was directed to
another portion
of the transcript in the District Court trial where she gave evidence that she
remembered Alan and Ben proceeding
upstairs, where the location of the Bridal
Suite was identified for Ben. When the primary judge sought clarification of
that evidence,
Jana responded that she saw Ben and Alan walk towards a set of
blue doors, that ultimately lead to the Bridal Suite, and that she
assumed that they were intending to ascend the stairs. She did not recollect
that they in fact did so.
again denied that she did not observe Alan walk Ben out of the winery, denied
that she was not present when Ben left and denied
that she was outside vaping
when he did so. She was then taken to her affidavit evidence about blowing out
candles at the top of
the stairs to assist Alan in locking up for the night.
She was also taken to the transcript in the District Court trial where she
given similar evidence, but with the qualification that the candles may have
been LED powered, rather than the traditional version.
Jana confirmed that she
had an actual memory of ascending the stairs to the purpose of extinguishing
candles. Jana confirmed that
she did not understand at the time that the stairs
lead to a door into the Bridal Suite. She confirmed that there was “no
other reason” to ascend the stairs other than to extinguish the candles.
In the course of several more questions on the same
topic, Jana once again
confirmed that evidence.
attention was then drawn to Exhibit 2, a series of photographs taken during the
Summer Showcase event. Those photographs did
not depict any candles at the top
of the stairs, which fact Jana confirmed. Jana denied the proposition that
there had not been
candles at the top of the stairs “for some
years”. Despite the photographic evidence, Jana maintained that her
for being at the top of the stairs was to extinguish the candles and
denied as “that’s incorrect” the proposition
that she ascended
the stairs “with Alan to continue your sexual encounter”.
Continuing,
with the preamble “moving on”, counsel confirmed that Jana’s
next memory was that Alan sat down next
to her at the top of the stairs. She
accepted that they then engaged in conversation which covered the topics: his
life, difficulties
in his relationship with Mariana, he told her that he loved
her and wanted her to be “his lover on the side” to which
responded: “What? I don’t agree”. Jana said that she clearly
remembered each of those facts. Jana was then
taken to further evidence she had
given in the District Court trial when, in her evidence-in-chief, she said that
she did not “exactly”
recall what she said in response to Alan. The
question was unfair, because it relied on an incomplete passage in her evidence.
that, it was not objected to. In any event, the entire transcript was
admitted before the primary judge and is in
of the Appeal Book. The more
complete account of her evidence is:
And when you sat on that stair, were you by yourself? --- Alan was next to me,
there. And - - -
Can you just describe what happened from there, please? --- Yep. We were –
we were talking. Alan was talking about how –
there were a few things
– but there was about how unhappy he was in his marriage to my mum. You
know, how life wasn’t
very good, how he hadn’t imagined it would end
up like the way it had. And he was saying how easy I am to talk to, that we
a connection. Obviously, I agreed with some of the connection, but I – I
was kind of, yeah, you know, listening being
his confidante. And he was
mentioning that he wanted to tell me that he loved me, that he really loved me,
and that he wanted to
have something with me on the side.
Just before you go on, had he ever said anything to you previously about loving
you? --- No, not like that.
Okay. Did you say anything to him when he said he loved you and wanted to have
something on the side? --- No, I don’t know
exactly what I would’ve
said. I would’ve been very shocked. I would’ve just said exactly
what most people say,
like, “No, that doesn’t” – I kind
of joked, I think. I would’ve said, “I don’t think you
Well, after you joked with him about it, from your point of view, did he say
anything else to you? --- I don’t remember right
Okay? --- Yep.
Go on? --- And then he kissed me quite aggressively.
What do you mean by that? --- He kissed me, but impressed my face with his
Just his mouth? --- And tongue.
entirety of that evidence was not pursued in cross-examination. Jana was next
taken to a different portion of the District Court
trial transcript during her
cross-examination. The topic concerned her evidence as to what occurred at the
top of the stairs. Jana
was taken to sections of the transcript where she
recalled that Alan used a key to open the door into the Bridal Suite, which key
he “pulled out of somewhere”, and recalled that “he had a
string around the key” but “was not sure
whether it was around his
neck”. That evidence was then contrasted with paragraphs in Jana’s
police statements, each
of which were to the effect that Alan used a key to
unlock the door to the Bridal Suite. Her attention was then redirected to the
photographs of the venue, one of which depicted the door to the Bridal Suite.
It was put to her that: “There’s no lock
on that door is there?
There’s no place to put a key?”, to which Jana responded: “I
don’t think so, no.”
A further photograph, being a close-up of the
door handle was shown to her. She accepted that it did not depict a keyhole for
a lock. Some of the affidavit evidence of Alan was then put to her, to the
effect that the door to the Bridal Suite cannot be opened
from the winery side.
Jana maintained her evidence that she remembered seeing a key in the door but
was uncertain as to whether
Alan unlocked the door.
that point Jana’s counsel took an objection: the point being whether
evidence would be led as to when the photographs were
taken. Counsel for Alan
said that he would. Counsel for Jana submitted that he could deal with it in
his cross-examination of Alan.
The primary judge did not therefore rule on the
evidence continued. The questions returned to the amendments that she had made
to her affidavit at the commencement
of her evidence-in-chief. Once again it
was put to her that on each occasion that she had given evidence, her memory was
observed Alan put a key into the lock of the door in order to open it.
It was bluntly put to her that her evidence as to that was
a fabrication, which
she denied. She was further questioned about another amendment that she made:
whether she discussed sexual
intimacy matters with Alan or with Mariana. She
amended her affidavit to confine those discussions to her mother. At this point
the questions and answers became somewhat confused for the reason that the
cross-examiner spoke across the witness. Eventually,
Jana’s evidence was
that when she made her affidavit she “remembered” that the
discussion was with Alan, but in
preparing for the trial of her proceeding she
went through her evidence “with a fine-tooth comb” in order to
sure that everything I say is correct”. She explained that
she undertook that exercise “in the last couple of days”.
then directly put to her that she had; “tailored” her evidence so as
to align it with what she thought “will
suit your case”, to which
she answered: “That is incorrect”.
questions then turned to what took place in the Bridal Suite. Jana confirmed
that Alan guided her through the door and that each
sat down on the bed. She
was asked to confirm the location of items within the Bridal Suite by reference
to a series of photographs,
which were marked as Exhibit 7. Those photographs
of the Appeal Book. In any event, Jana confirmed the location
of various items of furniture as depicted in the photographs, as being
same location when she and Alan were in the Bridal Suite.
then confirmed that she laid down on the bed, Alan unzipped her dress and
removed it. Jana disputed that it would have been difficult
to do each of those
things if she was lying on the bed, responding: “I didn’t say
anything about it being easily removed”.
She next confirmed that Alan
removed her tampon and placed it in a bin in the ensuite bathroom. It was put
to her, which she disputed,
that her angle of view would not have permitted her
to make that observation answering: “I could still turn my head”.
That evidence was contrasted with a paragraph in her police statement where she
had said of the placing of the tampon:
I don’t know how I knew this, but I knew that the tampon had been put into
the bin. I don’t know who put it in there.
I don’t know if it was
me, but I don’t remember doing it. I don’t remember Alan putting it
in there, too.
accepted, somewhat obviously, that she had given different versions of this
evidence. She was next questioned about inconsistencies
in her evidence as to
when she first noticed that her tampon had been placed in the ensuite bathroom
bin, and in particular whether
she had an actual recollection of observing it in
the bin. Jana denied that she “realised” the inconsistency in her
evidence and then decided to change it.
Non-sequential
questions were then put to her as to whether she had given inconsistent evidence
in the District Court trial about
Alan “fluffing around” to make up
the bed, after intercourse, to which she answered: “He was trying to get
for me to sleep in”. That answer was plainly not inconsistent
with her evidence in the District Court trial that Alan “was
questions then returned to the act of intercourse. Jana said that they were not
under the covers or between the sheets answering:
“I don’t know what
there was. We were on top of everything.” Counsel had Jana confirm her
evidence that she was
“severely affected by medication” but
nonetheless was able to speak clearly and recalled telling Alan “No”
or words to the effect “No, I don’t want that”. Jana, in
answer to several more questions, confirmed her affidavit
evidence that she felt
very heavy and could not move her body or control her limbs and was “too
weak and affected by medication
to push him off”. Following the act of
intercourse, Jana got up from the bed and went to the ensuite toilet. She
collected her shoes and then went back to the residence in the dark.
When questioned as to how she was then physically mobile, given
her earlier
evidence, she answered: “I could feel a lot of adrenaline so I was able
to... in trying to get out of that situation”.
put to Jana Alan’s version of events in a series of propositions, each of
which Jana denied. Her evidence was:
Okay. Now, look, stepping back for a moment, Jana, I’m going to put to
you, as I need to, an alternative version of what occurred
when you went into
the bedroom. I’m going to put to you that Alan has, in fact –
you’ve gone to the bedroom with
Alan. Alan sat down on the bed and you
stood in front of him? --- No.
No. That Alan has taken his shirt off and while standing in front of him,
you’ve take your dress and your underpants off and
he has assisted you a
little bit in that process? --- No.
That when that has occurred, he has giggled and said, “Oops, it looks like
you’ve got a bit of a rat’s tail hanging
out” referring to
your tampon? --- No.
That from there, you’ve gone into the bathroom, sat on the toilet and
taken the tampon out yourself? --- No.
And, in fact, it was you who said something to him along the lines of,
“It’s all clean”? --- No.
And you placed that into the toilet – sorry, the rubbish bin beside the
toilet? --- No.
No. But you’ve come back out into the bedroom part of the unit –
into the bridal suite and by that stage Alan was under
the sheets? --- No.
That you’ve gotten in under the sheets with him as well? --- No.
That Alan has said words to the effect, “Are you sure you want
this?”? --- No.
That your reply was, “I need this”? --- No.
From there, you two have had sex where Alan was on top and you were underneath?
And, in fact, you helped guide his penis into your vagina. Sorry, Jana, would
you like to take a break? --- I’m okay.
HIS HONOUR: I think we will just give you a short break. Would you like some
water? --- I’m fine, thank you.
that answer, Jana was in a state of distress which caused his Honour to briefly
adjourn. Jana’s evidence resumed approximately
15 minutes later as
Now, Jana, I was in the process of putting to you a sequence of events for your
comment, and I had just put to you that, in fact,
you helped guide Alan’s
penis into your vagina, and once he had entered, he said to you, “Are you
okay?” And you
responded, “It’s good”? --- .....
Now, I put it to you that it didn’t go on for very long because Alan
stopped and rolled off you, and he apologised, not being
able to go any further?
--- No. And he wasn’t able to continue performing. And he apologised to
you for that? --- Yes.
And, Jana, I put it to you that Alan then lay beside you and fell asleep? ---
And that at no stage during those events did you say “stop” or
“no” or anything else that would indicate
that you – this was
not something that you wanted? --- Incorrect.
Okay. Now, moving on, Jana. You say that you then ran back to the house after
going downstairs to collect your shoes, and you say
you went straight into the
bathroom and put your sleep clothes on? --- Yes.
Yes. So were those clothes in the bathroom, or did you have to collect them - -
-? --- I don’t remember.
Okay. Then you say Alan came into the house. Did you see him come into the
house? --- No, I heard him.
Okay. You heard him whispering, “Where are you”? --- Something like
Yes. When you say you heard him – sorry, just to be clear, do you mean you
heard the door opening or you heard him whispering,
or was it something else?
--- I don’t know, but something indicated his presence in the house.
was next questioned as to her interaction with Alan when she had returned to the
residence. Jana stated that she did not recall
“exactly” Alan
enquiring of her: “Are you all right”, but did accept that he made
some enquiry of her and
to which she might have responded “Yes” or
words to that effect. She maintained her evidence that he offered to tuck
was then asked a of number of detailed questions about the timeline between Ben
leaving the winery and her returning to the residence
at approximately 4 am.
Jana was unable to give precise answers to those questions.
was next questioned about her conversation with Mariana in the evening of 13
January. Her evidence was:
Yes. And at some stage during the day, you and your sister, Sam, arranged for
mum to come around to your place later that evening?
Yes. And your mum came around, and Sam was also there? --- Yes.
And you had a conversation with your mother and Sam about what happened the
night before? --- Yes.
And you said to your mum, “Alan had sex with me last night”? --- I
said that, plus without consent.
Yes. Sorry. Did you say, “Alan had sex with me without consent last
night.” So the words you say you used? --- I think
I would have used that,
Well, I’m going to suggest to you that – sorry, I withdraw that. The
words you say you used were without consent or words
to that effect. Do you
remember exactly what you said? --- I remember I didn’t use the word
“rape” yet. I said,
“without consent.”
Yes. Well, you’ve given some varying evidence about that in the District
Court trial, haven’t you? And I will take that
– I will take you to
that now. Transcript 1-20 .....
MR HENRY: And so at transcript – in that paragraph, Mr Cummings asks you:
Ms Kruger, do you remember what conversation you had with your mother? --- So
she came around to my house, and Sam and I sat her down
at my dining room table,
and I told her something along the lines of, “Alan took advantage of me
last night in the apartment.”
I think I tried to tell her what happened.
She started asking questions about it.
So that’s a different form of words put in that evidence, isn’t it?
--- Well, I did say along the lines of.
Yes, understand? --- So - - -
But you accept that that was your evidence at the District Court trial? --- That
At least at that point? --- Yes.
then denied that she had told Mariana and Sam that she and Alan only: “Had
slept together and had sex”. Her evidence
Your mum asked you, then, “Did you mean Ben?”? --- She did mistake
it for that, yes.
No. Sorry. The question I asked was your mum asked you, “Do you mean
Ben?”? --- She did ask that, yes.
Yes. And you’ve gone on to explain, “No, no. It was Alan”? ---
Your mum has asked you, “What do you want me to do about this?”? ---
Asked you, “Do you want me to leave Alan?”? --- Yes, yes.
Yes. And you said there was nothing for her to do, and that you would sort it
out with Alan? --- No.
You said that nobody could ever know? --- No, I didn’t say that.
And you said, especially, that James could never find out about it? --- I did
not want him to find out at the time, no.
Sorry. But did you say James could never find out about it or words to that
effect? --- There’s a difference between “never”
Yes, I understand? --- - - - and “at the time”.
All right. So what did you say? Did you say, “James is not to know,”
or what was the form of words that you used? ---
”I don’t want James
to find out right now.”
Okay. And I will put to you that, at no point during that conversation did you
say anything to your mum to the effect that Alan had
raped you - - -? ---
That’s incorrect.
- - - or that the sex was not consensual? --- That’s incorrect.
or two questions were then put to Jana about a visit to her general
practitioner, Dr James Williams, on 14 January 2019. Jana
confirmed that she
requested an STD test and then gave this evidence:
And you said to Dr Williams that you were embarrassed about the sexual contact
with your step-father? --- I can’t remember
exactly the words I used about
Certainly. You didn’t say that there was anything non-consensual about it?
--- I had my son with me in that consultation.
Yes. Well, I’m putting to you that, in fact, you said you were embarrassed
--- I might have said that I was
embarrassed about having to ask for this.
intended to show a document to Jana being a file note made by Dr Williams of the
consultation. There was an objection. Limited
arguments ensued. The primary
judge adjourned for lunch. On resumption, there was tendered without objection
a police statement
made by Dr Williams on 23 February 2021 and which attached
his typed file note, which includes the entry:
Embarrassed to mention sexual contact with stepfather – will be discussing
fully with psychiatrist in a day or two.
request chlamydia screen
were no further questions about what Jana had said to Dr Williams. Jana was
next questioned about her conversation with Alan
at Flaxton Gardens
approximately one week after 13 January. She was challenged as to the version
set out in her affidavit. She
denied that Alan said to her words to the effect
that: “The events of 12 and 13 January were a mistake that you were both
responsible
for”. She further denied that Alan had said that he was:
“Sorry for his part in that mistake” and “That
it should never
have happened and that you had both made a bad choice”. She denied that
Alan said he would be willing to talk
to a counsellor if she considered that
would help. She also denied that Alan had said that he would be: “Okay to
tell James”.
was questioned about whether she had agreed to hold her wedding at Flaxton
Gardens, which evidence I have addressed above. The
balance of the
cross-examination was taken up with questions relevant to the claim for
compensation which, for the present, may be
put to one side.
re-examination, Jana was questioned as to why, when speaking with Mariana on 14
January she had not used the word “rape”.
As explained in
Jana’s evidence set out at [204], she refrained from using the word
“rape” because of its shameful
connotation.
is of course necessary to make findings about the truthfulness of Jana’s
evidence. Before doing so, I assess the evidence
of the other witnesses, apart
have addressed part of Sam’s evidence - her encounter with her sister at
4.30 am on 13 January - in my analysis of some of
the appeal grounds. I find
that evidence to be truthful and compelling. Her evidence was not exposed as
false in cross-examination
and is considerably assisted by her contemporaneous
Tumblr post. The post manifests authenticity from the raw emotion of Sam:
“It breaks my heart”, and her angry reaction to what her
distressed sister had told her: “Alan had sex with me”
“she said no & told him to stop”. The suggestion in
cross-examination that the post was edited at a later date
was firmly rejected
by Sam and I accept her evidence. It follows that I find the Tumblr post to be
an accurate record of what Jana
said to her sister from 4:30 am on 13 January.
also accept Sam’s oral evidence as to the state of distress of Jana and as
to her recollection of the conversation.
is other important evidence that Sam gave concerning the meeting on the evening
of 13 January with her mother and sister. In
her affidavit she said that at
approximately midday on 13 January, Jana told her that she could not continue
working at Flaxton Gardens.
Her evidence continued:
Jana and I spoke about telling our mother what Alan had done, and I agreed that
I would arrange for our mother and I to come over
to Jana’s house that
night so that we could tell her together.
In the late afternoon, my mother and I drove separately to Jana and James’
house together.
James went out of the room with their son, Hugo.
Jana then told my mother words to the effect of,
“Alan had sex with me
last night”
I could see my mother was shocked. She did not seem to believe Jana.
Jana then told my mother what happened, that Alan had taken her up to the Bridal
My mother said to Jana words to the effect that Alan would never do something
Jana was clear to my mother that she had not and would never consent to having
sex with Alan.
My mother still did not seem to believe Jana, so Jana said words to the effect
that if she wanted proof, her tampon might still be
in the bathroom in the
Bridal Suite.
My mother made it clear that she did not want to speak about the rape ever
again. The three of us agreed that we would not speak
to anyone else about it
until we knew how to do (sic) with it ourselves first. My mother expressed being
unsure of what to do, and
how to best handle the information.
Jana and I told our mother that she should leave Alan because he was not a good
cross-examination, Sam was first questioned about her police statement made on
18 June 2020, which became an exhibit in the proceeding.
In that statement, her
evidence about the discussion with her mother and sister differed from the
account in her affidavit. Relevantly,
Mum then came to Jana’s house. We sat mum down at the living room table
and Jana told her what happened. Mum was shocked and
seemed to not know how to
process it. Mum started asking Jana questions (mum asked Jana if Alan was
circumcised and she also asked
how he had kissed her).
This did not seem to help the situation at all. It seemed like mum was trying to
make sure that this wasn’t something that
was fabricated. However, with
every response that Jana gave it seemed like mum could tell that Jana
wasn’t lying.
After speaking together about this. At the end, we sort of made a pact to never
talk about it. I remember having a conversation with
Jana and mum (Jana did not
know how to deal with this and mum felt betrayed by two people that she loves).
I know mum was also worried
there is no reference in the statement to Jana telling her mother that she did
not consent to having sex with Alan.
cross-examination initially focused heavily on the earlier discussion between
Sam and Jana at 4:30 am on 13 January 2019, which
I have addressed above. The
questions then turned to the meeting with their mother on 13 January. Sam
accepted that she did not
mention any absence of consent in her police
statement, nor did she during meetings that she had with the Crown prosecutors
giving evidence in the District Court trial. That evidence was not
further explored. Rather, the questions then turned to the Tumblr
evidence differs in one material respect to that of Mariana. To Mariana’s
recollection, Jana did not say that the
sex was without her consent. Jana in
her evidence maintained that she told her mother that she had not consented,
though she did
not use the word rape. Apart from that difference, I regard Sam
as having given truthful evidence to the best of her ability from
recollection (noting that apart from the suggestion that she edited the Tumblr
post, no allegation of general untruthfulness
was made in the course of her
cross-examination).
James Lindsay
made an affidavit on 29 August 2023, which he adopted as his evidence-in-chief.
The cross-examination was very limited, unproductive
and did not challenge any
of the substantive evidence of James.
his affidavit, James gave somewhat extensive evidence of his observations about
the impact of PTSD on Jana, and how the impacts
altered after 13 January 2019.
He confirmed that Jana took her medications each day, by naming each and the
dosage. He is a registered
nurse, at the time was working as a senior nurse
consultant and, according to his evidence, he was “very well versed in
psychotropic
medications” such as those taken by his wife. His evidence
extended to conversations in approximately 2013, during which Jana
disclosed her
childhood sexual abuse. He first met Alan in early 2017. He recalled
conversations with Alan about Jana’s mental
health and her prescribed
medications.
made observations of Jana after 13 January 2019. His evidence was:
Almost immediately after 13 January 2019, I noticed a change in Jana’s
behaviour. She seemed more distracted, her sleep deteriorated,
she was less
affectionate, she began drinking every day, her mood dropped, she did not want
to go outside often or do much, and she
was less enthusiastic about her family
– both her own, and Hugo and I. She increased the regularity of her
psychiatrist appointments.
When I asked Jana what was going on, she told me she was “feeling
Jana started working a lot less. She told me about several great modelling jobs
that she had been offered but then she gave me excuses
or should not do them. Sometimes I found out that she had a modelling
opportunity, and she just never went
By mid-August 2019, Jana stopped working completely.
have no reason to doubt the truthfulness of his evidence and no allegation of
untruthfulness was put to him in cross-examination.
Dr De Leacy
have addressed the evidence of Dr De Leacy above, to the extent relevant to
liability. In short, his evidence explains gaps in
Jana’s memory,
particularly as to the events leading up to her finding herself at the top of
the stairs leading to the entrance
to the Bridal Suite, in contrast with her
relatively clear recollection of what happened therein.
De Leacy was obviously an independent witness and gave truthful evidence to the
best of his ability.
Ben Connolly
evidence-in-chief, Ben adopted his affidavit made on 8 December 2023, and was
not asked any supplementary questions. I have addressed
aspects of Ben’s
evidence when dealing with the sexualised conduct and alcohol consumption
findings made by the primary judge.
I have set out parts of Ben’s
evidence above from [167]-[172]. Relevantly, Ben gave evidence to the effect
that Alan was
“tipsy” and in his assessment was someone “who
had three or four drinks”. Ben gave other relevant evidence
observations of Jana and Alan’s interactions (which is set out at [169])
whilst they were seated on the sofa, including
evidence to the effect that
“there was a sexual element” to the interactions, and that Jana sat
on Ben’s lap on
one occasion, which made him feel uncomfortable. During
the entire course of the conversation, Ben did not form the view that Alan
“affected by alcohol to an extent that I would be concerned about his
ability to function or make decisions.”
cross-examined about that evidence, his attention was drawn to his police
statement where, amongst other things, he said: “Alan
and Jana were
slurring their words”. He then qualified his evidence answering:
“towards the end of that – at the
end, yes.” He distinguished
between his earlier observations of Jana and Alan when they were sitting next to
each other on
the sofa where, to his observation: “there was no major
intoxication”. It will be recalled that when he was questioned
inconsistent evidence in his police statement concerning the state of
intoxication of Jana, he could not provide any reason
for not mentioning in his
affidavit that Jana was “slurring her words and struggling to stand
up” by the time he left
Flaxton Gardens.
for that aspect of his evidence, there is no reason to doubt his truthfulness
generally; he was an independent witness and his
credit was not otherwise
impugned in the course of his cross-examination.
Mariana Van Der Westhuizen
have set out aspects of the evidence of Mariana above. As I have noted, Mariana
did not voluntarily give evidence and expressed
her deep trauma and distress in
having to do so.
her affidavit, she said that at least in the early part of the afternoon of 12
January, Alan “seemed to be a bit tipsy, but
not drunk”. She did
not give evidence that Jana sat in the lap of Ben or Alan. When she met with
Jana and Sam on the evening
of 13 January, she noted that her daughters were
each visibly upset and her evidence then was:
Jana said words to me to the effect that “something happened”. My
first thought was that something had happened between
Jana and Ben, but then
Jana said that she and Alan “slept together and had sex”.
called to give evidence, Mariana adopted her affidavit and was not asked any
supplementary questions in evidence-in-chief.
cross-examination commenced with questions about her police statement dated 7
July 2020 which became Exhibit 13 in the proceeding.
In that statement, Mariana
said Alan and Jana: “were getting really tipsy after a period of
time” which was a reference
to when she was dancing with Jana in the
winery. She also said that she was woken by Alan approximately 4 am when he
entered the
bedroom and: “It was obvious that Alan was quite
to her discussion with Jana on the evening of 13 January, the statement included
this evidence:
On 13 January 2019, early Sunday evening just after the event closed, Jana
called me and asked me to pack an overnight bag and come
to her house as she
wanted to talk to me. I immediately knew something was not right as she has
never invited me to sleep over at
I travelled to Jana’s house and when I got there Sam was there as well.
James her then boyfriend (now husband) was in their
bedroom. Jana and Sam were
crying and were very upset.
Jana told me something happened the night before after I went to bed. My first
thought was that something happened between Jana and
Ben. But Jana told me
something (Jana told me that Alan and herself slept together and had sex). I was
really shocked. I then discussed
this with Jana (I asked Jana if she was sure it
was Alan. Jana told me yes. Jana then told me that they went to the apartment
the internal stairs and described what Alan looked like naked). This was the
last thing I expected to hear from Jana. I was really
Jana and I continued to have our conversation (I kept asking if Jana was sure
because she had been drunk. Jana said yes and said
Alan took out her tampon). I
then remember Sam telling me something (Sam said she checked and saw that it was
in the bin in the room).
I was very shocked. I did not really know what to think. I remember saying
things to Jana (I asked her what she wanted me to do and
she kept saying
nothing, nobody can ever know and especially James (now her husband) can’t
find out). I remember that Jana
was shaking and was very upset, as was I.
did not say in that portion of her statement that Jana had told her that she had
been raped. In another conversation that
occurred in early January 2020, her
evidence was that: “Around this time Jana told me that Alan had raped
effect of the cross-examination was to confirm that evidence. It was not put to
Mariana that Jana told her on 13 January that
she had not consented.
also find that Mariana was a truthful witness who did her best, noting the
stress and trauma that the events of this proceeding
have caused her to suffer,
to give evidence to the best of her recollection and was not a partisan
determinative issue is whether Jana gave truthful evidence about what occurred
between her and Alan from the time Ben left the
winery, between 1 and 1:30 am,
to when she entered Sam’s bedroom at 4:30 am on 13 January. If she did,
it follows that her
(now uncontradicted) account must be accepted.
assessing Jana’s credibility, four periods must be considered: (1) her
conduct and that of Alan before the departure of Ben;
(2) what occurred between
her and Alan when they were alone; (3) her conduct from 4.30 am on 13 January to
her meeting with Mariana
and Sam later that day; and (4) her conduct to the time
when she made a complaint to the Queensland Police in June 2020.
the detailed reasons that follow, I conclude that Jana’s account is
truthful, I accept it and I find according to her evidence,
save for some
matters which are not undermining.
what follows, there is an overlap with my findings that none of the matters
identified by the primary judge in forming his conclusion
that Jana was an
unsatisfactory witness are made out.
Conduct before the departure of Ben
is uncontroversial that Jana and Alan consumed alcohol during the Summer
Showcase event, and considerably more thereafter. I find
in accordance with the
evidence of Ben that Jana, to his observation, in the early part of the evening
was “a bit tipsy and
was in a relaxed bubbly mood”. Conformably
with my findings concerning appeal ground 2(a), Jana took her medications before
returning to the winery and when she did, she was significantly affected to the
extent that she was slurring her words and struggling
to stand up by the time
Ben departed between 1 and 1:30 am on 13 January.
Mariana was in the winery (and she and Jana were dancing and singing), Jana was
in a playful mood consistent with her consumption
of alcohol and an intention to
enjoy herself. Whilst Jana danced with Mariana in a physical way, touched her
mother, ran her fingers
through her mother’s hair and placed her legs on
her mother’s lap, that conduct is readily explained by Jana’s
consumption of alcohol. It was playful, not sexualised conduct. Viewed in
isolation it does not support a finding that Jana,
subsequently, was a willing
participant in sexual intercourse with Alan.
also find in accordance with the evidence of Ben that before he departed: Jana
on one occasion sat on his lap; once or twice sat
on the lap of Alan and while
sitting next to Alan leaned her body against his; Jana and Alan snuggled
together, Alan placed his arm
around her shoulder; and there were occasions when
Alan had his hand on Jana’s leg and she had, at least once, placed her
over his. Those findings are consistent with the nature of the personal
relationship that Jana and Alan then enjoyed, and which
Jana accepted when
cross-examined. That is, they would often engage in drinking sessions and it
was not unusual for each to discuss
their personal lives. That relationship
extended to her disclosing that she had consulted a psychologist, they each
shared their
experience of childhood sexual abuse and the impacts on their
mental health. The conversations extended to the topic of issues that
in his relationship with Mariana. Alan would discuss with Jana the fact that he
was unhappy, at least about life in general.
Correspondingly, Jana considered
Alan as a person she could relate to because of their family relationship and
their backgrounds
these findings do not support a conclusion that Jana agreed to have sexual
intercourse with her stepfather. A close personal
relationship with a family
member and being playful and affectionate is a world apart from consensual
intercourse. What should not
be overlooked is Jana’s evidence that she
“trusted Alan completely”. Her behaviour may be explained by her
consumption.
approximately 12:30 am on 13 January, Jana left the winery in the company of
Mariana with the intent of walking to the residence.
They did not travel that
distance together because Mariana diverted to the office. Jana continued to her
bedroom where on arrival
she consumed her prescribed medication: an important
fact that was not challenged in cross-examination. She then went into
bedroom to retrieve a pillow. When she did, she woke Sam who then
observed that her sister was intoxicated. That evidence is consistent
Jana’s evidence that before she left the winery, she felt intoxicated to
the extent that when dancing with Mariana each
were nearly falling over when
twirling around.
retrieved a pillow, Jana did not retire to bed. She made an unsuccessful
attempt to locate her mother in the residence. Why
she returned to the winery
is controversial. On her evidence she walked to the office, but her mother was
not there. She then returned
to the winery in search of her. The reason for
returning was challenged in cross-examination, though not effectively in my
It has not been established on the evidence that she did so with the
intent of continuing to party. In my view, Jana gave a plausible
explanation in
the context that she had consumed and was adversely affected by alcohol by that
am I persuaded that the inability of Jana to precisely account for her movements
between leaving the winery with her mother and
returning to it alone points to
untruthfulness or unreliability in her evidence. The same is so for her
inability to precisely account
for the timing of her movements when doing so.
Much is explained by the effects of alcohol and her medications.
Jana returned to the winery, Ben and Alan were still engaged in conversation.
Jana sat down on a couch. From then until her
recollection of being at the top
of the stairs, her memory of what occurred is incomplete, which she accepted in
her affidavit evidence.
She accepted in cross-examination that she sat down on
a couch with Alan and Ben. She insisted that at times she drifted off to
because of the combined effect of her medications and alcohol. For the reasons
I have given, there is no material inconsistency
with the evidence that she gave
in the District Court trial about being asleep on the couch. Consistently with
her cross-examination,
she may have gone outside to smoke or vape, but that is
not inconsistent with the fact that when seated she was sleepy.
accepted in cross-examination that she remembered watching Alan walk Ben out of
the winery, which is consistent with the evidence
in her affidavit. She also
said in her affidavit that she assumed that Alan would then lock up the venue
and that each would walk
together to the residence, that being something which
they did on prior occasions. She remembered Alan re-entering the winery, but
from that point she was “extremely affected” by her medication with
the result that: “I remember the following
events in pieces and
fragments”, commencing with “the next thing” being at the top
of the stairs. She maintained
that evidence in cross-examination.
evidence as to these matters is plausible, was not exposed as wrong in
cross-examination and raises no credibility issue.
I accept her account of
these events and find accordingly.
Conduct when Jana and Alan were alone
established that Jana had no memory of any event between the return of Alan to
the winery and her position at the top of the
stairs, cross-examining counsel
then put a number of direct propositions to her as to what occurred between her
and Alan when they
were at each sitting on a couch in the winery. I have set
out the transcript extracts earlier in these reasons. Jana did not recall
discussing relationship difficulties. She accepted that Alan discussed his
relationship with Mariana, but maintained that this conversation
did not occur
at that time on the couch. She accepted that she did discuss problems in her
relationship with James and conduct,
that might be characterised as overbearing,
of James’ mother towards her.
thought she received a neck and shoulder massage from Alan, but did not think
they were then alone. She denied placing her legs
over his whilst on the sofa.
She denied he gave her a foot and leg massage. She denied saying to him:
“Are you actually intending
to create a sexual feeling in that massage,
because it feels really good”. She denied the asserted subsequent
conversation
that Alan was “okay” if she was. She denied that Alan
massaged further up her legs and that she said something to the
“Are you wanting this to go further, sexually”. She denied that his
response was to the effect of: “I
am comfortable with it going further if
you are”. She denied that there was a discussion about the prospect of
going further.
She did not recall that Alan disclosed that his relationship
with Mariana was “looking pretty bad anyway”. She denied
was content to proceed so long as James did not find out. She denied that she
unzipped her blue denim dress “almost
evidence was that she ascended the stairs for the purpose of extinguishing
candles. Her evidence about that was shown
in cross-examination to be wrong.
However, as I have explained in dealing with the appeal grounds, this error is
explicable by the
combined effect of the medication and her alcohol consumption
and does not undermine her credibility.
relatively clear recollection of what occurred between her and Alan from when
she found herself at the top of the stairs
starkly contrasts with her lack of
recollection to that point.
her affidavit, she stated that her vision was blurred and she felt disoriented.
Alan sat next to her and said words to the effect:
“I’m not happy
with my life”. Jana did not consider that unusual, it being consistent
with discussions which they
had frequently engaged in. She does not believe
that she responded to that statement. As set out above at [104], on
account, Alan then expressed his love for her, employing words to
the effect: “I’m in love with you. I wish things turned
differently and I could be with you. We’re perfect for each other”,
then adding words to the effect: “I want
you to be my lover on the
was shocked by these statements responding to the effect of: “What! I
don’t agree” and “Obviously you
don’t mean that”.
There was further discussion, which Jana did not elaborate, on, to the effect
that he should not be
making those statements. Her speech was slurred and she
felt “completely disorientated” at that point. She does recollect
that Alan then said words to the effect of: “I’ve been thinking
to the effect:
“You should be going back to your wife”. On her evidence that did
not dissuade Alan: he lent over kissed
her on the lips and inserted his tongue
into her mouth. In her evidence in the District Court trial, she said that
Alan: “kissed
me quite aggressively” and “he kissed me, that
impressed my face with his mouth”. There was further unwanted kissing
initiated by Alan.
experienced difficulty in comprehending what was happening. It will be recalled
from the evidence I set out at [105] that Jana’s
evidence is that at that
point: “My body felt very heavy and I could not control my limbs”.
There were more expressions
of love from Alan: words to the effect of: “I
have loved you for a very long time and I have wanted this for years now”
and that he wanted Jana as a lover “on the side”. Jana responded to
the effect of: “What if you’re wanting
a relationship with me, this
will make you end up like your stepfather”, to which he replied:
“it’s not the same”.
evidence was not directly challenged in cross-examination. Rather, as the
transcript extract that I have set out at [319] demonstrates,
a forensic choice
was made to challenge her evidence propositionally. She denied that there was
consensual kissing and caressing
at that point, insisting that Alan did so
without her consent. She denied that she was asked whether she wanted to go
into the apartment
and responded that she did. As I set out at [326], Jana was
questioned about whether the door to the Bridal Suite was locked. The
was that she had never noticed the door being used and that Alan used a key to
open the door. Although it was put to Jana,
by reference to a photograph, that
she was mistaken about the door having a locking device, she maintained her
Importantly,
apart from those propositions Jana’s evidence about what was discussed at
the top of the stairs was left unchallenged.
Accordingly,
save for her reason for proceeding up the stairs, I accept the truthfulness of
her account and find according to her
evidence. Jana may have been mistaken
turn to what occurred in the Bridal Suite.
cross-examination there was much focus on how the door to the Bridal Suite was
opened, whether there was a lock and if Alan used
a key. As noted, a photograph
was shown to Jana, apparently to demonstrate that the door did not have a
keyhole for a lock, but
has not been included in
of the Appeal Book.
Although Jana accepted upon being shown that photograph that it did not depict a
keyhole for a lock, I do not
make a finding about that evidence because in
cross-examination the objection was resolved on the basis that her counsel would
Alan about that matter and I have not had regard to his evidence for
the reasons above. In any event, how entry was effected is
peripheral to what
occurred therein and once again an explanation is that Jana’s memory was
affected by her medications and
alcohol consumption.
critical evidence-in-chief which Jana gave in her affidavit as to the next
sequence of events was largely challenged in cross-examination
by the method of
putting to her a series of propositions consistent with the case of Alan, which
she denied and her answers were
not further pursued. This portion of the
transcript is set out above at [334].
was, however, directly challenged on the following evidence, which I have
earlier set out, but it is important to state the effect
of her evidence. She
said that Alan unzipped her dress and removed her underpants while she was
laying on her back on the bed.
She disagreed that her dress could not be
removed easily whilst in that position. She maintained her evidence that Alan
her tampon and placed it into a bin in the ensuite bathroom, despite
giving evidence in the District Court trial that she did not
know how her tampon
came to be in the bin. She frankly acknowledged that inconsistency. She also
acknowledged that she had given
inconsistent evidence in the District Court
trial that, following intercourse with Alan, she went into the ensuite but did
into the bin. In contrast her evidence-in-chief was that she
remembered noticing the tampon in the bin. Once again, she acknowledged
inconsistency.
the issue of whether Jana verbally told Alan that she did not consent, the
questions commenced with confirming her evidence that
she was “severely
affected” by her medication but not to the extent of being unable to
speak. The questions went so
far as confirming Jana’s evidence that she
was able to “think reasonably clearly”, despite the difficulties
she then had of moving her body. She was not directly challenged on her
evidence that she said to Alan: “No” or words
to the effect of:
“I don’t want this”; “This is not what I want” and
“No, I don’t want
that”. She was challenged about her
evidence that following the intercourse, she got up from the bed walked into the
dressed and then ran back to the residence. She was challenged as to
how that could be correct, accepting that she was severely
affected by her
medication. The answer that she gave, which was the effect of her adrenaline
and her determination to remove herself
from the Bridal Suite, is entirely
Surprisingly,
there was no direct challenge to her evidence that she felt mortified, shocked,
frozen and paralysed with fear; she
felt completely powerless; that Alan
performed oral sex on her and placed at least one finger into her vagina and in
response to
her protestation said words to the effect of: “I just want to
make you feel good”. There was no direct challenge to
her further
evidence that Alan then moved on top of her and she could feel his erect penis
which he then inserted into her vagina;
that he placed the entire weight of his
body on top of her; that she was too weak and affected by her medication to push
that she reached a point of disassociation and just lay there; she then
heard him making sounds to the effect that he had finished
whereupon he got off
her (but she did not know whether he had ejaculated) and after he had concluded
he said words to her to the
effect of: “Don’t worry about getting
pregnant, I’ve had the snip”.
was put by way of challenge to Jana’s evidence was described by counsel as
“an alternative version” commencing
with the proposition that upon
entry to the Bridal Suite, Alan sat down on the bed and Jana stood in front of
him, which she denied.
I have set out the full extract from the transcript
above at [334]-[335]. Once again, Jana directly responded to each proposition
with clear succinct answers. In all 15 propositions were put to her, 14 were
denied. The only proposition which she accepted was
“Wasn’t able to continue performing” and apologised for that
cross-examination did not demonstrate that Jana’s account of what occurred
in the Bridal Suite was false or omitted any
material particular. However,
whether her account should be accepted is not limited to a consideration of what
occurred therein.
For the reasons I have given in addressing appeal ground
2(k), Jana’s state of distress and what she said to Sam from 4:30
January is probative of what occurred and is relevant to Jana’s
Conduct from 4.30 am on 13 January 2019
have accepted the evidence of Sam both as to her observation of the state of
distress of Jana and her complaint that Alan had sex
with Jana without
evidence of discussing the matter with her sister was less detailed. On her
account, she entered the bedroom crying
hysterically and with breathing
difficulties. She was unable to fully answer her sister’s questions,
limiting her responses
to: “Something had happened”; “Alan had
sex with me” and “It just happened”. Notably, on that
evidence she did not say anything about her lack of consent.
was not cross-examined on that evidence.
Jana did not give evidence that she told her sister that the sex was without
consent, does not detract from the force of the
evidence of Sam confirmed by her
contemporaneous Tumblr post.
am therefore satisfied that Jana in a state of much distress (I find that she
was hysterical) made a complaint that she had been
raped by Alan shortly after
it occurred. This is forceful, though not determinative, probative evidence of
the fact that Jana did
not consent to intercourse. It is implausible that if
consensual intercourse occurred, Jana would present in her sister’s
bedroom at 4.30 am in a state of severe distress and relate what had occurred in
the Bridal Suite. None of that is consistent with
a consensual affair.
my acceptance of Sam’s evidence strongly supports an overall conclusion
that Jana gave truthful evidence as to what
occurred within the Bridal
is then the meeting with Mariana on the evening of 13 January. There is no
dispute on the evidence that Jana and Sam arranged
for the meeting so that
Mariana would be informed of what occurred. Nor is there a dispute that when
they met, Mariana observed
that each of her daughters was visibly upset, Jana
said words to the effect that: “Something happened” and that she and
Alan: “Slept together and had sex”. The difference in the evidence
is that according to Jana, although she did not use
the word “rape”,
which she found confronting, in response to her mother stating: “He would
never do that”,
she responded to the effect: “I would never
affidavit evidence corroborates Jana. According to her, the response to her
mother’s proposition that Alan “would
never do something like
that” was: “Jana was clear to my mother that she had not and would
never consent to having sex
with Alan”. In contrast, as exposed in
cross-examination, Sam in her police statement did not mention that her sister
her mother that the sex was without her consent.
am not able to resolve this inconsistency based on my review of the documentary
of the Appeal Book. This is quintessentially a matter for
resolution with the benefit of seeing and hearing the witnesses give their
evidence. In consequence, my finding is only that Jana was visibly distressed
when she met Mariana to advise her that she and Alan
had sexual intercourse. It
does not follow, however, that this finding is of limited value for the reason
that I have given above:
it is implausible that if Jana had engaged in
surreptitious consensual sexual intercourse with her stepfather, that she would
a little more than 12 hours after the event, then in a state of
considerable distress have reported that fact to her mother in the
that it would likely lead to the end of her mother’s marriage and she
would then suffer the opprobrium of intercourse
with her mother’s husband
and the personal shame of doing so. None of that is plausible. This
conversation corroborates the
truthfulness of Jana’s account.
gave other consistent evidence about what she did on 13 January, which was not
challenged in cross-examination. On her walk
from the Bridal Suite to the
residence she was shaking and crying, an emotional reaction consistent with the
trauma of rape. On
entering the residence, she went into the bathroom where she
“felt really scared”, changed into her sleeping attire and
“washed my face, trying to clean around my mouth where he had kissed
it”. That emotion and conduct is not consistent
with a consensual sexual
then entered the residence and in a whispering voice enquired: “Where are
you”. Jana did not respond. She tried
to hide behind the bathroom door
and was shaking. That evidence was simply confirmed in cross-examination and is
not consistent
with a consensual sexual encounter.
short while later Jana exited the bathroom, believing that Alan had gone to bed.
He had not. He confronted her with the words:
“Here you are”, to
which she responded: “Yep” and kept walking towards her bedroom. In
answer to his question:
“are you all right” she responded
“Yep” because she did not wish to converse with him. On her account
just wanted to get away from him. He then offered to tuck her into bed to
which she responded: “No”, went into her bedroom
and closed the
door. She knelt down between two beds in the room and cried in the dark. Jana
was challenged in cross-examination
on this evidence. She did not recall
whether Alan asked her whether she was alright though firmly maintained her
evidence that he
offered to tuck her into bed. There is no reason to reject her
evidence about those denials.
was not challenged on her evidence that having returned to her bedroom, she
began to have suicidal thoughts flowing from her
reflection on her thought
processes of: “This is my mum’s husband and he believed there was
nothing wrong with professing
his love for me”; “After all my
progress and healing, how am I possibly supposed to do it all over again”
also thought about how he has children, and I have a partner and a
child and my life was happy”. It is implausible that Jana
experienced
suicidal ideation, the result of a surreptitious consensual sexual encounter
with her stepfather.
woke at approximately 11 am on 13 January. She had a brief conversation with
Sam, readied herself for work and walked over to
the office to continue for a
second Summer Showcase event. Upon her arrival at the office, she encountered
Alan where, to her observation
he was: “Sitting at his desk with a smug
look on his face” and said to her words to the effect: “Morning
That greeting made her feel sick and she went outside in an
attempt to find her mother. She only worked for approximately two hours
day because: “I was too upset and could not keep working”. She left
Flaxton Gardens. Alan attempted to telephone
her, but she did not answer. He
sent text messages including: “Can we talk”, to which she did not
respond. None of
that was challenged in cross-examination. It is not
consistent with Jana having consented to intercourse.
one may question why Jana returned to Flaxton Gardens knowing that it was likely
that she would encounter Alan shortly after
they had non-consensual sex, the
failure to explore this in cross-examination does not open for inquiry why she
acted in this way.
In any event, balanced against that matter is her
unchallenged evidence that she felt sick when Alan greeted her and was too upset
to continue working at Flaxton Gardens that day.
there is the discussion between Jana and Alan before she left Flaxton Gardens on
19 January, and in response to Mariana telling
her that they: “Needed to
sort your shit out” and that Alan was waiting to speak with her.
Jana’s evidence was
that she walked over and spoke with Alan who said
words to the effect of: “Well this is tough. Honestly, I was disappointed
when you told your mum. We could have had something between us” to which
she responded to the effect: “She deserved
to know. What did you tell
her?” and he in turn replied to the effect of: “Obviously I had to
play the I don’t
remember the card”. Jana then told Alan she was
not going back to work. She was not cross-examined on this evidence.
evidence is inconsistent with Jana having agreed to consensual sex with her
stepfather.
overall, I find that Jana’s conduct on 13 January, to be consistent with
the truthfulness of her evidence of what
occurred in the Bridal Suite.
Conduct to June 2020
primary judge made much of the decision of Jana and James to hold their wedding
at Flaxton Gardens. I have explained why this
is not a matter that undermines
Jana’s credibility.
is other unchallenged evidence that is supportive of Jana’s credit,
because it is logically inconsistent with a consensual
sexual encounter.
April 2019, Mariana persuaded Jana to stop working from home and resume working
at Flaxton Gardens, which she agreed to do but
on the condition that she would
never be left alone with Alan. After she recommenced working, she had a
conversation with Mariana
who enquired as to her well-being to which she
answered: “Not good” and that she had been prescribed antipsychotic
medication.
Later, in approximately January 2020, she had a telephone
discussion with Mariana during which she reaffirmed that the intercourse
without consent and during it she first used the word rape to her mother.
Mariana became very upset and the conversation was
September 2019, Jana ceased working at Flaxton Gardens. She gave as one of her
reasons her inability to be in the same room as
Alan and his repeated greetings
to her: “Hello Gorgeous”.
gave unchallenged evidence that she did not inform her general practitioner, Dr
Williams, that she had been raped during her
consultation on 14 January because
her child was present with her. She also gave evidence to the effect that for a
long time she
was unable to use the word rape when discussing her intercourse
gave unchallenged evidence that after 13 January, her sister: “Was unable
to cope with small everyday stressors and would
completely shut down
emotionally”.
gave unchallenged evidence that “almost immediately” after 13
January 2019, he noticed changes in Jana’s behaviour,
which evidence I
have set out above.
of this evidence, which I accept, is consistent with non-consensual sex with her
stepfather.
Sexual Harassment is made out
follows that Jana has made out the following pleaded contentions in her
12 or 13 January 2019, whilst seated with Alan at the top of the stairs leading
to the Bridal Suite at Flaxton Gardens, Alan said
to Jana words to the
(a) “I’m in love with you”;
(b) “I wish things turned out differently and I could be with
(c) “We’re perfect for each other”;
(d) That he wanted Jana to be his “lover on the side”;
(e) “I have loved you for a very long time and I have wanted this for
years now”; and
(f) That he wanted Jana “on the side”.
whilst seated at the top of the stairs, Alan kissed Jana on the mouth without
her consent.
whilst in the Bridal Suite, Alan:
(a) sat down on the bed next to Jana and said words to the effect: “I want
to go further with this” before closing and
locking the door;
(b) kissed Jana on the mouth without her consent;
(c) removed Jana’s clothing including her underwear without her
(d) removed Jana’s tampon from her vagina without her consent;
(e) engaged in oral sex and digital penetration of her vagina without consent;
(f) had sexual intercourse with Jana without consent.
approximately 4 am on 13 January 2019 at the residence Alan said to Jana words
to the effect: “I want to tuck you in”.
the morning of 13 January 2019, at Flaxton Gardens Alan said to Jana words to
the effect: “Morning gorgeous”.
or about 19 January 2019, Alan said to Jana words to the effect:
“honestly, I was disappointed when you told your mum. We
could have had
something between us”.
28A of the SDA defined sexual harassment as follows:
Meaning of sexual harassment
(1) For the purposes of this Division, a person sexually harasses another person
person harassed
(a) the person makes an unwelcome sexual advance, or an unwelcome request for
sexual favours, to the person harassed; or
(b) engages in other unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature in relation to the
person harassed;
in circumstances in which a reasonable person, having regard to all the
circumstances, would have anticipated the possibility that
the person harassed
would be offended, humiliated or intimidated.
(1A) For the purposes of subsection (1), the circumstances to be taken into
account include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) the sex, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, intersex status, marital
or relationship status, religious belief, race, colour,
or national or ethnic
origin, of the person harassed;
(b) the relationship between the person harassed and the person who made the
advance or request or who engaged in the conduct;
(c) any disability of the person harassed;
(d) any other relevant circumstance.
(2) In this section:
conduct of a sexual nature
includes making a statement of a sexual
nature to a person, or in the presence of a person, whether the statement is
made orally
or in writing.
can be no doubt that, having regard to their family relationship as stepfather
and stepdaughter and because Jana did not engage
in conduct which invited any of
the statements made by Alan to her and did not consent to being kissed by him,
his performance of
oral sex on her, his digital penetration of her vagina or the
act of sexual intercourse, Alan engaged in sexual harassment within
the meaning
of this provision.
further follows that Alan engaged in unlawful sexual harassment contrary to s
28B(6) of the SDA, which provided:
(6) It is unlawful for a workplace participant to sexually harass another
workplace participant at a place that is a workplace of
either or both of those
subsection (7) provided:
In this section:
includes a ship, aircraft or vehicle.
means a place at which a workplace participant works or
otherwise carries out functions in connection with being a workplace
participant.
workplace participant
means any of the following:
(a) an employer or employee;
(b) a commission agent or contract worker;
(c) a partner in a partnership.
in her amended notice of appeal seeks relief as follows:
(1) The Order dismissing the Originating Application be set aside and the
following orders are made:
(a) A declaration that Alan contravened s 28B of the SDA in respect of each of
the established contraventions.
(b) A declaration that, by reason of s 106(1) of the SDA, Flaxton Gardens Pty
Ltd contravened s 28B of the SDA in respect of each
of the established
conventions.
(c) An order pursuant to s 46PO of the Commission Act that the Alan and Flaxton
Gardens Pty Ltd pay compensation in the amount of
$300,000 in general damages.
(2) An order that Alan and Flaxton Gardens Pty Ltd pay the costs of the
proceeding and the appeal.
first needs to be said about the vicarious liability of Flaxton Gardens Pty Ltd,
which it did not admit on the pleadings
due to the denial that Alan had
contravened the SDA. Section 106 of the SDA provided:
Vicarious liability etc.
(1) Subject to subsection (2), where an employee or agent of a person
does, in connection with the employment of the employee or
with the duties of
the agent as an agent:
(a) an act that would, if it were done by the person, be unlawful under
Division 1 or 2 of Part II (whether or not the act done by
employee or agent is unlawful under Division 1 or 2 of Part II);
(b) an act that is unlawful under Division 3 of Part II;
this Act applies in relation to that person as if that person had also done the
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to an act of a kind referred
to in paragraph (1)(a) or (b) done by an employee or agent
of a person
if it is established that the person took all reasonable steps to prevent the
employee or agent from doing acts of the
kind referred to in that paragraph.
was admitted on the pleadings by Alan and Flaxton Gardens Pty Ltd that Alan was
a director of Flaxton Gardens Pty Ltd and is and
was its agent. Flaxton Gardens
is therefore vicariously liable for sexual harassment committed by Alan, when
committed in connection
with his duties as an agent provided that the exception
in s 106(2) does not apply. The critical phrase ‘in connection
has been construed broadly:
South Pacific Resort Hotels Pty Ltd v
[2005] FCAFC 130
(2005) 144 FCR 402.
As explained by Black CJ and
Tamberlin J in that case at [42] it is wider than the familiar common law or
workers compensation phrase
“in the course of”. As that case
illustrates it is a fact sensitive inquiry. The Court dismissed an appeal from
of a Federal Magistrate who held the employer liable for the conduct
of an employee after work hours within a staff accommodation
facility at a hotel
complex on Norfolk Island. A male employee without consent twice entered the
accommodation of a fellow female
employee. On each occasion he made sexual
advances to her.
other reasons for dismissing the appeal, their Honours reasoned that the conduct
was between two employees, at the premises
of the employer and in accommodation
provided by the employer for work purposes: [39]-[40]. It “could not be
said here that
the common employment was unrelated or merely incidental to the
sexual harassment”: [39]. Although another reason for the conclusion
prohibition on staff entertaining visitors in the staff accommodation,
prohibitions of that kind are clearly unnecessary to
engage vicarious liability
pursuant to s 106.
Kiefel J also concluded that the provision is to be broadly construed: [70]. In
part her Honour reached that conclusion
by reference to the statutory objects,
to eliminate as far as possible discrimination in areas of work ([62]) and the
positive duty
on employers to take steps to eliminate such conduct from the
workplace: [63].
this case the conduct occurred within the workplace, following a work function
perpetuated by a director of the employer who took
advantage of a vulnerable
workplace participant. The workplace was the venue for the conduct. The Bridal
Suite provided the private
and well-appointed area to engage in the conduct.
The employer’s alcohol was used to, in part, make Jana vulnerable and,
ultimately,
incapable of resisting Alan’s desires. Alan took advantage of
the employment to engage in his conduct: cf
Weir v Telstra Limited
(2023) 301 FCR 261
those matters are properly considered, I am well satisfied that all of the
impugned conduct of Alan occurred in his capacity
as an agent of Flaxton Gardens
46PO of the Commission Act provides a mechanism for the grant of relief where
unlawful discrimination is established, including
acts, omissions or practices
that are unlawful under Part II of the SDA, if certain requirements are met.
They are in this case.
That is, Jana made a complaint to the President on 11
February 2022, alleging unlawful discrimination contrary to the SDA, which
complaint was terminated pursuant to s 46PH by notice dated 12 October 2022. On
termination, Jana was entitled to make an application
to the Circuit Court
alleging unlawful discrimination by Alan and Flaxton Gardens Pty Ltd. The
unlawful discrimination that she
alleged in her proceeding before the Circuit
Court was the same as the unlawful discrimination the subject of the terminated
and arose out of the same acts.
conditions having been met, s 46PO(4) conferred power to make a range of
(4) If the court concerned is satisfied that there has been unlawful
discrimination by any respondent, the court may make such orders
(including a
declaration of right) as it thinks fit, including any of the following orders or
any order to a similar effect:
(a) an order declaring that the respondent has committed unlawful discrimination
and directing the respondent not to repeat or continue
such unlawful
discrimination;
(b) an order requiring a respondent to perform any reasonable act or course of
conduct to redress any loss or damage suffered by
an applicant;
(c) an order requiring a respondent to employ or re - employ an applicant;
(d) an order requiring a respondent to pay to an applicant damages by way of
compensation for any loss or damage suffered because
of the conduct of the
respondent;
(e) an order requiring a respondent to vary the termination of a contract or
agreement to redress any loss or damage suffered by
an applicant;
(f) an order declaring that it would be inappropriate for any further action to
be taken in the matter.
Note 1: The Federal Court, or a judge of that court, may award costs in
proceedings under this section in certain circumstances--see
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Note 2: The Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2), or a
Judge of that Court, may award costs in proceedings
under this section in
certain circumstances--see
section 214
Federal Circuit and Family Court
of Australia Act 2021
my view, it is appropriate that declaratory relief be granted as sought.
Although the power to grant such relief is discretionary,
this is a case
justifying it as publicly vindicating Jana’s claims and to express
disapproval of the sexual harassment she
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2006] FCA 1730
, Nicholson J;
Shizas v Commissioner of Police (Obh
of Commonwealth)
[2017] FCA 61
(2017) 268 IR 71
, Katzmann J.
the Circuit Court Jana claimed general damages, loss of past and future income
and medical expenses. Before us her only claim
is compensation for general
damages. The statutory basis for an award of compensation requires
identification of loss or damage
suffered because of the unlawful
discrimination. This allows for an assessment of compensation by reference to
principles analogous
to an award of damages for tortious conduct, but is not
constrained by those principles:
Corporation Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC 82
(2014) 223 FCR 334
, [30]; Kenny J and [126]; Besanko and Perram JJ.
is well understood, in tort an award of general damages is to compensate for
injury by reference to pain, suffering, loss of amenity,
diminution in quality
of life and discomfort (amongst others). Jana’s evidence is that
Alan’s conduct caused her physical
and psychological damage. The
statutory object is to provide for fair and adequate compensation for the injury
she suffered because
of the unlawful discrimination. The statutory purpose of
the SDA may “inform the proper approach to causation”:
at [130], Besanko and Perram JJ. Community standards inform
the assessment:
at [95], Kenny J;
August and Pemberton Pty Ltd
[2023] FCA 1313
; (2023) 328 IR 1 at
, Katzmann J. However, as Katzmann J explained in
The purpose of damages is to compensate the applicant for the harm caused to her
by the sexual harassment she suffered, not to reflect
the community’s
appreciation of the extent of harm that can be occasioned by sexual harassment.
gave unchallenged evidence-in-chief as follows. Between the ages of four and
seven she was subjected to sexual abuse by the
husband of her mother’s
sister. She first revealed the abuse to James in 2013 and confronted the
psychological impact of the
abuse which had afflicted her for years. She became
depressed and withdrawn. James recommended that she seek medical advice. She
commenced visiting the psychiatrist, Dr Martin. As noted, he diagnosed her with
PTSD, anxiety disorder and depressed mood symptoms.
When she first consulted Dr
Martin, Jana described her condition as: “I experienced really bad PTSD
symptoms for about six
months. I felt like I was losing my mind.”
Martin commenced a form of prescribed medication. After approximately eight
months of treatment, Jana considered that her PTSD
symptoms had lessened. She
continued however to take her prescribed medication.
commenced working as a model when she was 16 years of age. In 2013 she was
working at least once per week and moved to Sydney
to pursue further
opportunities. In her words she had “a mental breakdown” towards
the end of 2013 and returned to live
in Queensland. She continued modelling
until November 2015 when she gave birth to her son Hugo. She was able to work
“consistently”
until January 2019.
intercourse, Jana relived the trauma of her childhood sexual abuse. When she
returned to the residence she was distressed:
shaking and crying. In her
darkened bedroom she knelt down between the twin beds and cried. She had
profoundly disturbing thoughts,
including suicidal ideation. She presented
hysterically to her sister.
January 2019, Jana resumed sessions with Dr Martin because, in her view,
Alan’s conduct “had a very significant impact
Martin increased the dosage of her medications. Since 2020, her evidence is
that the symptoms “have gradually
improved, but the assault continues to
have a significant impact on me in the way I live my life”. She gives as
“I have a lack of trust and now wary”; “I feel a
sense of shame”; “I have intrusive memories about
incident”; “I still have PTSD, and symptoms of anxiety and
depression”; “I find it hard to cope with
stress and finding it
heightened now that my son has developed type I diabetes”; “I
continuously have flashbacks to the
evening and find it hard not to think about
it”; “My sleep is erratic and disturbed”; “My
concentration and
short-term memory are poor”, “My social life is
decreased as a result of my anxiety” and “I am currently
medication Sertraline, which is an anti-depressant”.
evidence is that the conduct had a “profound impact” on her
relationship with James. It caused her “a
massive amount of pain”
and “a huge amount of emotional damage”. As to her employment
prospects, the evidence
is that the health impacts of the conduct have severely
limited her employment prospects. She gives evidence about her past earnings,
but as no past or future economic loss claim is made, I do not undertake an
assessment by reference to that evidence. What is relevant
is that the conduct
of Alan has adversely affected her ability to derive enjoyment in life through
undertaking useful and continuous
employment in her modelling career. The final
sentence in her affidavit reads:
I believe my low confidence, low moods, difficulty coping with stress and my
poor concentration and memory would make it very difficult
for me to work
consistently.
also gave unchallenged evidence as to the impact of the conduct on Jana. To his
observation, “almost immediately”,
there was a noticeable change in
her behaviour. She was more distracted, her sleep was disturbed, she was less
affectionate and
she began drinking heavily. She undertook less work. Prior to
January 2019, he observed Jana: “To be moving to a place emotionally
her trauma and vulnerabilities were managed so that she could function, and she
did not see the world as an inherently scary
place”. But since, to his
observation: “The incident caused years of progress in her mental health
to be brought back
to square one... The incident appears to have reinforced all
of Jana’s insecurities and rattled her confidence. She is more
now than she was before”.
have already set out her state of distress that Sam observed from 4:30 am on 13
January. When addressing her observations of the
impact of the conduct,
Sam’s unchallenged evidence included:
After the event, Jana was unable to cope with small everyday stressors and would
completely shut down emotionally....
Jana became very distant from my mother and Alan.
De Leacy in his report of 12 April 2023, about which there was very limited
cross-examination, recorded her history as including:
She has developed a lack of trust. She is very wary now. She has intrusive
memories about what happened. She has a sense of shame.
She has anxiety and
depression. She finds it hard to cope with stress and she commented that there
is an additional stressor now
that her young son has developed type I diabetes
and requires extra care.
She has flashbacks to the evening and she cannot stop thinking about it.
Her sleep is erratic.
Her appetite is dropped that she has maintained a fairly stable weight.
Concentration and short-term memory are poor.
Her social life has dropped because of her anxiety.
De Leacy opined that her current condition is an aggravation of her pre-existing
condition, caused by the conduct of Alan. Previously,
she suffered from Complex
PTSD from childhood sexual abuse, which had been treated. In more detail, he
expressed his opinion as:
She can be diagnosed as suffering from Complex Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder,
the current situation being aggravation of pre-existing
Complex Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder. The pre-existing condition was well under control but there has
been a significant recrudescence
of symptomology since the events that have been
described above occurred.
She has a wide range of symptoms, with anxiety, depression, flashbacks,
rumination, a sense of mistrust, sleep disturbance, appetite
variability,
withdrawal socially, and she has had a falling out with her mother.
Concentration on short-term memory are poor.
De Leacy opined that Jana’s diagnosis meets the criteria of DSM-5. When
asked to express an opinion about her prognosis,
he stated that the symptoms:
“Will require intensive treatment to resolve”, comprising regular
visits to a psychiatrist
as well as counselling from a psychologist and
long-term medication. The symptoms: “May not entirely resolve but will
over the course of one to two years.”
a very brief cross-examination, Dr De Leacy confirmed that Jana’s prior
existing PTSD was controlled by Jana’s prescribed
medication, that a
possible stressor may be isolation from her family, including moving to another
state and that, in time, she may
be able to return to some form of part-time
employment.
find that the conduct did and continued to have each of those impacts on
the course of argument, the Court was taken to a number of decisions concerned
with the quantum of awards for general damages said
to have been made in
comparable cases.
was put by counsel for Jana that awards in sexual harassment cases have not
maintained parity with awards of general damages in
personal injury and
defamation cases. It was submitted that the award in
$100,000 in 2014, does not now reflect significant alterations in community
attitudes to sexual harassment in more recent times.
As a particular example,
reliance is placed on the award in
of $180,000 in 2023 for sexual
harassment and victimisation.
have not been greatly assisted by considering quantum awards in other cases.
Necessarily each turns on their own facts:
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La
[1968] HCA 62
(1968) 119 CLR 118
at 124-125, Barwick CJ, Kitto and
Menzies JJ. Although that decision has been criticised and overtaken in some
legislation (as to which, see Luntz H and Harder S,
Assessment of Damages For Personal Injury and Death
LexisNexis, 2021) at [3.1.6]-[3.1.8]), in my view, it is the correct approach in
assessing compensation pursuant to s 46PO(4)
of the Commission Act because the
requirement is to compensate for loss or damage suffered by an individual in
unique circumstances
caused by the contravening conduct. It is also irrelevant
to examine awards in defamation cases as explained by Katzmann J in
do however, accept the general submission that community attention in more
recent years has brought into sharper focus the impact
on individuals of sexual
harassment, which Katzmann J partly chartered in
at [502]- [505].
For example, in 2022, the Australian Human Rights Commission (
completed its fifth national survey on workplace sexual harassment:
Australian Human Rights Commission,
Time for respect: Fifth national
survey sexual harassment workplaces
(AHRC, Sydney, 2022). The report, among
other things, outlines that there has been “an improvement in Australians
understandings
of the concept of sexual harassment” and that “there
is clearly growing support and appetite for change” in Australian
workplaces. Further, since the award of damages in
, there has
been significant legislative change enacted to provide better protection from
sexual harassment in the workplace, including
Anti-Discrimination and
Human Rights Legislation Amendment (
Respect at Work
(Cth). The Respect at Work Act, among other things, introduced a
positive duty on employers to take reasonable and proportionate
measures to
eliminate sexual harassment, as far as possible: s 47C of the SDA. This
amendment is intended to shift the focus to proactively
preventing sexual
harassment, rather than addressing and responding to conduct that has already
occurred: Explanatory Memorandum,
Anti-Discrimination and Human Rights
Legislation Amendment (Respect at Work) Bill 2022.
this matter, the contravening conduct caused Jana to suffer very great distress
in the immediate aftermath, the aggravation of
her pre-existing Complex PTSD
with all of the sequelae described in the lay and expert opinion evidence. The
conduct has had a profound
adverse impact on her mental health, enjoyment of
life and personal, professional and social interaction. It has caused anxiety,
a loss of confidence and the considerable shame of being sexually harassed by
her stepfather.
regard to all of the relevant circumstances, I consider an award of general
damages in the sum of $230,000 as fair and adequate
compensation.
to costs, the broad discretion to award costs pursuant to s 43 of the FCA Act,
for the costs of the appeal, is subject to s 46PSA
of the Commission Act, which
When respondent liable for costs
(2) Subject to subsection (4), if the applicant is successful in
proceedings on one or more grounds, the court must order each respondent
whom the applicant is successful to pay the applicant’s costs.
(3) The court may order that the costs to be paid by the respondent
be assessed on an indemnity basis or otherwise.
(4) If the court is satisfied that the applicant’s unreasonable
act or omission caused the applicant to incur costs, the court
is not required
to order the respondent to pay the costs incurred as a result of that act or
the broad discretion to award costs pursuant to
Federal Circuit
and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
(Cth), for the costs of the Circuit
Court proceeding, does not apply to proceedings in relation to a matter arising
under Division
2 of Part IIB of the Commission Act.
Accordingly,
in each case, costs must follow the event.
these reasons, I would allow the appeal, grant declaratory relief generally in
accordance with the conduct set out in ground 2
of the amended notice of appeal,
award compensation in the amount of $230,000 and order the respondents to pay
the costs of the appeal
and of the proceeding in the Circuit Court.
I certify that the preceding four hundred and
eleven (411) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
Honourable Justice
Dated: 17 October 2025
RTF format (1.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format