Commissioner of the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission v Lifestyle Solutions (Aust) Ltd (Reportable Incidents Proceeding) [2025] FCA 1394 (14 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Commissioner of the NDIS Quality and
Safeguards Commission v Lifestyle Solutions (Aust) Ltd (Reportable Incidents
Proceeding)
[2025] FCA 1394
File number(s):
NSD 1683 of 2024
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
CIVIL PENALTY –
proceeding for civil
contraventions of
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act
(Cth) – where failures involved breach of
National Disability
Insurance Scheme (Incident Management and Reportable Incidents) Rules 2018
(Cth) – where conduct serious – where failure to notify reportable
incidents on numerous occasions – where parties
agreed on proposed
declarations, pecuniary penalties and costs orders – whether proposed
penalty and declaratory relief are
appropriate – orders made in terms
Legislation:
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act
(Cth), Ch 4
Regulatory Powers (Standard Provisions) Act 2014
ss 82(5)(a)
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Incident Management and Reportable
Incidents) Rules 2018
(Cth), ss 10(1)(c), 11A, 15(1), 16, 17, 18, 20, 21,
Cases cited:
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
Reckitt Benckiser
(Australia) Pty Ltd
[2016] FCAFC 181
(2016) 340 ALR 25
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v The Good Guys Discount
Warehouses (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2025] FCA 1085
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Yazaki Corporation
[2018] FCAFC 73
(2018) 262 FCR 243
Australian Energy Regulator v Origin Energy Electricity Ltd
Australian Energy Regulator v Santos Direct Pty Ltd
Commissioner of the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission v Aurora
Community Care Pty Ltd (in liquidation) (No 2)
[2025] FCA 1237
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Cahill
(2010) 269 ALR 1
General Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Commercial and Corporations
Regulator and Consumer Protection
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for Applicant:
Mr D Star KC and Ms S Martin
Solicitor for Applicant:
NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission
Counsel for Respondent:
Ms M Norton SC and Mr J Gray
Solicitor for Respondent:
Corrs Chambers Westgarth
NSD 1683 of 2024
COMMISSIONER OF THE NDIS QUALITY AND SAFEGUARDS
LIFESTYLE SOLUTIONS (AUST) LTD (ACN 097 999 347)
ORDER MADE BY:
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT DECLARES THAT:
the period 23 November 2018 to 13 December 2023, in respect of 148 reportable
incidents, the Respondent (Lifestyle Solutions)
failed to notify the
Commissioner of the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission (Commissioner) of
each reportable incident within
24 hours as required by s 20 of the
Disability Insurance Scheme (Incident Management and Reportable Incidents) Rules
(Cth) (Reportable Incidents Rules) and in doing so:
(a) failed to comply with a condition of its registration as a registered NDIS
provider under
s 73F(2)(h)
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act
(Cth) (NDIS Act) and contravened s 73J of the NDIS Act on 148 separate
occasions; and
(b) by reason of
Regulatory Powers (Standard Provisions) Act
(Cth) (RPA), contravened s 73J of the NDIS Act on a further 1,312
separate occasions, being each additional day that it failed to
Commissioner of each reportable incident,
as set out in Annexure A to these orders.
the period 25 January 2 019 to 1 November 2022, in respect of 49 reportable
incidents, Lifestyle Solutions failed to notify
the Commissioner of each
reportable incident within 5 business days as required by s 21 of the Reportable
Incidents Rules, and in
(a) failed to comply with a condition of its registration as a registered NDIS
provider under s 73F(2)(h) of the NDIS Act and contravened
s 73J of the NDIS Act
on 49 separate occasions; and
(b) by reason of s 93(2) of the RPA, contravened s 73J of the NDIS Act on a
further 302 occasions, being each additional day that
it failed to notify the
Commissioner of each reportable incident,
as set out in Annexure B to these orders.
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Regulatory Powers (Standard Provisions) Act 2014
of that Act and s 73ZK of the NDIS Act, Lifestyle Solutions
pay within 30 days of the date of this order to the Commonwealth of
(a) an aggregate penalty of $400,000 in respect of the contraventions of s 73J
of the NDIS Act referred to in paragraph 1; and
(b) an aggregate penalty of $100,000 in respect of the contraventions of s 73J
of the NDIS Act referred to in paragraph 2.
30 days of the date of this order, Lifestyle Solutions pay a contribution to the
Commissioner's costs of, and incidental to,
this proceeding, fixed in the amount
of $50,000.
Note: Entry of orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Commissioner of the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission, brings proceedings
against Lifestyle Solutions (Aust) Ltd (Lifestyle
Solutions), a registered
National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) provider, for its failure to fulfil
the condition of its registration
s 73F(2)(h)
Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
(Cth) (NDIS Act) which required it to
comply with reporting obligations prescribed by the
National Disability
Insurance Scheme (Incident Management and Reportable Incidents) Rules 2018
(Cth) (Reportable Incidents Rules). Each failure to notify the Commissioner
within mandatory time limits stipulated in the Reportable
Incidents Rules
constituted a contravention of s 73J of the NDIS Act, which is a civil penalty
provision. Further, by operation of
Regulatory Powers
(Standard Provisions) Act 2014
(Cth) (RPA), a separate contravention of s
73J was committed each day an incident was reported late.
reasons are to be read in conjunction with those of
Commissioner of the NDIS
Quality and Safeguards Commission v Lifestyle Solutions (Aust) Ltd (Hakone House
Proceeding)
[2025] FCA 1393 (Hakone
House Judgment), another proceeding
heard concurrently with this proceeding. In that proceeding, Lifestyle Solutions
was also the
subject of civil penalty orders for its conduct as an NDIS
provider, but for contraventions of a different nature. A penalty of $2,000,000
was imposed on Lifestyle Solutions for those contraventions.
with the other proceeding, Lifestyle Solutions also admitted these
contraventions. The proceeding was conducted by way of agreed
facts, which are
attached to these reasons as Appendix A (the Annexures to the agreed facts are
not reproduced in the Appendix, but
are Annexures to the orders made in this
proceeding). The parties have also agreed that a pecuniary penalty of $500,000
on Lifestyle Solutions, and declarations be made reflecting the
admitted contraventions.
the reasons below, the declarations are made in the terms sought, and the
proposed pecuniary penalty of $500,000 is imposed on
Statutory Scheme
the Hakone House Judgment, I addressed the statutory scheme which is unnecessary
to repeat. Given the contraventions in this case,
it is appropriate to
supplement that description to address the nature of the contraventions in this
proceeding.
a registered NDIS provider, Lifestyle Solutions’ registration is subject
to certain conditions specified in s 73F(2). One
of those conditions is a
requirement to comply with all applicable requirements relating to reportable
incidents prescribed by the
NDIS rules for the purposes of s 73Z (s 73F(2)(h)).
In this proceeding, the applicable rules are the Reportable Incidents Rules.
Part 3 of the Rules is made for the purposes of s 73Z of the NDIS Act: s 15(1)
Reportable Incidents Rules.
73J of the NDIS Act provides that a person contravenes that section if they are
a registered NDIS provider and breach a condition
of its registration.
is appropriate to also recall the Commissioner’s core functions as set out
in the NDIS Act. They include upholding the rights
of, and promoting the health,
safety and wellbeing of people with disability receiving supports or services,
including those received
under the NDIS: s 181E(a). In addition, the
Commissioner’s core functions include securing compliance with the NDIS
Act through
effective compliance and enforcement arrangements, including through
the monitoring and investigative functions conferred by Division
8 of Part 3A of
Chapter 4: s 181E(d). The Commissioner also has registration and reportable
incident functions as follows: (1) monitoring
registered NDIS provider
compliance with their conditions of registration (s 181F(c)); (2) functions
relating to the notification
and management of reportable incidents conferred on
the Commissioner by the NDIS rules made for the purposes of s 73Z of the NDIS
Act, which are Parts 3 and 4 of the Reportable Incidents Rules (s 181F(e) and
Reportable Incidents Rules, ss 15(1) and 27(1)); and
(3) collating and analysing
information relating to reportable incidents to identify trends and systemic
issues (s 181F(g)).
Reportable Incidents Rules
Reportable Incidents Rules provide requirements for NDIS Providers relating to
reportable incidents. Pursuant to s 73Z(4) of the
NDIS Act (as modified by s 16
of the Reportable Incidents Rules), “reportable incident” means, as
identified in the applicant’s
submissions:
(a) the death of a person with disability; or
(b) serious injury to a person with disability; or
(c) abuse or neglect of a person with disability; or
(d) unlawful sexual or physical contact with, or assault of, a person with
disability – unless:
(i) the act is unlawful physical contact with a person with disability; and
(ii) the contact with, and impact on, the person with disability is negligible;
(e) sexual misconduct committed against, or in the presence of, a person with
disability, including grooming of the person for sexual
activity; or
(f) the use of a restrictive practice in relation to a person with disability,
other than where the use is in accordance with an
authorisation (however
described) of a State or Territory in relation to the person, except that:
(i) the use is a reportable incident if the use is not in accordance with a
behaviour support plan for the person with disability;
(ii) the use is not a reportable incident where the use is not in accordance
with an authorisation (however described) of a State
or Territory if:
use is in accordance with a behaviour support plan for the person with
disability; and
State or Territory in which the restrictive practice is used does not have an
authorisation process in relation to the use of
the restrictive
a reportable incident includes one that is alleged to have occurred: s 17
Reportable Incidents Rules.
Relevantly,
“key personnel” is defined as:
11A Definition of key personnel
(1) Each of the following is one of the key personnel of a person or entity
(a) a member of the group of persons who is responsible for the executive
decisions of the person or entity;
(b) any other person who has authority or responsibility for (or significant
influence over) planning, directing or controlling the
activities of the person
a registered NDIS provider becomes aware of a reportable incident in connection
with the provision of its services and support,
the registered provider must
notify the Commissioner: within 24 hours if the incident is of the type referred
to in (a) to (e) in
paragraph [
above (s 20, Reportable Incidents Rules); or within 5 business days if the
incident is of the type referred to in (f) of paragraph
] above (s 21, Reportable Incidents
Rules). Lifestyle Solutions admit it became aware of a reportable incident at
least by the time
one of its “key personnel” were informed of the
already described, Parts 3 and 4 of the Reportable Incidents Rules confer on the
Commissioner registration and reportable incident
functions. These include:
(1) if a registered NDIS provider gives notification of a reportable incident
under ss 20(4) or 21, the Commissioner may require
the provider to give further
written information, including details of any internal or external investigation
or assessment undertaken
in relation to the incident, a copy of any
investigation or assessment report, and whether the participants or their
representatives
have been kept informed (s 24);
(2) the Commissioner may take action upon receiving notification of a reportable
incident in connection with supports or services
provided by a registered NDIS
provider, including a referral of the incident to other responsible entities
(such as child protection),
and requiring the provider to take specified
remediation action, carry out an internal investigation or appoint an
independent expert
to carry out an investigation (s 26); and
(3) the Commissioner may also authorise an inquiry in relation to a reportable
incident or series of reportable incidents (ss 26(1)(e)
Factual overview
is unnecessary to repeat all the detail of the factual basis and context in
which the contraventions occurred, which is detailed
in the agreed facts. The
following only provides a very a brief overview. It is necessary to consider the
detailed agreed facts (see
Appendix A) to appreciate the full nature and
import of the conduct the subject of these proceedings.
Solutions provide disability services including supported independent living
accommodation, development of daily living
and life skills, participation in
community, social and civil activities, support coordination (between 19 May
2021 and 17 May 2024),
specialised supported employment, positive behaviour
support and therapeutic supports, and short-term accommodation.
a registered NDIS provider, Lifestyle Solutions was required to comply with the
requirements prescribed by the Reportable Incidents
Rules relating to reportable
Solutions admit it failed to notify the Commission of reportable
(1) within 24 hours pursuant to s 20 of the Reportable Incidents Rules during
the period of 23 November 2018 to 13 December 2023
on 148 occasions; and
(2) within 5 business days pursuant to s 21 of the Reportable Incidents
Rules during the period of 25 January 2019 to 1 November
2022 on 49 occasions.
detail of each incident (i.e. incident date and type, date key personnel became
aware of incident, date the report was received
by the Commissioner and number
of days the report was late) is identified in the agreed facts. Lifestyle
Solutions admit that it
became aware of the reportable incidents by at least the
date key personnel were informed of the incident.
Solutions admit, by reason of those failures, 197 contraventions of s 73F(2)(h)
of the NDIS Act. The admitted contraventions,
being a condition of Lifestyle
Solutions’ registration, therefore give rise to 197 contraventions of s
73J of the NDIS Act.
Lifestyle Solutions admit that separate contraventions were committed each
additional day a report was late to the Commissioner
pursuant to s 93(2) of the
RPA. For the 1,614 additional days the reports were late on the occasions
identified in paragraph [
the admitted contraventions give rise to a further 1,614 contraventions of s 73J
of the NDIS Act.
failures resulted in an aggregate 1,811 contraventions over a period of
approximately five years.
Relief Sought
application is to be determined under the RPA. I have addressed the principles
in respect to the imposition of a civil penalty
and the granting of a
declaration in the Hakone House Judgment at [30]-[43] and are unnecessary to
repeat. Again, it is appropriate
to supplement that summary by addressing the
maximum penalty.
to s 82(5)(a) of the RPA, a pecuniary penalty for a body corporate must not be
more than five times the penalty specified
for the civil penalty provision.
Noting that provision, the maximum penalty for each contravention is 1250
penalty units. At the
time of the contraventions spanning from 23 November 2018
to 13 December 2021, the individual penalty unit changed as identified
below tables provided in the applicant’s submissions (see column with
maximum civil penalty per single contravention).
Each table identifies the total
number of contraventions during each period the penalty unit changed.
Section 20 contraventions
Section 21 contraventions
discussed in paragraph [35] of the Hakone House Judgment and demonstrated by the
above tables, this is another case where there
are a sufficiently large number
of contraventions, such that the maximum aggregate penalty rises to such a
number that it is no longer
meaningful:
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
Reckitt Benckiser
(Australia) Pty Ltd
[2016] FCAFC 181
(2016) 340 ALR 25 at
. In that circumstance “the focus should be on
the conduct and on determining a penalty to match the conduct”:
Australian Energy Regulator v Origin Energy Electricity Ltd
Australian Energy Regulator v Santos Direct Pty Ltd
although separate contraventions arising from separate acts would ordinarily
attract separate penalties, where the separate
acts give rise to separate
contraventions which are inextricably interrelated, they may be regarded as a
“course of conduct”
for the purpose of imposing a penalty:
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Yazaki Corporation
[2018] FCAFC 73
(2018) 262 FCR 243
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v The Good Guys Discount Warehouses (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2025] FCA 1085
. This avoids double punishment for those parts of
the legally distinct contraventions that involve overlap in wrongdoing: see for
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Cahill
(2010) 269 ALR 1
and [41]. As the applicant submitted, that
approach is provided for by s 85(1) of the RPA where the Court may impose a
single penalty
for multiple contraventions if the contraventions “form, or
are part of, a series of contraventions of the same or a similar
character”.
Consideration
Commissioner addressed what she submitted were the relevant factors to consider
in assessing the penalty in this proceeding. Lifestyle
Solutions endorse the
Commissioner’s submission with a small number of additional observations.
Given that, it is unnecessary
to recite the submissions in detail. In addition
to the agreed facts, the Commissioner tendered some additional material, which I
have taken into account in assessing the appropriateness of the agreed penalty.
Further, the additional material relied on by the
parties in the Hakone House
Proceeding was also admitted in this proceeding, which I have also taken into
addressing considerations particular to this proceeding, it is appropriate to
record that when assessing the penalty, the discussion
in the Hakone House
Judgment in relation to the size and nature of Lifestyle Solutions’
business, its financial circumstances,
Lifestyle Solutions’
acknowledgement of liability, lack of prior contraventions, and acts undertaken
since the contraventions,
apply similarly to this proceeding. I rely on those
observations without repeating them: Hakone House Judgement at [52]-[53],
In addition, I add the following.
the contraventions are serious. The reporting requirements of NDIS providers are
of the utmost importance in circumstances where
they are providing services to
vulnerable people, who are dependent on the provider fulfilling its obligations.
It is timely to recall
the objects of the NDIS Act, which are identified in s 3
and include: promoting the provision of high quality and innovative supports
that enable people with disability to maximise independent lifestyles and full
inclusion in the community (s 3(1)(g)); and protecting
and preventing people
with disability from experiencing harm arising from poor quality or unsafe
supports or services provided under
the NDIS (s 3(1)(ga)). The late reporting of
incidents by Lifestyle Solutions necessarily impeded the ability of the
Commissioner
to give effect to those objects.
the different time requirements for notifying the Commissioner under the
Reportable Incidents Rules reflect the gravity of
the matters that are the
subject of notification. In
Commissioner of the NDIS Quality and Safeguards
Commission v Aurora Community Care Pty Ltd (in liquidation) (No 2)
[2025] FCA 1237
), many of the
contraventions involved breaches of reporting conditions. I observed there that
contraventions involving breach of
statutory conditions imposed on NDIS
providers are serious. The “[o]bservance of the conditions of this scheme
is essential
to its proper operation”:
The Commissioner described the nature of the
contraventions in her submissions
as (citations omitted):
[81] The different time requirements for notifying the Commissioner under the
[Reportable Incidents] Rules reflect the gravity of
the matters that are the
subject matter of notification.
(a) The matters covered by s 20, which require notifications to be made within
24 hours of the provider becoming aware, are the most
serious forms of incidents
– death, serious injury, abuse or neglect, unlawful sexual or physical
Lifestyle Solutions’ contravening conduct
spanned the gamut of these serious incidents as set out in Table E.
(b) While the matters the subject of s 21 – being use of restrictive
practices – are also serious, the requirement to
notify within 5 business
days under s 21 is indicative of a lower level of gravity of the matter
[82] The number of contraventions and extent of delay by Lifestyle
Solutions’ contravening conduct in the RI Proceeding is
particularly in relation to the s 20 notifications.
[83] Of the 148 late notifications of reportable incidents that were subject to
the 24-hour reporting requirement:
(a) Three (3) were almost six months late (ie, between 171 and 187 days
(b) Four (4) were between one and three months late (ie, between 40 and 91 days
(c) Seven (7) were between two and four weeks late (ie, between 15 and 28 days
(d) 19 were between one and almost two weeks late (ie, between 8 and 13 days
(e) 68 were between three and seven days late; and
(f) 47 were between one and two days after the expiry of the 24-hour period.
[84] Of the 49 late notifications of reportable incidents that were subject to a
within 5 business days reporting requirement:
(a) Two (2) were between one month and almost two months late (ie, one was 33
and another was 54 days late);
(b) Five (5) were over a week late (ie, between 8 and 11 days late);
(c) 26 were between 6 and 7 days late – ie, they were notified at least 6
or 7 days after the expiry of the 5 business day
period and therefore at least
11 to 12 days after Lifestyle Solutions’ key personnel became aware of the
incident; and
(d) 16 were between 1 and 3 days late – ie, at least 6 to 8 days after
Lifestyle Solutions’ key personnel became aware
of the incident.
note also that the contraventions occurred over a lengthy period, for over five
years in respect of the breaches of s 20, and three
years and nine months in
respect of the breaches of s 21.
the failure to notify the Commissioner of the reportable incidents within the
mandatory timeframes, including some very lengthy
delays, prevented the
Commissioner from fulfilling her statutory functions: see discussion at [
] above. The persons impacted by the
reportable incidents were deprived of the opportunity for the Commissioner to
review and respond
at the earliest opportunity. That might have included prompt,
adequate and necessary responses and/or remedial action for the harm
persons suffered. The significance of this consequence is evident from the
circumstances in which mandatory notification
is required (particularly for the
24-hour reportable incidents). Here, the nature and number of contraventions, in
particular of
the 24-hour reporting requirement, starkly illustrates both the
importance of the obligation, and the potential consequences where
failure to do so.
provide one example. As explained in the Hakone House Judgment, there is some
degree of overlap between the proceedings, including
one incident which forms a
contravention in both proceedings. That is AT Incident 29, in which AT grabbed
Ms Leicester by the arms
and attempted to bite her, before a support worker
intervened which was required to be reported within 24 hours of the incident but
was reported 187 days late.
the contravening conduct necessarily arose from a breakdown with the reporting
processes that involved senior personnel within Lifestyle
Solutions. That is
because the Reportable Incidents Rules place a responsibility on members of the
provider’s “key personnel”
and any person specified under s
10(1)(c) of the Rules, to “take all reasonable steps to ensure that
reportable incidents ...
are notified to the Commissioner”: s 18. There is
no evidence that “all reasonable steps” were taken.
the conduct by Lifestyle Solutions, which involves numerous breaches of ss 20
and 21 of the Reportable Incidents Rules, can properly
be considered as two
distinct courses of conduct based on the provisions contravened, for the
purposes of imposing a penalty: see
I accept the applicant’s submission that the number and extent of the
contraventions, the geographic spread and extended
period of time in which they
occurred are indicative of a systemic problem within Lifestyle Solutions at the
time of the contravening
conduct and reflects poorly on its compliance
parties proposed the following aggregate penalties:
(1) $400,000 for Lifestyle Solutions’ 148 late notifications contrary to s
20 of the Reportable Incidents Rules (24-hour reportable
incidents), resulting
in 1,460 contraventions of s 73J of the NDIS Act; and
(2) $100,000 for Lifestyle Solutions’ 49 late notifications contrary to s
21 of the Reportable Incidents Rules (5 business
day reportable incidents),
resulting in 351 contraventions of s 73J of the NDIS Act.
penalties were structured recognising the multiple contraventions, and the
principles regarding a course of conduct.
Commissioner submitted that in circumstances where non-compliance with s 20 of
the Reportable Incidents Rules relates to notifications
that the legislature has
deemed more serious and urgent, it is appropriate that the failure to comply
with s 20 results in a larger
penalty. Further, the total number of
contraventions of s 73J of the NDIS Act, arising from failures to notify in
accordance with
s 20, is just over four times greater than the number of
contraventions arising from non-compliance with s 21.
have addressed the principles relevant to considering an agreed penalty in the
Hakone House Judgment at [38]-[40]. It is unnecessary
to repeat them. Suffice to
say I am conscious of those principles in considering the parties proposed
penalty in this proceeding.
Court must impose a penalty that is appropriate in all the circumstances. The
principal purpose in imposing a civil penalty is
deterrence. The contravening
conduct occurred over many years, and in some instances, the delay in
notification was exceedingly long.
Lifestyle Solutions repeatedly failed to
fulfill its reporting obligations as an NDIS provider, and as illustrated by the
contraventions and the nature of the underlying reportable incidents (in
particular the s 20 contraventions, which include death,
serious injury, abuse
or neglect, unlawful sexual or physical contact, and sexual misconduct). The
contraventions are serious. Compliance
by an NDIS provider of the obligations
imposed on it is essential to the proper operation of the scheme. The
contraventions deprived
the Commissioner of timely information. It affected the
ability of the Commissioner to exercise critical statutory functions necessary
to protect vulnerable members of the public who are participants of the scheme.
It undermines the Commissioner’s ability to
ensure the objects of the NDIS
scheme are fulfilled.
Considering
the evidence and relevant principles, I am satisfied the total of the aggregate
penalties of $500,000 is an appropriate
penalty in this proceeding. It carries
an appropriate deterrent value for Lifestyle Solutions, and others.
the circumstances of this case, I am also satisfied that the declaratory relief
in the terms sought is appropriate. The matter
is of public interest by reason
of, inter alia, its subject matter, the vulnerable position of the NDIS
participants, and the nature
and consequences of the failures. These
circumstances call for the marking of the Court’s disapproval of the
conduct. Consequently,
the declarations sought have significant utility. I
accept the terms of the declarations, and I am satisfied that it is in the
of justice to make the declarations sought.
parties have also agreed that Lifestyle Solutions would pay $50,000 of the
applicant’s costs for the proceedings. The costs
order ought also to be
Accordingly,
I make the orders in the terms sought by the parties.
I certify that the preceding forty-five (45)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 14 November 2025
RTF format (77.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format