Kaur as Litigation Guardian of Singh v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs [2021] FCCA 2034 (27 August 2021)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Kaur as Litigation Guardian of Singh v
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2021] FCCA 2034
File number(s):
BRG 288 of 2020
Judgment of:
JUDGE JARRETT
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Judicial review –
Student (Temporary) (Class TU) (Subclass 500) visa – secondary applicant
– minor dependent
– whether conclusion attended by irrational or
illogical fact-finding – no jurisdictional error – dismissed.
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth). regs. 500.312, 500.312 (a),
500.312(a)(iii)
Cases cited:
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
Affairs v Lay Lat
[2006] FCAFC 61
(2006) 151 FCR 214
MZZUG v Minister for Immigration
[2015] FCA 1151
SJSB v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2004] FCAFC 225[
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Counsel for the Respondents:
Solicitors for the Respondents:
Clayton Utz
BRG 288 of 2020
HARPREET KAUR AS LITIGATION GUARDIAN OF GURVEER
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP, MIGRANT
SERVICES AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS
ADMINSTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
JUDGE JARRETT
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The amended application for review filed on 8 March, 2021 be
2. The applicant pay the first respondent’s costs of and incidental to
the application for review to be fixed in the sum of
REASONS FOR
JUDGE JARRETT:
1 The applicant, by his litigation guardian seeks review of the decision of
the second respondent made on 22 April, 2020 which affirmed
a decision of the
first respondent’s delegate to refuse him the grant of a Student
(Temporary) (Class TU) visa. His mother
was the primary visa holder, having been
granted a Student (Subclass 500) visa on 1 August, 2018.
2 The applicant seeks that the application should be allowed, and the
decision of the second respondent (Tribunal) set aside, because
the finding (at
[33]) that the applicant does not intend to stay in Australia temporarily was
arrived at in a way that is illogical,
irrational, or unreasonable. That is,
the purported decision was not one which was made within jurisdiction, because
the Tribunal
did not have a properly-formed (being as it was illogical,
irrational and unreasonable) state of mind. In particular:
(a) there is no basis for any finding that the
applicant’s father does not intend to stay in Australia temporarily. He
not even live here, and does not have a visa allowing him to stay in
Australia, even if he wished to;
(b) the Tribunal provides only two bases for concluding that the
applicant’s mother does not intend to stay
temporarily:
(i) her studies in Australia; and
(ii) her pregnancy.
(c) in relation to her
(i) the Tribunal accepts (at [25]) her
reasons for not finishing particular courses; and
(ii) nevertheless, despite finding that it accepts her explanation, concludes
(at [25]) that she intends to remain in Australia because
she has not completed
particular courses;
(d) in relation to her
(i) the Tribunal did not in terms reject the
mother’s contention (at [28]) that she suffers from travel sickness, as a
for not returning to India or the UAE while pregnant or with a young
(ii) to the extent the mother’s explanation about travel sickness was
otherwise not accepted, no logical basis was advanced
for not accepting it;
(iii) in any event, remaining in Australia while pregnant (which is a temporary
condition) can not provide a logical basis for concluding
that the mother does
not intend to stay in Australia
temporarily;
(e) the mother (the only parent in
Australia):
(i) is the holder of a temporary visa
(ii) is not said ever to have been in breach of any temporary visa; and
(iii) is married to a person who lives in a different country;
(f) the Tribunal’s views about the strength of any
“incentive” of the mother to return to India (at [23]) or the
(at [30])), can not logically provide a basis for any finding about the
mother’s (and therefore the applicant’s)
intention to remain in
Australia temporarily.
3 The applicant is an Indian citizen. He is 8 years
of age. He was five and three-quarter years old at the time of the second
respondent’s
decision the subject of this review.
4 The applicant is a secondary applicant for a visa. He lives with his
mother and younger sister in Australia. His mother is the
holder of a student
5 In the application for her student visa, the applicant’s mother
listed the applicant and her husband, who is the applicant’s
non-migrating family members.
6 Since arriving in Australia, the applicant’s mother has enrolled in
an Advanced Diploma of Leadership and Management and a
Diploma of Leadership
Management but has failed to complete either course.
7 However, there is no contention that she is in breach of that temporary
visa, or that she has ever been in breach of that or any
other temporary
8 The applicant’s father lives in India, but operates a business in the
United Arab Emirates. He applied for a temporary visa
to come to Australia in
2018 and again in 2019, but each application was refused.
9 On 24 August, 2018 the applicant and his father lodged applications for
Student (Subclass 500) visas as secondary applicants. The
applicant’s
father was overseas at the time and had no review rights. The applicant was in
Australia on a visitor visa.
10 On 22 November, 2018 the first respondent’s delegate refused the
grant of the visa to both the applicant and his father on
the basis that the
applicant did not satisfy cl.500.312 of the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth), because the delegate formed the view that the applicant did not intend to
stay in Australia temporarily. Clause 500.312 relevantly
The applicant is a genuine applicant for entry and stay
as a member of the family unit of a person who holds a student visa, having
satisfied the primary criteria for that visa, because:
the applicant intends genuinely to stay in Australia temporarily, having regard
the applicant's circumstances; and
the applicant's immigration history; and
if the applicant is a minor--the intentions of a parent, legal guardian or
spouse of the applicant; and
any other relevant matter;
11 The applicant sought review of the delegate’s decision by the second
respondent. In the course of that review, on 25 March,
2020 the second
respondent sent correspondence to the applicant inviting him to attend a hearing
on 9 April, 2020. The applicant’s
mother appeared before the Tribunal by
telephone on 9 April, 2020 to give evidence and present arguments as the
applicant’s
representative.
12 On 22 April, 2020 the second respondent affirmed the decision of the
delegate to refuse the grant of the visa. It is in respect
of this decision
that the applicant now seeks judicial review.
GROUND OF REVIEW
13 The applicant pursues a single ground of review
in his amended application for review filed on 8 March, 2021 expressed as
1. The Second Respondent’s decision was affected
by jurisdictional error as its finding that the Applicant does not intend to
stay in Australia was arrived at in a way that is illogical, irrational or
unreasonable.
14 The second respondent gave written reasons for its determination. They
are relatively brief. In them, the second respondent identified
that the issue
for determination was whether the applicant satisfied cl.500.312(a) of the
Regulations. The second respondent recorded
that it was required to have regard
to Direction No.69 made pursuant to
Migration Act 1958
“but that the factors specified should not be used as a checklist but,
rather, are intended only to guide decision makers
when considering the
applicant’s circumstances as a whole in reaching a finding about whether
the applicant satisfies the genuine
temporary entrant criterion.”
15 Regulation 500.312(a)(iii) required the second respondent to have regard
to the intentions of a parent, legal guardian or spouse
of the applicant where
the applicant is a minor. The applicant concedes that the second respondent was
obliged to have regard to
the intentions of at least his mother and probably
both his mother and his father in determining whether it was satisfied that the
applicant genuinely intended to stay temporarily. Thus, the second respondent
paid close attention to the applicant mother’s
actions and claims.
16 The second respondent then set about recording the evidence and other
material before it having regard to the framework established
by the Direction
and the issue at hand.
17 The second respondent recorded that in her visa application the
applicant’s mother had declared that her husband would be
remaining in the
United Arab Emirates and that the applicant would be returning to India to stay
with her parents for “the
next couple of years”. She had not
included her husband and the applicant as secondary applicants in her own visa
application.
Notwithstanding that, 23 days after her student visa was approved,
the applicant’s father and the applicant applied to join
applicant’s mother in Australia.
18 At paragraph [20] of the reasons, the second respondent said:
The visa holder advised the Tribunal that she has three
children: an older son who lives in India with her parents; the applicant,
second son; and a daughter born in Australia in January 2019. She stated that
her oldest son has bonded with her mother in India,
but her second son has
bonded with her and for this reason can’t be separated from her. She
stated that the applicant wept
when she told him he might have to go back to
India. She stated that the applicant is going to school, a state public school,
he is in preparatory year, and that he has an illness for which he is
receiving ongoing medical treatment. She argued that her two
youngest children
as siblings should stay together, in Australia, with her. She stated that she
has advised the Department about
the birth of her
19 The second respondent set out the arrangements for the applicant’s
family – where his father lived and worked and where
his siblings lived.
It set out the applicant’s mother’s intentions and her intentions
regarding the applicant and where
they would live. The second respondent
accepted that the presence of the applicant’s mother’s eldest son
and her parents
in India provided some incentive for her to return to that
country but it noted however that she had stated that her older son had
with her mother rather than with her and that it was her intention to return on
completion of her studies to the United Arab
Emirates rather than to India.
20 The second respondent put to the applicant’s mother the information
that it obtained via the Provider Registration and International
Management System records. It put to her that those records showed that most of
her enrolments had been cancelled and that
she had completed none of her
enrolled courses. It put to her that her study record raised concerns that she
was not a genuine student
and that she was using the student visa system to
circumvent the intentions of the migration program and to maintain her in the
applicant’s
residence in Australia. The applicant’s mother was
given the opportunity of extra time to consult with a representative the
before responding that assertion but she did not seek that extra time.
21 The applicant’s mother told the second respondent that she did not
attend courses in 2018 and 2019 because she was having
a baby. She told the
second respondent that she was not able to attend classes in 2020 because of the
coronavirus. The second respondent
accepted both of those propositions.
22 The second respondent recorded:
27. The Tribunal asked the visa holder why she chose,
after she had lodged her student visa application, to have another child,
time she claimed to intend to travel and remain temporarily in Australia for
employment-related study purposes. The visa holder
claimed that she didn’t
realise she was pregnant when the visa was granted. The Tribunal asked the
primary visa holder why,
when she did realise she was pregnant, she didn’t
cancel or indefinitely defer her study plans and return to India or the UAE
be with her husband and family while having another baby, rather than remaining
with the applicant in Australia without family
support, and without
28. The visa holder claimed that she suffered from travel sickness and
didn’t want to fly while pregnant or with a young
baby. The Tribunal found
the primary visa holder’s explanations as to why she had a third child in
Australia without family
support, and why she has remained in Australia after
she learned she was pregnant, and after she realised she could not attend to
studies, weak and unconvincing. The Tribunal considers that the visa holder and
her husband’s intentions have been to maintain
residence in Australia, and
that they have intended to use the student visa program for this
23 The second respondent recorded that the applicant’s mother made no
claim that she needed qualifications that she said she
wished to study for in
Australia in order to obtain employment in India or in the United Arab Emirates.
The Tribunal noted that she
was performing, via the Internet, her role of
managing the paperwork for the family business and there was no argument to show
an Australian qualification in Leadership and Management might progress the
business and enhance the applicant’s mother’s
and the family’s
income and future prospects in India or the United Arab Emirates. Further, the
second respondent considered
that the applicant’s father intended to join
him and the applicant’s mother and the other child in Australia and that
the lack of information about the business conducted by him in the United Arab
Emirates led to the conclusion that there was no incentive
applicant’s parents to return and live in the United Arab Emirates.
Rather, the second respondent considered that
with his wife and two youngest
children in Australia, incentive would be for the applicant’s father to
remain in this country.
24 As the applicant submits, critical paragraphs of the second
respondent’s decision were [31] and [33]. They are as follows:
[31] The circumstances of the applicant are that he was
brought, at a very young age, to Australia by his mother. As discussed above,
the visa holder stated that the applicant wants to stay in Australia because he
is attending school here and receiving medical treatment
here, and because he
wants to stay with her. She indicated that her intention and desire is that the
applicant remains and attends
school, and receives medical treatment, in
Australia. She argued that the applicant needs to stay in Australia to be with
his sister,
her daughter who was born in Australia. The Tribunal finds these
arguments to indicate that the visa holder does not intend for the
applicant to
stay temporarily in Australia.
[33] Having considered the evidence, arguments and circumstances of the
applicant, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the applicant
intends genuinely to
stay in Australia temporarily. Therefore, the applicant does not meet
cl.500.312(a)
CONSIDERATION
25 The applicant contends that the second
respondent’s reasons do not logically support the finding that the
applicant does
not intend to remain in Australia temporarily. But the second
respondent made no such finding. In the last sentence of [31] it
made a finding
26 Insofar as the applicant seeks to attack this finding, it is apparent from
that paragraph that the finding was made on the basis
of the matters set out in
[31]. That is to say that the applicant’s mother said that the applicant
wanted to stay in Australia
(a) he is attending school here;
(b) he is receiving medical treatment here; and
(c) he wants to stay with her.
27 Further she indicated that her intention and desire was that the applicant
remains and attend school and receive medical treatment
in Australia. The
second respondent recorded the applicant’s mother’s argument that
the applicant needs to stay in Australia
to be with his sister, her daughter who
was born in Australia. It was “these arguments” that the second
respondent found
indicated that the applicant’s mother does not intend for
the applicant to stay temporarily in Australia. They were arguments
second respondent considered in the context of its earlier conclusions that the
applicant’s mother was not a genuine
student and was utilising the student
visa system to remain in Australia.
28 Those matters identified by the second respondent in [31] were capable of
leading to the finding that the second respondent made.
Whilst it might be the
case that other decision-makers may not have reached the same finding, that does
not mean that the finding
was illogical or irrational.
29 The relevant jurisdictional fact in this case, namely whether the second
respondent was satisfied that the applicant met the description
required by
cl.500.312(a), was addressed in [33]. There is no finding in this paragraph,
only the expression of a lack of satisfaction
fact. There is a difference:
MZZUG v Minister for Immigration
SJSB v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCAFC 225
Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs v Lay Lat
[2006] FCAFC 61
(2006) 151 FCR 214
30 The applicant argues that the conclusion reached by the second respondent
expressed in [33] of its reasons was “vitiated
by illogicality or
irrationality in its formation”. He submits that the matters that the
second respondent referred to in
support of its conclusion in that regard do not
logically or rationally support the conclusion it reached.
31 The applicant argues that as to his parents’ intention, the second
respondent only made a finding about his mother’s
intentions. Indeed, the
second respondent made a finding about the applicant’s mother’s
intention to remain in Australia.
I have set that finding out above where I
have extracted [31] of the second respondent’s reasons. As to the
applicant’s
father, the second respondent said:
30. No evidence was provided regarding the visa
holder’s or the visa holder’s husband’s income from the
in the UAE, and the fact that the primary visa holder’s husband
has applied to join her in Australia indicates that the business
incentive for the visa applicant’s parents to return to live in that
country. The Tribunal does not accept that the
visa holder’s
husband’s intentions when he applied for visitor and student visas in 2018
and 2019 were that he would
‘come and go’ between the UAE and
Australia. The Tribunal considers that with his wife and two youngest children
in Australia,
the incentive would be for him to remain in this
32 It is clear that as part of its overall consideration, the second
respondent paid regard to whether the applicant genuinely intended
Australia temporarily having regard to his mother’s intention as found in
[31]. But it also identified and took
into consideration the applicant’s
father’s intention as found in [28] and what the second respondent
described as the
incentive for his father to remain in Australia in [30]. These
were matters to which the second respondent, if not obliged, then
certainly was
entitled to take into account in its deliberations.
33 The applicant argues that the second respondent’s determination that
the applicant’s father did not intend to stay
in Australia temporarily was
erroneous. However, the second respondent made no such finding or
determination. The finding in [28]
was that his intention has been to maintain
residence in Australia and to use the student visa program for this purpose. As
as I have described above, the second respondent considered that there
was an incentive for him to remain in this country should
he come here. The
basis for that determination is self-evident. He had attempted to come here on
two occasions by applying for
a visitor visa and a student visa. His
wife’s assertion that he would come and go between the United Arab
Emirates in Australia
was rejected and the second respondent concluded that with
his wife and two youngest children in Australia, the incentive would be
to remain in this country. That was made against the second respondent’s
conclusion that the applicant’s mother
did not intend to reside in
Australia temporarily. The approach and determination of the Tribunal to this
matter was not illogical
or irrational in the legal sense. I do not think it
could be said that no other rational decision-maker could not reach the same
conclusion.
34 The applicant argues that the second respondent provided only 2 bases for
concluding that the applicant’s mother did not
intend to stay temporarily
in Australia namely her studies in Australia and her pregnancy. The respondent
submits that this is incorrect
and there were more reasons than those. In
particular, the first respondent submits that the second respondent also took
into account
the circumstances surrounding the visa application is made by the
applicant and his father soon after the applicant’s mother
secured her
student visa, the applicant’s mother’s continued stay in Australia
notwithstanding that she was not studying
because of her pregnancy and her weak
and unconvincing explanation as to why she had a third child in Australia
without family support,
and why she has remained in Australia after she learned
she was pregnant, and after she realised she could not attend to her studies.
Indeed, the second respondent’s reasoning in [31] also supplies another
basis for concluding that the applicant’s mother
did not intend to stay
temporarily in Australia.
35 The applicant argues that the second respondent’s reliance upon the
applicant’s mother’s failure to complete
any studies does not
support its conclusion that she intends to remain in Australia other than
temporarily. Whilst it is true that
the second respondent accepted the
mother’s explanation for why she had changed her course of study over the
years because
of her pregnancy and because her study was affected by the
coronavirus pandemic, the second respondent concluded that the fact that
applicant’s mother remained in Australia without studying indicated that
she has not and does not intend to stay in Australia
temporarily. That finding,
in my view, is directed more to the failure of the applicant’s mother to
became clear that she was not going to study in
Australia for the period of her pregnancy or the pandemic. The second
considered that the applicant had no family support in Australia and
considered her explanation as to why she did not return to India
or the United
Arab Emirates where her husband was as weak and unconvincing.
36 The applicant further argues that the second respondent did not in terms
reject his mother’s contention that she suffered
from travel sickness, as
a reason for not returning to India or the United Arab Emirates while pregnant
or with a young baby. He
argues that to the extent that his mother’s
explanation about travel sickness was otherwise not accepted, no logical basis
was advanced for not accepting it. However, it is trite that the second
respondent was not required to accept uncritically any and
applicant’s evidence. It was within the second respondent to make an
assessment of the weight that would attach
to the applicant’s
mother’s explanation for why she did not return to India or the United
Arab Emirates in all the circumstances,
including the fact that she had no
family support in Australia and she would not be able to study while pregnant or
with a baby.
37 I reject the applicant’s submission that the fact that his mother
remained in Australia while pregnant could not provide
a logical basis for
concluding that his mother did not intend to stay in Australia temporarily. It
is logically connected given
that her pregnancy prevented her from studying (on
her own case), she had no family support in Australia, the reasons given for not
returning to India or the United Arab Emirates were assessed as weak and
unconvincing and she had no other reason to remain in Australia.
Nor did she
the commencement of the coronavirus pandemic
notwithstanding that she was able
38 I am not persuaded that no other reasonable
decision-maker could not reach the same conclusion as the second respondent did
this case. The matters taken into account by the second respondent in
reaching its conclusion were all available to it on the material
presented by
the applicant. I accept the first respondent’s submission that the
applicant is seeking to engage in an impermissible
review of the merit of the
second respondent’s decision.
39 The application does not disclose that the second respondent’s
decision is attended by jurisdictional error. The application
for review must
be dismissed with costs.
I certify that the preceding thirty-nine (39)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 27 August 2021
RTF format (365 KB)
Signed PDF/A format