K2 Office Pty Ltd and Adelaide Tooling Pty Ltd v Justin Peter Brown [2018] ADO 4 (29 October 2018)
DESIGNS ACT 2003
OF A DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF DESIGNS WITH REASONS
Re Request for examination by K2 Office Pty Ltd and Adelaide Tooling Pty Ltd
of design number 201514265 (registered design number
363869) in the name of
Justin Peter Brown
DELEGATE: Robert Wilson
REPRESENTATION: Owner: Self represented – written submissions
Examination Requestors: Joshua Simons of Thomson Geer
Designs Act 2003
Third party request for
examination of a design under
– design not distinctive when compared
to prior art base – registration to be revoked
The Application
19 August 2015 (‘
the Priority Date
’) Office Portfolio Pty Ltd
filed an application under the
Designs Act 2003
’). The design number allocated to the sole design in the
application was 201514265 (‘
’). The Design was
registered on 27 August 2015 and allocated registration number 363869. The
product to which the Design relates
is described as a ‘Chair control
mechanism’. No Statement of Newness and Distinctiveness was included in
the application.
Office Portfolio Pty Ltd assigned ownership of the Design to
Justin Peter Brown (‘
’) by deed executed on 4
February 2016. The Assignment was recorded by the Office on 17 March
following are the representations of the Design contained in the
application:
Requests for examination
12 December 2017 a request for examination of the Design was filed by the Owner.
The Design was duly examined and a Certificate
of Examination was issued on 24
January 2018.
is permitted under
of the Act, on 15 February 2018, K2 Office Pty Ltd
’) and Adelaide Tooling Pty Ltd (‘
Examination Requestors
’) jointly requested examination of the Design.
The request included a Statutory Declaration made on 15 February 2018 by Darryl
Burpee, the Managing Director of K2, with Exhibit DB-01 (‘
’). The exhibit to Burpee 1 includes a number of tabs labelled Tab 1
to Tab 7. The Design was examined again and no grounds
for revocation were
found. By correspondence dated 17 May 2018 the Examination Requestors were
notified accordingly. As is their
right, on 12 June 2018 the Examination
Requestors requested on oral hearing in respect of the
examination.
Hearing and evidence
matter was set down for hearing on 6 September 2018. I was allocated to hear the
matter as Delegate of the Registrar of Designs.
The Examination Requestors were
represented at the hearing by Joshua Simons of Thomson Geer. The Owner chose to
rely on written submissions
and did not appear at the
Examination Requestors provided a written summary of submissions prior to the
hearing which included the following declarations:
Declaration made on 22 August 2018 by Darryl Burpee with Exhibit DB2-01
’). The exhibit to Burpee 2 includes a number of
tabs labelled Tab 1 to Tab 4.
Declaration made on 29 August 2018 by Christian Nettleton, a Director of Turnco
Industries (Vic) Pty Ltd (‘
’) which is a customer of
K2, with Annexures 1 to 4 (‘
the Nettleton Declaration
Declaration made on 22 August 2018 by Tony Rogers, a Director of Woods Furniture
’) which is a customer of K2, with Annexures 1
Owner did not file any evidence.
The Legislative Framework
Registrar must examine a registered design if any person requests that the
Registrar do so.
In examining a
design the Registrar must consider whether a ground for revocation exists.
The grounds for revocation include
that the design is not a registrable design.
A design is a registrable design
if the design is new and distinctive when compared with the prior art base for
the design as it existed
before the priority date of the design.
The prior art base for a design
consists of:
(a) designs
publicly used in Australia; and
(b) designs
published in a document within or outside Australia; and
(c) designs in
relation to which each of the following criteria is satisfied:
(i) the design
is disclosed in a design application;
(ii) the design
has an earlier priority date than the designated
(iii) the first time documents disclosing the design are made available for
public inspection under
is on or after the priority date of the
designated design.
design is new unless it is identical to a design that forms part of the prior
A design is
distinctive unless it is substantially similar in overall impression to a design
that forms part of the prior art base
for the design.
of the Act provides
some factors to be considered in assessing substantial similarity, and
(1) If a person is required by this Act to decide whether a design is
substantially similar in overall impression to another design,
the person making
the decision is to give more weight to similarities between the designs than to
differences between them.
(2) The person must also:
(a) have regard to the state of development of the prior art base for the
design; and
(b) if the design application in which the design was disclosed included a
statement (a
statement of newness and distinctiveness
) identifying
particular visual features of the design as new and distinctive:
Designs Act 2003
Designs Act 2003
Designs Act 2003
Designs Act 2003
Designs Act 2003
Designs Act 2003
Designs Act 2003
(i) have particular regard to those features; and
(ii) if those features relate to only part of the design—have particular
regard to that part of the design, but in the context
of the design as a whole;
(c) if only part of the design is substantially similar to another design, have
regard to the amount, quality and importance of that
part in the context of the
design as a whole; and
(d) have regard to the freedom of the creator of the design to innovate.
(3) If the design application in which the design was disclosed did not include
a statement of newness and distinctiveness in respect
of particular visual
features of the design, the person must have regard to the appearance of the
design as a whole.
(4) In applying subsections (1), (2) and (3), the person must apply the standard
of a person who is familiar with the product to
which the design relates, or
products similar to the product to which the design relates (the
of the informed user
(5) In this section, a reference to a person includes a reference to a
‘informed user’ was considered by Kenny J in
Review 2 v Redberry
wherein her Honour stated:
In summary, the standard of the informed user is an objective one. ... The
informed user is not an expert, but must be more than
barely informed. The focus
for consideration is on eye appeal and not on internal or less visible
manufacturing features. ...
Thus, whilst there will be some women who subscribe to fashion magazines (such
that illustrated the prior art in this
case) and have particular knowledge of, and familiarity with, fashion trends,
there will be
many other women who lack such knowledge and familiarity.
Precedent and the text of
indicate that it is from the perspective of
someone closer to the former group that the newness and distinctiveness of the
Design and the similarity of the Redberry garments in terms of overall
impression must be judged.
a ground for revocation exists the Registrar must give the relevant parties a
notice stating that the registration of the design
is revoked and make an entry
in the Register.
[2008] FCA 1588
(2008) 79 IPR 214
, 221 [26]-[27], approved
by the Full Federal Court in
LED Technologies Pty Ltd v
Roadvision Pty Ltd
[2012] FCAFC 3
Designs Act 2003
Owner has submitted that, ‘I, Justin Peter Brown, created the design of
the product ... Therefore I am entitled to be the
Registered Owner of the
Design’. It is unnecessary that I decide whether or not the Owner created
the design: that question
is not at issue here. What is at issue is whether the
Design is a registrable design. As indicated by the discussion above, the Design
is a registrable design if it is new and distinctive when compared with the
prior art base as it existed before the Priority Date.
The Requestors have
submitted that the Design is not new and distinctive when compared to the prior
art base, in particular that:
the Design is
substantially identical to the ‘Steno-matic22 H/Duty 3 lever chair
mechanism’ (‘
the 22C-HD mechanism
mechanism was publicly used or published before the Priority
2 of Burpee 1 is declared to be various photographs of the 22C-HD mechanism.
Some examples of the photographs are provided below:
22C-HD mechanism as shown in the photographs appears to be identical to the
Design. In any case, I am satisfied that the 22C-HD
mechanism is at least
substantially similar in overall impression to the Design. All that remains to
be determined for the purposes
of the Act is whether the 22C-HD
mechanism forms part of the prior art base for the Design.
is stated by Mr Nettleton in the Nettleton Declaration
Through my involvement with [Turnco], I am familiar with both [the 22C-HD
mechanism] and the ‘Bigboy HD Chair’, which
uses [the 22C-HD
mechanism]. Now shown to me, annexed hereto, and marked:
(a) Annexure 1 are a bundle of photographs of the ‘Bigboy HD Chair’;
(b) Annexure 2 are a bundle of photographs of [the 22C-HD mechanism].
is similarly stated by Mr Rogers in the Rogers Declaration
Through my involvement with [Woods], I am familiar with both [the 22C-HD
mechanism] and the ‘Bigboy HD Chair’, which
uses [the 22C-HD
mechanism]. Now shown to me, annexed hereto, and marked:
(a) Annexure 1 are a bundle of photographs of the ‘Bigboy HD Chair’;
(b) Annexure 2 are a bundle of photographs of [the 22C-HD mechanism].
photographs in Annexure 2 of both the Nettleton Declaration and the Rogers
Declaration are the same photographs that appear Tab
2 of Burpee 1. I am
satisfied that the three declarations just discussed are referring to the same
Nettleton further declared that Turnco purchased and resold the 22C-HD mechanism
from K2 and its predecessor business operated
by Klasse Pty Ltd, since at least
20 March 2015. Annexure 3 to the Nettleton Declaration is declared to
two purchase orders (dated 20 March 2015 and 5 August 2015) that evidence that,
on or about those dates, [Turnco] purchased the following
items from K2 ...:
(a) ‘BIGBOY M/B MINIKIT STENO 22C’ (100 units on 20 March 2015 and
30 units on 5 August 2015);
(b) ‘BIGBOY H/B MINIKIT STENO22C’ (50 units on 20 March 2015 and 20
units on 5 August 2015);
(c) ‘BIG BOY MESH STENO 22C’ (20 units on 5 August 2015) Each of the
above items contain [the 22C-HD mechanism].
The purchase orders are as declared and I have no reason to doubt Mr
Nettleton’s statement that the items contain the 22C-HD
Rogers Declaration states that Woods purchased and resold the 22C-HD mechanism
‘since at least 2013’. Annexure 3 to
the Rogers Declaration provides
‘a bundle of invoices and purchase orders’ to support Mr
Rogers’ statements. While
the documents provided in the annexure are
difficult to read, I am satisfied that they do support Mr Rogers’
statements. For
example, a tax invoice from K2 to Woods, dated 4 March 2015,
includes 10 of STEN0MATIC22 H/DUTY 3 LEVER.
Owner has submitted in respect of the photographs of the 22C-HD mechanism
provided in the declarations discussed above:
The photographs submitted are not dated (Or dated within the past month) and are
in fact recent photographs of a mechanism with a
product having been stripped
down to appear like [the Design] and is not sold
as shown in the
These photos do not pre-date [the Design]. A simple search of the photograph
jpg.properties will show that they were taken recently
(emphasis in original)
It is not asserted by any of the declarants that the photographs were taken
before the Priority Date. I take the purpose of the photographs
identify the type of mechanism in the photographs to be the same as the 22C-HD
mechanism referred to
in the remainder of the declarations. I am satisfied that the photographs serve
that purpose.
Owner has submitted in respect of the 22C-HD mechanism that the design was never
published, including that it was ‘Never
available to the general
of the Act is not limited to published designs.
Specifically,
states that the prior art base for a design includes
‘designs publicly used in Australia’. The meaning of this expression
plainly differs from ‘available to the
‘Designs publicly used in Australia’ is not defined by the Act. The
apparently broader expression ‘design
... used in Australia’ found
in s 17 of the
Designs Act 1906
(Cth) has on occasion been considered in
the courts. For example:
[I]f the circumstances relevant to the document or article in question are such
that one may reasonably infer that the public were
able to take advantage of and
become acquainted with the features of the design that would be sufficient ...
[I]t will not in all
cases be necessary, for the occasion to be described as
‘public’ or ‘open’, that a large number of persons
or have likely been able to avail themselves of the opportunity to comprehend
the design in question.
evidence shows that the 22C-HD mechanism has, before the Priority Date, been
sold by a manufacturer to a number of unrelated persons
including a distributor
and a company that further used it in the assembly of another product. Given all
of this, the 22C-HD mechanism
has in my view been ‘publicly used in
Australia’ and forms part of the prior art base for the
am satisfied by the evidence provided by the Examination Requestors that the
22C-HD mechanism was sold to both Turnco and Woods
as part of kits or as a
stand-alone item before the Priority Date. I am also satisfied that the 22C-HD
mechanism is substantially
similar to the Design. Consequently, the Design is
not distinctive when compared to the prior art base for the design. The Design
is, therefore, not a registrable design and a ground for revocation of the
registration of the Design has been made out.
Richsell Pty Ltd v Khoury
[1994] FCA 1538
am satisfied that a ground of revocation has been made out. I direct that design
number 201514265 be revoked one month from the
date of this decision. If the
Registrar is served with a notice of appeal from this decision before that time,
I direct that revocation
shall not occur until either the appeal is withdrawn or
a court so orders.
Examination Requestors have sought an award of costs in their favour. I see no
reason to depart from the general rule that costs
follow the event. As the
Examination Requestors have established a ground of revocation, I award costs
against the Owner under s
127 of the Act.
Robert Wilson Hearing Officer
Hearings and Oppositions 29 October 2018
RTF format (4.52 MB)
Signed PDF/A format