Palmanova Pty Ltd v Commonwealth of Australia [2025] HCA 35 (3 September 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAGELER CJ,
EDELMAN, JAGOT AND BEECH‑JONES JJ
PALMANOVA PTY LTD APPELLANT
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA RESPONDENT
Palmanova Pty Ltd v Commonwealth of Australia
Date of Hearing: 13 June 2025
Date of Judgment: 3 September
Appeal dismissed with costs.
On appeal from the Federal Court of Australia
Representation
R P L Lancaster SC with N A Wootton for the appellant (instructed by Simpsons
Solicitors)
G T Johnson SC with N D J Swan for the respondent (instructed by
HWL Ebsworth Lawyers)
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
Palmanova Pty Ltd v Commonwealth of Australia
Statutes – Construction – Temporal operation of statute –
Where in June 2020 archaeological artefact imported into
Australia – Where
artefact seized by inspector under
Protection of Movable Cultural Heritage
(Cth) ("Act") upon request for return of artefact from Government
of Bolivia – Where artefact unlawfully exported from Bolivia
commencement of
– Where appellant purchaser commenced action for
recovery of artefact under
enacted to bring
Australia into conformity with obligations of State Party to UNESCO Convention
on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit Import, Export and
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property (1970) prior to Australia acceding to
Convention –
Where s 14(1) of
provides that "protected object of
a foreign country" may be liable to forfeiture – Whether
renders liable to forfeiture protected object of a foreign country unlawfully
exported from that country before commencement of
Words and phrases – "archaeological artefact", "context", "cultural
property", "exportation of cultural property", "extrinsic
"forfeiture", "has been exported", "import of cultural property", "modern
approach to statutory interpretation", "movable
cultural heritage", "obligations
of a State Party", "ordinary language", "presumption against redundant words",
"presumption against
surplusage", "protected object of a foreign country",
"redundant words", "statutory construction", "statutory purpose", "syntax",
"temporal operation", "unlawful exportation".
Protection of Movable Cultural Heritage Act 1986
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import,
Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property (1970),
Arts 1, 2, 5,
GAGELER CJ,
GORDON, JAGOT AND BEECH-JONES JJ. This appeal turns on a question of
statutory construction concerning the temporal
operation of
Protection of Movable Cultural Heritage Act 1986
(Cth) ("the
question is whether
renders liable to forfeiture, upon
importation into Australia after the commencement of the
, a protected object
of a foreign country unlawfully exported from that foreign country before the
commencement of the
. The answer is that it does.
majority of the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia (Banks-Smith and
Abraham JJ, Downes J dissenting) adopted that construction
in the judgment under
The Full Court in
consequence ordered forfeiture of an archaeological artefact found by the
primary judge
protected object of Bolivia, having been manufactured by people of the Tiwanaku
civilisation whose culture rose to prominence
on the shore of Lake Titicaca
between 600 and 1000 AD, and to have been unlawfully exported from Bolivia
either in 1934 or around
1950 ("the Artefact").
correctness of the construction adopted by the majority of the Full Court in the
decision under appeal means that this appeal
must be dismissed. The Artefact
will remain forfeited.
Text and context
construction is the process of attributing meaning to statutory
The construction of a
statutory provision begins and ends with the statutory text understood in
and in light of the
statutory purpose – being what the provision is designed to achieve in
– insofar as that
purpose is discernible from the statutory text and
In the construction
of a provision of a Commonwealth statute, the meaning that would best achieve
the statutory purpose so discerned
is to be preferred to each alternative
being the nature of the task to which the process is directed, the "modern
approach" to statutory construction, as was explained
nearly 30 years ago in
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club
in a statement
repeated and endorsed many times
"(a) insists that the
context be considered in the first instance, not merely at some later stage when
ambiguity might be thought
to arise, and (b) uses 'context' in its widest sense
to include such things as the existing state of the law and the mischief which,
by legitimate means ... , one may discern the statute was intended to remedy".
Use of extrinsic material in the construction of a
provision of a Commonwealth
statute is guided but not governed by a non-exhaustive list of categories of
material statutorily recognised
to have potential to illuminate the statutory
the construction of
adopted by the majority of the Full
Court was correct, the majority saw the statutory text as so "clear" as to
ke material extrinsic to the
"unnecessary to
Understanding
context, including so much of the context as might be revealed by extrinsic
material, "has utility if, and in so far
as, it assists in fixing the meaning of
the statutory text".
Focus on the statutory text is not to the exclusion of extrinsic material that
has the potential to assist in fixing its meaning.
Appreciating
the context of
involves situating the
international and constitutional setting and locating
scheme of the
so situated.
The international and
constitutional context of the
was enacted on 13 May 1986 and commenced on 1 July 1987
anticipation of Australia acceding on 30 October
to the Convention on
the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property
adopted by the
General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization on 14 November 1970 ("the
UNESCO Convention"). The UNESCO
Convention entered into force with respect to Australia on 30 January
UNESCO Convention was the outcome of a long-term movement towards protecting
movable cultural heritage which gained momentum
in the aftermath of World War II
with decolonisation and with mounting global concern about illicit trade in
movable cultural
The expression
"cultural property" is defined in Art 1 to mean property within any of a
number of specified categories of movable
property which, "on religious or
secular grounds, is specifically designated by each State as being of importance
for archaeology,
prehistory, history, literature, art or science".
Parties to the UNESCO Convention undertake a range of obligations expressed at
different levels of generality within the UNESCO
Convention. Most general are
those set out in Art 2. By Art 2(1), States Parties recognise that
"the illicit import, export and transfer
of ownership of cultural property is
one of the main causes of the impoverishment of the cultural heritage of the
countries of origin
of such property and that international co-operation
constitutes one of the most efficient means of protecting each country's
property against all the dangers resulting therefrom". "To this end",
States Parties undertake by Art 2(2) "to oppose such practices
means at their disposal".
specific obligations undertaken by States Parties to the UNESCO Convention with
respect to the import, export and transfer of
ownership of cultural property
include those set out in Arts 5 and 6 concerning protections by States
Parties of their own cultural
property and those set out in Art 7
concerning protection of the cultural property of other States Parties.
most relevant of the obligations set out in Arts 5 and 6 of the UNESCO
Convention concerning protections by States Parties of
their own cultural
property are those in Arts 5(b), 6(a), 6(b) and 6(c). By Art 5(b),
each State Party undertakes to set up "one
or more national services" for the
protection of its "cultural heritage" sufficient for the "effective carrying
out" of the function
of "establishing and keeping up to date, on the basis of a
national inventory of protected property, a list of important public and
cultural property whose export would constitute an appreciable impoverishment of
the national cultural heritage". By Art
6(a), (b) and (c) respectively,
each State Party undertakes: to introduce a system of certification for the
authorised exportation
of cultural property; to prohibit exportation of cultural
property unless accompanied by an appropriate certificate; and to publicise
prohibition "by appropriate means, particularly among persons likely to export
or import cultural property".
obligations set out in Art 7 of the UNESCO Convention concerning the
protection to be afforded by a State Party to the cultural
property of another
State Party include that, by Art 7(a), each State Party undertakes "to
prevent museums and similar institutions
within [its territory] from acquiring
cultural property originating in another State Party which has been illegally
exported after
entry into force of [the UNESCO Convention] in the States
concerned". By Art 7(b)(i), each State Party undertakes "to prohibit the
import of cultural property stolen from a museum or a religious or secular
public monument or similar institution in another State
Party to [the UNESCO
Convention], after the entry into force of [the UNESCO Convention] for the
States concerned". And by Art 7(b)(ii),
which is not limited to museums and
similar institutions, each State Party also undertakes "at the request of the
State Party of
origin, to take appropriate steps to recover and return any such
cultural property imported after the entry into force of [the UNESCO
Convention]
in both States concerned" subject to the proviso that "the resulting State shall
pay just compensation to an innocent
purchaser or to a person who has valid
title to that property". The only temporal limitation in Art 7(b)(ii)
concerns the date of
import of the cultural property. Accordingly, for the
purposes of Art 7(b)(ii), "[n]either the date of the property's theft nor
date it was exported is
This reflects
that, Art 7(b)(ii) not being limited to museums and institutions, the
reference to "such cultural property" in that
provision means "cultural
property" as defined in Art 1 (which has no temporal dimension). It also
reflects that, unlike Art 7(a)
and (b)(i), Art 7(b)(ii) refers to "an innocent
purchaser" of cultural property.
pertinent observation to be made is that the obligations set out in Art 7
of the UNESCO Convention do not exhaust the protection
that can be afforded by a
State Party to the cultural property of another State Party or to the cultural
property of any other State.
Quite apart from whatever force might be attributed
to the general obligation in Art 2(2), to which reference has already been made,
the non-exhaustive nature of the obligation imposed on a State Party by
Art 7(b)(ii) is made clear by Art 15, which expressly contemplates
States Parties entering into and implementing other bilateral or multilateral
agreements with any other States for the recovery and
return of cultural
property of those other States irrespective of when that cultural property might
have been exported from those
States. Article 15 provides:
"Nothing in this Convention shall prevent States Parties thereto from concluding
special agreements among themselves or from continuing
to implement agreements
already concluded regarding the restitution of cultural property removed,
whatever the reason, from its territory
of origin, before the entry into force
of this Convention for the States concerned."
the legislative choice being made in enacting the
to bring Australia into
compliance with the obligations of a State Party to the UNESCO Convention prior
to acceding to the UNESCO
Convention, the Minister for Arts, Heritage and
Environment commenced the Second Reading Speech for the
in the House of
Representatives by stating in general terms that the purpose of the
protect Australia's heritage of cultural objects and to extend certain forms of
protection to the cultural heritage of other
nations" and immediately added that
"[a]s a result of these steps, Australia [would] be able to accede" to the
UNESCO Convention.
of summary, the Minister referred to the
providing for "[n]ew export and
import controls to regulate the movement of important cultural objects" which
would "enable the establishment
of reciprocal arrangements with other countries
for the return of illegally exported
respect of the import controls to be imposed by the
, the Minister said
"The import controls exist solely to enable Australia to respond if an official
complaint is received from a foreign government that
an illegally exported
object has been brought to Australia. If a foreign government does not consider
an object sufficiently important
to lodge such a complaint, we do not consider
ourselves as having an obligation to protect that country's cultural property on
behalf. Although these controls relate essentially to Australia's treaty
obligations under the [UNESCO] Convention, they will also
make it possible for
the Government to provide this form of protection to countries which may not yet
be party to the Convention.
An institution or individual buying an important
cultural object from overseas will need to be satisfied that the requisite
authorisations have been issued in the country of origin."
Minister stressed in the Second Reading Speech that the UNESCO Convention was
"not concerned with restitution of cultural property
taken from this country in
the past or brought here in past years from other countries without proper
authority". The "concern" of
, the Minister said, was "to draw a line
across history to ensure that in future years transfers of important and
valuable cultural
objects from one country to another take place in a legal and
orderly fashion and that sanctions imposed will discourage illicit
trafficking
in cultural
Explanatory Memorandum for the
explained to similar effect that the purpose
was "to provide for the protection of Australia's heritage of
important movable cultural objects by introducing export controls and
protection to the cultural heritage of other countries through import controls",
adding that "[i]mplementation of the
[would] enable Australia to become a
party to the ... UNESCO
Convention".
, the Explanatory Memorandum reiterated that "[i]mported objects forming
part of the cultural heritage of a foreign country and so
recognised under the
law of that country will not be seized unless a formal request to return the
object has been received from the
government of that country" and made the point
that the "primary sanction" in the
"to discourage unlawful export or import
of important cultural heritage objects will be loss of the object through
seizure or forfeiture".
Section 14(1)
in the context of the
Replicating
in statutory form the broad legislative purpose identified in the Second Reading
Speech and the Explanatory Memorandum,
the long title to the
describes it as
to protect Australia's heritage of movable cultural objects, to support
the protection by foreign countries of their heritage of
movable cultural
objects, and for related purposes". The
makes no reference to the UNESCO
Convention.
is headed "Control of Exports and Imports". Within
Div 1, headed "Exports", pursues the first of the objectives identified in
the long title of the
: to protect Australia's heritage of movable cultural
objects. Division 2, headed "Imports", pursues the second of those
objectives:
to support the protection by foreign countries of their heritage of
movable cultural objects. For the purposes of the
, "export" means export
from Australia and "import" means import into
structure and relevant content of Div 1 of Pt II of the
protecting Australia's heritage of movable cultural objects by imposing controls
on exports from Australia, conform broadly to the
specific undertakings of a
State Party to protect its own cultural property in Arts 5(a), 6(a) and
6(b) of the UNESCO Convention.
The expression "the movable cultural heritage of
Australia" is first explained in
in terms consistent with
the definition of "cultural property" in Art 1 of the UNESCO Convention.
Provision is then made in
for the establishment by
regulation of the National Cultural Heritage Control List which is to comprise a
list of categories of objects
that constitute the movable cultural heritage of
Australia, the export of which objects from Australia is to be "subject to
control". An object becomes an "Australian protected
by virtue of
being within a category in the National Cultural Heritage Control List.
Exporting or attempting to export such an Australian
protected object otherwise
than in accordance with an export permit granted by the Minister administering
or a certificate of exemption granted by the Minister
is designated by the heading to
"[u]nlawful" and is the subject of sanctions set out in that section. If the
object is exported, the object is automatically
forfeited by operation of
If the object is merely attempted to be exported, the object is
rendered liable to forfeiture by operation of
In either event, a
person exporting or attempting to export the object can be criminally liable for
the commission of an offence
structure and relevant content of Div 2 of Pt II of the
supporting the protection by foreign countries of their heritage of movable
cultural objects by imposing controls on imports into
Australia, enables
fulfilment of the undertaking of a State Party to protect the cultural property
of another State Party set out
in Art 7(b)(ii) of the UNESCO Convention and
also facilitates the implementation of other bilateral and multilateral
arrangements
that are in alignment with the terms of the
contemplation of Art 15.
sole provision within Div 2 of Pt II of the
Section 14(1)
(a) a protected object of a foreign country has been exported from that
(b) the export was prohibited by a law of that country relating to cultural
property; and
(c) the object is imported;
the object is liable to forfeiture."
Section 14(2)
"Where a person imports an object, knowing that:
(a) the object is a protected object of a foreign country that has been exported
from that country; and
(b) the export was prohibited by a law of that country relating to cultural
the person commits an offence."
offence created by
, like the offence created by
, is an indictable
Ch 2 of the
Criminal Code
schema of Ch 2 of the
Criminal Code
, s 14(2)(a) and (b) each
refer to a distinct physical element of the offence, each such physical element
being a "circumstance" in
which the "conduct" of a person importing an object
needs to occur with intention on the part of that person to engage in that
and with awareness on the part of that person of the existence of those
circumstances in order for the offence to be
expression "protected object of a foreign country", used in s 14(1) and
(2), is defined to mean "an object forming part of the
movable cultural heritage
of a foreign country".
The reference in that definition to "movable cultural heritage", in relation to
a foreign country, is in turn "a reference to objects
that are of importance to
that country, or to a particular part of that country", for "ethnological,
archaeological, historical,
literary, artistic, scientific or technological
reasons" or for other prescribed
is apparent that each of the liability to forfeiture created by s 14(1) and
the offence created by s 14(2) applies to any importation
of any protected
object of any foreign country. Each applies without reference to whether
Australia or the foreign country is a State
Party to the UNESCO Convention at
the time of the importation or whether Australia or the foreign country is a
State Party to the
UNESCO Convention when the protected object of the foreign
country was exported from the foreign country.
repeat the language of the Second Reading Speech,
and (2) of the
are constrained "solely to enable Australia to respond if an official
complaint is received from a foreign government that an illegally
object has been brought to Australia" through limitations on their enforcement
for which provision is made in
, headed "Enforcement of
", sets out a regime for the enforcement
of both the sanctions for the unlawful exportation from Australia of an
Australian protected
object set out in
, (2) and (3) of the
the sanctions for the unlawful importation into Australia of a protected object
of a foreign country set out in
and (2) of the
. Within the
nomenclature of the
, each of a protected object of a foreign country and an
Australian protected object is a "protected
provides for the enforcement of sanctions in respect of protected objects by
inspectors appointed by the Minister administering the
, read with
, empowers an inspector to seize
a protected object that the inspector believes on reasonable grounds to be
forfeited or liable to
forfeiture. By operation of
, a seizure is
taken to occur upon a Customs officer delivering an object to an inspector under
Customs Act 1901
Importantly,
, a power conferred on an inspector by
including most importantly the power of seizure, is not to be exercised in
relation to a protected object of a foreign country unless
the inspector
believes on reasonable grounds that the Commonwealth has received a request for
the return of the object from the government
of the foreign country.
Correspondingly,
provides that proceedings for a
contravention of
in relation to a protected object of a foreign
country are not to be instituted unless the Commonwealth has received a request
that nature from the government of the country. Nothing in
is capable of
confining such a request to an object that was only exported from the foreign
country after the
came into force.
Concordantly,
the Explanatory Memorandum for the
explained in its commentary on
with specific reference to the operation of
official request from the government of the country concerned" was to be "prior
condition" of the enforcement of
and (2). The Explanatory
Memorandum added, no doubt by reference to Art 7(b)(ii) of the UNESCO
Convention, that "[a]s set down in
the terms of the [UNESCO Convention], a
country making such a request for the return of an illegally exported cultural
object must
be prepared to provide compensation to an innocent third party
purchaser". The Explanatory Memorandum explained s 14(1) and (2) as
providing for "the reciprocal protection of the movable cultural heritage" not
only of other States Parties to the [UNESCO Convention]
but also of countries
with which Australia might have "bilateral agreements the purpose of which is to
protect objects exported from
a foreign country".
part of the regime for the enforcement of ss 9(1) and (2) and 14(1) for which Pt
allows the owner or immediate prior possessor of
a protected object that has been seized by an inspector to bring an action for
recovery of the object "on the ground that the object is not forfeited or
liable to be forfeited" in a "court of competent jurisdiction".
The Federal
Court answers that description by virtue of the jurisdiction conferred on it by
s 39B(1A)(c)
Judiciary Act 1903
an action for the recovery of a seized object is brought in a court of competent
, the court is required by
or (b) as the case may be to determine on the balance of
probabilities whether the object is an Australian protected object that
forfeited by virtue of
, or is an Australian protected object that is
liable to be forfeited by virtue of
, or a protected object of a
foreign country liable to be forfeited under
If the court
determines that the object is an Australian protected object that is forfeited
by virtue of
, the court is required by
to reject the
claim for recovery. If the court determines that the object is an Australian
protected object that is liable to be
forfeited by virtue of
protected object of a foreign country liable to be forfeited under
the court is authorised and required by
to order that the object
is forfeited.
forfeiture of a protected object by operation of
order under
, all title and interest in the object is vested in
the Commonwealth by force of
and the object is to be dealt with and
disposed of in accordance with directions of the Minister administering the
by force of
Upon forfeiture, a protected object of a foreign
country liable to be forfeited under
is available to be returned at
the direction of the Minister to the government of the foreign country which had
made the request
for the return of the object which had prompted the seizure of
the object by an inspector as permitted by
and procedural history
Pty Ltd, an Australian company, purchased the Artefact online from the Artemis
Gallery in Colorado on or about 5 June 2020
for a purchase price of
USD17,340. As a result, the Artefact was shipped by FedEx to Melbourne on or
officers intercepted the Artefact upon entry
into Australia.
receipt by the Government of Australia from the Government of Bolivia of a
request for the return of the Artefact to Bolivia,
a Customs officer on
17 May 2021 delivered the Artefact under
to an inspector appointed under
as a consequence of
which the Artefact was taken by operation of
to have been seized by
the inspector at that time. Palmanova subsequently commenced an action against
the Commonwealth in the Federal
Court for recovery of the Artefact under
first instance, Perram J found on the balance of probabilities that the
Artefact is pre-Columbian in origin, having been manufactured
by people of the
Tiwanaku civilisation whose culture centred around the ancient city of Tiwanaku
on the shore of Lake Titicaca in
what is now modern-day Bolivia and rose to
prominence between 600 and 1000 AD. His Honour characterised the Artefact
as "an exceptional
and unique piece of archaeological
significance".
basis, his Honour found the Artefact to form part of the "movable cultural
heritage" of Bolivia and therefore to be a "protected
object of a foreign
country" within the meaning of the
further found on the balance of probabilities that the Artefact was removed from
the ruins of the city of Tiwanaku in contravention
of a Bolivian statute of 1906
entitled "Law of Property of the Nation, Ruins of Tiahuanaco and Lake Titicaca".
The removal was either
by an identified archaeologist in the course of
excavating the site in 1934 or by looters in or around 1950. Whether removed in
or in or around 1950, the Artefact had been exported from Bolivia to
Argentina by some time in the
Notwithstanding
those findings, Perram J held that the Artefact was not liable to
forfeiture under
. The reason was that his Honour
considered that, properly construed,
did not apply to a protected
object of a foreign country exported from the foreign country before the
commencement of the
on 1 July 1987 at least where the exportation of
the object from that foreign country was unconnected with the importation of the
object into Australia after 1 July
to have such a limited temporal operation,
Perram J placed weight on the contrast between the use of the present
perfect tense in
("has been exported") and the use of the past
("was prohibited"). Holding to the syntactic tenet that
"the present perfect tense indicates the completion of an event in the past
where that completion has some relevance to the
pointed out that the description in
of where "a protected object
of a foreign country has been exported from that country" indicates "a
connection between the completed
act of export and the present to which
connection between the completed act of export and the present to be inferred to
lie in the mere present existence of the
past exported object, his Honour
thought, the use of the present perfect tense in
which satisfies
must necessarily have been exported and
therefore satisfy
s 14(1)(a).
also considered that the reference in the Second Reading Speech to the concern
being "to draw a line across history to ensure that in future years
transfers of important and valuable cultural objects from one
country to another
take place in a legal and orderly fashion" provided some, albeit limited,
support for construing
as applying only to a protected object of a
foreign country that was exported from the foreign country after the
commencement of
He derived no assistance from a consideration of the UNESCO Convention, taking
the view that "the differences between Art 7 and s
14(1) are too large
to make comparison
Commonwealth appealed to Full Court. The sole issue on the appeal to the Full
Court was the correctness of the construction of
by Perram J. Neither party sought to support the construction treated as
open by his Honour according to which
might apply to a protected
object of a foreign country where the exportation of the object from the foreign
country before the commencement
was somehow continuous with the
importation of the object into Australia after the commencement of the
the Full Court, issue was joined between the parties as to whether
properly construed applies: only to a protected
object of a foreign country exported from that country after the commencement of
, as Palmanova contended; or to any protected object of a foreign country
exported from that country before or after the commencement
Commonwealth contended. Both parties accepted that the commonality of statutory
language and purpose between
requires that
whichever of those alternative meanings is attributed to
also be attributed to
s 14(2)(a).
majority in the Full Court, Banks-Smith and Abraham JJ, considered that
"the critical time for the operation" of the provisions
"is the time of import into, or export from,
and that the
provided "no basis" to limit its application to exports
from a foreign country after the commencement of the
Despite expressing
the view, already noted, that the text was so "clear" as to make extrinsic
material "unnecessary to
the majority
went on to conclude, in response to the reasoning of Perram J, that nothing
in the Second Reading Speech suggested that
and (2) were designed
to be limited to "objects exported after the date of enactment, which are then
imported into
Australia".
dissentient in the Full Court, Downes J, considered Palmanova's
construction to be that which best achieves the purpose of the
relevantly identified that purpose, by reference to Art 6 of the UNESCO
Convention and to the statements in the Second
Reading Speech about "requisite
export authorisations" and "draw[ing] a line across history", as being to
control the importation
into Australia of protected objects of foreign countries
exported from the territories of those countries in the future: at a time
exportation of those objects from the territories of those countries ought to
occur only if authorised by certification in accordance
with Art 6(a) in
order not to be prohibited in accordance with Art 6(b) and when the
existence of such a prohibition on export ought
to be publicised to persons
likely to be importers or exporters of those objects in accordance with
regarded the alternative construction as creating a practical necessity for
honest importers and exporters to engage in
onerous and unworkable inquiries
into the provenance of traded objects in order to obviate the risk of forfeiture
under s 14(1) and
of criminality under s 14(2), a result which her
Honour regarded as "unreasonable and
improbable".
its appeal by special leave to this Court, Palmanova called in aid both the
textual reasoning of Perram J and the purposive and
contextual reasoning of
Downes J. Palmanova relied also on what it argued to be the consistency of
its construction of s 14(1)(a)
and (2)(a) with the temporal limitation in
Art 7(a) of the UNESCO Convention. Fairly acknowledging that "[t]he rule
formerly accepted,
that statutes creating offences are to be strictly construed,
has lost much of its importance in modern times" to the point of having
"one of last resort",
Palmanova also sought to derive assistance from the consideration that
s 14(2)(a) expresses an element of a criminal offence.
preferable construction of s 14(1)
expressed in the long title to the
been noted, is "to support the protection by foreign countries of their heritage
of movable cultural objects". Pursuit of
that statutorily identified purpose by
and (2) is moderated by the constraints on enforcement imposed by
its enforcement is constrained by
the statutorily identified purpose of supporting the protection by foreign
countries of their heritage of movable cultural
objects by permitting seizure of
a protected object of a foreign country (leading eventually to forfeiture of the
object to the Commonwealth
and return of the object to the government of the
foreign country) only after receipt of a request for the return of that object
by the government of the foreign country. For an object to be liable to
forfeiture by operation of
, the criteria set out in
, (b) and (c) must all be met at the same time. The criterion in
is that "a protected object of a foreign country has been
exported from that country". The criterion in
is that "the
export was prohibited by a law of that country relating to cultural property".
The criterion in
is that "the object is imported". Obviously,
the event referred to in the criterion set out in
present act of importation – furnishes the temporal reference point for
the criteria set out in
Section 14(2)
pursues the same purpose of supporting the protection by foreign
countries of their heritage of movable cultural objects by complementary
As its enforcement is constrained by
permits criminal
prosecution of an importer who was aware at the time of importation of the
circumstance set out in
that "the object is a protected object
of a foreign country that has been exported from that country" and the
circumstance set out
that "the export was prohibited by a law
of that country relating to cultural property". Prosecution can occur only after
of a request from the government of the foreign country of the same
nature as the request required to permit seizure and forfeiture
was properly no dispute between the parties that
and (2) of the
speak in the present so as to apply upon and only upon the importation of a
protected object of a foreign country occurring on or
after the commencement of
. The parties also correctly proceeded on the basis that neither of their
competing constructions of
and (2)(a) would result in either of
those provisions operating retroactively in the sense that would invoke "[t]he
general rule
of the common law ... that a statute changing the law ought not,
unless the intention appears with reasonable certainty, to be understood
applying to facts or events that have already occurred in such a way as to
confer or impose or otherwise affect rights or liabilities
which the law had
defined by reference to the past
That is to say,
it was common ground that neither construction would result in
(2) "provid[ing] that as at a past date the law shall be taken to have been that
which it was not" and either construction would
simply involve "the creation by
[s 14(1) and (2)] of further particular rights or liabilities with respect to
past matters or
transactions".
question of construction on which the parties joined issue was confined to how
the textual reference in each of
and (2)(a) to a protected
object of a foreign country that "has been exported from that country" is best
construed in its overall
context of the
, having been enacted with a view to bringing Australia into
conformity with the obligations of a State Party prior to Australia acceding
the UNESCO Convention, furnishes no basis for considering that the purpose of
s 14 is more limited than that expressed in the
long title to the
for construing
and (2)(a) to apply only to a protected object of
a foreign country that was exported from that country on or after the
commencement
in order for those provisions not to conflict with
Australia's obligations as a State Party to the UNESCO
Convention.
That is for
three independent and sufficient reasons. None of those reasons relies on the
generality of the obligation of a State
Party under Art 2(2) of the UNESCO
Convention and none therefore involves any consideration of the relationship
between Art 2(2)
and any of the specific obligations of a State Party under
Arts 5, 6 and 7 of the UNESCO Convention.
first reason derives from the circumstance that, although the obligations of a
State Party under Art 7(a) and (b)(i) of the UNESCO
Convention are limited
by reference to the timing of the export or theft of the cultural property of
another State Party, the obligation
of a State Party under Art 7(b)(ii) of
the UNESCO Convention is limited only by the timing of the import of cultural
property. The
obligation of a State Party under Art 7(b)(ii), as has been
noted, is "at the request of the State Party of origin, to take appropriate
steps to recover and return any such cultural property imported after the entry
into force of [the UNESCO Convention] in both States
concerned".
Article 7(b)(ii) itself expresses no limitation on the cultural property
which can be the subject of a request by reference
to the time of the export of
that cultural property from the territory of the country of origin and no such
limitation can be inferred
from Art 6(a), (b) or (c), all of which are
addressed to the distinct topic of the obligations of a State Party with respect
own cultural property, or from Art 7(a) or (b)(i), which are
concerned with museums and institutions.
absence from Art 7(b)(ii) of the UNESCO Convention of any limitation as to
the timing of the export of cultural property from
the territory of the country
of origin requesting its return is important as
together provide the statutory mechanism which enables Australia to respond to a
request by the government of that country for the
return of that property so as
to fulfil Australia's obligation under Art 7(b)(ii) to take appropriate
steps to recover and return
the requested cultural property. To construe
to contain a limitation as to the timing of the export of the
protected object from its country of origin would not facilitate compliance
Australia's obligation under Art 7(b)(ii) of the UNESCO Convention.
second reason is that, as has also been noted, Art 15 of the UNESCO
Convention makes abundantly clear that the obligations undertaken
Party under Art 7 do not constrain the State Party from entering into and
giving effect to other bilateral or multilateral
agreements for the recovery and
return of cultural property of other States, irrespective of when that subject
cultural property
might have been exported from those States. Again,
s 14(1) in combination with s 41(1) provides the statutory mechanism
Australia to implement any such other bilateral or multilateral
agreement that is in alignment with the terms of the
third reason is that, as
does not limit the objects that can be the subject
of a valid request by a foreign country to those objects exported from that
came into force, the contrary interpretation would leave a
request made by a foreign country in respect of an object exported from
country prior to the
coming into force unable to be acted upon. Such an
outcome tells strongly against that contrary interpretation.
Second Reading Speech and the Explanatory Memorandum reinforce those reasons for
considering the purpose of
to be no more limited than that expressed
in the long title to the
and for construing
and (2)(a) to
contain no limitation as to the timing of the export of a protected object from
a foreign country. Both the Second
Reading Speech and the Explanatory Memorandum
have been seen to allude to
(1) providing the statutory mechanism
to enable Australia to respond to a request by a foreign country for the
recovery and return
of a protected object of that foreign country in accordance
with Art 7(b)(ii) of the UNESCO Convention and both allude to the same
statutory mechanism also being available to enable Australia to implement
bilateral agreements for the recovery and return of protected
objects of foreign
"line across history" to which the Minister referred in the Second Reading
Speech was drawn in
, (2) and (3) of the
by reference to exports
or attempted exports of Australian protected objects from Australia which were
to occur on or after the commencement
reference to imports of protected objects of foreign countries into Australia
which were to occur on or after the commencement
. No further line was
and (2) by reference to exports of protected objects from
those foreign countries which were to occur on or after the commencement
regard to these textual and contextual considerations, the consideration that
expresses an element of the criminal offence created by
need hardly be said to be of no assistance in construing
alone in construing
s 14(1)(a).
The consideration could at its highest
carry some weight in the attribution of statutory meaning were considerations
drawn from text
and context finely balanced. Here, they are not.
remains finally to deal with the syntax. The context and purpose of a statutory
provision "are surer guides to its meaning
than the logic with which it is
constructed".
Nonetheless, the syntax of
and (2)(a) is consistent with
and (2)(a) not being confined to applying only to a protected
object of a foreign country that was exported from that country on
or after the
commencement of the
, by reference to the logic with which those provisions
are constructed.
temporal focus of
, like the temporal focus of
, is the time of the importation of an object into Australia. That
is made clear by
, as it is made clear by the chapeau to
The condition set out in
can only be met where an
object is imported into Australia after the commencement of the
. Unless that
condition is met,
does not render the object liable to forfeiture.
respect of an object that is imported into Australia after the commencement of
so as to meet the condition set out in
and (b) set out cumulative criteria which must be met for the object to be
liable to forfeiture. The sequence of those criteria and
the differences between
them reflect the different tenses in which they are expressed in accordance with
the ordinary use of the
English language.
, expresses two criteria each addressed to a
characteristic of the object at the time of importation. The first is that the
is at that time a protected object of a foreign country: that the object
is then of importance to that country, or to a particular
part of that country,
for ethnological, archaeological, historical, literary, artistic, scientific or
technological reasons or for
other prescribed reasons. The second is that the
object "has been" exported from that country. Each being addressed to a
characteristic of the same object at the same time, the temporal shift
in those two criteria explains the use of the present perfect
tense ("has been")
in the expression of the second of them. The use of the present perfect tense
indicates no more than that the
completion of the act of exportation of the
protected object of the foreign country in the past has some relevance to the
The connection between the completed act of exportation and the present
lies in the circumstance that the object that is in the present
a protected
object of a foreign country, thereby meeting the first criterion, is the same
object that was in the past the subject
of the completed act of exportation,
thereby meeting the second criterion.
, then expresses the additional criterion that the
past completed act of exportation of the object in question was prohibited by a
law of the foreign country in question. The shift from the use of the present
perfect tense in the expression of the second criterion
the simple past tense in
, to the extent it requires explication,
simply reflects the shift from
concerning an act of exportation
completed in the past as a present characteristic of the protected object of a
foreign country to
concerning a quality of that act of
exportation which was completed in the past: the quality being that the act of
exportation was
unlawful when it was completed in the past.
and (2) of the
therefore involves neither surplusage
nor redundancy. In using the present perfect tense,
and (2)(a) each
express the criterion of operation that an object which is at the time of
importation into Australia a protected
object of a foreign country is also an
object that was previously exported from that foreign country. The use of the
present perfect
tense indicates no further temporal limitation as to when the
object was exported from that foreign country.
appeal is to be dismissed with costs.
I agree with the reasons of Gageler CJ, Gordon, Jagot and
Beech-Jones JJ ("the joint reasons") and with their conclusion
appeal should be dismissed with costs. I wish to address only two additional
points. The first concerns a principle of statutory
interpretation sometimes
described as a presumption against surplusage or redundant language. The second
concerns the relevance of
extrinsic materials.
aspect of the clear and comprehensive submissions made by senior counsel for the
appellant, relying upon the typically lucid
reasons of the primary judge, was
reliance upon an interpretive principle that has been described as a
"presumption" against surplusage.
appellant's submission was that the words "has been exported" in
Protection of Movable Cultural Heritage Act 1986
") would be redundant if they were given the meaning of "was
exported" which, in effect, was the meaning attributed to those words
majority in the Full Court of the Federal Court. The appellant argued that since
requires that the object liable to forfeiture be "a protected
object of a foreign country", and since
, read with the
definition of "import" in
, imposes a requirement that the object is
imported into Australia, the protected object must be one that was exported from
the foreign
country (directly to Australia or via another country to Australia).
In short, an object of a foreign country that is imported must
also have been
exported. Hence, the appellant rightly argued, it would be surplusage to
interpret the words "has been exported" in
to mean "was
exported" from the foreign country.
appellant's alternative interpretation, which was preferred by the primary
and the minority of the Full Court, was that the words in the
present perfect tense—"has been exported"—meant that the
been exported after the commencement date of the
. Thus, on the
appellant's alternative interpretation,
would not apply to an
object that was exported prior to the commencement of the
foreign country in which it was protected, even if that object "is imported"
into Australia after the commencement of the
. In this way, the
interpretation of "has been exported" would avoid the redundancy of those words
that would arise if those words
were taken to mean "was exported".
Professor Pearce rightly points out, a so-called "presumption against
surplusage" has sometimes been treated as having the effect
that courts "are not
at liberty to consider any word or sentence as superfluous or insignificant. All
words must prima facie be given
some meaning and
The force with
which this interpretive principle has sometimes been expressed may have been a
reason for the primary judge's avoidance
of the interpretation involving
redundant words by a heavy focus on the present perfect tense of
s 14(1)(a).
Although the approach of the primary judge was critically
described by the majority of the Full Court as a construction that was
almost entirely" upon the use of that
that approach by
the primary judge is consistent with those cases which have given great weight
to interpretations which avoid redundant
decisions that have taken such a strict approach to the interpretive presumption
against redundant words do not accurately reflect
the nature of interpretive
presumptions as no more than generalisations of ordinary language use. As
Lord Wilberforce once said,
"[m]odern linguistic theory has helped us to
realise that language is deeply rooted in social habits and
interpretation of legal instruments, whether by members of the public or by
lawyers or judges, is the interpretation of language,
which must generally
employ the same ordinary language techniques used in society with the lodestar
being the intention of the speaker.
As with the techniques used to understand
ordinary language, presumptions in interpretation of legal instruments are only
to ascertaining meaning. This is particularly true of the
interpretation of legislation, the laws that govern people generally, which
should usually involve (and is intended to involve) the governed and lawyers
alike using ordinary techniques of communication without
the rigid application
of special legal rules.
legislation, as in ordinary language, there can be a number of reasons for
repetition, tautology, and surplusage. One reason may
be a desire for emphasis
or comprehensive coverage, to cover a field by the use of similar concepts, even
if the concepts might have
identical effect, "for more abundant
Another reason
is looseness in drafting,
or matters of emphasis, such that although "there may be a superfluous
expression here or there ... the
will be consistent
throughout".
reason is that the drafter "may not have appreciated" the
surplusage.
with ordinary language, the force of an interpretive principle against
surplusage will also depend upon the extent of the surplusage.
A few redundant
words might be more reasonably expected than a redundant sentence which, in
turn, might be more reasonably expected
than a redundant provision. Even at the
level of a sub-section, Lord Hoffmann remarked that he seldom thought "that
an argument from
redundancy carries great
Minister for Resources v Dover Fisheries Pty
expressed the interpretive principle at the level of a provision, saying that it
was "improbable that the framers of legislation
could have intended to insert a
provision which has virtually no practical effect".
Ultimately,
and again modelling on the techniques of interpreting ordinary usages of
language, the overriding concern of statutory
interpretation is with the
heuristic of the notional intention of the Parliament as revealed by the purpose
of the words of the statutory
provision and the context in which those words are
determining Parliamentary intention the context and purpose of the words of a
provision are "surer guides" than the logic
with which the words are
constructed
interpretation that would best achieve the purpose of an
is to be preferred
to any other
interpretation.
the joint reasons explain, the context and purpose of
support the interpretation preferred by the majority of the Full Court, far
outweighing the slight force of the interpretive
principle that relies upon the
few redundant words, "has been exported", in
s 14(1)(a).
important aspects of that context to which the joint reasons refer include the
Second Reading Speech and Explanatory Memorandum
and the Convention
on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property
(1970). By contrast, the majority of
the Full Court had concluded that the extrinsic material was unnecessary to
consider because
the construction of s 14 was clear (although the majority
properly did consider the extrinsic material and found that it did not
against their preferred
interpretation).
cautious approach to extrinsic materials by the majority of the Full Court was
probably informed by the terms of
Acts Interpretation
(Cth), which, superficially, appear to be in tension with the
modern approach to statutory interpretation, reflecting ordinary language
by which text, context, and purpose all inform each other and together shape the
meaning of the provision.
theory, that tension arises in any case in which
requiring a stepped, iterative approach to interpretation, by which the literal
or semantic meaning of words in their
internal context (described in
as an "ordinary meaning") is considered before considering
whether that "ordinary meaning" is altered by extrinsic
In practice,
however, even with reliance only upon
without reference to the
common law position, there should rarely, if ever, be a need for such a stepped
approach since: (i)
s 15AB(1)(b)(i)
reflects the modern approach to
statutory interpretation by which all context is relevant in the first instance
to determine the
meaning of a provision whenever the provision is ambiguous or
obscure; and (ii) ambiguity includes latent ambiguity, the existence
which cannot be eliminated without reference to extrinsic materials.
Acts Interpretation Act
was introduced in
as a facultative
provision, by which "Parliament should give a
partly because the
common law rules of interpretation at that time were "neither clear nor
convincing".
The section
provided a baseline of circumstances in which, in cases considered to be
appropriate,
could be made to extrinsic materials, including the non-exhaustive list in
But the section was not limited to those circumstances.
Reference to extrinsic materials was "to be left to the discretion and the
judgment of the courts".
That discretion and judgment now generally extends beyond the stepped, iterative
to apply the modern approach to statutory
interpretation, as applied in this case by the joint
The Commonwealth v Palmanova
(2024) 304 FCR 163.
Palmanova Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[2023] FCA 1391.
Thiess v Collector of
[2014] HCA 12
; (2014) 250 CLR 664 at 671
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
; (2012) 250 CLR 503 at 519
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
; (2009) 239
CLR 27 at 46-47
v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 280 CLR 137 at 157
YBFZ v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 40
; (2024) 99 ALJR 1 at 12
[2024] HCA 40
; 419 ALR 457 at 468.
Section 15AA
Interpretation Act 1901
(1997) 187 CLR 384 at 408.
Newcastle City Council v
GIO General Ltd
[1997] HCA 53
; (1997) 191 CLR 85 at 112-113;
Network Ten Pty Ltd v TCN
Channel Nine Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 14
; (2004) 218 CLR 273 at 280-281
Finance Direct Ltd v Director of Consumer Affairs (Vic)
[2007] HCA 57
; (2007) 234 CLR 96 at
Aussie Vic Plant Hire Pty Ltd v Esanda Finance Corporation Ltd
[2008] HCA 9
; (2008) 232 CLR 314 at 332
Section 15AB(2)
Interpretation Act 1901
The Commonwealth v Palmanova
(2024) 304 FCR 163 at 169 [27].
Port of Newcastle Operations
Pty Ltd v Glencore Coal Assets Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] HCA 39
; (2021) 274 CLR 565 at 594
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings
[2012] HCA 55
; (2012) 250 CLR 503 at 519
National Report on the
Implementation of the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the
Illicit Import, Export and
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property:
, C70/15/National-report/Australia
823 UNTS 231.
Vrdoljak, "Introduction", in
Vrdoljak, Jakubowski and Chechi (eds),
The 1970 UNESCO and 1995 UNIDROIT
Conventions on Stolen or Illegally Transferred Cultural Property: A
(2024) 3 at 5-15.
Urice and Levy, "Article
7(b)(ii) of the 1970 UNESCO Convention: Cooperation for the Return of Cultural
Property", in Vrdoljak,
Jakubowski and Chechi (eds),
The 1970 UNESCO and 1995
UNIDROIT Conventions on Stolen or Illegally Transferred Cultural Property: A
(2024) 245 at 256. See also Arts 28, 31 and 32 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties (1969) 1155 UNTS 331.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 27 November 1985
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 27 November 1985
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 27 November 1985
at 3740-3741.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 27 November 1985
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Protection of Movable Cultural Heritage Bill 1985
Explanatory Memorandum.
Section 3(1) (definitions of
"export" and "import") of the
Section 3(1)
(definition of
"Australian protected object") of the
Section 46(1)
Sections 3.1, 4.1(a) and (c),
5.1(1) and 5.2(1), 5.3 and 5.6(1) of the
Criminal Code
Section 3(1)
Section 3(5)
Section 3(1)
(definition of
"protected object") of the
[1978] HCA 27
; (1978) 140
CLR 584 at 588-589, cited in
Kodak (Australasia) Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[1988] FCA 438
; (1988) 22 FCR 197 at 201.
Palmanova Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[2023] FCA 1391
Palmanova Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[2023] FCA 1391
Palmanova Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[2023] FCA 1391
Palmanova Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[2023] FCA 1391
, [380], [381].
Palmanova Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[2023] FCA 1391
Palmanova Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[2023] FCA 1391
Palmanova Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[2023] FCA 1391
Palmanova Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[2023] FCA 1391
Palmanova Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[2023] FCA 1391
Palmanova Pty Ltd v The
Commonwealth
[2023] FCA 1391
The Commonwealth v Palmanova
(2024) 304 FCR 163 at 166 [16].
The Commonwealth v Palmanova
(2024) 304 FCR 163 at 168 [25].
The Commonwealth v Palmanova
(2024) 304 FCR 163 at 169 [27].
The Commonwealth v Palmanova
(2024) 304 FCR 163 at 169 [29].
The Commonwealth v Palmanova
(2024) 304 FCR 163 at 178 [77], 181 [96].
The Commonwealth v Palmanova
(2024) 304 FCR 163 at 178 [75]-[76], 180 [90]-[91].
The Commonwealth v Palmanova
(2024) 304 FCR 163 at 179-180 [87]-[88].
Waugh v Kippen
[1986] HCA 12
160 CLR 156 at 164, quoting
Beckwith v The Queen
[1976] HCA 55
; (1976) 135 CLR 569 at
576. See also
Aubrey v The Queen
(2017) 260 CLR 305 at 325 [39];
[2019] HCA 35
; (2019) 269 CLR 507 at 525
Maxwell v Murphy
[1957] HCA 7
96 CLR 261 at 267.
The Commonwealth v SCI
Operations Pty Ltd
(1998) 192 CLR 285 at 309 [57], citing
Coleman v Shell
Co of Australia Ltd
[1943] NSWStRp 41
; (1943) 45 SR (NSW) 27 at 30-31. See also
[2022] HCA 31
; (2022) 273 CLR 635 at 653
Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
; (1995) 183 CLR 273 at 287;
for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs v QAAH of 2004
[2006] HCA 53
; (2006) 231 CLR 1 at 14-16
CPCF v Minister for Immigration and Border
(2015) 255 CLR 514 at 627 [385].
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
; (1998) 194 CLR 355 at 381
Commissioner for Railways (NSW) v Agalianos
[1955] HCA 27
; (1955) 92 CLR 390 at 397.
Interpretation in Australia
, 10th ed (2024) at 69 [2.44].
The Commonwealth v Palmanova
(2024) 304 FCR 163 at 167 [18].
See, for instance,
Commonwealth v Baume
[1905] HCA 11
; (1905) 2 CLR 405 at 414, citing
R v Berchet
[1794] EngR 1806
; [89 ER 480].
Wilberforce, "A judicial
viewpoint", in Australia,
Symposium on Statutory Interpretation
Parliamentary Paper No 340/1983
(1983) 5 at 6.
Leon Fink Holdings Pty Ltd v
Australian Film Commission
(1979) 141 CLR 672 at 679.
Beckwith v The Queen
[1976] HCA 55
; (1976) 135 CLR 569 at 574.
Commissioners for
Special Purposes of Income Tax v Pemsel
[1891] AC 531 at 589.
Western Australian Planning
Commission v Southregal Pty Ltd
[2017] HCA 7
; (2017) 259 CLR 106 at 122
Walker (Inspector of Taxes)
v Centaur Clothes Group Ltd
[2000] UKHL 23
; [2000] 1 WLR 799 at 805;
[2000] UKHL 23
; [2000] 2 All ER 589 at
[1993] FCA 366
; (1993) 43 FCR 565 at 574,
AMP Inc v Utilux Pty Ltd
[1972] RPC 103 at 109.
Automotive Invest Pty Ltd v
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] HCA 36
; (2024) 98 ALJR 1245 at 1266
[2024] HCA 36
324 at 352-353. See also
Ravbar v The Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 25
; (2025) 99 ALJR 1000 at
[2025] HCA 25
; 423 ALR 241 at 291.
Commissioner for Railways
(NSW) v Agalianos
[1955] HCA 27
; (1955) 92 CLR 390 at 397;
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
; (1998) 194 CLR 355 at 381
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
The Commonwealth v Palmanova
(2024) 304 FCR 163 at 169 [27].
Harvey v Minister for
Primary Industry and Resources
[2024] HCA 1
; (2024) 278 CLR 116 at 160-161
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR
384 at 408.
Acts Interpretation Act
s 15AB(1)(a)
, (1)(b)(ii).
Acts Interpretation
Amendment Act 1984
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 3 April 1984 at
1288. See also Australia, Senate,
Parliamentary Debates
8 March 1984 at 583.
Dharmananda, "Sliding Doors:
Harvey and the Dual Legal Gateways to Extrinsic Materials" (2024) 35
105 at 105, quoting Mason, "Summing up", in Australia,
Symposium on Statutory Interpretation
, Parliamentary Paper
No 340/1983
(1983) 81 at 81.
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 3 April 1984 at
Newcastle City Council v
GIO General Ltd
[1997] HCA 53
; (1997) 191 CLR 85 at 99, 112. See also
Ravbar v The
Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 25
; (2025) 99 ALJR 1000 at 1033-1034
, 1043 [172], 1065 [270];
[2025] HCA 25
; 423 ALR 241 at 277-278, 291, 320-321.
RTF format (607 KB)
Signed PDF/A format