Donalds & Donalds (No. 2) [2021] FamCAFC 163 (17 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Donalds & Donalds (No
[2021] FamCAFC 163
Appeal from:
Donalds & Donalds (No 4)
[2021] FCCA 1618
Appeal number(s):
SOA 41 of 2021
File number(s):
MLC 11505 of 2020
Judgment of:
STRICKLAND J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – PARENTING
– Where the time to be spent between the father and the children is a
prime matter for determination
in the upcoming final hearing in relation to all
parenting issues – Where even if the appeal was allowed to proceed it
not be heard and determined before the conclusion of the final hearing
– Where there is no utility in allowing the appeal to
Where in any event the appeal is incompetent and cannot succeed – Appeal
Cases cited:
Donalds & Donalds
[2021] FamCAFC
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Melbourne by telephone link to Adelaide
The Appellant:
Self represented
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Joseph David Lawyers
Counsel for the Independent Children’s Lawyer:
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Nicholes Family Lawyers
MLC 11505 of 2020
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
STRICKLAND J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The Amended Notice of Appeal filed on 30 July 2021 be dismissed.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Donalds & Donalds
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
EX TEMPORE REASONS
FOR JUDGMENT
1 This is an appeal against an order providing for the child Y, born in 2021,
to spend time with Mr Donalds (“the father”),
and against an order
that costs be reserved.
2 It is not an appeal against the orders providing for relocation; the issue
of relocation is the subject of earlier orders, and the
appeal against those
orders has been dismissed.
3 Thus, the issue raised by Ms Donalds (“the mother”), namely
whether if this appeal is dismissed that may lead to a warrant
being issued to
enforce the relocation orders simply does not arise, it is not relevant, and
cannot be taken into account in relation
to this appeal.
4 That said, I propose to dismiss this appeal, and the primary reason for
that, is that it lacks utility, or to put it another way,
it is futile. It is
futile because the substantive hearing in relation to the parenting issues is
now listed to commence before
a judge of the Family Court of Australia on 24
August 2021, with four days set aside, and then a further four days set aside in
5 One of the orders the subject of this appeal, to repeat, is an order that
the child Y spend time with the father. However, the
issue of the time to be
spent between the father and the children, including Y, is a prime matter for
determination by the judge
hearing the substantive proceedings. Thus, given the
closeness of the final hearing in relation to all parenting issues, it is of
utility whatsoever to allow the appeal to proceed against the orders that I have
just identified.
6 I add to those comments by adverting to this timing. Even if the appeal
was allowed to proceed, it could not be listed for hearing
September/early October 2021, and by then of course, on current indications, the
trial before the primary judge will have
7 Further, following the hearing of the appeal, it is likely that there would
be a reserved judgment, and such judgment might take
as long as two or three
months to be delivered, and by then the final hearing would well and truly be
8 And then, of course, if the appeal was successful, the only option for the
appeal judge would be to remit the proceedings for rehearing.
Now, there would
be absolutely no point in doing that, given that all parenting issues, including
the time that Y is to spend with
the father, would have been the subject of
evidence and determination by her Honour in the context of the substantive
proceedings.
9 Thus, I confirm that there is no utility in this appeal proceeding, and I
propose to dismiss it for that reason.
10 I have indicated earlier, and I confirm now, that in any event, the appeal
and the grounds of appeal are incompetent.
11 The first thing to note in the Amended Notice of Appeal filed on 30 July
2021, is that, for some reason, leave to appeal is sought.
That is not
required, given that the appeal is against a parenting order. Fortuitously,
there are no facts put in the Notice of
Appeal in support of leave to appeal, so
I am perplexed as to why the mother has sought leave to appeal, but, as it turns
is not relevant in any event.
12 Turning to the grounds of appeal, there are eight pages comprising a
mixture of narrative and arguments, interspersed with alleged
errors by the
primary judge.
13 The first ground of appeal relates to the jurisdiction of the court to
make the orders the subject of the appeal. That is a matter
which has been
dealt with already by judgment delivered by this Court on 8 July 2021 (see
Donalds & Donalds
[2021] FamCAFC 129)
, and there is no basis
whatsoever for that as a ground of appeal. It is nonsense.
14 Then there is a further eight pages of narrative and arguments, but it is
patently obvious that the majority, if not all of that
narrative, and those
arguments, are directed to earlier orders, including in particular the issue of
relocation.
15 To repeat, this is not an appeal against the earlier orders. It is not an
appeal against the orders for relocation; it is an appeal
against discrete
orders made for time to be spent by Y with his father, and for costs.
16 It is difficult in the extreme, even on the closest reading of the eight
pages of narrative, to find any complaint or error alleged
in relation to those
two orders the subject of the appeal.
17 Thus, even if the appeal had any utility, to repeat, in my view, the
appeal is incompetent. The grounds of appeal are incompetent,
completely inappropriate to allow such an appeal to proceed. It cannot succeed.
Not only does it have no reasonable prospect
of success, it has no prospect, and
thus it would be a waste of everyone’s time, resources and, presumably,
costs, to allow
this appeal to proceed, either because it has some utility or
because it has some competence. But, to repeat, neither is the case.
I certify that the preceding seventeen (17)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 25 August 2021
RTF format (314 KB)
Signed PDF/A format