Betrys & Mega [2025] FedCFamC1A 189 (24 October 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1) APPELLATE
Betrys & Mega
[2025] FedCFamC1A 189
Appeal from:
Mega and Betrys
[2025] FCWA 136
Appeal number:
NAA 289 of 2025
File number:
PTW 6286 of 2019
Judgment of:
CAMPTON, CHRISTIE & SCHONELL JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – Where the appellant sought to
appeal orders made by a judge of the Family Court of Western Australia
the appellant’s application for indemnity costs – Where
each ground asserts a mixture of discretionary, legal and/or
factual error
– Where no ground has merit – Where the respondent sought an order
that the appellant pay her costs –
Where the appellant opposed an order
for costs – Where the appeal was without merit and it is appropriate to
make a costs order
– Costs ordered in the sum of $5,000.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules
(Cth) r 335
Cases cited:
[1999] 199 CLR 160;
Chong & Kerimowa
[2025] FedCFamC1A 158
Dimmick & Harrison
[2023] FedCFamC1A 30
Fitzgerald v Fish
(2005) 33 Fam LR 123
[2005] FamCA 158
Graham & Squibb
(2019) FLC 93-892
[2019] FamCAFC 33
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
Mega and Betrys
[2025] FCWA 136
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZSSJ
[2016] HCA 29
Norbis v Norbis
(1986) 161 CLR 513
[1986] HCA 17
Penfold v Penfold
(1980) 144 CLR 311
[1980] HCA 4
Re F: Litigants in Person Guidelines
(2001) FLC 93-072
[2001] FamCA
Royal Guardian Mortgage Management Pty Ltd v Nguyen
(2016) 332 ALR
[2016] NSWCA 88
Tame v New South Wales
(2002) 211 CLR 317
[2002] HCA 35
Thorne v Kennedy
(2017) 263 CLR 85
[2017] HCA 49
Warbrick & Warbrick (No 2)
(2021) FLC 94-030
[2021] FamCAFC
Whisprun Pty Ltd v Dixon
(2003) 200 ALR 447
[2003] HCA 48
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
The Appellant:
Self-represented litigant
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr van der Westhuizen
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Elite Family Law
PTW 6286 of 2019
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
DIVISION 1 APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CAMPTON, CHRISTIE & SCHONELL JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Notice of Appeal filed 24 June 2025 is dismissed.
appellant pay the respondent’s costs fixed in the sum of $5,000, such sum
to be paid within 60 days of the date of these
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Betrys & Mega
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
CAMPTON, CHRISTIE & SCHONELL JJ:
Notice of Appeal filed 24 June 2025, the appellant sought to appeal orders made
by a judge of the Family Court of Western Australia
dismissing the
appellant’s application for indemnity costs. On 11 June 2025, the primary
judge delivered reasons recorded as
Mega and Betrys
[2025] FCWA 136
(“the primary judge’s reasons”).
are 16 grounds of appeal, each ground variously asserting a mixture of
discretionary legal and/or factual error. The sheer number
of grounds may,
contrary to the appellant’s contentions, demonstrate that none have merit
Thorne v Kennedy
[2017] HCA 49
(2017) 263 CLR 85
Tame v New South Wales
[2002] HCA 35
211 CLR 317).
appeal is from a discretionary determination pursuant to
Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”) as it then was. With the
exception of those grounds asserting a denial of procedural fairness, to succeed
the appellant must bring his appeal within the categories of error identified in
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
at 505. The observations of Brennan J
Norbis v Norbis
[1986] HCA 17
(1986) 161 CLR 513
at 540 resonate as words of caution
in appeals from such a determination, where his Honour observed:
The “generous ambit within which reasonable disagreement is
possible” is wide indeed when there are a number of factors
to be taken
into account and the comparative weight to be attributed to those factors is not
clearly indicated by uniform standards
and values of the community. The
generous ambit of reasonable disagreement marks the area of immunity from
appellate interference.
the context of an application for costs pursuant to
of the Act (which for
present purposes is identical to that now found in
of the Act) it is
apposite to observe the settled jurisprudence is as follows:
Section 117
of the Act, now
, provides that each party to the
proceedings should bear their own costs.
Section 117(2)
of the Act reposed in the Court a discretion to make a costs
Penfold v Penfold
(1980) 144 CLR 311
at 315, the plurality in
the High Court observed that in making an order under
of the Act, the
Court needed to make a finding of “justifying circumstances” as a
preliminary prerequisite to the making
of an order. Their Honours observed that
a term such as “a clear case” is not necessarily a determiner of
order for costs should be made. All that was required or necessary is
that there are justifying circumstances.
(3) No one factor in
of the Act is determinative, and the Court may
give such weight as it considers relevant to any factor and there is nothing to
any one factor being the sole foundation for an order for costs
Fitzgerald v Fish
[2005] FamCA 158
(2005) 33 Fam LR 123
27 November 2024, the Court made orders and delivered reasons in proceedings
pursuant to
of the Act in relation to the parties’ one child. The
focus of the hearing was whether the child should live with the appellant
Town B or the respondent in Town C, where she had lived since early 2021.
final orders provided for the parties to share parental responsibility, for the
child to live with the respondent in Town C, and
for the child to spend time
with the appellant during school holidays in Town B.
18 December 2020, the parties reached an agreement which was embodied in a draft
Consent Order and provided, amongst other orders,
for the child to live with the
respondent in Town C (“the 2020 agreement”). The order was never
made and some two days
later on 20 December 2020, the respondent withdrew from
the 2020 agreement.
Notwithstanding
such prior agreement, the hearing was conducted on the basis that the child
would live either with the respondent
in Town C or the appellant in Town B.
the making of the final orders, the appellant sought an order for his costs on
an indemnity basis for a defined period between
18 December 2020 (being the date
of the 2020 agreement) to 7 March 2023 (being the date upon which his legal
representatives ceased
to act for him).
primary judge addressed the relevant considerations under s 117 of the Act
including having regard to the financial circumstances
of each party, observed
that neither party was in receipt of a grant of legal aid, recorded the various
arguments advanced by the
appellant in relation to what was contended to be the
respondent’s conduct including what it was that gave rise to a recusal
application, the 2020 agreement from which the respondent withdrew, accepted the
respondent’s position that the final orders
represented a more favourable
outcome to her than that embodied in the 2020 agreement and that neither party
had sought to narrow
the issues at hearing and concluded by finding:
the degree of detail in the agreement made on 18 December 2020, and given the
[respondent] withdrew from the agreement on 20
December 2020, the Court
considers as a highly material consideration her failure to present an
alternative proposal for the [appellant]’s
consideration.
the Court is satisfied that the [respondent] achieved a better outcome at trial.
The Court is not satisfied that the circumstances
render it just to make a costs
order against the [respondent] in favour of the [appellant]. The Court forms
this view after taking
into account and weighing all of the above
considerations.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
number of the grounds contend a denial of procedural fairness. Consistent with
authority such grounds will be dealt with first (
Royal Guardian Mortgage
Management Pty Ltd v Nguyen
(2016) 332 ALR 128 at [9]).
Ground 1: Procedural Unfairness: Improper acceptance of late
Notice to Dispute Facts.
Ground 2: Procedural Unfairness: Refusal of
adjournment.
Ground 11: Procedural Unfairness and mischaracterisation of the
costs application under s 117(2A)(g)
1, 2 and 11 as framed in the Notice of Appeal assert a denial of procedural
fairness. Whilst so framed, the appellant’s
Summary of Argument expanded
each ground to contend discretionary error.
1 contended that the appellant was denied procedural fairness in permitting the
respondent to rely on a late-filed Notice Disputing
Facts and that the primary
judge erred in his factual finding.
fairness concerns itself with fairness of the process, not fairness of the
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZSSJ
However, procedural fairness is not a one-way street. The court is
obliged to afford procedural fairness to all parties. The appellant
was heard on
his objection. He was not denied procedural fairness.
Notice to Admit Facts and a Notice Disputing Facts are entirely a creature of
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) (“the Rules”). While the Rules may record a process whereby a
fact can be denied, the Rules are designed to serve
the interests of justice to
both parties. The Full Court’s observations in
[2023] FedCFamC1A 30
, albeit it in a different context, are
[T]he Rules are a guide to sound forensic practice, not a judicial
straight-jacket. They are meant to be applied flexibly to meet
the ends of
justice. It does not matter that the appellant did not apply for relief from
compliance with the Rules. The appeal registrar
could act of his own volition
and was entitled to dispense with the Rules as needed ... to ensure the quick,
inexpensive and efficient
conduct of the proceedings
Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
the appellant contended a prejudice occasioned by permitting the respondent to
proceed upon the Notice Disputing Facts, we
are not satisfied that is so. No
aspect of the ruling prevented the appellant from making a submission which he
clearly did. In so
far as the appellant contended that the primary judge erred
in his factual finding, we are not satisfied that the factual error bears
materiality urged by the appellant. There is no merit to Ground 1.
2 contends the refusal to grant an adjournment amounted to a denial of
procedural fairness. The appellant was heard on his
application, and the
application was refused as the primary judge concluded that the interests of
justice required that the hearing
proceed. The primary judge’s
determination accorded with the observations of the Full Court in
[2025] FedCFamC1A 158
where their Honours observed:
on mid-trial adjournments are pre-eminently procedural decisions requiring
speedy disposition. The avoidance of undue delay
and the efficient use of public
resources are considerations which may transcend the individual interests of a
party, particularly
in litigation concerning children (
Aon Risk Services Aust
[2009] HCA 27
(2009) 239 CLR 175
–[26], [91]–[103],
[111]–[113] and [148]–[149];
Bloch v Bloch
[1981] HCA 56
(1981) 180 CLR
Sali v SPC Ltd
[1993] HCA 47
(1993) 116 ALR 625
at 628-629 and
are not satisfied that the appellant was denied procedural fairness. No error is
exposed by the refusal of an adjournment. There
is no merit to Ground 2.
Ground 11, the appellant contends that the primary judge failed to afford him
procedural fairness by not raising with him during
the hearing that he should
have adduced evidence as to the quantum of costs he sought and by so doing
“unfairly characteris[ed]”
the application as incomplete.
is apposite to record that the appellant sought to conduct the hearing on the
basis that the Court first determine whether an order
should be made and at some
later date determine the quantum. The appellant contended that he proceeded on
that basis as that was
how he interpreted the Rules. The primary judge
for reasons which do not appear from the [appellant]’s material, he does
not present his entire case in respect of costs in
the documents he filed. In
his written submissions the [appellant] refers to his application being made in
two stages, the first
stage seeking to establish costs liability, and if
liability is established, stage two determining the quantum of costs through
or taxation. The [appellant] further states that the submissions and
his affidavit form part of the first stage and do not attempt
to quantify the
costs, that is do not address stage two.
programming orders for the costs determination (made on 30 January 2025 and 7
March 2025) do not give any indication that the
process will extend beyond an
oral hearing. The oral hearing was only programmed by orders made on 7 March
2025 because the [appellant]
availed himself of the opportunity, afforded by the
orders made on 30 January 2025, to request such a hearing.
party was required to, and has had the opportunity to, bring forward all of the
evidence upon which that party relied prior to
the oral hearing and this is
apparent from the terms of the orders.
(Emphasis in original)
part of the orders made by the primary judge in preparation for the costs
hearing would have led the appellant to believe that
the hearing was to be
conducted in the manner he imagined.
appellant’s contention as to error is erroneous. A court is not required
to provide advance notice of its determination.
While a court may be required to
provide an unrepresented person with guidance as to its procedures (
Litigants in Person Guidelines
[2001] FamCA 348
(2001) FLC 93-072)
such guidance does not
extend to the provision of legal advice. To do that which the appellant submits
the primary judge should have
done would be procedurally unfair to the
respondent.
obligation fell upon the appellant to present his case in its entirety. The
settled jurisprudence of the court and the Rules make
plain that the court
retains a wide discretion in the way in which it determines costs (see r
335(1)). It is implicit in such an
application that a party who fails to adduce
some evidence as to the quantum of costs and how it was calculated does so at
is no merit to Ground 11.
Ground 3: Failure to compel or engage with disclosure
appellant submits the primary judge erred as follows:
primary judge erred by failing to compel or meaningfully engage with the
[respondent]’s lack of disclosure; the absence
of disclosure was not
addressed in any procedural rulings or fact-finding, thereby depriving the
[appellant] of procedural fairness
and preventing relevant evidence from being
considered.
focus of the appellant’s submission was the respondent’s affidavit
which contained what he described as unsubstantiated
assertions addressing the
reasons why the respondent withdrew from the 2020 agreement and how much worse
off financially she would
have been under the 2020 agreement. The appellant
submitted she failed to disclose documents that went to such an assertion and
the primary judge failed to address the issue of disclosure.
is apposite to observe that a judge is not required to address every factual
contention or every submission a party makes (
Whisprun Pty Ltd v Dixon
[2003] HCA 48
[2003] 200 ALR 447).
However, supposing for the moment the correctness of the
appellant’s submission, then the respondent’s failure to disclose
provided the platform for the appellant to invite the primary judge to infer by
its absence that the evidence would not have assisted
the respondent.
Consequently, there was no prejudice to the appellant. More pertinent however is
the absence of any finding by the
primary judge that the respondent would have
been worse off. Consequently, the error if it exists is devoid of the necessary
of materiality. As Kirby J observed in
150. [A]n appellate court, invited to review the
exercise of discretion at first instance will avoid an overly critical, or
pernickety, analysis of the primary judge's reasons, given the large element of
judgment, discretion and intuition which is involved.
Only if a material error
of the kind warranting disturbance of a discretionary decision is established is
the appellate court authorised
to set aside the primary decision, to substitute
its own exercise of discretion or to require that it be re-exercised on a
(Footnotes omitted)
is no merit to Ground 3.
Ground 4: Failure to consider relevant conduct under
Ground 4, the appellant contends the primary judge erred as follows:
determining conduct did not warrant costs, the primary judge failed to consider
that the recusal application arose directly from
the [respondent]’s
conduct, namely the ex-parte communications from her solicitor’s office to
Moncrieff J Chambers.
appellant’s ground and submission misquote the primary judge’s
reasons. Contrary to how the ground was framed, the
primary judge did consider
the recusal application but concluded that he was not satisfied that the
respondent’s opposition
to the recusal application constituted conduct
justifying a costs order. Having given reasons as to why it was not relevant,
primary judge was not obliged to engage with the factual contentions
anterior to the making of the recusal application nor could
he in the absence of
reasons explaining why the judge recused himself (appellant’s Written
Submissions filed 28 September 2025,
paragraph 65).
is no merit to Ground 4.
Ground 5: Misapplication of
s 117(2A)(e):
Wholly unsuccessful
proceedings improperly dismissed as irrelevant
appellant contended the primary judge erred as follows:
primary judge misapplied
s 117(2A)(e)
by failing to observe it as a mandatory
consideration. Having found that the [respondent]’s opposition to the
recusal application
wholly unsuccessful, the judge was bound to weigh that fact
in the exercise of the costs discretion.
of the considerations pursuant to
of the Act are mandatory.
Antithetical to that submitted by the appellant, the primary judge did weigh the
recusal application in
the exercise of discretion by finding that it was not a
relevant consideration. Dissatisfaction with a finding does not without more
establish discretionary error. There is no merit to this ground.
Ground 6: Error of Principle: Applied incorrect test under
appellant contends that the primary judge erred as follows:
primary judge misapplied
s 117(2A)(f)
by treating the finding that the
[respondent] obtained a more favourable outcome at trial as determinative,
rather than addressing
the correct question — whether it was reasonable to
reject the offer at the time it was made.
6 to 9 deal with asserted error in relation to
s 117(2A)(f)
of the Act (as it
then was) and will be dealt with collectively.
Ground 7: Failure to assess the reasonableness of the
[appellant]’s offer in the context of when it was made under
s 117(2A)(f)
appellant contends the primary judge erred as follows:
misapplication of
s 117(2A)(f)
amounts to an error of principle, as it treated
the ultimate trial outcome as dispositive rather than addressing the statutory
requirement
of assessing reasonableness at the point of offer.
Ground 8: Failure to assess whether rejection of the offer was
unreasonable in the context of when it was made under
s 117(2A)(f)
appellant contends that the primary judge erred as follows:
primary judge erred by failing to assess whether the [respondent]’s
rejection of the 18 December 2020 mediated agreement
was unreasonable in the
context of when it occurred, as required under
s 117(2A)(f)
, and instead
improperly treated the subsequent trial outcome as determinative.
Ground 9: Failure to consider financial detriment to the
[respondent] arising from final orders under
s 117(2A)(f)
appellant contends that the primary judge erred as follows:
primary judge erred by failing to consider material evidence and submissions
relevant to
s 117(2A)(f)
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), namely the
financial detriment to the [respondent] under the final orders compared to the
2020 agreement.
subsection invites the court’s attention, assuming its relevance, to the
fact of an offer and its terms. Contrary to that
submitted by the appellant at
paragraph 47 of his
Summary of Argument, the primary
judge did not find the fact that the outcome was more favourable as
determinative. It was but one
of many considerations as made clear at [31] of
the primary judge’s reasons. It is erroneous to contend, as the appellant
at paragraphs 46, 48, 50, 51, 52, 58 and 59 of his Summary of Argument,
that the correct question is one of reasonableness or that
there is a statutory
requirement to consider reasonableness. There is no such statutory
requirement.
reasonableness of a party in refusing an offer is but one of many
considerations. To describe the primary judge’s conclusions
at [31] as an
error of principle is specious. The primary judge’s assessment that the
outcome to the respondent was more favourable
was open and his treatment of it
as a relevant consideration was entirely consistent with authority.
respect of Ground 9, no aspect of
s 117(2A)(f)
of the Act requires or mandates
as contended for by the appellant a consideration of the financial detriment to
the respondent of
not accepting the 2020 agreement as a matter relevant to the
question of costs. In circumstances where there is no such mandate,
constitute an error to not have regard to it.
is no merit in Grounds 6 to 9.
Ground 10: The primary judge erred in finding that the
[respondent] obtained a more favourable outcome at trial than under the consent
orders dated 18 December 2020 when assessing
s 117(2A)(f)
primary judge compared the two positions, articulated by the parties at [19] and
[20] of the primary judge’s reasons. At
[21] the primary judge accepted
the respondent’s summary as more accurate. No aspect of the
appellant’s submissions challenges
the primary judge’s finding as an
error of fact. The primary judge provided reasons for rejecting the
appellant’s submission
that the respondent’s outcome was worse than
what she might have obtained under the 2020 agreement and, providing reasons for
so concluding based upon the difference in the two positions as to parental
responsibility, school holiday time, attendance at extracurricular
and apparent flexibility to the appellant. The outcome to the respondent of the
proceedings was but one aspect of the
primary judge’s determination. No
aspect of the appellant’s submissions is demonstrative of discretionary
error on the
part of the primary judge.
is no merit to Ground 10.
Ground 12: Error in treating the [appellant]’s litigation
conduct as relevant under
s 117(2A)(g)
appellant contended that the primary judge erred as follows:
Court erred in treating the [appellant]’s response to the repudiated
agreement as relevant adverse conduct under
s 117(2A)(g)
, and thereby based the
decision on a legally flawed characterisation of the proceedings’ history.
appellant’s ground and submission fail to properly address the primary
judge’s reasons. The primary judge addressed
both parties’ conduct.
In that respect, the primary judge observed as follows:
neither party sought to narrow the issues for determination at trial in light of
the document signed on 18 December 2020. In particular,
the [appellant] did not
thereafter present his case on an open basis (including at trial) that the
relocation was conceded. The contrary
proposition was vigorously argued by the
[appellant] at trial, and formally pursued since 13 August 2021, despite the
[appellant]
presumably considering that it was in the child’s best
interests for the relocation to occur, in combination with the other
orders with
which he agreed.
the [respondent] determined to proceed to trial and made no further
counter-offer after 18 December 2020, despite the principal
issue of relocation
being agreed between the parties. The [respondent]’s explanation is that
she believed there were a number
of intractable issues dealt with during the
eight-hour mediation style conference on 18 December 2020 which could not be
prior to trial. The [respondent] specifically identifies the degree of
flexibility given to the [appellant] and her concern about
the possibility of
ongoing litigation as a result of that flexibility.
(Emphasis in original)
disrespectfully characterising the primary judge’s consideration of the
appellant’s conduct as “legally
flawed” and an application of
the “wrong test” (appellant’s Summary of Argument filed 21
August 2025, paragraphs
94 and 95) he cites no authority for such specious
contention. The appellant was perfectly entitled having agreed to one course of
action to resile from it, as was the respondent. What he could not escape was
the logical conclusion properly drawn by the primary
judge. The conduct of both
parties in the way they conducted the hearing relative to the 2020 agreement was
a highly relevant consideration
particularly where one sought the other pay
their costs on an indemnity basis. There is no merit to Ground 12.
Ground 13: Failure to consider post-agreement events that
justified the [appellant]’s position under
s 117(2A)(g)
appellant contends that the primary judge erred as follows:
primary judge erred in criticising the [appellant] for not narrowing the issues
at trial, by failing to consider material factual
developments that occurred
after the December 2020 consent orders were signed and withdrawn, which
reasonably justified the [appellant]’s
decision to continue contesting
relocation.
was a highly relevant and pertinent observation for the primary judge to record
in his reasons, particularly in circumstances where
the appellant sought an
order for costs, that the appellant had maintained a position contrary to that
submitted by him in the 2020
agreement. It only became a relevant consideration
in circumstances where the appellant sought an order for costs. No aspect of the
ground or the submission points to, let alone establishes, discretionary
Ground 14: Error in considering the [respondent]'s assertion
that intractable differences were dealt with in the agreement of 18 December
s 117(2A)(g)
appellant contends that the primary judge erred as follows:
Court erred in considering the [respondent]'s explanation without evaluating its
credibility or testing it against the objective
documentary evidence. This
failure contributed to an erroneous finding that her refusal to proceed with the
agreement or to make
further offers was not unreasonable under
s 117(2A)(f).
appellant’s submission is misconceived. The primary judge did not make a
finding accepting the respondent’s evidence
of “intractable
issues” nor did the primary judge make a finding that the
respondent’s refusal to proceed with
the 2020 agreement or to make further
offers was not unreasonable. Quite to the contrary, the primary judge’s
reasons reveal
a criticism of her failure to advance an alternate proposal.
There is no merit to Ground 14.
Ground 15: Error in considering the [respondent]’s
assertions about flexibility as a justification for withdrawing from the
agreement under
s 117(2A)(g)
appellant contended error on the part of the primary judge as follows:
failing to evaluate the credibility of the [respondent]’s retrospective
justification and by treating it as reasonable under
s 117(2A)(f)
, the judge
reached a conclusion that was inconsistent with the evidentiary record. This
error materially affected the assessment
of whether the [respondent] had not
acted unreasonably in withdrawing from the agreement and proceeding to trial,
and therefore impacted
the outcome on costs.
ground and the submission are without merit and misstate the primary
judge’s reasons as explained above. The primary judge
did not make any
finding that the respondent’s withdrawal from the 2020 agreement was
reasonable. Having not made such a finding
there was no error of fact and
consequently the ground and submission is erroneous.
Ground 16: Failure to consider the proportionality of the
litigation under
s 117(2A)(g)
appellant contends that the primary judge erred as follows:
failing to consider whether the pursuit of trial was proportionate to the issues
in dispute and the extent of the differences in
the competing outcomes, the
primary judge erred in not giving proper effect to
s 117(2A)(g).
primary judge did consider the proportionality of the parties’ respective
positions, made clear by the primary judge’s
reasons at [28] and [29]
where the primary judge observed that neither party sought to moderate their
respective positions. There
is no merit to Ground 16.
DISPOSITION
the above reasons, the appellant’s Notice of Appeal will be
respondent sought an order that the appellant pay her costs in the sum of
$8,703.55. The appellant opposed an order for costs.
In circumstances where the
appeal was without merit and will be dismissed, we are satisfied it is
appropriate to make a costs order.
court has the power to fix a sum for costs to avoid delay, aggravation and
further costs (
Graham & Squibb
[2019] FamCAFC 33
(2019) FLC 93-892).
sufficient evidence before us to fix costs in a set sum. To do otherwise, given
the high degree of conflict and the inability
of these parties to agree, would
be to condemn them to further disputation and costs. We propose to adopt the
approach taken in
Warbrick & Warbrick (No 2)
(2021) FLC 94-030 at
[13] where the Full Court observed that it did “not intend to permit the
costs question to become in effect
satellite litigation” and will fix the
amount of costs. Having regard to the Itemised Costs Account filed on behalf of
respondent, we are satisfied that the circumstances justify an order in the
sum of $5,000.
I certify that the preceding fifty-eight (58)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justices
Campton, Christie &
Dated: 24 October 2025
RTF format (469 KB)
Signed PDF/A format