Kantibye v Chief of Army (No 2) [2022] ADFDAT 4 (21 October 2022)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Kantibye v Chief of Army (No 2)
Appeal from:
Defence Force Magistrate
File number:
DFDAT 2 of 2022
Judgment of:
LOGAN J (PRESIDENT), BRERETON ja (DEPUTY
PRESIDENT) AND PERRY J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
DEFENCE AND WAR
– appeal against
conviction by Defence Force Magistrate (DFM) – where appellant gave
evidence at trial – where
DFM gave self
direction –
formulation and application of
direction – held that DFM
conflated second and third limbs of
direction and therefore did
not in fact apply the direction – error of law – appellant deprived
of reasonable possibility
of acquittal – miscarriage of justice –
conviction quashed and retrial ordered
Legislation:
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Crimes Act 1900
Cases cited:
Angre v Chief of Navy (No 3)
[2017] ADFDAT
Boyson v Chief of Army
[2019] ADFDAT 2
Coulter v R
(1988) 164 CLR 350
[1988] HCA 3
De Silva v R
(2019) 268 CLR 57
[2019] HCA 48
[2022] NSWCCA 165
Kearns v Chief of Army
[2022] ADFDAT 3
Liberato v R
(1985) 159 CLR 507
[1985] HCA 66
(2020) 268 CLR 123
[2020] HCA 12
Private R Army v Chief of Army
[2022] ADFDAT 1
[2020] NSWCCA 81
(2011) 243 CLR 400
[2011] HCA 13
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr J Nottle
Solicitor for the Appellant:
David Healey Solicitors
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr A Johnson
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Office of the Director of Military Prosecutions
DFDAT 2 of 2022
SHADI ABDU KANTIBYE
CHIEF OF ARMY
LOGAN J, BRERETON JA AND PERRY J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
be no publication of any matters that identify or are likely to identify the
complainant.
appellant be granted the requisite extension of time within which to appeal and
the appeal be heard instanter.
as the same may be necessary, having regard to the grounds pleaded in the notice
of appeal, the appellant be granted leave
appeal be allowed and the conviction of the appellant by a Defence Force
Magistrate on 10 December 2021 be quashed.
be a new trial of the appellant in respect of the service offence
REASONS FOR DECISION
THE TRIBUNAL:
Introduction
appellant Private Shadi Abdu Kantibye was convicted on 10 December 2021 after
trial by a Defence Force Magistrate on one count
of act of indecency, contrary
Crimes Act 1900
Defence Force Discipline Act
(Cth) (DFDA),
At the trial there was no issue that the
appellant was and knew that he was a defence member, or that the alleged act was
The appellant and the complainant knew each other and had had
consensual sexual intercourse on prior occasions. The central issue
trial was whether in the early hours of 23 February 2020 at Bandiana in the
State of Victoria, the appellant entered the complainant’s
sexually touched her. The DFM expressed himself to be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the appellant had done so,
and convicted the appellant.
the conclusion of the hearing of the appeal on 22 July 2022, the Tribunal made
orders that:
(1) There be no publication of any matters that identify or are likely to
identify the complainant;
(2) The appellant be granted the requisite extension of time within which to
appeal and the appeal be heard instanter;
(3) Insofar as the same may be necessary, having regard to the grounds pleaded
in the Notice of Appeal, the appellant be granted
leave to appeal;
(4) The appeal be allowed and the conviction of the appellant by a Defence Force
Magistrate on 10 December 2021 be quashed; and
(5) There be a new trial of the appellant in respect of the service offence
Tribunal indicated that its reasons would be elaborated and published in due
course. These are the Tribunal’s reasons for
making those
The prosecution case
appellant and the complainant met during their recruit training, which commenced
at Kapooka on 29 October 2019. Following completion
of their recruit training
both were posted to the Army Logistics Training Centre at Bandiana for their
initial employment training
commencing on 5 February 2020. There, they were
accommodated in the same accommodation block. The appellant’s room was on
the ground floor, and the complainant’s on the first floor. Between 11
and 21 February 2020 they had consensual sexual intercourse
prosecution case was that on 23 February 2020 at about 3:30 am, the appellant
knocked on the complainant’s door, entered
her room uninvited, climbed
into her bed, and touched her sexually for a period of about 45 minutes before
leaving when she refused
to have further sexual intercourse.
appellant voluntarily participated in a record of interview with service police
on 21 July 2020, in the course of which he denied
the allegation and said that
he did not go to the complainant’s room that night. His version was that
he had been at Paddy’s
Bar in Albury with other trainees, and had returned
to the base at approximately 3:30 am, and then remained on the veranda outside
the accommodation block with others, including Private Mackie, for some time.
In a later record of interview, he again denied that
he entered the
complainant’s room at the relevant time. When charged, the appellant gave
notice of his intention to rely on
the trial, the complainant gave evidence that on 23 February 2020, at
approximately 3:30 am, the appellant came to her room, was
let into the
room by her, climbed into her bed and proceeded to touch her sexually.
“recent complaint” witnesses gave evidence in the prosecution case.
So did a number of other witnesses, including
Private Mackie and Private
Dingley, who attended Paddy’s Bar or were with the appellant or were
otherwise in the vicinity of
the accommodation block at around the relevant
appellant gave evidence, consistent with his two records of interview. Good
character evidence was also tendered on his behalf.
The DFM’s decision
appellant having given evidence, the DFM appropriately gave himself a
“Liberato direction” [as to which see
Liberato v R
[1985] HCA 66
[1985] HCA 66]
, which is set out later in these reasons [below
it came to considering the appellant’s evidence, the DFM began by
observing “I cannot say that I found the accused
as impressive a witness
as the complainant” and then that he had carefully observed the accused in
his two records of interview
and when giving evidence and found that he was
“less than convincing” [T401.10-14]. For that conclusion, the DFM
three reasons. The first was that in his first record of interview, the
appellant confidently invoked Private Mackie as an alibi,
whereas the DFM found
that he must have known Private Mackie was very drunk, concluding that
“such confident reliance on Private
Mackie as a witness who would put the
accused with him, and at a different location at the relevant time, [was]
misplaced, and most
unconvincing” [T401.32-25]. The second was that the
DFM formed the view that the appellant displayed an attitude of arrogance
some of his answers in respect of his relationship with the complainant at
Bandiana. The third was that the appellant in his
second record of interview
was “unnecessarily defensive and combative”, having
“repeatedly asked for clarification
terms and what was being said about him. Such behaviour also causes me to find
the accused’s
evidence unconvincing” [T402.01-07]. As will be
explained, the appellant challenged this reasoning.
learned DFM then said [T402.22-27]:
Although I accept that the accused was not shaken under cross examination, I
find that his evidence was unconvincing. Accordingly,
I set the evidence of the
accused to one side, and return to the rest of the evidence and ask myself
whether, on consideration of
such evidence as I do accept, I am satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the prosecution has proved each of the elements of the
offence in question.
having reviewed the other evidence [T402.29], the DFM accepted the evidence of
the complainant beyond a reasonable doubt and
found the elements of the offence
charged proven beyond reasonable doubt [T405.20-34].
Extension of time
appellant having been convicted on 10 December 2021 did not file his appeal
until 3 May 2022 and requires an extension of time
in which to do so.
his conviction, the outcome of the automatic review under DFDA
communicated to the appellant on 27 January 2022. He then petitioned for a
review under
on 7 February 2022, the result of which was communicated
to him on 28 March 2022. His appeal was filed on 3 May 2022.
the Tribunal has not infrequently observed, it is reasonable that an appellant
should exhaust other review mechanisms – including
the automatic review
, and a petition of review under
– before being expected
to file an appeal to the Tribunal [see for example
Boyson v Chief of Army
[2019] ADFDAT 2
, at [44]]. Indeed, the Tribunal has previously suggested that
amendment of
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
(Cth) (Appeals Act) ought to be considered, so as to provide that time for
appeal runs at least from notification of the results
of a review under s 152,
or even notification of results of a review under s 154 if one is sought
Private R Army v Chief of Army
[2022] ADFDAT 1
Chief of Army
[2022] ADFDAT 3
, at [9]]. The respondent did not oppose an
extension of time.
Leave to appeal
to appeal to the Tribunal is required, except on a question of law (Appeals Act,
The purpose of a requirement for leave to appeal in this context is
generally to serve as a filter on unmeritorious or trifling
appeals, so as to
restrict the appeal procedure to appropriate matters and thereby promote the
efficiency of the appeal procedure,
and leave would not be refused if it
appeared there had been a miscarriage of justice warranting the quashing of a
conviction [
Coulter v R
(1988) 164 CLR 350
[1988] HCA 3
Angre v Chief of Navy (No 3)
[2017] ADFDAT 2
, at [42] – [43]].
the grounds of appeal included contentions that the conviction was unreasonable,
or unsafe and unsatisfactory. Such grounds
are not questions of law and require
leave. As will appear, however, the critical ground was a question of law, for
which leave
was not required.
Reviewing the interview footage
of the grounds of appeal challenged the DFM’s rejection of the
appellant’s account on the basis that, in his second
record of interview
(or ‘ERISP’), he appeared unnecessarily defensive and combative.
The DFM said [T401.45 – 402.07]:
With respect to the second interview conducted on 1 September 2020, that is
exhibit 22, the accused, in my view, became unnecessarily
defensive and
combative at a very early stage of proceedings. Directly after Sergeant Jones
explained that he was conducting further
investigations into the allegations,
which were succinctly summarised, the accused then repeatedly asked for
clarification, what
allegedly happened, in specific terms, and what was being
said about him. Such behaviour also causes me to find the accused’s
evidence unconvincing.
a time when the appellant’s grounds included the factual grounds that the
conviction was “unreasonable” or “unsafe
unsatisfactory”, the appellant requested that the Tribunal view the
relevant portion of the ERISP. In
(2020) 268 CLR 123
, the High Court endorsed its earlier rejection in
243 CLR 400
[2011] HCA 13
, at [31], of the proposition that where a video
recording of a witness’s evidence at trial was available, proper discharge
of the appellate Court’s function of independently reviewing and assessing
the evidence required a viewing of the recording.
The Court said (at
The position maintained by the respondent [that the existence of the recordings
was enough to make it appropriate for them to be
watched by the Court of Appeal]
is not one that should generally be adopted by courts of criminal appeal. In
, French CJ, Gummow and Kiefel JJ rejected the suggestion that the
mere availability of a video-recording of a witness’ evidence
meant that the proper discharge of the function of the appellate court, to make
its independent assessment of the evidence,
necessitated a viewing of the
recording. There may be cases where there is something particular in the
video-recording that is apt
to affect an appellate court’s assessment of
the evidence, which can only be discerned visually or by sound. In such cases,
there will be a real forensic purpose to the appellate court’s examination
of the video-recording. But such cases will be exceptional,
and ordinarily it
would be expected that the forensic purpose that justifies such a course will be
adopted by the parties, rather
than upon independent scrutiny by the members of
[2020] NSWCCA 81
, the NSW Court of Criminal Appeal acceded to
an appellant’s submission that the Court should view the recording of a
of interviews, notwithstanding that no particular forensic reason for
doing so was identified. As was explained by Hamill J, with
whom Brereton JA
and Fagan J agreed, an understanding of the complainant’s evidence was
facilitated by reviewing her interview.
least when the appeal included contentions that the conviction was unreasonable
or unsafe and unsatisfactory, the present was a
significantly stronger case than
for acceding to the submission that the Tribunal should review the
relevant part of the ERISP. First, the relevant part –
a relatively short
excerpt – was identified. Secondly, the appellant wished to submit that
the DFM erred in considering the
appellant’s response on that occasion to
be “unnecessarily defensive and combative” such as to contribute to
conclusion that his evidence was unconvincing. Where the very same material
on which the DFM relied for that conclusion –
the ERISP – was
available to the Tribunal, that submission could not fairly be evaluated without
reviewing that material.
Accordingly, the Tribunal acceded to the request that
Grounds of appeal
the hearing, the appellant abandoned grounds of appeal which complained that he
was denied an opportunity for an acquittal
by reason of an oversight of his
counsel in failing to cross-examine a witness on a matter important to his alibi
defence. Late
in the hearing, the appellant abandoned the grounds of appeal
which complained that the conviction was unreasonable, or unsafe and
unsatisfactory. Thus the contention that it was not open to the DFM on the
evidence to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the
appellant’s guilt
was not pressed. However, such a conclusion was not inevitable.
the appellant also complained, not without force, that the three reasons given
by the DFM for finding the appellant “unconvincing”
were not good
reasons for doing so, his main complaint was that although the DFM at the outset
correctly stated the
direction, he did not in fact apply
stating at the outset of his reasons the directions he gave himself, the DFM
relevantly said [T377.27 – 378.24]:
As I have already stated, the accused does not have to give evidence or call
other witnesses to give evidence on his behalf; that
he has done so does not
mean that he has assumed the responsibility of proving his innocence. The
burden of proof has not shifted
His evidence, and that of those who have provided statements in respect of his
good character ... is added to the evidence called
by the prosecution. The
prosecution has the burden of proving each of the elements of the offence beyond
reasonable doubt, and it
is upon the whole of the evidence that I must be
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the prosecution has proved the case,
the accused may be convicted.
In a criminal trial, it is not a question of my making a choice between the
evidence of the complainant and the other prosecution
witnesses, and the
evidence of the accused and others who have attested to his otherwise good
The proper approach is to understand that the prosecution case depends upon my
accepting that evidence of the complainant was true
and accurate, beyond
reasonable doubt, despite the sworn evidence of the accused.
I have directed myself that I do not have to believe the accused is telling the
truth, before he is entitled to be found not guilty.
Here, it is often said
that usually, one of three possibilities results; that is, where there is
defence evidence:
(1) First, I may think that the accused’s evidence is credible and
reliable, and that it provides a satisfying answer to the
prosecution’s
case. If so, my verdict would be not guilty.
(2) Secondly, I might think that although the accused’s evidence was not
convincing, it leaves me in a state of reasonable
doubt as to what the true
position was. If so, my verdict would be not guilty.
(3) Thirdly, I might think that the accused’s evidence should not be
accepted. If that is my view, I must be careful not to
jump from that view to
an automatic conclusion of guilt. If I find the accused’s evidence
unconvincing, I must set it to one
side and go back to the rest of the evidence
and ask myself whether, on consideration of such evidence as I do accept, I am
beyond reasonable doubt that the prosecution has proved each of the
elements of the events in question.
respect, use of the word “unconvincing” in the third limb tends to
conflate the second and the third limb which,
as will ultimately be seen, is
what happened in this case. The approach required of the judge of the facts
embodied in the “
direction” is that:
(1) if the accused’s evidence is believed, the accused must be
(2) if the accused’s evidence is difficult to accept (or unconvincing) but
may nonetheless, as a matter of reasonable possibility,
be true, the accused
must be acquitted;
(3) if the accused’s evidence is disbelieved, then it should be put to one
side, but the question remains, has the prosecution,
on the basis of evidence
that is accepted, proved the accused’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt.
Liberato v R
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
[1985] HCA 66 (Brennan
De Silva v R
(2019) 268 CLR 57
[2019] HCA 48
, at [12] (Kiefel CJ, Bell,
Gageler, Gordon and Nettle JJ);
[2022] NSWCCA 165
, at [51]].
Nonetheless,
had this been a trial by Court Martial, in which the reasons of the tribunal of
fact are inscrutable, the appeal would
have failed: the direction as initially
stated by the DFM and set out above was not on its face obviously erroneous.
However, in
a judge alone trial, the appellate Court is able to see how the
judge (or here, the DFM) applied the direction and whether in fact
complied with. It is one thing to set out a litany of directions at the outset
of reasons for decision; what is really of
importance is whether the later
reasoning and analysis of the evidence reflects obedience to those directions.
Here, as has been
noted, the DFM said: “I cannot say that I found the
accused as impressive a witness as the complainant” [T401.10-11],
he was “less than convincing” [T401.13-14]. After explaining his
three reasons for that view, he concluded
that the appellant’s
“evidence was unconvincing” [T402.23]. The learned DFM then
immediately proceeded: “accordingly,
I set the evidence of the accused to
one side...” [T402.23-24]. The DFM did not address the crucial second
question, namely
whether the appellant’s evidence, though unconvincing,
nonetheless as a matter of reasonable possibility might be true, or,
words of the DFM’s direction, whether “it leaves me in a state of
reasonable doubt”. The pre-condition
to embarking on the third limb
enquiry is not merely that the accused’s evidence is unconvincing, but
that it is disbelieved
in the sense that it could not as a matter of reasonable
possibility be true. The learned DFM did not undertake that step. The
not state that he disbelieved the appellant, nor that his evidence could not as
a matter of reasonable possibility be true.
This is not a merely formulaic
matter: it is an important element of judicial discipline to state “I
disbelieve the accused’s
evidence” or “the accused’s
evidence could not as a matter of reasonable possibility be true”, because
requires the judge’s mind to address that critical issue, which is
fundamental to the operation of the burden and standard
of proof in matters
involving criminal conviction.
Accordingly,
the learned DFM’s reasons disclosed that although originally reciting an
appropriate
direction, he did not in fact apply it and thereby
erred in law. The appellant was thereby deprived of a reasonable possibility
an acquittal, and thus a substantial miscarriage of justice occurred.
Conclusion and an observation
was for those reasons that we concluded that the appeal must be allowed and made
the orders which were made on 22 July 2022.
further matter, however, warrants comment. The events the subject of and
surrounding the charge took place in barracks accommodation
at Bandiana. The
participants and witnesses were trainees on their initial employment training.
They were, at least generally speaking,
young soldiers, who had only just
completed their recruit training at Kapooka. The environment, in which the
complainant and the
appellant had been able to have consensual intercourse in
her barracks room on multiple occasions, was one which the complainant
in her diary as follows:
So, [initial employment training] is so much better than Kapooka, holy shit. I
really like my course mates!! I don’t have
any room mate which is great
too. ... Frat is still a thing here but not policed like at all. ....
Observations
have been made elsewhere about the apparent absence of the supervision of
soldiers in their lines, which is traditionally
the immediate responsibility of
non-commissioned officers, subject to the overarching scrutiny of an appointed
duty officer. In
the operational context, the insidious effects of an absence
of supervision and inspection of the lines and personnel was noted by
Afghanistan Inquiry [
Afghanistan Inquiry Report
, Chapter 3.03 at
[51]]. In the present case, adherence to traditional practices in respect of
supervision of junior soldiers in
their lines might well have averted any
I certify that the preceding thirty-one (31)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of the
Honourable Justices
Logan (President), Brereton (Deputy President) and Perry
Dated: 21 October 2022
RTF format (329 KB)
Signed PDF/A format