Bernice Botha v Christian Postlethwaite [2025] ATMO 216 (21 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE
REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Opposition by Bernice Botha
to registration of trade mark application 2369181 (44) –
– in the name of Christina Postlethwaite
Nicholas Smith
REPRESENTATION:
Opponent: Self-represented
Applicant: YIP Legal Pty
2025 ATMO 216
Trade Marks Act 1995
opposition:
considered – ground established – registration
decision concerns an opposition brought by Bernice Botha
’) to the registration of the trade mark which is
the subject of the application detailed below in the name of Christina
Postlethwaite
Application Number:
Filing Date
Therapy services; Psychological counselling; Psychological or psychiatric
counselling; Psychotherapy; Hypnotherapy; Meditation therapy
services; Art
therapy; Mental health counselling; Life coaching being psychological
counselling services
Applicant’s Services
Trade Mark:
otherwise indicated, any references to sections or regulations in this decision
are references to sections or regulations of
Trade Marks Act 1995
Trade Marks Regulations 1995
Regulations
’), respectively.
the advertisement of the application’s acceptance for possible
registration, the Opponent filed a Notice of Intention
to Oppose the
registration followed by a Statement of Grounds and Particulars
’) on 27 January 2024. The SGP raised grounds of
opposition under
. The Applicant filed a Notice of Intention to
Defend on 16 February 2024.
parties filed the following evidence in this matter:
Declarant and Position
Annexures or Exhibits
Evidence in support
Bernice Maryna Botha, the Opponent (‘
declaration
Evidence in answer
Christina Postlethwaite, the Applicant (‘
Postlethwaite
declaration
CP-1 to CP-22
Evidence in reply
Bernice Maryna Botha (‘
Applicant claims that certain information in its EIA is confidential but does
not identify the information with any specificity.
I note that, if a party
considers a piece of information to be commercially sensitive it must identify
that information with specificity.
If in my summary of the evidence, I have
disclosed information that is sensitive, then this is an issue that has arisen
party not specifically identifying that information as sensitive.
the time allowed for filing evidence had ended, the parties were given an
opportunity to request an oral hearing or a hearing
by written submissions. On
2 December 2024 the Applicant requested a hearing by submissions and paid the
appropriate fee. The matter
was set down for a hearing on 8 August 2025. In
line with usual practice, a letter was sent to the parties on 26 May 2025 which
contained a schedule for the provision of written summaries of submissions to be
filed prior to the hearing. Neither party filed
any submissions.
am a delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks (‘Registrar’) and I am
to decide the opposition as required by
which provides that, unless the
proceedings are discontinued, dismissed, or have lapsed under s 54A the
Registrar must, at the end,
(a) to refuse to register the
trade mark; or
(b) to register the trade mark (with or without conditions or limitations)
in respect of the goods and/or services then specified
in the application;
having regard to the extent (if any) to which any ground on which the
application was opposed has been established.
In doing so I take account of the written record comprised of the materials
mentioned in the preceding paragraphs.
The Opponent
Opponent is an individual who has provided individual and couples counselling in
Gold Coast since 2021.
relevant claims/statements in Botha 1 are be summarised below. I note that much
of the material in Botha 1 consists of submissions
rather than evidence which is
not necessary to summarise in any great detail.
The Opponent
owns the business name Anchor Counselling Services under which she has provided
her counselling services since 2021.
The Opponent advertises her services from
her website at www.anchorccs.com, ‘ccs’ being an obvious acronym for
‘counselling
& coaching services’.
The Opponent has
developed a significant reputation in her mark, having traded for three years
and having an Instagram Account under
the handle @anchor_ccs.
‘anchor’ is descriptive of a procedure used in counselling services,
where an internal response is associated
with an external or internal trigger to
re-access the response. This technique is used for social anxiety and
cognitive psychology.
The Applicant
has only operated under their business since 12 February 2023 and in any event
does not use the Trade Mark to represent
their business, rather they use the
term ANCHOR CLINCAL COUNSELLING SERVICES.
annexures to Botha 1 include evidence of the Opponent’s business name and
domain name registrations, Instagram site and
copies of articles that refer to
the anchor technique.
2 consists primarily of submissions on the grounds of oppositions and
suggestions that the Applicant, when conducting its due
diligence, should have
taken a broader approach in searching for entities using the Trade Mark,
including for providers outside Melbourne.
The Applicant
Applicant is an individual who specialises in trauma and clinical anxiety. She
commenced practice in Melbourne under the business
name Anchor Clinical
Counselling Services (AnchorCCS) in February 2023.
relevant claims/statements in the Postlethwaite declaration can be summarised as
The Applicant
chose the Trade Mark for a number of reasons, including for personal reasons
connected to the fishing industry. In
addition, on a professional level, the
Applicant considers the term anchor or anchoring is a technique is used to
assist in trauma
therapy when a client becomes distressed.
The Applicant
did a business name search prior to commencing their business and launched their
website in 2023. She was not aware
of the Opponent at the time of commencing
her business or any other business using a similar business name in
Grounds of Opposition, Onus and Standard of Proof
indicated above, in the SGP the Opponent nominated grounds of opposition under
. To successfully oppose the application the Opponent needs to
establish one of the nominated grounds. As will become apparent,
the Opponent
has successfully established the ground of opposition pursuant to
Consequently, it is unnecessary that I consider the remaining grounds of
opposition. Of course, should the decision be appealed,
it would remain open to
the Opponent to plead any ground available to it under the Act in proceedings
before the Court.
onus of proof in an opposition rests upon the
The relevant standard of
proof is the ordinary civil standard based on the balance of
probabilities.
The date at which
the rights of the parties are to be determined is the relevant
41 – Trade Mark not distinguishing
applicant’s goods or services
(1) An application for the registration of a trade mark must be rejected if
the trade mark is not capable of distinguishing the applicant’s
services in respect of which the trade mark is sought to be registered (the
designated goods or services
) from the goods or services of other
goods of a person
services of a person
see section 6.
(2) A trade mark is taken not to be capable of distinguishing the designated
goods or services from the goods or services of other
persons only if either
subsection (3) or (4) applies to the trade mark.
(3) This subsection applies to a trade mark if:
(a) the trade mark is not to any extent inherently adapted to distinguish the
designated goods or services from the goods or services
of other persons; and
(b) the applicant has not used the trade mark before the filing date in respect
of the application to such an extent that the trade
mark does in fact
distinguish the designated goods or services as being those of the applicant.
(4) This subsection applies to a trade mark if:
(a) the trade mark is, to some extent, but not sufficiently, inherently adapted
to distinguish the designated goods or services from
the goods or services of
other persons; and
(b) the trade mark does not and will not distinguish the designated goods or
services as being those of the applicant having regard
to the combined effect of
the following:
(i) the extent to which the trade mark is inherently adapted to distinguish the
goods or services from the goods or services of other
(ii) the use, or intended use, of the trade mark by the applicant;
(iii) any other circumstances.
Note 1: Trade marks that are not inherently adapted to distinguish goods or
services are mostly trade marks that consist wholly of
a sign that is ordinarily
used to indicate:
(a) the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, value, geographical origin,
or some other characteristic, of goods or services;
(b) the time of production of goods or of the rendering of services.
Note 2: For
goods of a person
services of a
see section 6.
Note 3: Use of a trade mark by a predecessor in title of an applicant and an
authorised use of a trade mark by another person are
each taken to be use of the
trade mark by the applicant (see subsections (5) and 7(3) and section 8).
(5) For the purposes of this section, the use of a trade mark by a
predecessor in title of an applicant for the registration of the
trade mark is
taken to be a use of the trade mark by the applicant.
Note 1: For
predecessor in title
see section 6.
Note 2: If a predecessor in title had authorised another person to use the
trade mark, any authorised use of the trade mark by the
other person is taken to
be a use of the trade mark by the predecessor in title (see subsection 7(3) and
section 8).
it is appropriate to discuss the ‘presumption of
registrability’. As was explained by the Hearing Officer in
plc v Beiersdorf AG
with respect to s 33:
Section 33 of
the Act states that the Registrar must accept an application unless satisfied
that it has not been made in accordance
with the Act, (which is not relevant
here), or that there are grounds under the Act for rejecting it. In this regard
s 33 embodies
what is often referred to as a ‘presumption of
registrability.’ As was explained in
Blount Inc v Registrar of Trade
’), however, prior to the [
Intellectual
Property Laws Amendment (Raising the Bar) Act 2012
(“the Amending
Act”)] ss 41(5) and (6) as they then were, (which essentially
correspond to current ss 41(4) and (3) respectively),
effectively shifted
the onus onto an applicant. Section 41 was thus amended to address that
inconsistency, with the Explanatory
Memorandum to the
Intellectual Property
Laws Amendment (Raising the Bar) Bill 2011
stating at page 146:
The changes are intended to clarify that the presumption of registrability,
as provided for in section 33, does apply to section 41.
intention is that, if the Registrar is equally unsure of whether the mark is or
is not capable of distinguishing, that doubt
should be resolved in the
applicant’s favour.
The Amending Act was not however intended to alter the relevant standard for
registrability. In this regard the EM goes on to state
Note that while the amendment [to s 41] ensures that the onus rests with
the Registrar during examination, it is not intended to require
that the trade
mark should clearly not be registered. Rather, as with other grounds it is
intended that the delegate need only be
satisfied that a ground exists on the
balance of probabilities.
The amendments are not meant to alter the key concepts of “inherently
adapted to distinguish”, “capable of distinguishing”
“does or will distinguish”. The judicial tests for these terms are
settled and the amendments are not intended to
change the legal concept of a
trade mark distinguishing the applicant’s goods or services from
Branson J’s analysis at 504 in Oregon of the operation of
s 41 as it stood prior to the Amending Act, as paraphrased below,
remains apt in relation to the amended section:
Having taken [the extent of inherent adaptation] into account, it is
theoretically open to [me] to conclude:
(a) that the [Trade Mark] is inherently adapted to distinguish the
[Applicant’s Services] from the goods or services of other
persons and
capable, on that basis alone, of so distinguishing the [Applicant’s
Services]; [that is, neither s 41(3) nor s
41(4) applies] or
(b) that the [Trade Mark] is not to any extent inherently adapted to
distinguish the [Applicant’s Services] from the goods or
services of other
persons; [that is, s 41(3) applies] or
(c) that the [Trade Mark] is to some extent inherently adapted to
distinguish the [Claimed Goods] from the goods or services of other
persons, but
there is uncertainty, on that basis alone, that the trade mark is actually
capable of so distinguishing the [Applicant’s
Services]. [that is,
s 41(4) applies]
the present case the Applicant’s evidence of use prior to the relevant
date of the Trade Mark is minimal, amounting to approximately
5 months (between
February and July 2023) of operations as a solo practitioner with a limited
client base. I am also unpersuaded
from the limited evidence of use that there
are or would be other circumstances, or any intended use that would operate to
distinguish
the Applicant’s Services as being those of the applicant. As
such the ground for rejection under s 41 will apply if the Trade
Mark is to some
extent, but not sufficiently, inherently adapted to distinguish the
Applicant’s Services from the services
of other persons, being the test in
s 41(4). It is not necessary to conclude that the Trade Mark is not to any
extent inherently
adapted to distinguish, being the test in s 41(3).
Accor Australia & New Zealand Hospitality Pty Ltd v Liv Pty Ltd
Full Court summarised the principles in respect of s 41 as
(1) In deciding whether or not a trade mark is capable of
distinguishing the designated services from the service of others, the first
question is the extent to which the trade mark is inherently adapted to
distinguish the designated services from those of others:
s 41(2) and (3).
(2) In determining whether a trade mark is inherently adapted to distinguish
the services of a trader, the answer largely depends
upon whether other traders
are likely, in the ordinary course of their businesses and without any improper
motive, to desire to use
the same mark, or some mark nearly resembling it, upon
or in connection with their goods:
Clark Equipment Co v Registrar of Trade
Clark Equipment
[1964] HCA 55
(1964) 111 CLR
per Kitto J at 514.
(3) The question of whether a trade mark is adapted to distinguish the
services of the applicant is to be tested by reference to the
that other persons, trading in goods of the relevant kind and being actuated
only by proper motives (in the exercise of the common
right of the public to
make honest use of words forming part of the common heritage for the sake of the
signification which the words
) will think of
the word and want to use it in connection with similar goods in any manner which
would infringe the trade mark once
registered:
Clark Equipment
(4) Directly descriptive words, like geographical names, are not prima facie
suitable for the grant of a monopoly conferred by registration
of a trade mark
because use of them, as trade marks, will “rarely eclipse” their
“primary” (that is, their
ordinary) signification. Such words (or a
word) are unlikely to be inherently, that is to say, “in [their] own
adapted to distinguish the applicant’s goods. Traders may
legitimately want to use such words in connection with their goods
or services
“because of the reference they are ‘inherently adapted to
make’ to those goods”:
Cantarella Bros Pty Limited v Modena
Trading Pty Limited
[2014] HCA 48
254 CLR 337
per French CJ, Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel JJ.
(5) The principles derived from the observations of Kitto J in
apply with as much force to directly descriptive words as they do
to words which are, according to their ordinary signification,
geographical
(6) In determining whether a word is (or words are) inherently adapted to
distinguish the goods or services of an applicant, the question
examined from the point of view of the “possible impairment” of the
rights of “honest traders” and
from the “point of view of the
(7) In determining whether a word contains (or words contain) a “direct
reference” to the relevant goods or services (and
thus prima facie not
registrable as a trade mark) or whether the word (or words) makes a
“covert and skilful allusion”
to the relevant goods or services (and
thus prima facie registrable as a trade mark), the “ordinary
signification” of
the word or words to persons who will purchase, consume
or trade in the goods or services, must be considered:
(8) Where the question is whether there are other traders who may
legitimately want to use or apply a word or words in connection
with their goods
or services (other than a geographical name or a surname), the test refers to
the “legitimate desire of other
traders to use a word which is directly
descriptive in respect of the same or similar goods”:
(9) Consistent with the proposition at (7), the test described at (8) does
not encompass the desire of other traders to use a word
or words which in
relation to the goods or services are “allusive or metaphorical”:
(10) In determining whether a trade mark is inherently adapted to distinguish
the designated goods or services for the purposes of
s 41(3), the ordinary
signification of the word or words are to be considered from the perspective of
“any person in Australia
concerned with the goods or services to which the
trade mark is to be applied”:
(11) Consideration of the “ordinary signification” of any word or
words said to constitute a trade mark is “crucial”:
at [71]. That is so whether the word (or words) is said not to
be registrable because: it is not an invented word and has direct
reference to
the character or quality of the goods or services; or, the word is laudatory;
or, the word is a geographical name; or,
the word has either lost its
distinctiveness or it never had the requisite distinctiveness from the outset:
Cantarella at [71].
(12) The process of reasoning in addressing s 41(3) of the Act involves first
identifying the “ordinary signification”
of the word in question and
then undertaking an enquiry into whether other traders might legitimately need
to use the word in respect
of their goods:
at [71]. If a word
contains an allusive reference to goods or services it is, prima facie,
qualified for the grant of a monopoly
as a trade mark under the Act. If, on the
other hand, the word is understood, by the target audience, as having a directly
descriptive
meaning in relation to relevant goods or services then, prima facie,
the proprietor is not entitled to a monopoly in respect of the
general proposition, a word or words which are prima facie entitled to a
monopoly secured by registration as a trade mark
under the Act, according to
this method, are inherently adapted to distinguish:
first step is to consider whether the Trade Mark has an ordinary signification
and, if so, what that ordinary signification is.
The determination of the
ordinary signification of the Trade Mark must be the ordinary signification if
the sign were to be used
in connection with the Applicant’s Services. If
the Trade Mark is found to have an ordinary signification it is then necessary
to consider the second step, namely the likelihood of the Trade Mark being
needed by other traders.
the present case both the Applicant and the Opponent acknowledge that in
relation to the Applicant’s Services, the Trade
Mark consists of two
elements; ‘Anchor’ referring to the ‘anchor technique’,
a technique commonly used in
therapy, and ‘CCS’, being an obvious
abbreviation for ‘clinical counselling services’. Based on this
I am satisfied that the Trade Mark has an ordinary signification,
meaning a clinical counselling practitioner who utilises or specialises
anchor technique. I also accept the evidence before me (including of the
Opponent herself) demonstrates a legitimate desire
of other traders to use the
Trade Mark to describe their own clinical counselling services as services based
on the Anchor technique.
As such I consider that the Trade Mark is, to some extent, not sufficiently,
inherently adapted to distinguish the Applicant’s
Services, that is s
41(4)(a) applies. Noting my comments at paragraph
above it is not necessary to consider
s 41(4)(b) and I found that the ground of opposition under s 41 has been
established.
Decision and Costs
have found the Opponent has established the ground of opposition it raised
pursuant to s 41. As the delegate of the Registrar I
accordingly refuse to
register the Trade Mark. I direct that the refusal be recorded one month from
the date of this decision. If
the Registrar is served with a notice of appeal
before that time, I direct that the refusal shall not occur until the appeal has
been withdrawn or discontinued. Otherwise the disposition of this application
should be in accordance with the Court’s orders
or directions.
Opponent has sought an award of costs in its favour. I see no reason to depart
from the general rule that costs follow the event.
I accordingly award costs in
respect of trade mark number 2369181 against the Applicant under s 221 in the
relevant amounts under
Schedule 8 of the
Regulations.
Hearing Officer
Delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks
October 2025
Also known in this decision
Channel Network Pty Ltd v Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC 58
(Keane CJ, Stone and Jagot JJ).
Pfizer Products Inc v Karam
[2006] FCA 1663
, [6]-[26] (Gyles
Telstra Corporation Limited v Phone Directories Company Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
, [133] (Besanko, Jagot and Edelman
Southern Cross
Refrigerating Co v Toowoomba Foundry Pty Ltd
[1954] HCA 82
, [4] (Kitto J)
(1998); 40 IPR 498
, 505 (Branson
[2017] ATMO 25
, [38]-[40]
(Hearing Officer Kirov).
, [236] (Greenwood, Besanko and Katzmann JJ).
RTF format (344 KB)
Signed PDF/A format