Segler and Commissioner of Taxation (Taxation) [2024] AATA 4286 (11 October 2024)
Segler and Commissioner of Taxation (Taxation)
[2024] AATA 4286
October 2024)
ReviewNumber: 2024/6251; 2024/6252
TAXATION AND COMMERCIAL
File Numbers:
2024/6251; 2024/6252
Sharon Segler
Commissioner of Taxation
Deputy President
Thompson SC
The application for review is dismissed on the
basis that the Tribunal does not have any jurisdiction.
..........................[sgd]......................................
Deputy President Thompson SC
– income tax –
Taxation Administration Act 1953
Tribunal has no jurisdiction – refuse to exercise discretion to refund
credit amounts from income tax to reduce
debt owed – no taxation decision
– no taxation objection – no reviewable objection decision –
running balance
account – application dismissed
LEGISLATION
Administrative
Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
Judiciary Act 1903
Taxation Administration Act 1953
ss 8AAZL(1)
SECONDARY MATERIALS
Commissioner
of Taxation
, Practice Statement Law Administration 2011/21 – Offsetting
of refunds and credits against taxation and other debts
(14 April 2011)
Pearce, Dennis
, Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(LexisNexis
Butterworths, 4th ed, 2015)
REASONS FOR DECISION
24 August 2024, Ms Sharon Segler applied to the Tribunal for ‘
Respondent’s refusal to exercise a discretion to refund credit amounts
from her income tax returns for the years ended
30 June 2022 and 30 June 2023
) to reduce a debt she owed to the Respondent (
Commissioner
which had accrued from earlier income
1 October 2024, I dismissed the applications on the grounds that the Tribunal
does not have jurisdiction to review the decision.
Ms Segler has sought reasons
for that decision. These are my reasons.
Legal framework
Taxation Administration Act 1953
) empowers the Commissioner to establish a running
balance account (
) for a taxpayer which records a taxpayer’s
debits and credits in a single account. Division 3 of
contains the
powers regarding payments and credits to an RBA. The scheme of
for the recording of tax debts, interest and penalties applied to debts,
including the remission of interest and penalties,
and the application of
credits reducing the tax debt. An RBA deficit debt arises when the balance in
the RBA is in favour of the
Commissioner, that is, a taxpayer is indebted to the
Commissioner. An RBA deficit debt may be reduced in three main ways:
(a) by a payment made to the Commissioner by the taxpayer or on their behalf;
(b) by an offset being applied, meaning a payment due to the taxpayer by the
Commissioner is applied in reduction of the RBA deficit
(c) by remission of penalties or interest charges.
of the TAA provides that a refund may only be made to a taxpayer who has a
tax debt when:
(a) the tax debt is owing but not yet payable;
(b) the amount owing is under a payment arrangement which the taxpayer is
complying with;
(c) the Commissioner has agreed to defer recovery of the tax debt; or
(d) the amount owing is to be offset against a director penalty debt.
Commissioner’s
Practice Statement Law Administration 2011/21 –
Offsetting of refunds and credits against taxation and other debts
) is a policy document which provides guidance on how to apply the
offset provisions of Division 3 of
, and when a refund may be provided
to a taxpayer instead of offsetting a credit against a tax debt.
of the TAA contains the provisions relating to a taxpayer’s rights to
seek review of certain decisions made by the Commissioner.
Those rights include
the ability to apply to the Tribunal in certain circumstances.
Tribunal is established by
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
). It provides an avenue for merits review
of some Commonwealth decisions. The scheme of the AAT Act requires a conferral
of jurisdiction
by another Act
the Tribunal has no general jurisdiction of itself. Consequently, when a person
seeks a review in the Tribunal, the Tribunal will
only have jurisdiction if
there is a relevant provision of a conferring Act. The TAA is a conferring Act
in respect to some decisions
made by the Commissioner.
Pearce explains:
To determine whether the AAT can review a decision there are three matters
that must be considered:
Does an enactment confer jurisdiction;
Has a ‘decision’ been made; and
Has that decision been taken under the enactment conferring jurisdiction.
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review)
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) provide avenues for
judicial review of administrative decisions made by Commonwealth bodies. The
Federal Court of Australia,
the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia,
and the High Court of Australia may all exercise the ADJR Act and the
Procedural background
2023 Ms Segler filed, through her registered tax agent, her ITRs for the 2022
and 2023 income years. In mid September 2023 she
received notification from the
Australian Taxation Office (
) that she was entitled to a refund of
$10,612.67 for those years, being $1,936.34 for the year ended 30 June 2022 and
$8,676.33 for
the year ended 30 June
13 September 2023, Ms Segler checked her ATO account through MyGov and saw that
the two refunds, totalling $10,612.67, had been
transferred to her Integrated
Client Account without apparent explanation or notice to her (
Segler sent three letters to the ATO, on 22 September 2023, 14 November 2023,
and 18 January 2024. Ultimately the third of these
was apparently referred to
the Objections Team for
consideration.
There is however no
evidence to suggest that either the third letter, or its two predecessors, were
at any time considered by an
objections officer and a decision made in respect
27 March 2024, Ms Segler made a complaint to the ATO through its formal
complaints system which dealt with both the refund issue,
and other matters
arising in the course of her dealings with the
17 April 2024, the ATO issued a letter to Ms Segler headed ‘
The outcome
of your complaint
7 June 2024, the ATO sent an email to Ms Segler headed ‘
Your complaint
25 July 2024, the ATO issued a letter to Ms Segler headed ‘
The outcome
of your complaint
24 August 2024, Ms Segler filed two
applications
with the Tribunal
judicial review pursuant to
1 October 2024 I dismissed the applications for review.
The underlying dispute
Segler’s underlying complaint arises from the use of her income tax refund
amounts for the 2022 and 2023 income years to
pay a pre-existing debt she owed
to the Commissioner and for which an RBA had been established.
the Third Response the Commissioner explains the history of Ms Segler’s
debt in the following terms:
When we apply the proposed changes to your case, we find that at the time
your credits became available these discretions did not
apply. Your debt was
placed on hold and reactivated numerous times prior to 2017. On 20 July 2015
your debt was reactivated, and
collection action commenced. This debt was again
placed on hold 20 February 2018 at your request following the Administrative
(AAT) mediation. The debt was then reactivated to absorb income tax
credits 18 December 2018. The latest decision to place your debt
on hold was
made in February 2019 at your request. As part of that action the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO) discussed with you
the possibility of offsetting any
future credits against your debt on hold and issued correspondence detailing the
terms and obligations
of having a debt placed on hold (including offsetting) on
14 February 2019. This decision to place your debt on hold in 2019 was
to any decision to place your debt on hold that had preceded it.
the First Response the Commissioner records the following background:
(a) Ms Segler was informed in a telephone conversation on 18 February 2019 that
the debt could be re-raised at any time;
(b) On 19 May 2022 correspondence was issued to Ms Segler advising that the debt
was now due and payable, that action may now be
taken to recover it, and that
any tax refunds or credits she was entitled to may be used to pay it off; and
(c) On 18 October 2023 a letter was issued to Ms Segler’s registered tax
agent advising, amongst other things, that any tax
refunds or credits Ms Segler
became entitled to would be used to pay off any debts payable, including debts
Segler’s application to the Tribunal seeks to review the reactivation of
the debt, and the use of the 2022 and 2023 refund
amounts to pay that debt,
rather than refund the money to her.
CONSIDERATION
No Judicial review
discussed at [9] above, the Tribunal does not have any jurisdiction to conduct
judicial review of decisions. Any application for
judicial review must be made
to a Court with appropriate jurisdiction; in this case that would be the Federal
Court of Australia.
the request for judicial review, which is plainly incompetent, I will consider
whether Ms Segler’s application can be
dealt with as an application within
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.
Preconditions for review in the Tribunal
set out in [7] above, jurisdiction is conferred on the Tribunal by legislation
other than the AAT Act.
Relevantly,
the TAA confers jurisdiction on the Tribunal to review some decisions made by
the Commissioner of Taxation. However, as
ss 14ZZ and 14ZZA of the TAA make
plain, it is not every action by the Commissioner which is subject to review by
the Tribunal. Relevantly,
review is only available for matters which fall within
the definition of ‘
reviewable objection decisions
turn requires that an ‘
objection decision
’ has been made.
Objection decision is defined in s 14ZY to include, relevantly, a
taxation objection
’ is defined in s 14ZL in the following
(1) This Part applies
if a provision of an Act
or a legislative
instrument (including the provision as applied by another Act)
provides that
a person who is dissatisfied with an assessment, determination, notice or
or with a failure to make a private ruling, may object against it
in the manner set out in this Part.
(2) Such an objection is in this Part
called a taxation objection
(emphasis added)
order for a taxpayer to commence the process of making a taxation objection, a
taxation decision
’ must have been made. ‘
’ is defined in s 14ZQ to mean ‘
the assessment,
determination, notice or decision against which a taxation objection may be, or
has been, made
Consequently,
the preconditions for a taxpayer seeking review in the Tribunal are:
(a) a taxation decision must have been made;
(b) a taxation objection must have been made; and
(c) the taxation objection must be a reviewable objection decision.
of those preconditions exist in this case.
No taxation decision
issue raised by Ms Segler does not arise from any action of the Commissioner in
issuing an assessment, determination or notice.
I therefore consider whether a
decision has been made within the definition of a taxation decision.
taxation decision
’ is defined, the word
’ is not. The Macquarie Dictionary defines decision
in the following manner:
noun 1. The act of deciding; determination (of a question or
2. a judgement, as one formally pronounced by a court.
3. a making up of one’s mind.
4. that which is decided; a resolution.
5. the quality of being decided; firmness, as of character.
is clear from this definition that a decision requires some positive action
rather than, for example, the mere operation of a statute.
8AAZL(1) and (2) and ss 8AAZLA and 8AAZLB of the TAA mandate how the
Commissioner must treat a credit due to a taxpayer.
Whilst only one of either ss
8AAZLA and 8AAZLB can apply in any particular case, both mandate that credits
due to a taxpayer must
be paid to reduce debts owed by that taxpayer to the
Commissioner. Thus, it is the operation of the law, and not a decision, which
determines the treatment of a credit due to a taxpayer who has an outstanding
Segler had an RBA deficit debt so s 8AAZLA applied to the treatment of her
credit and operated to use the credit to pay down the
8AAZL(3) and (4) of the TAA set out the only circumstances in which a refund may
be made to a taxpayer who has a RBA deficit
debt. PSLA 2011/21 sets out how the
discretion should be exercised when a taxpayer fits within the circumstances set
ss 8AAZL(3) or (4). Ms Segler does not contend that she fits within s
8AAZL(3) or 8AAZL(4). Consequently, the effect of the law is
that no decision
could be made as to whether a refund should be provided.
noted in PSLA 2011/21 at [2], the ATO accounting system rules generally apply
automatic offsets in accordance with ss 8AAZL(1)
and (2) of the TAA.
No taxation objection
there is no taxation decision within the meaning of Part IVC of the TAA, it is
not possible for a taxpayer to make a taxation objection.
This means that,
whilst Ms Segler wrote to the Commissioner on three occasions seeking action on
the refund issue,
none of those
letters were a taxation objection within Part IVC of the TAA.
No reviewable objection decision
three responses Ms Segler received from the
are all responses to the
complaint she made on 27 March
In the absence of a valid
taxation objection, they cannot be, and are not, reviewable objection decisions.
Section 18-70 of Schedule 1 to the TAA
Segler’s application sought review under ‘s
18-70 of the
TAA’. Section 18-70 is contained within Part 2-5 of Schedule 1 of the
TAA which contains the machinery provisions for the Pay
as you go (
system. The PAYG system imposes obligations on entities who make certain types
of payments, for example employers, to withhold part
of a payment owed to a
person, for example, income to an employee, and pay that money to the
Commissioner, effectively on behalf
of the person who would otherwise be
entitled to the money.
18-70 contains a right to apply to the Commissioner for a refund by a person who
has had a PAYG amount which has been wrongly
withheld. The right is limited to
the circumstances set out in that section. A decision of the Commissioner under
s 18-70 is a taxation
decision which is reviewable under Part IVC TAA.
is no evidence that Ms Segler made a request for a refund to the Commissioner
pursuant to s 18-70, or even that s 18-70 or the
PAYG provisions have any role
to play in this matter.
any event, in the absence of a taxation decision, a taxation objection and a
reviewable objection decision, there is no right of
review by the
the reasons set out above, on 1 October 2024 I dismissed the application for
review on the basis that the Tribunal does not have
I certify that the preceding forty-three (43) paragraphs are a true copy
of the reasons for the decision herein of Deputy President
Thompson SC
.........................[sgd].........................................
Dated: 11 October 2024
2024/6251 – RE Segler and
Commissioner of Taxation Chronology of Events, filed with the Tribunal on 24
August 2024, including
attachments SLS1-SLS11 (
Application supporting
) at [32]; SLS11.
TAA, s 8AAZLA.
AAT Act, s 25.
Dennis Pearce,
Administrative Appeals
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 4
ed, 2015) at [3.1].
Application supporting document
Application supporting document
Application supporting document
Application supporting document
Provided to the Tribunal
attached to an email dated 26 September 2024.
Application 2024/6251 is for
the 2022 income year and application 2024/6252 is for the 2023 income year.
Application supporting
document at [32].
Application supporting
document at [5], [6] and [7] and attachments SLS1, SLS2 and SLS3.
See [14]-[16] above.
Application supporting
document at [9].
RTF format (1.65 MB)
Signed PDF/A format