Herbert v Chief of Air Force [2018] ADFDAT 1 (27 April 2018)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Herbert v Chief of Air Force
Appeal from:
Defence Force Magistrate
File number:
DFDAT 3 of 2017
TRACEY (PRESIDENT), HILEY AND GARDE (MEMBERS)
Date of decision:
Catchwords:
– appeal from a decision of a
Defence Force Magistrate (“DFM”) – where the DFM found the
appellant guilty
of one count of obtaining a financial advantage contrary to
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) and s
135.2(1) of the
Criminal Code
(Cth) by way of an overpayment of rental
allowance knowing or believing that he was not eligible to receive that
advantage –
where the appellant failed to advise Defence Housing Australia
in accordance with cl 1.5.2(4) of the
Defence Determination 2005/15
(“the Determination”) that he was sharing a residence with his
partner – whether the DFM misconstrued the status
of the Determination
– whether the Determination is a “law of the Commonwealth” for
the purposes of s 4.3 of the
Criminal Code
the duty to notify of a change in circumstances is of a legislative or
administrative character – whether the
DFM erred by addressing the offence
as if it were a strict liability offence – whether the DFM erred by
misconstruing the evidence
and rejecting the appellant’s evidence
Legislation:
Acts and Instruments (Framework Reform) Act
(Cth) Sch 1
items 117 and 119, Sch 1
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Slavery, Slavery-like Conditions and
People Trafficking) Act 2013
(Cth) Sch 1 item 1
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) Sch 1 (“
”) ss 4.1, 4.3(b), 4.3, 5.2, 5.2(1), 5.3, 5.6(1), 135,
135.2(1), 135.2(1)(a), 135.2(1A)
Defence Act 1903
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Defence Force Regulations 1952
(Cth) reg 72A
Defence Legislation Amendment Act (No. 1) 2010
item 2, Sch 3
Financial Management and Accountability Act 1997
Legislation Act 2003
Legislative Instruments (Transitional Provisions and Consequential
Amendments) Act 2003
, Sch 1 item 7
Legislative Instruments Act 2003
Public Governance, Accountability and Performance Act 2013
Cases cited:
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
Territory Revenue (Northern Territory)
(2009) 239 CLR 27
Applied Medical Australia Pty Ltd v Minister for Health
[2016] FCA 35
Baker v Chief of Army
(2017) 319 FLR 62
[2017] ADFDAT 3
Central Queensland Law Council Aboriginal Corporation v Attorney General
of the Commonwealth
(2002) 116 FCR 390
[2002] FCA 58
Commonwealth v Grunseit
[1943] HCA 47
(1943) 67 CLR 58
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v Poniatowska
(2011) 244 CLR
[2011] HCA 43
Airports Corporation v Aerolineas Argentinas
[1997] FCA 723
Filippou v The Queen
(2015) 256 CLR 47
[2015] HCA 29
Fitzgerald v The Queen
(2014) 311 ALR 158
[2014] HCA 28
Harbour Radio Pty Ltd v Australian Communications and Media Authority
(2012) 202 FCR 525
[2012] FCA 614
Latitude Fisheries Pty Ltd v Minister for Primary Industries and
(1992) 110 ALR 209
[1992] FCA 623
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
McWilliam v Civil Aviation Safety Authority
(2004) 142 FCR 74
[2004] FCA 1701
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
[2002] HCA 53
Minister for Industry and Commerce v Tooheys Ltd
[1982] 60 FLR 325;
[1982] FCA 135
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
Queensland Medical Laboratory v Blewett
(1988) 16 ALD 440
Re Colina; Ex parte Torney
(1999) 200 CLR 386
[1999] HCA 57
RG Capital Radio Ltd v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[2001] FCA 855
Roche Products Pty Ltd v National Drugs and Poisons Schedule Committee
(2007) 163 FCR 451
[2007] FCA 1352
SAT FM Pty Ltd v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1997) 75 FCR
[1997] FCA 647
Schwennesen v Minister for Environment and Resource Management
[2010] QCA 340
Sea Shepherd Australia Ltd v Western Australia
(2014) 313 ALR 184
[2014] WASC 66
Seafish Tasmania Pelagic Pty Ltd v Minister for Sustainability,
Environment, Water, Population and Communities (No 2)
(2014) 225 FCR 97
[2014] FCA 117
SKA v The Queen
(2011) 243 CLR 400
[2011] HCA 13
Smith v The Queen
(2017) 259 CLR 291
[2017] HCA 19
Uelese v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] FCA 348
Visa International Service Association v Reserve Bank of Australia
(2003) 131 FCR 300
[2003] FCA 977
Date of hearing:
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr M B Mannetta with Mr C Fabbian
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Fabbian Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
BRIG J Woodward, Director of Military Prosecutions with MAJ M Punter
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Office of the Director of Military Prosecutions
Table of Corrections
In paragraph 14, an ellipsis has been inserted before subsection
DFDAT 3 of 2017
DUNCAN GEORGE INGRAM
CHIEF OF AIR FORCE
TRACEY (PRESIDENT)
, HILEY AND GARDE
(MEMBERS) JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
the extent required, the appellant be granted leave to appeal under
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
appeal be dismissed.
REASONS FOR
INTRODUCTION
appellant appeals from the decision of a Defence Force Magistrate (“the
DFM”) made on 18 May 2017 finding him guilty
of one count of
obtaining a financial advantage contrary to
Defence Force
Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) and s 135.2(1) of the schedule to the
Code Act 1995
(Cth) (“the Criminal Code”). The DFM found that
the appellant had failed to advise Defence Housing Australia (“DHA”)
in writing, in accordance with cl 1.5.2(4) of
Defence Determination
(“the Determination”), that he was sharing a residence
in North Adelaide with his partner and that, as a result, he received
overpayment of rental allowance (“RA”) over the period of 12 March
2015 to 18 November 2015 (“the relevant period”)
amount of $2,904.80, knowing or believing that he was not eligible to receive
that financial advantage.
was extensive agreement between the parties as to the facts and the relevant
documents, leaving the mental element of the charge
as the main area of dispute,
viz whether the appellant intended to engage in the conduct by omission. The
appellant’s defence
was that, although he did fail to report the changed
circumstances, this was due to an administrative oversight because of his high
work tempo and state of mental health. There was no dispute that he shared
his residence with his partner over the relevant period.
There was also no
dispute that, due to the appellant’s omission to advise DHA of his changed
circumstances, he received RA
at the “non-sharing” rate over the
relevant period when he should have received RA at the lower “sharing with
rate. After finding the appellant guilty, the DFM imposed a fine of
$2,900, $1,450 of which was suspended.
appellant appeals against his conviction on three grounds. The grounds may be
summarised as follows:
Determination is not a “law of the Commonwealth” for the purposes of
s 4.3 of the Criminal Code. Consequently,
the duty to notify DHA of a change in
circumstances is of an administrative character and an omission to perform that
duty is not
conduct capable of forming the basis of an offence under s 135.2(1)
of the Criminal Code (Ground 1);
(2) the DFM
found that the omission to perform the duty did not involve dishonesty on the
part of the appellant and therefore erred
when he addressed the offence as if it
were a strict liability offence (Ground 2); and
(3) the DFM
misconstrued the evidence, and rejected the appellant’s evidence, thereby
erring in fact or as a matter of mixed
law and fact (Ground 3).
the extent that Ground 3 raised matters of fact, the appellant sought leave to
appeal under
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act
(Cth). The grant of leave was not opposed by the respondent and was
given by the Tribunal.
ground of appeal is considered in detail in the reasons that
1 alleges that the charge as amended discloses no offence known to the law and
that the DFM made two errors:
(a) in finding that the Determination
was a “law of the Commonwealth” within the meaning of s 4.3 of the
Criminal Code;
(b) in failing to find that the duty to notify DHA of a change of
circumstances imposed on the appellant by the Determination was
prescribed by a law of the Commonwealth and that an omission to perform that
duty could not, therefore, constitute a physical
element of the offence charged.
Criminal Code
charge of obtaining a financial advantage, of which the appellant was found
guilty, arises under s 135 of the Criminal Code.
Subsections
135.2(1) and (1A) of the Criminal Code, as in force during the relevant period
in 2015, provided that:
135.2 Obtaining financial advantage
(1) A person is guilty of an offence if:
(a) the person engages in conduct; and
(aa) as a result of that conduct, the person obtains a financial advantage for
himself or herself from another person; and
(ab) the person knows or believes that he or she is not eligible to receive that
financial advantage; and
(b) the other person is a Commonwealth entity.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 12
(1A) Absolute liability applies to the paragraph (1)(b) element of the offence.
4.1 of the Criminal Code provides that:
4.1 Physical elements
(1) A physical element of an offence may be:
(a) conduct; or
(b) a result of conduct; or
(c) a circumstance in which conduct, or a result of conduct, occurs.
(2) In this Code:
means an act, on omission to perform an act or a
state of affairs.
engage in conduct
(a) do an act; or
(b) omit to perform an act.
to perform an act are the subject of s 4.3 of the Criminal Code:
4.3 Omissions
An omission to perform an act can only be a physical element if:
(a) the law creating the offence makes it so; or
(b) the law creating the offence impliedly provides that the offence is
committed by an omission to perform an act that there is
a duty to perform by a
law of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory, or at common law.
scope of s 4.3(b) of the Criminal Code was expanded in 2013 to make it clear
that a duty to perform an act, arising under a law
operative in Australia or in
any State or Territory or under the common law, is sufficient to constitute the
basis of the commission
of an offence by omission under s 4.3: see the
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Slavery, Slavery-like Conditions and People
Trafficking) Act 2013
(Cth) Sch 1 item 1.
applicable fault element for the physical conduct element in s 135.2(1)(a) is
intention: see s 5.6(1) of the Criminal Code.
Section 5.2 of the Criminal
Code relevantly provides for intention as
5.2 Intention
(1) A person has intention with respect to conduct if he or she means to engage
in that conduct.
5.3 defines “knowledge” for the purposes of the Criminal Code:
5.3 Knowledge
A person has knowledge of a circumstance or a result if he or she is aware that
it exists or will exist in the ordinary course of
Defence Act
Defence Act 1903
(Cth) (“the
”) is concerned with determinations made by the Minister in relation to
remuneration, allowances and other benefits to be paid
to Defence Force members
and their families. At the relevant time, when the Determination was made and
cl 1.5.2(4) was inserted
relevantly provided:
58B Minister may make determinations
(1) The Minister may, by instrument in writing, make determinations, not
inconsistent with this Act, the
Naval Defence Act 1910
Force Act 1923
, providing for and in relation to:
(a) the remuneration of members or cadets; and
(b) the payment of allowances or other pecuniary benefits (except allowances or
benefits by way of remuneration) to or for members
or cadets, including the
payment of additional compensation to members of the Reserves to whom
compensation is payable under the
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
(c) the payment of allowances or other pecuniary benefits to or in respect of
members of the families of members or cadets; and
(d) leave of absence and long service leave of members; and
(e) the provision of other benefits to or in respect of members or cadets, or to
or in respect of members of the families of members
or cadets; and
(f) the payment of allowances and expenses to or in respect of, and the
provision of travelling facilities for, applicants for appointment
or engagement
as members in respect of attendance at an enlistment centre of the Defence Force
or attendance for interview or examination;
(g) deductions from the remuneration of a member or cadet or from allowances or
other pecuniary benefits referred to in paragraphs
(b) and (c); and
(ga) payments, by way of compensation, incentives or other benefits,
(i) members of the Reserves; or
(ii) their dependants; or
(iii) their employers, business or professional partners or other associates;
(iv) other persons;
in relation to the availability of the members for defence service, or for
losses incurred or inconvenience suffered because of the
members’ absence
on defence service (including losses incurred or inconvenience suffered because
of the operation of the
Defence Reserve Service (Protection) Act 2001
(h) the meanings to be attributed to words and expressions used in existing
determinations and future determinations made under
this section, and the
circumstances in which those meanings are to apply.
(1A) A determination made under this section may make provision for or in
relation to a matter by applying, adopting or incorporating,
with or without
modification:
(a) the provisions of any Act or of any regulations made under an Act or of any
determination made under this section, section 58H
of this Act or
Public Service Act 1999
, as in force at a
particular time or as in force from time to time; or
(b) any matter contained in any other instrument or writing as in force or
existing at the time when the first-mentioned determination
(1B) A determination under this section may provide that, where an amount has
been paid (whether before or after the commencement
of this subsection) to a
member or cadet or to a member of the family of a member or cadet under the
regulations or under a determination
made under this section or under Division
2, the member or cadet or the member of the family of the member or cadet is
required to
pay to the Commonwealth an amount, not exceeding the first-mentioned
amount, upon the occurrence of an event specified in the determination,
provide for the manner of recovery of such an amount.
(3) A determination shall not be made providing for or in relation to the
forfeiture or assignment of the whole or part
(a) the remuneration of a member or cadet; or
(b) allowances or other pecuniary benefits referred to in paragraph (1)(b) or
(4) A determination takes
(a) on the day on which it is made; or
(b) where another day (which may be a day earlier than the day on which it is
made) is specified for the purpose in the determination,
on the day so
(5) A determination shall not be expressed to take effect on a day earlier than
the day on which it is made in any case where, if
the determination so took
(a) the rights of a person (other than the Commonwealth) existing immediately
before the last-mentioned day would be affected in
a manner prejudicial to that
(b) liabilities would be imposed on a person (other than the Commonwealth) in
respect of anything done or omitted to be done before
that last-mentioned
and where, in a determination, any provision is made in contravention of this
subsection, that provision shall be void and of no
(8) The Minister shall cause to be published in the Gazette, in respect of each
determination, notice
(a) the fact that the determination has been made; and
(b) the place or places where copies of the determination can be
2005, when the Determination was made and cl 1.5.2(4) was inserted, s 58C of the
Defence Act provided as follows:
58C Tabling, disallowance etc. of determinations
(1) The provisions of section 48 (other than paragraphs (1)(a) and (b) and
subsection (2)) and sections 48A, 48B, 49 and 50 of the
Acts Interpretation
apply in relation to determinations as
(a) references in those provisions to regulations were references to
determinations and references to a regulation were references
to a provision of
a determination; and
(b) references in those provisions to the repeal of a regulation were references
to the revocation of a determination or of a provision
of a determination, as
(3) Determinations shall not be deemed to be statutory rules within the meaning
Statutory Rules Publication Act
provisions appearing in Pt XII of the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
to which reference was made in s 58C, provided for the tabling and disallowance
of regulations. Those
provisions were repealed with effect from 1
January 2005: see
Legislative Instruments (Transitional Provisions and
Consequential Amendments) Act 2003
(Cth) Sch 1 item 7. Nevertheless, the
cross-references to those provisions remained in s 58C of the Defence Act for
Despite their repeal, the effect of the Pt XII provisions, in
relation to the tabling and disallowance of determinations, was preserved
Legislative Instruments (Transitional Provisions and
Consequential Amendments) Act 2003
power to make determinations is capable of delegation by the Minister by
regulation. Section 58E of the Defence Act, as it stood
58E Delegation
The regulations may make provision for and in relation to the delegation by the
Minister of his or her power to make determinations
with respect to such of the
matters with respect to which determinations may be made as are specified in the
regulations.
2005, the delegation of the Minister’s power to make determinations in
relation to specified matters was provided for in
reg 72A of the
Force Regulations 1952
The Determination
Determination is dated 20 May 2005 and was made by a delegate of the Minister.
It commenced on 31 May 2005. It is reproduced
and published in the Defence
Force’s Pay and Conditions Manual (“PACMAN”) and is the
principal determination governing
conditions of service within Australia and
overseas. It deals with a wide range of conditions of service, and has
comprehensive
definitions and provisions. It has been amended a number of
times. On 30 November 2005, the same delegate made Defence Determination
2005/52, which inserted cl 1.5.2(4) into the Determination. Clause 1.5.2(4)
commenced on 1 December 2005.
5 of Chapter 1 of the Determination deals with a member’s rights and
obligations. Clauses 1.5.1 to 1.5.4 (as in force
during the relevant
period in 2015) relevantly provided:
Part 5: Member’s rights and obligations
1.5.1 Purpose
A member must meet certain obligations when they have an entitlement. This Part
sets out those obligations.
1.5.2 Change in member’s
circumstances
are responsible for keeping themselves informed about their entitlements.
clause applies if a member or their dependants meet both these conditions.
have qualified for an entitlement.
is a change in the circumstances by which they qualified.
member must tell their Commanding Officer about the change as soon as
practicable.
This requirement helps the Commonwealth prevent overpayments being
member must also inform the approving authority for any housing assistance that
the member is in receipt of about the change as
practicable.
1.5.3 Overpayment
clause applies if a person has been paid more than the amount they are entitled
person must repay to the Commonwealth the difference between their entitlement
and the amount they were paid.
A member is paid vehicle allowance in advance of travel. They
do not travel, or they travel less than they expected to. They must
or part of the allowance, whichever applies.
Where tax has been deducted from an amount overpaid and the
amount was paid in a previous financial year.
1.5.4 Recovery by the Commonwealth
clause applies if a member must repay an overpayment of salary or allowances to
the Commonwealth.
Commonwealth may recover the overpaid amount from the salary and allowances that
the member has been – or may be –
paid. The Commonwealth still has
the right to recover the overpaid amount by other means.
Explanatory Statement to the Determination relevantly states:
Mechanisms are provided for dealing with a range of general matters such as
overpayments, calculation of fortnightly and daily rates,
and joint entitlements
where a member’s spouse is also an ADF
Criminal liability for an omission
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v Poniatowska
(2011) 244 CLR 408
[2011] HCA 43
the plurality of the High Court decided that a law creating
an offence may impliedly provide that an omission to perform an act,
which under
the law there is a duty to perform, is a physical element of the offence: at
422 [34] (French CJ, Gummow, Kiefel and
Bell JJ), citing s 4.3(b) of the
Criminal Code. However, there can be no criminal liability for an omission
unless it is an omission
to perform a legal obligation: at 421 [29].
parties made submissions to the DFM and to us as to whether cl 1.5.2 of the
Determination was a law of the Commonwealth giving
rise to legal obligations on
the part of Defence Force members.
Appellant’s submissions
appellant submitted that the DFM erred in declining to dismiss the charge on the
basis that it disclosed no offence known to the
law. He raised three grounds of
objection to the charge before the DFM. Firstly, he submitted that the phrase
“law of the
Commonwealth” is confined to statutes of the Parliament
and does not extend to regulatory instruments such as the Determination.
Secondly, even if the phrase “law of the Commonwealth” is not
confined to statutes but extends to statutory instruments,
“law” confines the ambit of the provision to legislative
instruments, whereas the Determination is purely administrative.
Thirdly, it
was said that unless the word “law” is confined to statutes, there
would be an unconstitutional abdication
of legislative power by the Parliament
and an unconstitutional usurpation of legislative power by the Executive in
breach of the
doctrine of the separation of powers embodied in the
Constitution
of these objections was reiterated and pressed before us. In addition, the
appellant developed an elaborate argument based on
the provisions of the then
Legislative Instruments Act 2003
(Cth) (“the LIA”) (now the
Legislation Act 2003
(Cth)). We will return to this argument later in
these reasons.
Respondent’s submissions
respondent relied on the decision of the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia in
RG Capital Radio Ltd v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(2001) 113 FCR 185
[2001] FCA 855
where the Court held that there is no simple
rule for determining whether a decision is of a legislative or administrative
at 194 [40] (Wilcox, Branson and Lindgren JJ). Instead, it is the
task of the Court to determine whether the decision is legislative
administrative, taking into account the relevant considerations accepted in the
decided cases: at 194 [42]. The respondent extensively
reviewed the relevant
considerations, submitting that the duty to notify the approving authority of a
change in circumstances in
cl 1.5.2(4) of the Determination was a legal
obligation, and not mere guidance to decision-makers and recipients of
allowances.
DFM’s ruling
DFM dismissed each of the appellant’s objections to the charge. As to the
first objection, that the Determination was not
a “law”, he held
that the ordinary meaning of the word “law” extended beyond statutes
and that there was
no principle of statutory interpretation that would confine
it in this way. There was no obvious reason to exclude regulations,
Determination, from the expression a “law of the Commonwealth”.
to the second objection, that the Determination was of an administrative
character, the DFM held that the Determination sets out
general conditions of
eligibility for entitlements and the type of entitlements available to members.
It does not specify particular
terms of employment. Having considered the points
raised by the Full Court in
, as summarised by Tamberlin J
Visa International Service Association v Reserve Bank of Australia
[2003] FCA 977
(2003) 131 FCR 300
[2003] FCA 977
, the DFM held that the
Determination was of a legislative character.
to the third objection to the charge, the DFM held that there was no
constitutional reason why the word “law” in s
4.3 of the Criminal
Code should not be given a meaning which would extend to, and include, cl
1.5.2(4) of the Determination. There
was no reason based on the doctrine of
separation of powers to read down or not apply cl 1.5.2(4) of the Determination
and 135.2 of the Criminal Code.
Meaning of the word “law” in s 4.3 of the Criminal Code
our view, the DFM was correct in dismissing each of the three objections raised
by the appellant. We accept that the expression
“law of the
Commonwealth”, as used in s 4.3 of the Criminal Code, extends to and
includes cl 1.5.2(4) of the Determination.
We now set out our reasons for
upholding the DFM’s rulings on the objections and for rejecting the
appellant’s submissions
concerning Ground 1.
Principles of construction of statutes and statutory instruments
is first necessary to set out the principles of construction relating to
statutes and statutory instruments. They are well established.
Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
[1998] HCA 28
, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ
[T]he duty of a court is to give the words of a statutory provision the meaning
that the legislature is taken to have intended them
to have. Ordinarily, that
meaning (the legal meaning) will correspond with the grammatical meaning of the
provision. But not always.
The context of the words, the consequences of a
literal or grammatical construction, the purpose of the statute or the canons of
construction may require the words of a legislative provision to be read in a
way that does not correspond with the literal or grammatical
(Citations omitted.)
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue (Northern
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
[2009] HCA 41
, Hayne, Heydon,
Crennan and Kiefel JJ said:
This Court has stated on many occasions that the task of statutory
interpretation must begin with a consideration of the text itself.
considerations and extrinsic materials cannot be relied on to displace the clear
meaning of the text. The language which
has actually been employed in the text
of legislation is the surest guide to legislative intention. The meaning of the
require consideration of the context, which includes the general
purpose and policy of a provision, in particular the mischief it
is seeking to
(Citations omitted.)
the same decision, French CJ (at 31 [4]) said:
[I]t must be accepted that context and legislative purpose will cast light upon
the sense in which the words of the statute are to
be read. Context is here
used in a wide sense referable, inter alia, to the existing state of the law and
the mischief which the
statute was intended to remedy.
(Citations omitted.)
principles are to be applied in the construction of the relevant provisions of
the Defence Act and the Determination.
Previous authority
meaning of the expression “law of the Commonwealth” was considered
by the High Court in
Re Colina; Ex parte Torney
(1999) 200 CLR 386
[1999] HCA 57
, in the context of
Constitution
, where Gleeson
CJ and Gummow J said (at 397 [25]):
The term “law of the Commonwealth” refers to laws made under the
legislative powers of the Commonwealth. This meaning
is settled by a long
line of authority.
Baker v Chief of
[2017] ADFDAT 3
(2017) 319 FLR 62
[2017] ADFDAT 3
(Tracey, Brereton
and Hiley JJ).
, McHugh J also said (at 402
A law of the Commonwealth is simply a law made under or by the authority of the
Parliament of the Commonwealth.
our view, the same meaning should be given to this expression as it appears in s
4.3(b) of the Criminal Code noting, however,
that s 4.3(b) was expanded in 2013
to include the law of a State or Territory and the common law, as described
]. As a result, we reject
the submissions by the appellant seeking to confine the expression “law of
the Commonwealth”
as it appears in s 4.3(b) to statutes or statutes and
regulations only. Rather, it extends to any law made under the legislative
powers of the Commonwealth, or made by or under the authority of the Parliament
of the Commonwealth. Despite the appellant’s
submission to the contrary,
there is no constitutional limitation or reason which precludes the Tribunal
from adopting such a construction
of s 4.3(b).
The distinction between legislative and administrative provisions
distinction between legislative and administrative provisions has long been
recognised. In
Commonwealth v Grunseit
[1943] HCA 47
(1943) 67 CLR 58
at 82, Latham CJ
observed that:
The general distinction between legislation and the execution of legislation is
that legislation determines the content of a law
as a rule of conduct or a
declaration as to power, right or duty, whereas executive authority applies the
law in particular cases.
Subsequently,
Latitude Fisheries Pty Ltd v Minister for Primary Industries and
[1992] FCA 385
(1992) 110 ALR 209
at 228-229;
[1992] FCA 623
at p 36, French J,
quoting D Pearce,
Delegated Legislation in Australia and New Zealand
(LexisNexis, 1977) at 1-2, accepted that delegated legislation could be
defined as:
instruments that lay down general rules of conduct affecting the community at
large which have been made by a body expressly authorised
so to act by an Act of
parliament.
His Honour observed (at 229) that:
In the end, I think the better course in most cases is probably to eschew the
taxonic debate and focus upon identification of the
rights, duties, powers and
privileges which arise as a result of the determination of the plan.
Queensland Medical Laboratory v Blewett
(1988) 16 ALD 440
; [1988] FCA
708, Gummow J noted (at 456) that the
Constitution
does not forbid the
statutory authorisation of the Executive to make laws:
Rather, the Federal legislative powers of the parliament ... authorise the
parliament to repose in the Executive an authority of
an essentially legislative
character, at least where the exercise of the authority is subject to a measure
of parliamentary control.
A decision made under an
enactment of the Parliament by a Minister or his or her delegate may be
essentially legislative in character
in a direct and immediate sense: at
like effect, in
Minister for Industry and Commerce v Tooheys Ltd
60 FLR 325;
[1982] FCA 135
, the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia
held that the distinction between legislative and administrative acts was
essentially
between the creation or formulation of new rules of law having
general application and the application of those general rules to
cases: at 331 (Bowen CJ, Northrop and Lockhart JJ).
distinction between legislative and administrative determinations made under
legislative powers was revisited in
Airports Corporation v
Aerolineas Argentinas
(1997) 76 FCR 582
[1997] FCA 723.
Justice Lehane
(Beaumont and Whitlam JJ agreeing) said (at 591):
If there is anything that the authorities make plain ... it is that general
tests will frequently provide no clear answer. It is,
after all, not difficult
to point to authority which supports the proposition that a decision which
imposes obligations and is of
general operation may nevertheless be
administrative or executive ... There is no escape ... from the need to examine
closely the
particular provisions and the particular
circumstances.
decisions led to the adoption of a factorial approach by the Full Court in
. After observing that there is “no simple rule for
determining whether a decision is of an administrative or a legislative
character” (at 194 [40]) and that no one factor is decisive
(at 194 [42]), the Court listed a number of factors relevant to
determination (at 194-202 [43]-[77]). In summary:
(a) “legislative
decisions determine the content of rules of general, usually prospective,
application whereas administrative
decisions apply rules of that kind to
particular cases” (at 194 [43]);
(b) parliamentary
control of the relevant decision, for example, by disallowance, although not
definitive, is a factor pointing to
the decision being properly characterised as
legislative (at 198 [56]);
requirement of public consultation is a further pointer to the decision being
one of a legislative nature (at 198-199 [59]-[61]);
(d) provision
for review of the decision on the merits, for example, by the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal, is an indication that
the decision is of an administrative
character (at 201 [72]-[76]); and
(e) the fact
that a decision has a binding legal effect, in the sense of directly affecting
the operation of other statutory provisions,
suggests it is legislative in
nature (at 202 [77]).
Central Queensland Law
Council Aboriginal Corporation v Attorney General of the Commonwealth
[2002] FCA 58
116 FCR 390
[2002] FCA 58
(Wilcox J).
factors to be considered have been subsequently refined and relied on in many
cases where there is a need to distinguish legislative
actions from
administrative decision-making: see, for example,
SAT FM Pty Ltd v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1997) 75 FCR 604
[1997] FCA 647
Roche Products Pty Ltd v National Drugs and Poisons Schedule Committee
(2007) 163 FCR 451
[2007] FCA 1352
Harbour Radio Pty Ltd v Australian
Communications and Media Authority
[2012] FCA 614
(2012) 202 FCR 525
at 561-563;
(Griffiths J);
Seafish Tasmania Pelagic Pty Ltd v
Minister for Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities (No
[2014] FCA 117
(2014) 225 FCR 97
at 118-121;
[2014] FCA 117
Sea Shepherd Australia Ltd v Western Australia
[2014] WASC 66
(2014) 313 ALR 184
[2014] WASC 66
(Edelman J);
Applied Medical Australia
Pty Ltd v Minister for Health
[2016] FCA 35
(2016) 246 FCR 555
at 577-579;
[2016] FCA 35
(Robertson J);
Uelese v Minister for Immigration and Border
(2016) 248 FCR 296
at 305-307;
[2016] FCA 348
(Robertson J).
McWilliam v Civil Aviation Safety Authority
(2004) 142 FCR 74
, Selway J observed that previous authority should not be
understood as suggesting that administrative and legislative decisions fall
two mutually exclusive categories or that such categories can be clearly
identified by particular characteristics: at 83 [38]-[39].
Construction of the empowering provision
58B of the Defence Act is the legislative power authorising the making of the
Determination. It is fundamentally important
that s 58B(1) deals with the
financial entitlements of members of the Defence Force, including the payment of
remuneration, allowances,
compensation, incentives, and other benefits.
Determinations are intended to confer and define such financial entitlements of
They constitute the legal authority for the payment of remuneration
and benefits. The entitlement of each and every member of the
Defence Force to
remuneration and other benefits is dependent on determinations made under s
58B(1). Clearly, the statutory purpose
of s 58B is better effectuated if
determinations are treated as law rather than as mere guidance as to what
members should expect
to receive and be paid.
s 58B(1B) is concerned with the repayment to the Commonwealth of amounts or
allowances which may have been overpaid to members
and the families of members,
such as in this case. The making of a determination that will require the
repayment of monies in the
circumstances described in the determination is a
power conferred by s 58B(1B). The purpose of this power will not be
or is much less likely to be achieved, if the provisions of a
determination are regarded as mere guidance, rather than as establishing
and binding obligation to make repayment.
our view, the language of s 58B(1B) points to the conclusion that determinations
made under that power are intended to give rise
to binding obligations. The
provision directs that a determination may provide that a member or cadet or
family member “is
required to pay to the Commonwealth [the] amount”.
A determination may provide “for the manner of recovery of such an
amount”. It is clear, in our view, that the legislature intended that
determinations requiring repayments or providing for
the manner of recovery of
overpayments would have the force of law and give rise to legal duties and
obligations. This legislative
purpose is not met if determinations are
only administrative in character and are devoid of legal effect or enforceable
consequences.
addition, there are other indications in the statutory text of s 58B and 58C, as
those provisions stood in 2005, that suggest determinations
made under those
provisions are intended to have legal effect:
(a) determinations
are made by the Minister or a delegate by an instrument in writing not
inconsistent with the Defence Act and other
legislation (s 58B(1));
determination can apply, adopt, or incorporate, with or without modification,
the provisions of other Acts or regulations, or
the content of other instruments
in force at the time when the determination is made (s 58B(1A));
(c) determinations
cannot provide for the forfeiture or assignment of the whole or part of a
member’s remuneration, allowances
or other pecuniary benefits
(s 58B(3));
determination takes effect on the day on which it is made, or another specified
day (s 58B(4)), but cannot be expressed to take
effect on a day earlier than the
day on which it is made where the rights of a person (other than the
Commonwealth) would be prejudicially
affected, or a liability imposed on a
person (other than the Commonwealth) in respect of anything done or omitted to
be done prior
to that day (s 58B(5));
Minister is required to cause notice of the making of a determination to be
published in the Gazette, and of the place or
places where copies of the
determination can be obtained (s 58B(8));
(f) at the time
when cl 1.5.2 of the Determination was made (on 20 May 2005) and relevantly
amended (on 30 November 2005), and over
the relevant period in 2015,
determinations were disallowable instruments:
(i) in 2005,
determinations were disallowable instruments by virtue of
Legislative Instruments (Transitional Provisions and Consequential
Amendments) Act 2003
(Cth), which preserved the effect of
Acts Interpretation Act
(Cth) despite the repeal of
that Part. Prior to the repeal of Pt XII, which coincided with the
commencement of the LIA, a determination
made under s 58B was, by virtue of
s 58C of the Defence Act, subject to tabling and disallowance in the same manner
as a regulation
under Pt XII, albeit that a regulation was made under the
authority of the Governor-General in Council rather than a Minister;
(ii) in 2010, s
58B(4) of the Defence Act was amended to expressly provide that “[a]
determination is a disallowable instrument
for the purposes of s 46B of the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
” (s 46B otherwise applied to
“disallowable non-legislative instruments”): see
Legislation Amendment Act (No. 1) 2010
(Cth) Sch 3
item 2. These
amendments did not apply to determinations made and varied prior to the
commencement of these amendments on 2 August
Legislation Amendment Act (No. 1) 2010
(iii) in 2015,
s 46B of the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) was repealed and
s 58B(1) of the Defence Act was amended to provide that
“the Minister may, by legislative instrument,
determinations”: see
Acts and Instruments (Framework Reform) Act 2015
(Cth) Sch 1
items 117 and 119. Those amendments, which commenced
on 5 March 2016, made determinations subject to disallowance as legislative
instruments: see
Legislation Act 2003
its repeal, the application of s 46B was preserved for determinations in force
immediately before the commencement the
amendments: see
Acts and Instruments
(Framework Reform) Act 2015
(Cth) Sch 1
item 179; and
(g) the Minister’s power to make
determinations could only be delegated with respect to those matters specified
in the regulations
Construction of the determination
provisions and language of the Determination, particularly the operative
provisions, should also be scrutinised to see whether
they are intended to give
rise to legal obligations, and have legal effect. In the present case, these
are unmistakable indications
that the provisions of
of the Determination
are intended to give rise to legal rights and obligations:
(a) the heading
, which is the operative part of the Determination, is entitled
“Member’s rights and obligations”;
(b) the purpose
is to set out the obligations of members where they have an entitlement
(cl 1.5.1);
1.5.1 provides that “[a] member must meet certain obligations when they
have an entitlement”;
1.5.2 describes members as responsible for keeping themselves informed about
their entitlements and provides that, where
there is a change of qualifying
circumstances, “[t]he member must tell their Commanding Officer about the
change as soon as
practicable” (cl 1.5.2(3));
1.5.2 also provides that “[t]he member must also inform the approving
authority for any housing assistance that the
member is in receipt of about the
change as soon as practicable” (cl 1.5.2(4)). It was the omission to
perform this duty which
formed the basis of the appellant’s conviction
under s 135.2(1) of the Criminal Code;
1.5.3 applies where a person has been paid more than the amount to which they
are entitled and provides that the person
“must repay to the Commonwealth
the difference between their entitlement and the amount they were paid”
(cl 1.5.3(2));
1.5.4 applies if a member must repay an overpayment of salary and allowances to
the Commonwealth. It provides that the
Commonwealth may recover the overpaid
amount from the salary and allowances of the member, whilst confirming that the
Commonwealth
has the right to recover an overpaid amount by other means (cl
Characterisation factors
is convenient to adopt the succinct statement of the factors considered by the
Full Court in
and by Tamberlin J in
Visa International
at 424 [592]
Aronson, Groves and Weeks summarise these factors by
asking whether the challenged matter:
(i) creates new rules of general application, rather than applying existing
rules to particular cases;
(ii) cannot be made until there has first been wide public consultation;
(iii) incorporates or has regard to wide policy considerations;
(iv) can be varied or amended unilaterally by its maker, the analogy being to
primary legislation;
(v) cannot be varied or amended by the Executive;
(vi) is not subject to merits review in a tribunal such as the [Administrative
Appeals Tribunal];
(vii) can be reviewed in Parliament (for example, it is a disallowable
instrument);
(viii) triggers the operation of other legislative provisions; and
(ix) has binding effect.
See M Aronson, M Groves and
Judicial Review of Administrative Action and Government
(Thomson Reuters, 6
ed, 2017) at 93
[2.500]. See also
Schwennesen v Minister for Environment and Resource
[2010] QCA 340
n 66 (Holmes and Fraser JJA and
Mullins J).
now consider each of these factors in the present circumstances:
New rules of general application
The Determination is the main determination dealing with conditions of
service within Australia and overseas, and addresses a wide
range of matters.
It applies to the members of the Australian Defence Force of all three services,
their families and cadets. The
Determination establishes general rights and
obligations in relation to pay and allowances. It does not purport to apply
a particular set of facts.
Wide public consultation
The Explanatory Statement to the Determination notes, at p 2, that
policy-makers in the Defence Personnel Executive were closely involved
developing and reviewing the structure and text of the revised chapters of the
Determination “as drafting progressed over
a period of 18 months”.
Drafts were circulated to Defence administrators in Canberra and throughout
Australia during this
period and “[m]easures were taken to ensure that the
extensive practical comments from users of the provisions were incorporated,
without changing the policy effect of the [previous determination].”
Although there was some debate as to this during the
hearing, the Tribunal
was informed by the Director of Military Prosecutions that the Determination was
published on the Department
of Defence intranet, and reproduced in the PACMAN.
Regardless of the debate, but having regard to all other indicators and factors,
the outcome of the appeal is not affected by any doubt that may exist as to the
extent of public consultation prior to approval of
the Determination.
Wide policy considerations
The Determination has extensive scope. Defence Force conditions of service
have considerable public importance, affecting the conduct
of military
operations in and out of Australia, as well as the remuneration and terms and
conditions of service by Defence Force
members within Australia.
The Determination affects permanent and reserve Defence Force members,
family members and cadets.
Variations and amendments
The Determination can be varied or amended by the Minister or delegate.
This routinely occurs.
Cannot be varied or amended by the Executive
The Determination cannot be varied or amended by executive actions; it can
only be varied in the manner authorised by s 58B of the
Defence Act.
Merits review
A person dissatisfied with the Determination has no right to seek review of
the Determination before the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
No other form of
administrative review is available.
Parliamentary review
As noted above, the Determination is subject to Parliamentary control and is
subject to tabling, disallowance and incorporation in
the same manner as other
legislative instruments. Determinations and amending determinations are
notified in the Gazette.
Binding effect
As discussed above, the Determination is intended to have binding effect.
The Determination must also be read in the context of other
obligations, for example, the obligation to promote the efficient, effective and
ethical use of Commonwealth resources,
and to use and manage public resources
properly: see s 44 of the then
Financial Management and Accountability Act
Public Governance, Accountability and Performance Act 2013
(Cth) s 5(c)(iii).
the Tribunal’s view, the weight of the factors considered above strongly
favours the view that the duty to notify the approving
authority of a change of
circumstances in cl 1.5.2(4) of the Determination gives rise to a legal
obligation, and is not a mere administrative
policy or an unenforceable
expectation.
Distinction between the determination and policy statements
Determination and the applicable empowering provisions are clearly
distinguishable from the provisions before the Tribunal in
Baker v Chief of
(2017) 319 FLR 62
[2017] ADFDAT 3.
In that case, the operative clause
in a Defence Instruction provided that: Defence personnel were to have
responsibility for taking
all practical steps to protect the health and safety
of themselves and others in the workplace; supervisors were to be accountable
for reasonably practicable action to prevent unacceptable behaviour in the
workplace; and commanders and managers were to “manage
and report all
unacceptable behaviour complaints promptly and impartially in accordance with
[the] Instruction”: at 73 [68].
The Tribunal described these provisions
as, in effect, “aspirational statements of policy”. They were
“not provisions
which could justify or excuse conduct that would otherwise
constitute an offence”: at 73 [69].
, the relevant empowering provision was s 11 of the Defence Act.
This section authorises the Secretary and the Chief of the Defence
issue instructions “[for] the purposes of the administration of the
Defence Force”. Defence instructions made
under s 11 are not subject to
the formalities and requirements that apply to determinations made under
s 58B of the Defence Act:
see above at [
Appellant’s characterisation submission
is one other submission made by the appellant concerning Ground 1 that remains
to be dealt with by the Tribunal: see above
]. The appellant submitted that, during
the relevant period in 2015, the characterisation of the Determination was
governed by the
provisions of the then LIA and that this affected the
characterisation of cl 1.5.2(4) of the Determination.
the submission was put in a number of ways, the main thrust of the
appellant’s submission was that, if a determination
under s 58B of the
Defence Act was declared by s 7(1) of the LIA not to be a legislative
instrument, then it could not be a legislative
instrument or law of the
Commonwealth for any purpose. The flaw in this argument is that s 7 of the
LIA only declared determinations
under s 58B of the Defence Act not to be
legislative instruments “for the purposes of this Act”.
critical words in s 7 of the LIA restricted the operation and effect of the
provision relied on by the appellant to the LIA
itself. It is clear that the
provisions of the LIA were not intended to have wider consequences, or affect
the interpretation of
the Criminal Code. Nothing in the LIA or any other
enactment provides otherwise.
object of the LIA, found in s 3, was to provide a comprehensive regime for the
management of Commonwealth legislative instruments
through the establishment of
a register. The register was to serve as a repository for legislative
instruments including explanatory
statements and compilations. Section 3 made
clear that the new regime for the management of Commonwealth legislative
instruments
was intended to effect enhancements in consultation, drafting,
public access, parliamentary scrutiny and periodic review.
regard to the express object and purposes of the LIA, the Tribunal is not
persuaded that the provisions of the LIA offer any
assistance in the
construction of the phrase “law of the Commonwealth” in s 4.3 of the
Criminal Code or in the resolution
of the other issues before the Tribunal.
exemption of determinations made under s 58B of the Defence Act from the
provisions of the LIA generally, as provided for by s
7, make it plain that the
LIA was not intended to have any role in the interpretation of the criminal law
of the Commonwealth.
Conclusion as to Ground 1
these reasons, Ground 1 of the Notice of Appeal must be dismissed.
GROUNDS 2 AND 3
short, the prosecution case at trial was that the appellant was required to
advise DHA in writing that he was sharing a residence
in North Adelaide
(“the property”) with his partner “as soon as
practicable” after that change in the circumstances
by which he qualified
for the “not sharing” rental allowance occurred. Although that
change occurred on 12 March 2015,
when his partner commenced living at the
property on a full-time basis with the appellant, he did not notify DHA of that
change until
18 November 2015.
prosecution contended that the conclusion that his failure to so notify DHA was
intentional can be inferred from a number of circumstances.
These include: the
fact that he did not notify DHA until 18 November 2015, some eight months after
the change in circumstances;
that he only notified DHA then as a result of a
discussion earlier that day with his Administration Officer
(“ADMINO”),
FLGOFF Felicity Shearer (nee Upton); that he was well
aware of the relevant requirements (under cl 1.5.2(4) of the Determination);
that he had in the meantime notified DHA about other changes in circumstances
that related to his entitlements, for example an extension
to an overseas
deployment in April 2015; and that he represented to DHA that he was “not
sharing” when he returned his
annual RA rent review form in April
his opening before the DFM counsel for the appellant contended that the
appellant’s failures to notify DHA were due to a
number of circumstances
including some mental health issues following his service overseas and the fact
that he was very busy doing
other things between March and November 2015. At no
time did he attempt to hide the fact that he and his partner were living
after 12 March 2015. Counsel also stressed that the appellant was a
man of good character. The prosecution, he submitted, had not
established that
the appellant had the necessary intent.
indicated before the DFM that he was proposing to call five witnesses on behalf
of the accused, one of whom was SQNLDR Alex
Cave, his immediate superior.
SQNLDR Cave was the Commanding Officer (“the CO”) of the Joint
Electronic Warfare Operations
Support Unit. SQNLDR Cave would give
evidence about his understanding of the relationship between the appellant and
his partner
and the fact that there appeared to be no effort on the part of the
appellant to hide the fact of that relationship.
Background facts
appellant had been in a relationship with his partner since 2013. On
14 October 2014 both of them signed a lease document in relation
property. The appellant was listed as the tenant and his partner was listed as
a person permitted to reside at the premises.
It was agreed, however, that at
that time they were not cohabiting.
that day, on 14 October 2014, the appellant made an RA application to DHA using
the DHA online service portal. He stated that
he was a member without
dependants (“MWOD”) and “not sharing”. He also
indicated that his rent was $790
per fortnight. DHA processed his application
and authorised RA to be paid to him based on the “not sharing”
contribution
rate for an MWOD.
12 February 2015 the appellant electronically signed an “AE162 Deployment
Housing Retention” form notifying DHA of
his forthcoming deployment from 3
March 2015 to 14 April 2015. On 23 February 2015 the appellant updated his
next-of-kin details
on the Personnel Management Key Solution
(“PMKeyS”) program noting his partner as his “spouse”
primary next-of-kin contact. Notwithstanding that her address was
shown as the property it was agreed that they were not cohabiting
at that stage.
A few hours later the appellant telephoned someone at DHA to confirm that they
had received his AE162 form about his
upcoming deployment. A consequence of him
being so deployed was that he would be exempt from paying any contribution
towards his
rent and would thus be entitled to receive RA at a higher rate,
equal to the total amount of his rent of $790 per fortnight.
appellant was deployed on Operation OKRA on 3 March 2015 and returned to
Australia on 17 April 2015, a short time after his intended
return date. He
notified DHA by email on 13 April 2015 that his return date had been extended.
Accordingly he was entitled to,
and did, receive the rental subsidy at the
higher rate for that further period.
was agreed that, on 12 March 2015, his partner commenced living at the property
on a full-time basis with the appellant and that
she commenced contributing to a
joint bank account from which expenses, including rent, were met.
17 April 2015 DHA emailed the appellant about the annual RA rent review to be
completed using the DHA online service portal. The
form included the words
“no change” opposite the words “not sharing” in the
field marked “sharing”.
When it was put to him that, when he
submitted that form, he knew he had to inform DHA that his partner was in fact
sharing with
him, he had agreed “that would be logical but ... it
didn’t trigger.”
some nine months the appellant had been expecting to be posted to Williamtown,
New South Wales. However he was notified sometime
between 12 and 17
November 2015 that he was to be posted to East Sale for about six months before
going to Williamtown. Meanwhile
he had already begun packing and sending some
of his personal effects to Williamtown.
18 November 2015, at approximately 1000 hours, he attended a meeting with his
ADMINO, FLGOFF Shearer. The purpose of the meeting
was to discuss the
appellant’s upcoming posting and what arrangements could be made for his
partner to join the appellant or
to obtain reunion travel. During discussions
to such an allowance he told FLGOFF Shearer that they had been living
together for some time. He had not previously informed DHA
that he was sharing
that day, at 1345 hours, the appellant emailed DHA advising of the change of his
sharing circumstances. He said:
Good Afternoon DHA,
I have checked online – it appears that
some information has been
omitted since my last review
around May 15. Since 12 March 15, I have had a
housemate (my now partner) living with me ... . I understand I will have to
the monies owed – happy to make a lump sum payment. Apologies for
not picking this up earlier.
(Emphasis added.)
a recorded interview on 22 December 2015, known as the “digital record of
interview” (“the DROI”),
the appellant admitted that his
partner had been living permanently at the property since March 2015. It was
agreed that between
12 March 2015 and 18 November 2015 the appellant did
not notify DHA of his change in circumstances, in particular that he was sharing
with her. During that time the appellant received RA at the MWOD “not
sharing” rate based on his rank and living location
of Adelaide. During
that time he should have been receiving RA at the MWOD “sharing with
one” rate. Consequently, he
received an overpayment of
Other evidence
of the evidence comprised various documents. These included screen-prints of
entries made by the appellant on the DHA portal
and emails. Also tendered was a
detailed Statement of Agreed Facts.
Shearer gave evidence about her meeting with the appellant at about 1000 hours
on 18 November 2015. She said that SQNLDR Cave
suggested to the appellant that
he have a chat with her about his upcoming posting to East Sale.
said that they discussed his upcoming posting and whether his partner at the
time could live with him or whether they could have
reunion travel. She said
“it was established that they needed to be in an interdependent
relationship for that to occur.”
She said that they established that the
appellant was not in such a relationship “at that stage” as the
applicable policy
required that they had to have been living together for 90
days. The appellant replied: “We’ve been living together
then discussed how he would prove that they had been living together.
FLGOFF Shearer said that “the notification that
he sent to DHA that
somebody had moved in with him, that they were living together, would have been
sufficient to prove they were
living together.” The appellant responded
by saying something like: “I haven’t done that” or
know I had to do that”.
Shearer told the appellant that he was required to notify DHA in writing and she
showed him the relevant PACMAN reference on
her computer. She said that
“he seemed unaware that he needed to send them that notification”
and that he “said
that he had not done that at that stage.”
appellant gave evidence about his progress through the Royal Australian Air
Force (“RAAF”), his various postings in
Australia and overseas, and
his relationship with his partner since August 2013. He talked about various
stresses involved in his
work and about seeking help from a psychologist. He
also said that he had introduced his partner to his Flight Commander,
Cave, and they would sometimes socialise with him and his
appellant’s counsel asked him how, in November 2015, he realised that he
had not reported the fact that his partner was
living with him in that capacity.
The appellant said that for nine months he had been expecting to be posted to
No. 77 Squadron RAAF
at Williamtown. Sometime between 12 and 17 November
2015 he was at Sydney airport, on his way home from a funeral in America. He
received a telephone call from the Executive Officer (“the XO”)
of No. 81 Wing RAAF advising him that his posting had
changed and that he was to
attend a six month flying instructors’ course at East Sale before
commencing his Williamtown posting.
He was “very upset, angry”
already packed
up and sent a lot of his belongings off to Williamtown.
said it was then that he “realised [he] hadn’t told DHA about [his
partner].” He was then asked what steps he
took. He said: “Fixed
it online, saw the ADMINO, sent them an email.”
counsel then asked him whether he talked to his CO, presumably SQNLDR Cave, as
well. He said: “Yes. So, I rang the CO
when I was at Sydney Airport,
after I got the call from XO 81 Wing, and firstly asked him if he can change it
posting.” He did not say anything about any
discussion with SQNLDR Cave about his RA.
the end of his evidence-in-chief he was asked whether he was “able to
advance any the reason to the Court why [he] didn’t
change [his]
particulars to acknowledge [his partner’s] attendance until [he] did in
November 2015.” He replied: “Admin
oversight.” He was then
asked whether he did that “as a deliberate effort to get the additional
benefit” and he
answered: “No.”
was cross-examined at length about his knowledge of relevant procedures and his
use of various means to access DHA over the preceding
years and during the
period between March and November 2015. This included his communications
regarding deployment housing retention
for the six weeks or so when he was
deployed on Operation OKRA in March and April 2015, the annual RA rent review in
April 2015,
an application for a loan in July 2015, and completing online
documents regarding workplace harassment and for medical purposes.
to him that he had numerous opportunities between March and November 2015 to
notify DHA about his circumstances concerning
his rental allowance.
was asked about his meeting with FLGOFF Shearer on 18 November 2015. He said
that he met with FLGOFF Shearer because he wanted
to find out how many reunion
travel trips he could have with his recognised partner during his six-month
posting to East Sale. He
had difficulty remembering parts of the conversation
which included discussions about potential problems as a result of his partner
not having Australian citizenship.
conceded that he sent the email to DHA on 18 November 2015 after he had had the
meeting with FLGOFF Shearer. It was put to him
that “it was only
during that meeting that [he] realised [he was] in trouble, that [he’d]
been found out”. He
denied this. It was also put to him that he did not
realise his error before seeing FLGOFF Shearer that morning. He said that he
did. He said that: “Otherwise I wouldn’t have – I had no
reason to bring it up with her.” However he did
not say anything in his
evidence about having notified anyone else prior to then.
Cave was called to give evidence on behalf of the appellant. He did this on the
telephone from the United States. He had
been the appellant’s CO since
2014. He provided a character reference for the appellant. He also spoke about
the importance
of the appellant’s work during 2014 and 2015 and some of
the pressures involved. He knew the appellant’s partner and
that she had
been living with the appellant.
cross-examination SQNLDR Cave confirmed that it was the responsibility of an
individual to organise his or her own personal
administration and that if anyone
under his command required leave or other assistance he would attempt to provide
it. He said that
the appellant did have leave made available to him to assist
with his mental health.
further questions about the appellant’s workplace stresses and his access
to mental health services the cross-examination
finished with the following
... the charge FLTLT Herbert is here for today is failing to notify DHA that he
had changed his living arrangements. Does that make
sense? --- Yes, that does
make sense.
... You say that at some point, FLTLT Herbert either went on his own volition or
was referred to psych. Did you, as his superior
officer, refer him to any other
support services, such as an admino? --- I did, but that was much later on when
he’d come to
see me and said he needed to sort out his admin, specifically
in relation to DHA saying that he’d, you know, dropped the ball
fall through the cracks and I said – I referred him to the admino saying
that, “Go see the admino and she’ll
give you advice on what you need
to do to sort it out”.
was no attempt to re-examine SQNLDR Cave about this evidence. In particular, no
questions were asked by counsel whether this
discussion with the appellant and
the referral to the ADMINO occurred before or after SQNLDR Cave’s
telephone discussion with
the appellant concerning his reposting or, for that
matter, whether it occurred before or after the appellant’s discussion
with FLGOFF Shearer on 18 November 2015 concerning allowances for his partner
when he was at East Sale.
Contentions before the DFM
we have already noted, much of the prosecution case relied upon the documentary
evidence and agreed facts that showed the appellant’s
familiarity with
rules concerning rental allowances and other entitlements and his use of various
means to contact DHA in order to
obtain such benefits. The various excuses that
he offered for not notifying DHA of the circumstances that would have resulted
him having to refund the overpayments and stop receiving RA at the higher
“non-sharing” rate, namely mental issues and
excessive work
pressures, did not prevent him from seeking other benefits when it was to his
important part of the oral evidence concerned the events immediately preceding
the appellant’s email to DHA of 18 November
2015 advising of the change of
his sharing circumstances, in particular the context and contents of his
discussion with FLGOFF Shearer
a few hours earlier.
was common ground that during that meeting the appellant told FLGOFF Shearer
that his partner had been sharing the property with
him. Counsel for the
appellant contended that the appellant raised the fact of his need to notify DHA
of his changed circumstances
unprompted by anything that FLGOFF Shearer had
already said. The prosecution contended that the matter only arose in the
of the discussion about how the appellant should organise his affairs
prior to his posting to East Sale so that his partner could
accompany him or so
they could access reunion travel. This would entail, among other things, his
partner being recognised as an
interdependent partner, assuming there was no
desire to become married at that point.
for the appellant relied heavily upon the good character of the appellant and
his mental issues and work pressures as providing
an explanation for his failure
to notify DHA earlier of the changed circumstances. Counsel also stressed the
fact that the appellant
was quite open about his relationship with his partner
and never attempted to hide the fact that they were living together, as would
have been the case if he was intentionally misleading others, including DHA,
of oversight. At worst
he was negligent or even reckless. His failure to notify was not
intentional.
also stressed the evidence of SQNLDR Cave that emerged during cross-examination,
to the effect that the appellant had volunteered
to SQNLDR Cave that he, the
appellant, “needed to sort out his admin specifically in relation to DHA
saying that he’d
... dropped the ball and let it fall through the
cracks”, and that he should see the ADMINO for advice on how he should
it out. This was evidence that the appellant knew of the problem and
intended to fix it prior to and unprompted by his meeting with
FLGOFF Shearer. Counsel contended that this was a case of
self-referral.
appeal, counsel for the appellant stated that:
The Appellant’s defence was that he overlooked notifying DHA of his change
of circumstances, that in the circumstances and
conditions of service under
which he was operating at the time, it simply slipped his mind and that, when he
realised his mistake,
he “dobbed himself in” by reporting himself to
his immediate superior, SQNLDR Cave, who advised him to see his admino
turn, told him to contact DHA.
DFM’s findings and conclusions
DFM gave himself appropriate directions. These included directions about how he
should take into account the evidence about the
appellant’s good
character. He then identified each element of the offence, including the fact
that the fault element concerning
the appellant’s failure to advise DHA of
his change in circumstances was that he intended to engage in that conduct. He
found that all three of the prosecution witnesses were honest and reliable
witnesses and, in particular, that he had no doubt about
the credibility and
reliability of the evidence of FLGOFF Shearer concerning the meeting on 18
November 2015.
First, it’s common ground that the purpose of the meeting was not to
discuss RA. It was about the accused’s upcoming
posting and what
arrangements could be made for either [his partner] to join the accused or for
reunion travel. That led the conversation
towards recognition of interdependent
partnership.
DFM then referred to the evidence called on behalf of the appellant. He
The defence called the accused and five other witnesses who spoke to his
character and his relationship with [his partner] or a couple
of cases of both.
Along with material already in evidence as part of the prosecution case, there
are also numerous character statements,
annual reports, course reports and other
documents that were tendered.
As for the accused, I had the benefit of observing both his digital record of
interview and his in-Court testimony. Broadly,
I found him to be honest and
reliable when it came to the objective facts of the case
, facts which were
often not in dispute in any event.
Having made allowance for the good character evidence and his reputation for
honesty and integrity,
I nonetheless do not share the same opinion when it
comes to his evidence of his subjective understandings and beliefs.
(Emphasis added.)
DFM proceeded to provide examples of why he had this concern. One was that the
appellant had said in his DROI that he did not
notify DHA because he was not
able to access the DHA intranet site whilst he was overseas or away. However
DHA could be contacted
online over the Internet, by email, or by telephone.
More importantly, the appellant himself has utilised all three methods of
DHA. Indeed, the DFM found that, when the appellant did advise DHA
on 18 November 2015 of his changed circumstances, he did so “by
simple email that did not involve the intranet.”
DFM then referred to the issue as to whether the appellant had already decided
to notify DHA before his discussion with FLGOFF
Shearer on 18 November 2015, or
whether he only notified DHA after he realised during his conversation with her
that he had been
caught out. The DFM said:
There is a dispute over why it was the accused finally raised in November
’15 the issue of [his partner] sharing the RA property
and the fact that
that had not been notified to DHA. To summarise, the accused says he raised the
matter of [his partner] sharing
the property without him having previously
notified DHA unprompted, after receiving notification of a change of posting
orders from
77 Squadron at Williamtown to attend the flying instructor
course at East Sale for six months, prior to him subsequently taking up
posting to 76 Squadron at Williamtown.
The prosecution position is that the issue of [his partner] residing with the
accused only came to the fore during a conversation
between the accused and
FLGOFF Shearer, then JCO, ADMINO come PCO in November ’15, and the
purpose of that conversation was
affairs prior to his posting to East Sale so [his partner] could accompany him
he could access reunion travel.
This would entail, among other things, [his partner] being recognised as an
interdependent partner, assuming there was no desire
to become married at that
FLGOFF Shearer’s version makes some sense. The accused’s
version seems more peculiar. If he had realised prior to the
meeting with the
admino that he had not notified DHA of his change of circumstance, why did he
wait until after the meeting with
the admino to notify DHA.
If the purpose of the meeting was to discuss the fact that he hadn’t
previously notified DHA, which wasn’t FLGOFF Shearer’s
testimony, but even if it was I don’t understand why he would have had to
meet with the admino, he could simply have contacted
DHA, something that he had
done on other previous occasions; see paragraphs 34 and 35 of the agreed facts
and exhibit 1 for the sequences
This ordering of events, meeting with the admino, then notifying DHA is also
contrary to what he said in answer to question 22 of
his digital record of
interview where he said he logged on to update his lease end date, I understood
that to mean logging on to
the DHA online portal, when he realised the
“sharing, zero” was incorrect he fixed it online and send [sic] an
and then met with the admino.
There is nothing in exhibit 38 which is the exhibit that shows the various
interactions with DHA, to indicate that the accused had
made contact with DHA re
the RA property and his change of circumstances, prior to the email sent on the
afternoon of 18 November;
see exhibit 46. There is a record of a phone
call on 24 November, among other things, that deals with the lease end
date; see exhibit
52 and the corresponding entry on page 1 of
exhibit 38.
No contemporaneous material supports a version of the accused contacting
or logging on to the online service portal and amending things
to the meeting with the admino
. While I am prepared to accept in his
digital record of interview that he may simply have been mistaken as to the
order of events,
even though the digital record of interview was only a little
over four weeks after his meeting with the admino, what it does mean
explanation for his state of mind is not supported by those order of events.
The DHA records included in the online transactions
have nothing of relevance
prior to the meeting with the admino on 18 November ’15.
(Emphasis added.)
DFM then referred to the evidence of SQNLDR Cave quoted at [
] above. It is common ground that the
DFM misconstrued that evidence as the appellant telling SQNLDR Cave that
someone from DHA had
said that the appellant had “dropped the ball”
whereas it was he, the appellant, who was acknowledging that he had
the ball”. The DFM said:
It is apparent from that, that that referral to the admino would have been after
the member had been in contact with DHA because
SQNLDR Cave’s recollection
is that the accused said to SQNLDR Cave that the reason why he needed to sort
out his admin was
in relation to DHA saying that he’d you know, dropped
the ball. ... I took that to colloquially mean that DHA was indicating
member that he hadn’t attended to the relevant
requirements.
appeal, counsel for the appellant contended that this evidence of SQNLDR Cave
(set out at [
] above), when properly
construed, was in fact “contemporaneous material [supporting the] version
of the accused contacting
DHA ... prior to the meeting with the admino”
(referring back to the passage underlined at the end of the quotation in [
DFM then turned his attention to the evidence other than that concerning the
events on 18 November 2015, namely that concerning
the appellant’s
knowledge and ability to notify DHA of the relevant change in circumstances
during the previous eight months
I also find it unlikely that the status of the accused’s relationship with
[his partner] did not factor in his thinking until
he was notified of the change
of posting to East Sale for a six month course prior to continuing to
Williamtown.
On his evidence he had been on notice of a posting to Williamtown for some nine
months which is after [his partner] had joined him
in Adelaide. He had already
undertaken a number of removals with the air force, surely, at some stage prior
to notification of the
East Sale posting, he and [his partner] would have
discussed what would have happened when the accused went to Williamtown, as the
accused then thought he was doing at the end of the year.
Not that this casts doubt on the purpose of the meeting in November, which was
to sort out how [his partner] could potentially go
to East Sale, or reunion
travel, it just means that I find the accused’s explanations for
motivations for activities difficult
to reconcile with objective circumstances.
Finally, during the relevant period, the accused notified DHA of his change of
housing retention,
completed an online rent review which, amongst other things, specifically deals
with sharing, and applied for
a RAAF Welfare Trust Fund loan. I would add to
that also on a number of occasions used the online services to reset his
and then book, cancel or otherwise vary living-in accommodation.
However, on his evidence, it was an administrative oversight not to notify DHA
that he was sharing with [his partner], a fact he
would be reminded of on every
occasion he came home from work, when not absent from duty or away on leave, and
if [his partner] was
not otherwise absent from the premises herself.
While he was away, either on duty or leave for substantial periods, he was still
in-location for a significant number of days between
March and November
’15. I simply find it too convenient that he could attend to personal
admin tasks, to all his other personal
admin tasks which also included
notification to DHA for eight
months, a task which he had done on at least three
previous occasions when occupying RA properties.
I do not accept his evidence when it comes to describing his state
of mind at any given time
, rather, I put his testimony as to his state of
mind at any given point to one side, and in the usual way draw conclusions about
his state of mind from his actions and all the surrounding circumstances.
(Emphasis added.)
DFM then referred to the five witnesses called by the defence, pointing out that
their evidence related to the general character
of the accused and “the
openness of the relationship and residential status of [his partner].” He
I accept that the accused is a person of good character. I also accept that he
has a reputation for honesty and integrity. I note,
however, the offence
charged is not one of deception or dishonesty.
I also gather from the character statements and from other material, that the
accused is more likely to apply himself to his work
and to matters that engage
him than to, for example, matters of personal admin which he, at any given time,
may not consider important
or a priority.
The good character and reputation evidence is, therefore, of only some
. To the extent that it is of assistance, I have had regard to
it, particularly when considering the reckless [sic] of the fault
elements that
I have identified have been proven beyond reasonable doubt.
(Emphasis added.)
DFM then considered the evidence in relation to each of the elements of the
offence charged. This included a consideration of
the phrase “as soon as
practicable” in the duty to inform the approving authority set out in cl
1.5.3(4) of the Determination.
In this regard the DFM acknowledged that the
appellant was busy during the relevant period and that he had mental health
However he was still considered fit for duties and these matters did
not prevent him from engaging in other administrative tasks.
He managed to notify DHA by email on 13 April 2015 of his change of RTA date for
the purposes of his deployment housing retention.
This was about three weeks
after [his partner] had moved in full time. It would not have been a demanding
act to add one or two
more sentences to that email. He had also previously
During the period, he had a number of other contacts via online services with
DHA re: his password and living in accommodation.
DFM then said:
His mental health issues might explain one off lapses, otherwise out of
character behaviour during the period, or general degradation
performance, not [that] there is particular evidence of that in this case. But
his failing to notify for about eight months,
where the change of circumstances
were readily apparent, its effect on his entitlement was something that he was
familiar with without
the need of specialist advice, contrasts this to sometimes
where people’s personal relationship circumstances have changed
interpretation of that change under the determination of PACMAN might be a
complex question. But it is not a complex factual
circumstance whether a person
is residing full time in your house or not.
The means to advise DHA were available to him and were neither time consuming
nor physically, mentally or emotionally demanding as,
I had said, he otherwise
engaged with DHA on numerous occasions in the relevant period. I am satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that
he failed to notify DHA of a notifiable change of
circumstance between 12 March and 18 November 2015, that this amounted to a
to notify DHA as soon as practicable, and as such he engaged in conduct
by omission of a duty that he was legally required to perform.
DFM then turned to consider the relevant fault element. He
The fault element for that is that he intended to engage in that conduct, so
that is an intention an [sic] omission to notify. In
the period March to
November ’15, FLTLT Herbert corresponded or interacted with DHA on
numerous occasions. There is the aforementioned
change to his RTA date for the
purposes of his deployment housing retention, there’s the rent review in
April 2015 at exhibit
44, and there’s the number of other contacts via
online services re: his password and living in accommodation.
He was a flight lieutenant. He is an educated and capable man with access to
means of communication which he actually used to communicate
with DHA. He had
previous experience with DHA with rental allowance and change of sharing
notifications on at least three occasions,
see agreed facts paras 5 and 6. The
conduct by admission occurred over and [sic] eight month period. I have already
noted the stress
and mental health issues, but I also noted he remained on duty
and was regularly at work at Edinburgh.
He had a reminder that [his partner] was residing with him, every time he saw
her at the RA property. This is important as sometimes
there can be a change of
circumstance that, in effect, once one moves past it, it is all in the
background. That is not the case
The change in circumstance was neither factually nor administratively complex to
grasp and appreciate. There is my dual point finding
previously on his
character, that he has a reputation for honesty and integrity, but he also has a
reputation for being work-focused
and will engage on matters that interest him
and not prioritise those that do not.
A conclusion that he was aware of a personal admin task but did not give it
his attention by way of actioning that task, is not inconsistent
reputation for honesty and integrity.
Over an eight-month period, with the
physical presence of [his partner] in the RA property and being in contact with
DHA on numerous
other occasions, I do not accept that the failure to notify was
oversight or mere inadvertence. Rather, I am positively satisfied
reasonable doubt that FLTLT Herbert was aware that he was sharing and that he
intentionally never informed DHA about his change
of circumstances.
(Emphasis added.)
Ground 2 – Misdirection as to the law
appellant contends that:
[T]he [DFM] made a specific finding of fact that the Appellant’s failure
to notify the change of circumstance was not dishonest.
A finding that the
failure was nevertheless intentional is inconsistent with a finding of honesty.
It was therefore not open to
the learned [DFM] to find that the offence had been
quoted the conclusions set out in paragraph [
] above, and referred to the sentence
which we have underlined. Counsel contends that “a person of honesty and
integrity does
not deliberately neglect his duty, especially when the known
consequence of a deliberate neglect of duty will yield him an illicit
advantage. That is the misdirection.” Counsel contended that the
DFM’s observations to the effect that the
appellant did not prioritise his
obligations to attend to “mundane administrative tasks”, coupled
with him being a man
of honesty and integrity, may lead to an inference of
negligence but not intent. Counsel submitted that “[t]he finding tends
turn the offence into one of strict liability.”
disagree with these contentions. They ignore the careful attention given to the
appellant’s good character and its relevance
elsewhere in the DFM’s
reasons, including in the passages quoted in paragraphs [
] above, in particular those parts which
we have underlined. The DFM rejected the appellant’s evidence about his
state of mind
at any given time and drew his conclusions from the
appellant’s actions and surrounding circumstances. These included the
concerns noted in paragraph [
and his careful consideration of the evidence concerning the discussion with
FLGOFF Shearer (see [
] above). The
DFM also expressly referred to other evidence relevant to his consideration of
the appellant’s state of mind
during the relevant period: see, for
example, the penultimate paragraph in the passage quoted in [
as the DFM noted in the passage quoted in paragraph [
] above, the relevant offence did not
require proof of dishonesty as such. Rather, the relevant fault element was
intention. “A
person has intention with respect to conduct if he or she
means to engage in that conduct”: Criminal Code s 5.2(1). In cases
concerning an omission to perform an act which the person is under a duty to
perform, as was the case here, the person intends to
omit to perform that act if
not to perform it.
is a question of fact for the decision-maker to decide by a process of
inferential reasoning on the basis of all the facts
and circumstances of the
Smith v The Queen
[2017] HCA 19
(2017) 259 CLR 291
at 320-321;
[2017] HCA 19
and [61] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane, Nettle and Gordon JJ).
This is what the DFM did: see, for example, the penultimate paragraph
passage quoted in [
] above. He did
not treat the offence as a “strict liability” offence.
cognisant of the appellant’s general good character, honesty and
integrity, the DFM considered the appellant’s contentions
that his failure
to notify DHA was inadvertent and not intentional at length and concluded that
such a theory was not a reasonable
hypothesis. Having regard to all of the
evidence he was entitled to find this element proven beyond reasonable
2 is not made out.
Ground 3 – Erroneous findings of fact or mixed fact and law
ground turns on the DFM’s misunderstanding of part of the evidence of
SQNLDR Cave quoted in [
] above. It is
common ground that the DFM wrongly construed that evidence as the appellant
telling SQNLDR Cave that someone at DHA
had told him (the appellant) that he had
“dropped the ball”. Rather, the proper construction is that the
appellant was
acknowledging to SQNLDR Cave that he (the appellant) had
“dropped the ball” and “let it fall through the cracks”,
not that someone at DHA had said this to the appellant.
for the appellant contended that this error seriously infected the DFM’s
reasoning, in particular in relation to the
appellant’s contentions that
he had realised his obligations and decided to notify DHA of the change in
circumstances prior
to and un-prompted by his meeting with FLGOFF Shearer on 18
November 2015. On the DFM’s interpretation of that evidence of
Cave, it was someone from DHA who initiated the process by telling the appellant
that he had dropped the ball. Counsel submitted
that the DFM’s erroneous
understanding of that evidence led him to conclude, wrongly, that the appellant
must have had a second
meeting with FLGOFF Shearer, the existence of which there
is no evidence. Counsel also queried why the appellant would have needed
consult FLGOFF Shearer about how to notify DHA if he had already had that
discussion with someone at DHA. We would interpose
by asking a similar
rhetoric question: “Why did the appellant not notify DHA prior to his
discussion with FLGOFF Shearer, if
he was already aware of his obligation to do
contended that the evidence properly construed shows that the appellant had
raised his failure to notify DHA voluntarily and
without being prompted or
caught out. That is, he submitted, inconsistent with deliberate intent and
entirely consistent with honest
also referred to the DFM’s reference (underlined in the text quoted at [
] above) to there being “no
contemporaneous material [that] supports a version of the accused contacting DHA
or logging on to
the online service portal and amending things prior to the
meeting with [FLGOFF Shearer]” and contended that this evidence
Cave, properly construed, does constitute such corroborative material.
are some serious problems with these contentions. The appellant’s written
submissions begin with the assertion that:
The Appellant’s evidence was that, when he realised he had not updated his
rental status to inform DHA about his partner having
moved in to his rental
property, he approached his immediate commander, SQNLDR Cave, who told him to
report it to the admino.
appellant gave no such evidence. Moreover this was never part of the
appellant’s case until final submissions when his
counsel was able to
seize upon that evidence which emerged at the end of SQNLDR Cave’s
cross-examination. Until then, apart
from his broad denials in relation to his
meeting with FLGOFF Shearer on 18 November 2015, noted in paragraph [
] above, his position was that he had
inadvertently failed to notify DHA of his changed circumstances, and that this
was due to various
reasons including mental health issues, being too busy at
work and his inability to notify DHA for example because of his limited
to Internet.
our opinion the DFM’s misunderstanding of that part of SQNLDR Cave’s
evidence did not have a relevant bearing upon
his conclusions. Even if the
appellant was aware that he had “dropped the ball” some time before
his meeting with FLGOFF
Shearer on 18 November 2015 to discuss his allowances in
the context of his forthcoming posting to East Sale, the fact is that he
notify DHA until after that meeting. Even if he did realise a few days earlier
that he had “dropped the ball”
he could and should have notified DHA
then. The fact that he did not do that further supports the inference that he
was not going
to do so “as soon as practicable”. He was well aware
of how simple it was to notify DHA of the change in circumstances.
readily apparent when one looks at the simple email which he sent to DHA on 18
November 2015.
we have already noted, the DFM’s conclusions did not significantly rely
even upon the events immediately before and during
the appellant’s meeting
with FLGOFF Shearer on 18 November 2015. Nor did they necessarily rely
upon a rejection of the contention
that the appellant had voluntarily reported
to SQNLDR Cave. There was considerable other evidence upon which the DFM
relied, and
was entitled to rely, to draw the necessary inference beyond
reasonable doubt.
error of the DFM in misconstruing that part of SQNLDR Cave’s evidence does
not render the appellant’s conviction unsafe
or unsatisfactory. Having
reconsidered the evidence we are of the view that it was open to the DFM to be
satisfied of the appellant’s
guilt beyond reasonable doubt: cf
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
at 493 (Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson, Toohey JJ);
v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
at 614-615, 623;
[2002] HCA 53
(Gleeson CJ, Hayne and Callinan JJ), [55] (McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ);
v The Queen
[2011] HCA 13
(2011) 243 CLR 400
at 405, 406;
[2011] HCA 13
(French CJ, Gummow and Kiefel JJ);
Fitzgerald v The Queen
[2014] HCA 28
(2014) 311 ALR
[2014] HCA 28
(Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and Gageler JJ);
Filippou v The Queen
[2015] HCA 29
(2015) 256 CLR 47
at 53-54, 75-76;
[2015] HCA 29
(French CJ, Bell, Keane and Nettle JJ), [82]-[83]
(Gageler J).
3 is not made out.
DISPOSITION
appeal must be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
thirty (130) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision
the Honourable Justices Tracey
(President)
Hiley and Garde (Members).
Dated: 27 April 2018
RTF format (670 KB)
Signed PDF/A format