Sharma v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FedCFamC2G 1860 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Sharma v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1860
File number(s):
MLG 4443 of 2020
Judgment of:
JUDGE HUMPHREYS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
MIGRATION –
Administrative Appeals
Student (Temporary) (Class TU)
failure to accord procedural fairness and natural justice – Sole ground of
judicial review has no merit – Application
dismissed with costs
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
ss 363(1)(b)
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) cl 500.213 of Schedule 2
Cases cited:
Applicant WAEE v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
(2003) 256 FCR 593
Charisteas v Charisteas
[2021] HCA 29
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko–Wallsend Ltd
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v Dhillon
[2014] FCAFC 157
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v Sing
[2014] FCAFC
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2012] HCA 61
(2013) 249 CLR
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZJSS
[2010] HCA 48
(2010) 243 CLR
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng (2001)
205 CLR 507
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Yusuf &
(2001) 206 CLR 323
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs v
(2003) 128 FCR 553
SCAA v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2002] FCA 668
SZBEL v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
(2006) 228 CLR 152
SZJTK v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
SZRUI v Minister for Immigration, Multicultural Affairs and
Citizenship
[2013] FCAFC 80
Division 2 General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Self-Represented Litigant
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Mr Dietrich, Minter Ellison
Solicitor for the Second Respondent:
Submitting appearance, save as to costs
MLG 4443 of 2020
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
MAHESH SHARMA
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
Second Respondent
JUDGE HUMPHREYS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Application is dismissed.
Applicant is to pay the First Respondent costs fixed in the sum of
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or
order to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
or to record a variation to the order pursuant to
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2)
(General Federal Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE D HUMPHREYS
INTRODUCTION
is an application for judicial review of a decision of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal, as it then was
(the Tribunal), dated 2 December 2020,
affirming a decision of a delegate of the first respondent (the delegate) to
refuse to grant
the applicant a Student (Temporary) (Class TU) (Subclass 500)
(the visa).
the reasons set out below, the application must be dismissed.
applicant is a citizen of India.
1 July 2019, the applicant applied for the visa. At the time of application, the
Class TU visa contained two subclasses: Subclass
500 (Student) and Subclass 590
(Student Guardian). The applicant applied for the visa to undertake study in
7 August 2019, the Minister's department (the Department) notified the applicant
that he was required to provide, amongst other
things, evidence of his English
language proficiency. The applicant subsequently provided the Department with
several documents,
including a report indicating that the applicant's overall
score on the Pearson Test of English (PTE) Academic test was 19.
13 November 2019, the delegate refused to grant the applicant the visa on the
basis that the applicant had not provided evidence
that demonstrated his English
language proficiency met the legislative requirements, and therefore the
applicant did not satisfy
the requirements of cl 500.213 of Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
Regulations
2 December 2019, the applicant lodged an application for review with the
22 July 2020, the Tribunal wrote to the applicant to invite him to attend a
scheduled hearing on 6 August 2020. The invitation
noted that the hearing would
be held by telephone due to the COVID–19 pandemic.
14 August 2020, the applicant informed the Tribunal that he had made a booking
to take a further English language test on 23 November
26 August, the Tribunal invited the applicant to attend a further hearing
scheduled on 10 September 2020. The invitation noted
that the further hearing
would be held by telephone due to the COVID–19 pandemic.
27 August 2020, the applicant sought an adjournment until after 23 November
2 September 2020, the Tribunal confirmed with the applicant that his request for
an adjournment had been granted, and invited the
applicant to attend a scheduled
hearing before it on 27 November 2020, which was after his second English
language test. Again, the
invitation noted that the hearing would be held by
telephone due to the COVID–19 pandemic.
26 November, the applicant wrote to the Tribunal to provide the results of his
PTE test. The applicant noted that the score required
was 43 and that he had
only scored 29.
27 November 2020, the applicant attended the scheduled Tribunal hearing.
2 December 2020, the Tribunal affirmed the decision not to grant the applicant
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
Tribunal’s decision in this matter comprises two pages and fifteen
paragraphs.
[1] – [5], the Tribunal outlined the application for review and the
background of the matter.
[6] – [9], the Tribunal outlined the requirements of cl 500.213 of Sch 2
Regulations
, including the requirements for English language
proficiency and exempt classes of applicants. Further to this requirement, the
failed to provide the Tribunal with such evidence, noting that the
applicant had provided the Tribunal with evidence of achieving
a PTE score of
29, which is below the minimum set out in IMMI 18/015.
Tribunal noted at [10] that the applicant had been impacted by the
COVID–19 pandemic, as his studies were transferred online.
[11] – [13], the Tribunal stated that it had also considered further
adjourning the review; however, it determined that the
applicant had sufficient
time to demonstrate his ability to meet the English language proficiency
requirements. The Tribunal further
noted the fact that it was not satisfied that
the applicant was a member of an excluded class of exempt applicants.
Tribunal found that the applicants did not satisfy the requirements of cl
500.213 of Sch 2 to the
Regulations
, and accordingly, the Tribunal
affirmed the decision not to grant the applicant the visa [14] – [15].
GROUNDS OF JUDICIAL REVIEW
applicant advances one ground of judicial review contained in an Originating
Application filed with the Court on 29 December 2020,
with particulars at
“a” to “e”. They are as follows:
Tribunal failed to accord me the procedural fairness and natural
Nov 2020 AAT called for hearing on telephone in my case and I appeared for
hearing and gave my evidences thus this decision
is affected by jurisdictional
error in such a way that the Tribunal’s exercise or purported exercise of
power is thereby affected
resulting in a decision exceeding or failing to
exercise the authority or powers given under the
Migration Act
Minister for
Immigration & Multicultural Affairs v Yusuf & Anor
;(2001) 206 CLR 323;
(2001) 75 ALJR 1105
(2001) 180 ALR 1
(2001) 62 ALD 225
per McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ. I assert that this case is relevant in
decision maker has failed to give an opportunity to me, the applicant and to
address the issues and grounds upon which the visa
was refused. I sought
additional time to submit my English Result which was disallowed.
tribunal decided disregarding my fresh oral evidence submitted and on file which
included my relevant studies done in Australia,
my studies in my home country,
my need to do studies and my circumstances. Tribunal disregard the impact I have
due to COVID 19 pandemic
where all PTE and IELT Test Centres were closed and it
is utmost difficult to find a testing venue. Further it did not agree to my
submission that my efforts to take English coaching were also hampered by COVID
and I did to appear for test without coaching. I
was also unable to go to other
state due to the longest lockdown in the world imposed in Victoria The decision
maker has failed to
identify and consider the elements of the case pertaining to
the evidence I submitted to satisfy 500.213 clause of Migration Regulation
applicable in my case.
Tribunal failed to accord me, the applicant, and procedural fairness and it
seems the member at AAT was predetermined to reject
failed to assess my English skills relevant obtained through current Australian
studies, living period and employment which
was all done in
THE APPLICANT’S SUBMISSIONS
applicant appeared before the Court unrepresented. Although the applicant did
not request an interpreter in his Originating Application,
he indicated that he
required an interpreter to assist him. Accordingly, the commencement of the
hearing was delayed while a telephone
interpreter was sourced.
to the hearing commencing, the Court ensured that the applicant was in
possession of a copy of the relevant Court Books and
that the respondent’s
written submissions had been translated to him. The Court also ensured that the
applicant had access
to a pen and paper, so that he could take notes during the
course of the hearing, if he wished to do so.
the commencement of the hearing, the Court explained it was undertaking judicial
review, not merits review, and the difference
between the two types of review.
The Court also explained the procedure by which the hearing would be undertaken.
Court orders, no written submissions or other material were provided to the
Court by the applicant in support of his case.
The applicant was asked to
identify the legal error present in the Tribunal’s decision. The applicant
stated he did not know.
The applicant was asked how the Tribunal failed to
afford him procedural fairness. The applicant stated that he did not, noting
the Tribunal adjourned his hearing to allow him to undertake a second
English language test.
applicant was asked what evidence was not considered by the Tribunal. The
applicant was unable to answer.
applicant was asked how the Tribunal was biased against him. The applicant
stated he never suggested they were.
the conclusion of the respondent’s oral submissions, the applicant was
asked if he wished to state anything in reply. The
applicant answered
THE FIRST RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS
applicant’s sole ground of judicial review contains five particulars, each
making a range of contentions.
particular (a), the applicant contends that the Tribunal’s decision to
hold a hearing by telephone caused it to fall into
applicant places reliance on the case of
Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs v Yusuf & Anor
(2001) 206 CLR 323 (
at [82] per McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ. However,
does not apply to
this case as the paragraph cited by the applicant refers
definition of the meaning of jurisdictional error and provides no practical
guidance in interpreting the error the applicant
says applies in his case.
the extent that this particular is a contention that the Tribunal's decision to
hold a hearing by telephone caused it to fall into
Tribunal was legislatively empowered to allow an applicant's appearance for the
purposes of the review
of a decision by telephone, closed–circuit
television, or any other means of communication under s 366 of the
Migration Act 1958
Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection v Dhillon
[2014] FCAFC 157
(2014) 227 FCR 525
Allsop CJ, Murphy and Pagone JJ.
exercising the discretion provided for in s 366 of the
, the Tribunal
‘would generally need to consider whether an appearance using such
technology gave the applicant concerned a
fair opportunity to give his or her
evidence and to present arguments to it’:
SZJTK v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2008] FCA 1712
per Reeves J.
was not unreasonable for the Tribunal to exercise its discretion to hold a
hearing by telephone in circumstances where:
(a) the Tribunal notified the applicant in the hearing invitation of 22 July
2020 that, due to the COVID–19 pandemic, it was
not holding face-to-face
hearings as of Monday, 23 March 2020;
(b) the applicant was assisted by an interpreter in the Punjabi and English
languages; and
(c) the applicant did not raise any concerns with holding the hearing by
Accordingly,
the Tribunal exercised its discretion reasonably to proceed by way of telephone
pursuant to s 366 of the
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2012] HCA 61
(2013) 249 CLR 332
) at [63] per Hayne, Kiefel and Bell JJ;
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 92 ALJR 713
) at [4] per Kiefel CJ.
particular (b), the applicant contends that the Tribunal failed to give the
Applicant an opportunity to address the 'issues and
grounds' upon which the visa
was refused, and that the applicant sought further time in which to provide an
English language result,
which was not allowed.
provided the Tribunal with the discretion to adjourn
a review from time to time. This discretion must be exercised reasonably:
question of whether the Tribunal has acted reasonably is 'invariably fact
dependent' and, therefore, consideration must be given
to the relevant facts of
the matter and the evidence before the Tribunal, noting that the Tribunal's
reasons are the focal point
of any such assessment:
Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection v Sing
[2014] FCAFC 1
) at [42] and
applicant was provided a meaningful opportunity to present his case to the
Tribunal, as demonstrated by the following circumstances:
(d) the applicant was plainly aware of the dispositive issue on review, being
the ground for refusal of his visa from the date of
the delegate's decision, 13
November 2019;
(e) the applicant had a period of over 12 months between taking his two English
tests, and in that time had been studying English;
(f) the applicant had previously been granted an adjournment by the Tribunal for
the purpose of undertaking an English language test,
and the applicant had
achieved a score of 29, which was below the minimum requirement; and
(g) there was no evidence before the Tribunal that the applicant had booked
another English test.
Tribunal's refusal to grant the applicant additional time was reasonable on the
facts of the matter:
at [10] and [82].
Particulars
(c) and (e) complain that the Tribunal did not accept elements of the
applicant's submissions, including his complaints
that English language testing
centres were closed due to the COVID–19 pandemic. The applicant also
contends that the Tribunal
did not consider the evidence the applicant submitted
to satisfy cl 500.213 of Sch 2 to the
Regulations
and failed to assess
the applicant's English skills, which were acquired through study, living in
Australia, and employment in Australia.
to the applicant's submissions, the Tribunal plainly did consider the evidence
filed by the applicant against cl 500.213
of Sch 2 to the
Regulations
The Tribunal does not have to refer to every piece of evidence submitted by an
applicant in its reasons:
Applicant WAEE v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
(2003) 256 FCR 593 at [46].
is well established that the weight attributed to evidence is a matter for the
Tribunal as part of its fact–finding function:
Minister for Aboriginal
Affairs v Peko–Wallsend Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR 24
at 41. The applicant's
contention that the Tribunal should have assessed his English skills by
reference to his living, studying,
and working in Australia is without merit.
The wording of cl 500.213 of Sch 2 to the
Regulations
and IMMI 18/015 is
clear and unambiguous. It establishes that the only permissible method of
assessing an applicant's English language
proficiency for the purposes of cl
500.213 of Sch 2 to the
Regulations
is by an applicant completing one of
the specified tests, and achieving the requisite score for that test, as set out
in Schedule
1 of IMMI 18/015.
circumstances where the applicant had not provided evidence of achieving the
minimum requisite score in one of the tests set out
in Schedule 1 of IMMI
18/015, the Tribunal lacked the discretion to consider any other method of
assessing the applicant's English
language proficiency.
(c) and (e) cavils with the merits of the Tribunal's decision and are simply an
invitation for the Court to engage in impermissible
merits review:
for Immigration and Citizenship v SZJSS
[2010] HCA 48
(2010) 243 CLR 164
(d) alleges that the Tribunal failed to accord the applicant procedural fairness
and was predetermined to reject the applicant's
Tribunal's procedural fairness obligations are exhaustively outlined in Division
5 of Part 5 of the
. The Tribunal complied with its obligation to
invite the applicant to attend a hearing pursuant to s 360 of the
The applicant was plainly afforded sufficient opportunity to give evidence and
present arguments about the determinative issue on
review, which was the same as
that before the delegate:
SZBEL v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
and Indigenous Affairs
(2006) 228 CLR 152.
The applicant was afforded a
'real and meaningful' opportunity to participate in the hearing, which the
applicant did with the assistance
of an interpreter in the Punjabi language:
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs v SCAR
(2003) 128 FCR 553 at [37]. Accordingly, there is no merit to the applicant's
complaint that he was denied procedural fairness.
the applicant's contention of bias, there is no evidence to support this
allegation of bias, which is serious and must be
'distinctly made and clearly
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng
(2001) 205 CLR 507
at [69]. It is rare that such an allegation can be made
out with reference to the decision record alone, and no inference of bias
prejudgment should be drawn from the mere fact of adverse findings:
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
applicant has failed to particularise or provide any evidence of their claim
that the Tribunal 'predetermined' and has thus failed
to discharge this burden.
As such, where there is no evidence to support a finding of either actual or
apprehended bias, this complaint
is nothing more than an expression of the
applicant's disagreement with the Tribunal's decision:
SZRUI v Minister for
Immigration, Multicultural Affairs and Citizenship
[2013] FCAFC 80
CONSIDERATION
applicant sought a student (temporary) visa. A mandatory requirement for the
visa to be granted is that the applicant must pass
an English language
proficiency test. The applicant did not pass his first attempt. This led to the
delegate refusing the applicant
the applicant sought merits review at the Tribunal, he sought and was granted an
adjournment to undertake a second test. The
applicant was unsuccessful in that
second attempt.
those circumstances, as the applicant did not meet the mandatory requirement for
the grant of the visa sought, the affirmation
of the decision to refuse the
applicant’s visa was the only decision open to the Tribunal.
sole ground of judicial review is an allegation of a failure of procedural
fairness and natural justice. It is supported by five
particulars.
(a) complains that the hearing was held by telephone. Reference is made to the
decision of
paragraph refers to a definition of jurisdictional error and has no relevance to
the error complained about in this particular
Tribunal, at the time of the hearing, was empowered, pursuant to s 366 of the
, to conduct the hearing by telephone or other means. No error arises
from the Tribunal's decision to conduct the hearing by telephone,
given that it
occurred during the COVID-19 Pandemic. The applicant had the benefit of an
interpreter and raised no issue at the
time of the Tribunal hearing that it was
being held by telephone. No jurisdictional error arises. Particular (a) has no
(b) alleges the Tribunal failed to give the applicant additional time to submit
an English language test. This ground fails
on the facts. The Tribunal adjourned
the hearing of the matter till a time after the applicant had booked a second
English language
test. Having adjourned the matter once, it was within the
legitimate discretion of the Tribunal not to adjourn the matter again to
the applicant the opportunity to take a third test. No jurisdictional error
arises. Particular (b) has no merit.
Particulars
(c) and (e) complain that the Tribunal did not accept certain aspects of the
applicant’s evidence, including that
the testing centres were closed and
that the Tribunal failed to assess the applicant’s English language skills
obtained through
study, living in Australia and his employment in Australia.
to the latter claim, it was not the role of the Tribunal to assess the
applicant’s English language skills. The role of the
Tribunal was to
ascertain if the applicant had passed the relevant English language test
required for the grant of the visa sought.
The applicant had not passed the
test. That was the sole matter the Tribunal had to determine.
do not accept the submission that the Tribunal failed to take into account the
applicant’s other evidence. This is evidenced
by the fact that the
Tribunal allowed an adjournment for the applicant to undertake a second test.
Furthermore, the applicant has
not pointed to any other evidence that the
Tribunal failed to consider. Particulars (c) and (e) have no merit.
(d) is an allegation of bias. A claim of bias is serious and requires evidence,
such as a transcript of the Tribunal hearing.
It is a rare and exceptional case
that bias will be demonstrated solely from the published reasons of the
decision. Similarly, the
mere fact that the Tribunal makes adverse findings in
respect of the applicant does not give rise to an inference of bias or, by
itself, suggest that the decision maker approached their task other than with a
mind open to persuasion:
law in relation to apprehended bias is well known. In
Charisteas v
[2021] HCA 29
the following was said:
Where, as here, a question arises as to the independence or impartiality of a
judge, the applicable principles are well established,
and they were not in
dispute. The apprehension of bias principle is that “a judge is
disqualified if a fair-minded lay observer
might reasonably apprehend that the
judge might not bring an impartial mind to the resolution of the question the
judge is required
to decide”. The principle gives effect to the
requirement that justice should both be done and be seen to be done, reflecting
a requirement fundamental to the common law system of adversarial trial —
that it is conducted by an independent and impartial
tribunal. Its application
requires two steps: first, “it requires the identification of what it is
said might lead a judge...
to decide a case other than on its legal and factual
merits”; and, second, there must be articulated a “logical
connection”
between that matter and the feared departure from the judge
deciding the case on its merits. Once those two steps are taken, the
reasonableness of the asserted apprehension of bias can then ultimately be
applicant was unable to point to any evidence of bias on the part of the
Tribunal. I have considered all relevant supporting documents
related to this
matter, including the Tribunal’s decision record. I am not satisfied that
there is any evidence on the part
of the Tribunal. I agree with the first
respondent’s submission that this particular is no more than a
disagreement with the
Tribunal decision. Particular (d) has no merit.
the applicant is unrepresented, the Court has perused the relevant Court Books
and associated documentation. No other jurisdictional
DETERMINATION
none of the grounds of judicial review has any merit, the Application must be
I certify that the preceding sixty-five (65)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 13 November 2025
RTF format (398 KB)
Signed PDF/A format