Kirby and CEO, National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS) [2025] ARTA 2378 (10 November 2025)
Kirby and CEO, National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS) [2025] ARTA
2378 (10 November 2025)
Applicant: Hamish D’Arcy Kirby, by his plan
nominee, Jacqueline Kirby
Respondent: CEO, National Disability Insurance Agency
Tribunal Number: 2024/3369
Tribunal: General Member F Robertson
Place: Perth
Date of decision:
Date of written reasons:
decision of the delegate of the Chief Executive Officer of the National
Disability Insurance Agency made on 19 May 2024 and as
amended by the plan dated
30 September 2025 is set aside.
substitution for the decision set aside, the matter is remitted to the Chief
Executive Officer of the National Disability Insurance
Agency with a direction
that the applicant’s Statement of Plan Supports be approved in accordance
with the findings in these
reasons, namely that the applicant's plan is to
include funding for:
(a) specialist disability accommodation for a 'House, Robust' design category,
for one resident with two on-site overnight assistance
rooms, located in or
around the Albany, Western Australia area;
(b) provider travel - labour costs in the amount of $251,878.64 and
activity-based transport in the amount of $54,614.98;
(c) positive behaviour support, to include 90 hours of behaviour management and
(d) assistance with household tasks for five hours per week; and
(e) consumables - laundry liquid in the amount of $2,000;
the purposes of s 33(2)(c) of the Act, the plan is to be reassessed 2 years from
the date of this decision or 3 months after the
applicant transitions into SDA,
whichever is earlier.
Statement made on 10 November 2025 at 12:47pm
NATIONAL DISABILITY
INSURANCE SCHEME – reviewable decision of CEO – decision to approve
a Statement of Participant Supports
– specialist disability accommodation
– whether SDA Price Guide prohibits approval of a ‘house’ to
be occupied
by a single participant – where participant has extreme
functional impairments – held respondent should be supported
‘house’ in the robust category in his preferred
NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE SCHEME – reviewable
decision of CEO – decision to approve a Statement of Participant Supports
– where a significant amount of laundry liquid sought due to incontinence
– whether laundry liquid is an excluded support
– consideration of
National Disability Insurance Agency v Warwick (2025) 311 FCR 18 – held
laundry liquid neither a ‘day-to-day
living expense’ and solely and
directly caused by impairment – support not excluded – support
NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE SCHEME – reviewable
decision of CEO – decision to approve a Statement of Participant Supports
– travel – where respondent offers to partially fund travel –
where scheme does not permit partial funding –
travel funded
LEGISLATION
National Disability
Insurance Scheme (Specialist Disability Accommodation) Rules 2020
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
Disability Insurance Scheme (Getting the NDIS Back on Track No. 1) (NDIS
Supports) Transitional Rules 2024 (Cth)
National Disability Insurance Scheme
(Specialist Disability Accommodation) Rules 2020 (Cth)
National Disability
Insurance Scheme (Supports for Participants) Rules 2013
Allen and CEO, National Disability
Insurance Agency (NDIS) [2025] ARTA 1359
Collector of Customs v Agfa-Gevaert
[1996] HCA 36
(1996) 186 CLR 389
Commissioner of Taxation v Macoun
(2014) 227 FCR 265
[2014] FCAFC 162
FSWN and National Disability Insurance
Agency [2025] ARTA 114
Isaacs v McKinnon
[1949] HCA 64
(1949) 80 CLR 502
McGarrigle v
National Disability Insurance Agency
[2017] FCA 308
National Disability
Insurance Agency v Warwick (2025) 311 FCR 18;
[2025] FCAFC 100
Disability Insurance Agency v WRMF
[2020] FCAFC 79
(2020) 276 FCR 415
Palmanova Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth of Australia
[2025] HCA 35
Re Drake and Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs (no. 2)
(1979) 2 ALD 634
YBFZ v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 40
(2024) 99 ALJR 1
419 ALR 457
SECONDARY MATERIALS
Pricing Arrangements for Specialist Disability Accommodation
Weeks, G, ‘Soft Law and Public Liability: Beyond the
separation of powers?’
[2018] AdelLawRw 12
(2018) 39 Adelaide Law Review 303.
Statement of Reasons
INTRODUCTION
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Chief
Executive Officer (
) of the National Disability Insurance Agency
) on 19 May 2024. That decision affirmed an earlier decision of 5
October 2023 concerning the statement of participant supports (
the applicant's National Disability Insurance Scheme (
applicant, Mr Hamish Kirby, is 19 years of age. He has been diagnosed with,
among other conditions, autism spectrum disorder (level
3) and an intellectual
disability. He lives on a rural property in Scotsdale, Western Australia, and
has very high support needs.
The parties to the review application agree that
the applicant requires support in the form of a 2:1 ratio of support workers at
all times, which is necessary due to behaviours of concern that pose a risk of
harm to the applicant and others.
the internal review decision, the applicant lodged an application for review
with this Tribunal on 27 May 2024. The parties
have since reached agreement on
some supports, but several remain in dispute. The task for the Tribunal is to
determine, by way of
a fresh hearing on the merits, the correct and preferable
decision in respect of the reasonable and necessary supports to be included
the applicant’s SoPS.
The issues arising for determination
supports that remain in dispute can be separated into four areas:
(a) transport funding, for support worker travel between Albany and the
applicant’s residence, and for activity-based transport;
(b) specialist disability accommodation (
), concerning the appropriate
location and building type for the applicant;
(c) positive Behaviour Support funding, specifically whether an additional 40
hours of behaviour management and training is required;
(d) gardening and laundry services, concerning the number of funded hours for
these supports and whether they duplicate existing
Transport and Specialist Disability
Accommodation
two issues are interrelated. The applicant seeks to live in the Albany area to
remain close to his family, who provide informal
support and operate a business
there. He submits that forcing him to move to the ‘Perth – South
West’ region would
sever these critical connections and cause significant
disruption and anxiety. As there is no suitable SDA currently available in
Albany area, the applicant contends that his plan should provide funding to
encourage the construction of a new 'robust' design
category house. In the
absence of such accommodation, he argues that the significant transport costs
for workers to travel from Albany
to his current rural residence are reasonable
and necessary, as without this funding he cannot access any other supports in
respondent initially contended that the transport costs sought did not represent
value for money. It submits that because there
is no suitable SDA in the Albany
area, the appropriate and practical course is for the applicant to accept SDA in
- South West’ region, where such accommodation is
available and where he would be closer to support services thus negativing
need for transport costs. The respondent, now, acknowledges this limits the
applicant’s choice and control, but submits
this consideration is not
paramount and must be weighed against the need to ensure the financial
sustainability of the scheme. Yet,
the respondent now concedes that the
applicant should not have to relocate and has made an offer to partially fund
Positive Behaviour Support
applicant seeks 90 hours of behaviour management and training, which is an
additional 40 hours above the 50 hours the respondent
has agreed to fund. This
request is based on an expert recommendation and is said to be necessary to
manage the applicant’s
behaviours in light of his changing circumstances,
including his transition from school and a reduction in informal support from
his parents.
respondent submits that there is insufficient evidence to establish that the
additional 40 hours are required. The respondent
argues that the evidence does
not sufficiently justify why 90 hours are necessary, or what outcomes the
additional 40 hours would
achieve that 50 hours which is presently approved and
included would not.
Gardening and Laundry Services
applicant seeks funding for 5 hours of gardening and cleaning support per week,
as well as separate funding for a laundry service
or, in the alternative, for
laundry products. He contends these supports do not duplicate other funded
supports. Because of the need
for constant 2:1 supervision for safety, his
support workers are unable to attend to domestic chores such as gardening or
respondent has agreed to fund 3 hours per week for gardening and cleaning. It
contends that any further hours, including a separate
laundry service, would be
a duplication of supports already provided by the 2:1 support workers. It
further contends that laundry
products are a day-to-day living cost that cannot
be funded by the scheme.
hearing of the application was conducted in Perth from 7 to 9 October 2025.
the hearing, the applicant was represented by Mr I R Freeman of counsel,
instructed by Mr A Geronimos of Lavan Legal. The respondent
was represented by
Ms L Martin of counsel, instructed by Ms A Lean of Mills Oakley.
evidence before the Tribunal was extensive. The parties provided a Joint Hearing
Bundle which contained numerous reports, assessments,
and communications. I
refer to this evidence where material to my decision. However, of particular
relevance within the bundle, were
the Functional Capacity Assessment authored by
Ms Meg Jenkins and the Behaviour Support Plan (July 2025) authored by Ms
Jelley . The respondent relied on the evidence of Ms Trudi Warner who
prepared a report dated 9 December 2024.
addition to the bundle, the Tribunal was provided with the applicant's plan
dated 30 September 2025 ; the
NDIS Pricing Arrangements for Specialist
Disability Accommodation 2025-26;
National Disability Insurance
Scheme (Specialist Disability Accommodation) Rules 2020
; the SDA Guidelines
; a 'plan breakdown' for the applicant; and an email chain between R Griffiths
and P Klepe dated 7 April 2025.
The Tribunal was also provided with advice from
the Technical Advice and Practice Improvement Branch dated 13 August 2025.
Tribunal heard oral evidence from Ms Jacqueline Kirby (the applicant’s
mother and plan nominee), Ms Jelley (the applicant’s
behaviour support
practitioner), and Ms Jenkins (the applicant’s occupational
therapist).
the hearing, the parties filed written closing submissions in relation to the
supports that remain in dispute. As those
submissions made clear, it is common
ground that the applicant has profound disabilities, including Autism Spectrum
Disorder, Intellectual
Disability, and severe anxiety. It is also agreed that he
requires 2:1 support, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and that this level
support is reasonable and necessary.
RELEVANT LAW
this is a merits review, the Tribunal’s role is to arrive at the correct
or preferable decision by applying the same law
as the original decision maker.
The legislative framework governing this decision is the
National Disability
Insurance Scheme Act 2013
) and the legislative
instruments made under it, principally the
National Disability Insurance
Scheme (Supports for Participants) Rules 2013
Objects and general principles
Act is to be interpreted in a way that is consistent with its statutory
insofar as that purpose is
discernible from the statutory text and
objects of the Act include giving effect to Australia’s obligations under
Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities
intended to support the independence, and social and economic participation, of
people with disability, and to enable
them to exercise choice and control in the
pursuit of their goals and the planning and delivery of their supports.
objects of the Act, and how those objects are to be pursued, are contained in s
4 of the Act. The general principles guiding actions
under the Act are set out
in s 4. These principles provide that people with disability have the same right
as other members of Australian
society to realise their potential for physical,
social, emotional, and intellectual
development.
The principles require
that people with disability are central to the scheme and are to be supported to
exercise choice and control
The role of families,
carers, and other significant persons is to be acknowledged and
A further guiding
principle is the need to ensure the financial sustainability of the National
Disability Insurance
Principles relating to plans
31 of the Act specifies principles that must guide the preparation of a
participant’s plan. A participant’s plan
should, so far as
reasonably practicable, be individualised and be directed by the
participant.
32 of the Act provides that the CEO is required to facilitate the preparation of
a participant’s plan. Section 33 of
the Act provides that the plan must
include the participant’s statement of goals and aspirations, and a SoPS
prepared with
the participant and approved by the CEO.
Reasonable and necessary supports
central provision for the funding of supports is s 33, which provides that the
NDIS will fund supports that are ‘reasonable
and necessary’.
phrase ‘reasonable and necessary supports’ is not defined in the
Act, but its meaning can be determined with the assistance
of the provisions at
ss 33 and 34 of the Act.
McGarrigle v National Disability Insurance Agency
[2017] FCA 308
Mortimer J (as her Honour then was) made the following
observations:
Section 13 expressly indicates that a ‘support’ might be a
service, or it might be an activity. In my opinion, although
s 14 (which deals
with funding by the Agency of others to assist the participant rather than the
Agency assisting the participant
directly) is expressed purposively, its subject
matter is also ‘support’ - whether by way of services of activities
any other matter that assists a person with disability in a way that is
consistent with the general principles set out in s 4. The
‘support’ must be given a broad construction in this context, and
there is no need for the purposes of this proceeding
to seek to give it any
comprehensive meaning. Rather, the point to be made is that it is a practical
description of the means by
which a person with disability is assisted. It is
not intended, in my opinion, to encompass funding, especially because what s 14
contemplates is that the Agency will ‘fund’ a support. The Agency
cannot ‘fund’ funding.
Whether a support is ‘reasonable’ requires a different assessment
to whether a support is ‘necessary’. Again,
it is not necessary in
the context of this proceeding to be definitive about the nature and extent of
the meaning of the phrase,
or its components. It is enough to observe that using
the concept of necessity would appear to tie one aspect of the CEO’s
assessment to an evaluation of the kinds of factors set out in ss 34(1)(a),
(b) and (d). The word ‘reasonable’ would
appear to be directed at
factors such as those set out in s 34(1)(c) and (f). That is not to
say the meaning of each word is exhausted
by the factors set out in s
34(1): rather, it is to illustrate the different work that each concept does as
an adjective in the phrase
‘reasonable and necessary supports’.
Additionally,
National Disability Insurance Agency v WRMF
[2020] FCAFC 79
(2020) 276 FCR
Court of the Federal Court made the following observations about the meaning of
‘reasonable and necessary supports’:
here is no doubt that the contextual use of the phrase in this Act links
it to public funding to be provided to a participant. In
that context, the
phrase connotes supports which meet a threshold which justifies - by reference
to the context, objects and guiding
principles of the Act and the facts of the
case - the expenditure of public funds for that support, for a particular
participant.
As we have already explained, the phrase also needs to be
understood taking into account what has qualified a person as a participant,
the links between a person's impairment and their full participation in the
community, in the same variety of ways as persons
without a disability might
choose to participate.
criteria for determining whether a support is reasonable and necessary are set
out in s 34(1) of the Act. As a consequence of
the commencement of the
National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment
(Getting the NDIS back on Track No.
1) Act 2024
on 3 October 2024, to
be considered reasonable and necessary, a support must meet all of the following
(aa) the support is necessary to address needs of the participant arising
from an impairment in relation to which the participant
meets the disability
requirements (see section 24) or the early intervention requirements (see
section 25);
(a) the support will assist the participant to pursue the goals, objectives
and aspirations included in the participant’s statement
of goals and
aspirations;
the support will assist the participant to undertake activities,
so as to facilitate the participant’s social and economic
participation;
the support represents value for money in that the costs of the
support are reasonable, relative to both the benefits achieved and
the cost of
alternative support;
(d) the support will be, or is likely to be, effective and beneficial for the
participant, having regard to current good practice;
the funding or provision of the support takes account of what it
is reasonable to expect families, carers, informal networks and the
community to
(f) the support is an NDIS support for the participant.
The NDIS Rules
Act is supplemented by Rules made under the
The Supports Rules provide
additional guidance on the criteria for what is a reasonable and necessary
3.1 provides a non-exhaustive list of factors to be considered when determining
whether a support represents value for money
under paragraph 34(1)(c) of the
Act. These factors include:
(a) whether there is evidence that the support will substantially improve the
life stage outcomes for, and be of long-term benefit
to, the participant;
(b) whether the funding of the support is likely to reduce the cost of funding
of other supports for the participant in the long
(c) whether the support amounts to or involves income replacement;
(d) the cost of the support compared to the cost of supports of the same kind
that are provided in the area where the participant
resides; and
(e) whether the support will increase the participant’s independence and
reduce the participant’s reliance on other supports.
5.1 and 5.2 are relevant to whether a support is an NDIS Support. Rule 5.1(c)
provides that a support will not be funded if it
is a duplication of other
supports funded under the NDIS.
Specialist Disability Accommodation Rules
the supports sought by the applicant include specialist disability
accommodation, the
National Disability Insurance Scheme (Specialist
Disability Accommodation) Rules 2020
) are relevant.
I deal further with these rules below.
Government policy
am required to consider, but am not bound by, relevant
However, I recognise
that absent good reason for not doing so, the Tribunal should apply relevant
government policy.
However, that
does not mean that policy can be relied on to construe the legislation and
delegate legislation it is made under. To
adopt such an approach would be to
engage in ‘bottom up’
interpretation.
CONSIDERATION
start my consideration of the supports in dispute by first setting out what was
observed by the Full Court in
the statutory task of determining the contents of a participant's plan, and
what are the reasonable and necessary supports, is a fact‑intensive
exercise. More so than in many legislative schemes that confer an
administrative benefit, the circumstances of each participant
will vary greatly.
The exercise is highly individualised. There will be an area of 'decisional
freedom' (Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship v Li at [28] (French CJ)) for
the decision‑maker, about what supports fall within this description,
circumstances of a particular individual. Provided no substantive
legal error attends the choices made, it is possible for reasonable
exercising the power under s 33(2) to differ. So too on merits review.
turning to the particular supports in dispute, it is useful to make some
preliminary observations.
applicant’s most recent plan was approved on 25 September 2025 following
the reviewable decision being remitted to the respondent
pursuant to
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
(Cth). This plan provides for
supports funded to a maximum amount of $1,846,084.51 over a twelve-month period,
although it must be
noted that figure includes $1 as a ‘placeholder’
amount to represent the applicant’s SDA
eligibility.
The applicant’s goals
goals are recorded in his most recent plan. In summary, Hamish’s expressed
goals are to develop his ability to
regulate his anxiety and reduce associated
behaviours; explore future housing options so that he can be supported to move
the family home in the future; develop skills to manage his daily
activities in a variety of settings; and have his personal care
and safety needs
met in his home and community.
Specialist Disability Accommodation
is the most significant area of dispute, with the parties fundamentally
disagreeing on the proper construction of the relevant
legislative and policy
Notwithstanding
the disagreement about the relevant legislative and policy framework, the
parties now agree that:
(a) the applicant is eligible for
(b) the design category should be
(c) that the location should be the ‘WA - Wheat
Belt’ region.
was no issue raised as to whether any SDA was to be provided as an in-kind
issue in dispute concerns the permissible building type and, bound up
within that consideration, the appropriateness of inclusion
of two On-Site
Overnight Assistance (
applicant seeks funding for a house in the robust category for one resident,
with two OOA rooms in the WA – Wheatbelt Region.
respondent contends that a ‘villa/duplex/townhouse’ in the robust
category for one resident (and with one bedroom)
is permissible.
respondent expressly submits that, irrespective of the applicant’s
personal circumstances and impairments, by operation
of the SDA Rules and SDA
Price Guide, it cannot provide a support which consists of a house (irrespective
of whether it has one or
more OOA rooms) to a single occupant.
properly frame the context of the submissions, it is helpful to first outline
the respondent’s submissions.
Respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the SDA Price Guide is expressly
the SDA Rules (via the definition in s 5 and the note to s 15(2)) and that its
not only on it, but on the
respondent submits that the current ‘SDA Price Guide’ is the
NDIS Pricing Arrangements for Specialist Disability Accommodation
’. I will proceed on the assumption that submission is
correct, even though the SDA Rules expressly define the SDA Price Guide
‘the publication known as the National Disability Insurance Scheme Price
Guide for Specialist Disability Accommodation,
published by the CEO, as in force
from time to time.’
anything turns on the difference between a document entitled, relevantly,
‘NDIS Pricing Arrangements’ as compared
to the defined ‘Price
Guide’ is not necessary to determine for present purposes.
and in any event, on the above basis, the respondent submits:
(a) the SDA Price Guide does not provide funding for a sole occupancy house. It
limits sole occupancy to apartments or villas/duplexes/townhouses.
only funded for two or three SDA residents;
(b) the applicant's request for a three-bedroom house is properly construed as a
‘house, 1 resident, robust’ with two
(c) the request for two OOA rooms is contested. The respondent states the
applicant is funded for 2:1 active overnight support. There
is no evidence of
improved capacity to justify a move to inactive support, and the respondent
does not understand why two rooms would
be required given both carers should not
be sleeping simultaneously;
(d) a direction to fund a 1-resident house would ‘lack statutory force and
be invalid’ as it is contrary to the limits
adopted by the SDA Rules;
(e) therefore, the only building types the respondent can offer the applicant as
a support are an ‘apartment’ or a
‘villa/duplex/townhouse’.
The respondent submits the latter is
‘more appropriate’.
respondent also puts an alternative submission which is necessarily dependant on
its primary submission being accepted. The respondent
argues that if a
villa/duplex/townhouse is the only available option, the Tribunal must consider
the risks under rule 5.1(a) of the
Supports Rules (support must not cause
harm) and s 16(h) of the SDA Rules (mitigation of risks).
this respect, the respondent refers to evidence from the applicant's mother and
practitioners that the applicant poses a ‘fatal
neighbours, has previously ‘hospitalised’ teachers, and would be at
risk himself in a villa (e.g. escaping).
respondent submits that if a 1-resident house is excluded by the SDA Price Guide
and a villa/duplex/townhouse is inappropriate
due to the significant risks it
poses then it is ‘open to the Tribunal... to remove the SDA funding from
the applicant's plan
because there is no appropriate SDA building type for the
Applicant’.
Applicant's submissions
applicant’s primary submission is that the respondent has adopted a
‘reversed construction’ of the NDIS framework
by starting with the
SDA Price Guide instead of the Act and the SDA Rules. The applicant argues the
correct approach begins with
this basis and adopting that approach, the applicant submits:
(a) the proposed SDA meets all six criteria for a ‘reasonable and
necessary’ support under s 34(1) of the Act.
(b) the proposed SDA (a house for a sole resident) is the most appropriate
building type under s 16 of the SDA Rules. The applicant
provides submissions
addressing the relevant considerations in s 16, ultimately submitting that a
house mitigates risks to himself
and others, which other building types would
(c) the two OOA rooms are justified. The applicant has a sleep disorder.
The rooms are intended for carers to rest if the applicant
manages to sleep,
anticipating a future improvement in his sleep patterns. This would eventually
reduce costs by allowing carers
to move from ‘active’ to lower
‘inactive’ overnight rates. This, he argues, represents long term
(d) the SDA Price Guide is an administrative policy document, not
legislation. The applicant argues it is an ‘internal yardstick’
cannot be used to impose limitations that are inconsistent with the Act or SDA
(e) the fact that a 1-resident house is not listed as a specific line item in
the SDA Price Guide’s tables does not mean it
is an ‘active
exclusion with legislative
The applicant
submits that to deny the support on this basis would be an unjust and
‘perverse outcome’.
Observations about the approach
proper approach to whether SDA should be included in a plan has been the subject
of some consideration by the Tribunal. In
Allen and CEO, National Disability
Insurance Agency (NDIS)
[2025] ARTA 1359, Senior Member French broke the
approach down into three stages involving twelve separate steps. I gratefully
to the extent necessary for the resolution of the present review
application, the approach articulated by Senior Member French in
is not necessary to set out the approach in detail largely because of the quite
proper and commendable way that the parties conducted
their cases which confined
the issues which stood in the way of the applicant being able to receive
Senior Member French identified (correctly with respect) the three separate
stages as involving:
(a) as to the first stage, determine whether the applicant is eligible to
receive support for SDA;
(b) as to the second stage, determine if the requested support is reasonable and
necessary having regard to the criteria in s 34(1)
of the Act;
(c) as to the third stage, determine the building type, design category and area
in which the SDA is to be located.
understood, there was no real dispute between the parties that the first and
second stage of that analysis was satisfied
in respect of the applicant. The
divergence of the parties was in relation to the outcome of the third stage
which involved a close
consideration of the SDA Rules and the SDA Price Guide
made under those rules. There is no real dispute that a ‘house’
reasonable and necessary support and that each of the criteria contained in s
34(1) of the Act are met.
The operation of the SDA Rules
establish the framework for determining when a participant is
eligible for SDA and the specific nature of that accommodation. Where,
the parties agree that a participant meets the eligibility criteria in s 11, the
inquiry shifts to Division 3 of Part 2
This Division, comprising
ss 15 to 18, governs the determination of the design, type and location of the
central provision is s 15. Section 15 requires the CEO (or this Tribunal on
review) to determine three key matters for an eligible
participant: the
appropriate SDA building type, the appropriate SDA design category, and the area
in which the accommodation is to
be located. These determinations define the
character of the support to be included in the participant's plan.
15(2) provides a specific power that allows the CEO (or this Tribunal on
review), upon written notification from a participant,
to determine that the
participant is eligible to receive support in a dwelling that does not meet the
primary determinations made
under s 15(1). This may apply where the participant
wishes to remain in their current dwelling, or requires transitional
accommodation
while seeking a more suitable, long-term option.
SDA building type
16 prescribes the matters to which the CEO (or this Tribunal on review) must
have regard when determining the appropriate
SDA building type for an eligible
participant. The provision mandates a comprehensive, person-centric assessment.
The decision-maker
must consider a range of factors, including:
(a) the participant’s preference, where it can be established and aligns
with their statement of goals and aspirations;
(b) the participant’s support needs, and whether the support model
requires immediately available or constant person-to-person
(c) whether the building type represents value for money, assessing the
reasonableness of the costs relative to the benefits achieved
and the cost of
alternatives;
(d) the extent to which the building type would facilitate social and economic
participation, including engagement in the life of
the household and
(e) the facilitation of informal supports and the impact on the cost of other
supports; and
(f) the impact of the building type on the participant’s capacity, skill
development, and the effectiveness of other supports.
SDA design category
17 deals with the determination of the SDA design category. This decision must
be made having regard to the specific needs
of the eligible participant.
design categories themselves are set out in Schedule 2 and range from 'improved
liveability' to 'high physical support'. Section
17(2) expressly prohibits the
CEO (or this Tribunal on review) from determining the SDA design category of
evident purpose of such a prohibition is to ensure that a SDA determination is
only made for a home which has specialist design
features beyond that of a
standard home.
SDA location
s 18 sets out the matters for consideration when determining the area in which
the SDA is to be located. Like the process
for determining building type, this
requires a multi-factorial assessment. Regard must be had to matters including:
(a) the participant's preference, particularly where it is important for their
support needs or connections;
(b) the extent to which the location would assist the participant to pursue
their goals;
(c) the facilitation of past, established or planned cultural and community
connections;
(d) the likelihood that the location will facilitate social and economic
participation; and
(e) whether the location represents value for money, having regard to its impact
on informal supports and access to other required
area determined must be defined by reference to the Australian Statistical
Geography Standard, as either a Statistical Area Level
4, a part of such an
area, or a combination of such areas.
summary, once a participant is found to be eligible for SDA, ss 15 to 18 provide
a structured and principled pathway for determining
the specific features of
that accommodation. The decision-maker must undertake a distinct analysis for
each of the three components
(building type, design category, and location)
having regard to the comprehensive and specific list of matters set out in the
This ensures the resulting determination is tailored to the individual
needs and circumstances of the participant.
Does the SDA Price Guide exclude the ability to provide the
applicant with a house?
is no dispute that the applicant is eligible for SDA. As already noted:
(a) the applicant seeks funding for SDA in the form of a ‘house’, 1
resident, 2 OOA rooms, Robust’ design category,
to be in or around
Albany, Western Australia; and
(b) the respondent submits that a ‘house’ in the configuration
sought is not available as a support and, that subject
to the submissions about
risk issues identified, the appropriate SDA is a ‘Villa/Duplex/Townhouse,
1 resident, Robust’
design category.
respondent’s preliminary submission, that a ‘house’ in the
configuration sought by the applicant is not an available
option, logically
falls to be addressed first. This is a threshold legal question. The respondent
argues that the SDA Rules, through
their adoption of the ‘SDA Price
Guide’, do not permit SDA funding for a ‘house’ occupied by a
single participant.
accept the applicant’s submission that the respondent erroneously seeks
elevate the SDA Price Guide to a position of paramountcy
over the Act and the
SDA Rules. I accept that the correct approach begins with the Act which then
looks to the relevant rules. To
do otherwise is to adopt a bottom up approach
which would be erroneous.
correct approach begins with the Act and the Rules. Somewhat curiously, at least
for the respondent’s argument, the SDA
Rules make only limited reference
to the SDA Price Guide. Those references are:
(a) in s 5 relating to its own definition and in the definition of
‘minimum design requirements’;
(b) in s 9 of the SDA Rules, which relate to the simplified outline of Part 2 of
the SDA Rules;
(c) in ‘Note 2’ to s 15(2) of the SDA Rules. However, I note the
applicant does not seek a determination under s 15(2)
of the SDA Rules.
Notwithstanding,
the respondent appears to place considerable emphasis on this Note, which
states: ‘The SDA Price Guide sets
out the maximum amount of support that
is available’.
my view, this wording supports the conclusions I have reached in any event. The
respondent’s submission requires a conclusion
that the SDA Price Guide is
exhaustive and covers the field for all available SDA types. I reject this. I
accept the applicant’s
submission that the fact a 1-resident 'House' is
absent from the SDA Price Guide’s tables does not mean it is an
exclusion with legislative force’.
I am satisfied that the Price Guide’s stated purpose is to set a maximum
price, not to define the entirety of the supports
that can be funded. On a
proper construction of the SDA Rules, the absence of a ‘maximum
amount’ being ‘set out’
in the Price Guide for a 1-resident
'House' results in a conclusion that there is no pre-determined maximum price,
not a conclusion
that such a support cannot be funded at all. To accept the
respondent’s construction would lead to the perverse outcome that
respondent, by simply omitting a building type from its own policy document,
could unilaterally extinguish a participant's right
to a support that is
otherwise found to be reasonable and necessary under the Act.
I find that the S` DA Price Guide does not operate to preclude the funding of a
‘House’ for a sole resident.
What is the appropriate SDA building type?
found that a ‘House’ is a legally permissible building type, I must
now consider whether it is the appropriate
building type for the applicant under
s 16 of the SDA Rules.
analysis requires consideration of the SDA Rules. The SDA Rules require me to
consider whether the proposed SDA (a house with
two OOA rooms for a sole
resident) is the most appropriate building type under s 16 of the SDA Rules.
That assessment is to be conducted
by reference to the matters in s 16(a)-(m).
The applicant provides submissions addressing all 13 matters under s 16,
asserting that
a house mitigates risks to himself and others, which other
building types would not.
consideration is informed by the matters in s 16(a)-(m) of the SDA Rules. The
respondent does not contend that, on an analysis
of these factors, a
‘villa/townhouse’ is more appropriate than a ‘house’.
In any event, I consider that a
number of those factors weigh heavily, indeed dispositively, in favour of the
applicant’s position.
Among other things, the SDA Rules require
consideration of the participant’s
preferences;
participant currently lives and has
and the extent to which a
location would facilitate established
connections.
The evidence
establishes that the applicant has lived his entire life in and around the
Albany region. The evidence clearly demonstrates
that his family, his formal
support providers, and his entire community are based in the Albany region. I am
satisfied that his preference,
understandably, is to remain in that location and
it is, understandably, the preference of his parents.
evidence regarding risk is also compelling. The applicant’s behaviour
support plan details that changes to his routine are
a primary trigger for
behavioural escalations and extreme anxiety, posing a significant risk of harm
to himself and others. This
is supported by oral evidence that the applicant
poses a ‘fatal threat’ to neighbours and has previously
‘hospitalised’
'villa/duplex/townhouse', by its nature, involves shared walls or close
proximity to other residents. This would create an unacceptable
and unmanageable
risk to neighbours, to the applicant's support workers, and to the applicant
himself, who would be at risk of absconding.
A standalone 'House' is the only
building type that adequately mitigates these significant risks, thereby
satisfying s 16(h) of the
Furthermore,
the applicant’s family and entire support network are based in the Albany
region. His parents are his primary informal
support. Considering the matters
referred to in s 16 of the SDA Rules, I am satisfied that the correct and
preferable decision is
that the applicant’s plan should include funding
for SDA for a 'House, Robust' design category.
On-Site Overnight Assistance Rooms
am also satisfied that the request for two On-Site Overnight Assistance
) rooms is reasonable and necessary and satisfies the criteria
in s 34(1) of the Act.
respondent disputes this, submitting that because the applicant is funded for
2:1 active overnight support, there is no justification
for rooms to facilitate
inactive support.
submission takes an unduly narrow view. SDA is a long-term, foundational
support. The decision must consider the applicant's
needs over the life of the
dwelling, not just his funding at this precise moment.
accept the support represents value for money as required by s 34(1)(c). The
applicant has a sleep disorder, but the evidence supports
an aspiration that his
sleep patterns may improve. The inclusion of the OOA rooms is a pre-emptive and
prudent investment. It creates
the physical infrastructure to allow his support
to transition from ‘active’ to ‘inactive’ overnight
in the future, which would result in a significant reduction in long-term
support costs. The cost of including the rooms now is far
less than the cost of
retrofitting them later.
further accept that the support is effective and beneficial (as required by s
34(1)(d)) and assists the applicant in pursuing his
goals (as required by s
34(1)(a)). I find it is beneficial in ensuring the accommodation is a long-term,
stable home that can adapt
to his future needs. This minimises the risk of
disruptive modifications or a future move (or moves if his needs change over
which the evidence establishes would be traumatic for the applicant.
am further satisfied that the provision of SDA in the form of a house is
permitted having regard to Rule 5.1 and 5.2 of the Supports
Rules. Whilst there
will always be some inherent risks in relation to the applicant’s
outbursts, he has been living in a house
and the separation from neighbours has
meant that he has not harmed neighbours and I am satisfied that the provision of
instead of a villa/duplex/townhouse would mitigate against the risk
that the applicant might otherwise pose to others if he were
to be housed in
closer proximity to others.
all the relevant factors, I am satisfied that the conclusion is clear. The need
to sustain the applicant’s indispensable
family supports, the need to
maintain the continuity of his care, and the grave and evidence-based risks
associated with relocation
far outweigh the respondent’s concern regarding
the present lack of available housing stock.
therefore find that the inclusion of two OOA rooms is justified as a reasonable
and necessary component of the SDA support, I am
satisfied that the correct and
preferable decision is that the applicant’s plan should include funding
for SDA for a 'House,
Robust' design category, for a single resident with
provision for support workers, located in the Albany area.
Transport Funding
turn now to the issue of transport funding. The applicant seeks $251,878.64,
representing 2,920 hours, for the cost of support workers
travelling to and from
his rural property in Scotsdale. This property is in a Modified Monash Model 5
applicant submits that the respondent’s offer of $95,598.00 (1,170.5
hours) is based on a 2022 agreement. That figure is
no longer sufficient because
the applicant's circumstances have changed: he no longer attends school, and his
parents cannot provide
the informal support they once did due to carer burnout.
This necessitates a significant increase in formal care, and consequently,
provider travel.
applicant contends that the respondent’s offer of partial funding amounts
to an acceptance that the support itself is reasonable
and necessary. Relying on
McGarrigle v National Disability Insurance Agency
[2017] FCA 308
the applicant argues that once a support is found to be reasonable and
necessary, the respondent must fund the whole amount required,
not just a part
of it. The applicant concedes this funding could be removed once suitable SDA is
respondent submits that the $251,878.64 sought for support worker travel from
Albany to Scotsdale does not represent value for
money under s 34(1)(c) of Act.
This is because the applicant has been approved for SDA funding in the Albany
area, which, once secured,
would place him in the same location as his support
workers and ‘eliminate the need for transport funding’.
the respondent accepts that there is currently no suitable SDA available for the
applicant. In view of this, the respondent
‘offers’ to reinstate the
previous funding amount of $95,598.04 for a ‘time-limited period’ of
to cover 1,170.5 hours of travel
Consideration
applicant seeks significant funding for provider travel to cover the costs of
support workers travelling from Albany to his current
rural residence, and for
activity-based transport from that residence. The respondent submits that this
funding does not represent
value for money, as required by s 34(1)(c) of the
Act, because a cheaper alternative would be for the applicant to move closer to
those supports.
argument fails for the reasons I have just given. The proposed alternative of
relocating the applicant is not, on a holistic
assessment, a viable or
appropriate one. The question of value for money must therefore be assessed in
the entirety of the applicant’s
actual and present circumstances. The
concept of ‘value for money’ under s 34(1)(c) is not a simple
exercise in finding
the lowest possible cost for a single support in isolation.
It requires a broader assessment of the costs of a support relative to
benefits achieved and the cost of alternative supports.
this case, the applicant lives in a rural location and requires 24-hour, 2:1
support from workers who are based in the nearest
regional centre, Albany.
Without funding for those workers to travel to his home, he cannot receive the
support. The benefit achieved
by funding the transport is therefore fundamental
and is critical to ensuring the entire package of core supports viable. It
the applicant to be supported safely in his home, preventing the harm
that the expert evidence indicates would otherwise occur. I
find that it is the
essential precondition to the provision of 2:1 support as provided for in his
plan being effective.
cost of the alternative must also be considered. I do not accept the submission
that the relevant alternative is to consider requiring
the applicant to move to
the Perth – South West area and, indeed, the respondent concedes that SDA
should be included as a
support in the Perth – Wheat Belt region which
encompasses Albany and its surrounds. Moreover, the immediate alternative to
not funding transport is that the applicant’s support plan collapses and
either his parents are required to care for Hamish
or he is left without any
support whatsoever. In other words, Hamish would be left without the 2:1 support
that all parties agree
is necessary to keep him and others safe. This would
create an unreasonable risk to Hamish and to others, including his parents.
respondent’s previously suggested alternative, relocation, carries its own
severe costs, as detailed above. A significant
behavioural decline, risk of
injury, and the potential need for more restrictive, and ultimately more
expensive, interventions are
the likely consequences. When viewed in this proper
context, the cost of funding transport to maintain the applicant in a stable
safe environment represents a sound and necessary investment.
I accept the applicant’s
respondent’s offer to fund $95,598.00 in respect of travel for support
workers involves a concession on the part of
the respondent that such a support
is reasonable and necessary and satisfied s 34 of the Act. I further accept the
applicant’s
submissions that the respondent’s offer to partially
fund the travel required for a period of 12 months is an ‘incomplete
funding’ and that a support cannot be partially funded as the respondent
Accordingly,
until such time as the applicant moves into the new SDA dwelling in Albany, the
funding sought for provider travel and
for activity-based transport is a
reasonable and necessary support. I am satisfied that it represents value for
money because it
is the only means of ensuring the applicant’s safety and
giving effect to the other essential supports in his plan. It will
assist him to
pursue his goals and facilitate his social participation to the extent possible.
The funding for Transport, as sought
by the applicant, should be included in his
Positive Behaviour Support
next issue concerns funding for positive behaviour support. The dispute has
narrowed to 40 hours of Behaviour Management and Training
(BMT). The parties
agree on 120 hours of specialist behaviour intervention. The respondent has
approved 50 hours of BMT, but the
applicant seeks 90 hours.
applicant submits the extra 40 hours are justified by the reports of Ms Jelley
(Behaviour Support Practitioner, BSP) and Ms Jenkins
(Occupational Therapist,
rejects the respondent's contention that this funding creates a
‘duplication of supports’. He argues that a BSP (registered
the Act) and an OT (a regulated health professional) have different, though
complementary, roles and focuses. The fact that
both may deliver their services
via training support workers does not make the services a duplication.
respondent submits the additional 40 hours are ‘excessive’. It
argues Ms Jelley’s evidence failed to provide
justification’ for the extra hours. The respondent submits that there is
insufficient evidence to justify the
additional hours. It contends that the
behaviour support practitioner’s report, while recommending 90 hours, does
not adequately
explain why this specific amount is necessary, nor what outcomes
would be achieved beyond those realisable with the 50 hours already
approved. On
this basis, the respondent argues the additional support is not value for money
under s 34(1)(c) or effective and beneficial
under s 34(1)(d) of the Act.
respondent maintains the request constitutes a duplication of supports, contrary
to rule 5.1(c) of the Supports Rules. It points
to Ms Jenkins' evidence that her
OT work ‘wholly consisted of training for the Applicant's support
team’. As both practitioners
are training the support team, the respondent
submits the extra hours are not value for money.
Consideration
flaw, in my view, with this submission is that it takes too narrow a view of the
evidence and the nature of the support required.
The recommendation for 90 hours
of behaviour management and training is the considered professional opinion of
the applicant’s
behaviour support practitioner, Ms Jelley, which was
essentially unshaken in cross examination. Her behaviour support plan must be
read as a whole and in the full context of the applicant’s life. When this
is done, as I will endeavour to explain, the basis
for her recommendation
becomes clear.
evidence establishes and I find that the applicant is embarking on and
navigating a period of profound transition. In this respect
I observe that the
applicant has recently finished high school, removing the structure that
previously occupied a significant part
of his life. His parents, after years of
providing intensive informal support, are understandably and necessarily
stepping back to
manage their own business and wellbeing, leading to a change in
the applicant’s daily patterns of support. He is also maturing
young adult. The Behaviour Support Plan makes it plain that these kinds of
changes to routine and environment are significant
triggers for the behavioural
escalations that place the applicant and those around him at
purpose of behaviour management and training is to equip the applicant’s
support team with the specific skills and strategies
needed to implement the
Behaviour Support Plan effectively. It involves direct training, modelling, and
oversight to ensure the team
can proactively de-escalate situations and respond
safely and consistently when incidents occur. In a period of heightened flux and
instability, it is both logical and necessary that the intensity of this
training and support for his carers would need to increase.
The additional 40
hours is directed at ensuring his support team is prepared for the increased
challenges that these life transitions
will inevitably present.
am satisfied that the support is plainly effective and beneficial. A key
achievement of the applicant’s current support arrangements,
as evidenced
in the material, is that he is able to live in the community without the
imposition of restrictive practices. The provision
of such a support, among
other things, supports a primary object of the Act. I accept that maintaining
this outcome requires constant
vigilance and proactive, expert-led support. The
training for his support team is, and will be, a critical component of this
I accept that to reduce this support at the very time the
applicant’s circumstances are becoming more challenging would create
unacceptable risk of behavioural decline and increase the likelihood that
restrictive practices might be considered necessary
in the future.
also disposes of the respondent’s value for money argument. The
‘benefit achieved’ by this support is the maintenance
applicant’s safety and stability, the safety of his support workers, and
his ability to live without resort to restrictive
practices. The alternative is
to leave the applicant and his support team potentially ill-equipped to manage
his heightened needs,
risking serious incidents which may require crisis
intervention, hospitalisation, or involvement of the justice system. Such
are immeasurably more costly, both financially and in human terms. In
my view, the proactive funding to prevent such a situation
represents a clear
and prudent example of value for money.
these reasons, I am satisfied that the 90 hours of behaviour management and
training, as recommended by the applicant’s
behaviour support
practitioner, constitutes a reasonable and necessary support and, accordingly,
the additional 40 hours ought to
be included in his plan.
Gardening and cleaning supports
applicant notes the ‘recent inclusion of 3 hours per week’ for these
services, which was included in his plan subsequent
to a consent order remitting
the applicant’s plan to the respondent for reconsideration.
respondent states the applicant seeks 5 hours per week. It accepts that the
applicant cannot undertake these tasks and has funded
3 hours per week in the
current plan. The respondent contends there is a ‘lack of...
evidence’ to support the additional
2 hours sought. It submits these extra
hours would be a duplication of tasks that can be performed by the applicant's
2:1 support
worker, contrary to rule 5.1(c).
Consideration
respondent’s submission misunderstands the fundamental purpose for which
the 2:1 support worker ratio is funded. The evidence
before me readily
establishes that the applicant requires two support workers to be with him at
all times because of the significant,
constant, and unpredictable risk of
physical aggression and harm to himself and others. The evidence is overwhelming
and consistent
on this point.
The core function of this 2:1 support
is the continuous and vigilant supervision required to maintain safety. Both
workers must remain
attentive and available to respond to the applicant’s
needs and to ensure each other’s safety.
is not realistic, nor is it safe, to expect one of those two workers to
disengage from this primary and critical duty of supervision
to perform distinct
household tasks such as mowing lawns, tending to a garden, or completing the
multiple loads of laundry the applicant
requires each day. To do so would be to
leave the remaining worker alone with the applicant, thereby negating the very
the 2:1 ratio.
support provided by the 2:1 workers is therefore properly characterised as
‘Assistance with Self-Care Activities and Safety
Supervision’. The
support sought by the applicant is for ‘Assistance with Household
Tasks’. These are not the same
support. Given the particular and severe
nature of the applicant’s disability, funding for both is required. It is
not a duplication.
evidence also establishes that the support is necessary. The applicant presently
lives on a rural property where yard maintenance
is essential for safety,
particularly in relation to fire and snake risk. Further, his disability-related
needs result in him requiring
between six and eight loads of laundry to be
completed each day, a burden far in excess of ordinary day-to-day living costs.
unable to complete these tasks himself.
am satisfied that funding for five hours per week of assistance with household
tasks is reasonable and necessary. This funding is
to be used flexibly to
complete essential domestic activities that the 2:1 support workers cannot
safely perform, including gardening,
cleaning, and the significant daily laundry
tasks required. The additional support will be included in the plan.
Laundry supports
now move to the dispute in relation to the applicant’s laundry
applicant seeks $2,000 for laundry liquids and cleaning products. It is
submitted that due to his significant incontinence, he
produces a large amount
of laundry that is ‘more than normal living expenses’.
applicant argues these products are not excluded items under the
Disability Insurance Scheme (Getting the NDIS Back on Track No. 1) (NDIS
Supports) Transitional Rules 2024
Transitional Rules
characterises them as ‘Disability Related Health Supports’ under
Schedule 1 of those rules, related to continence
management.
the alternative, if the Products are found to be in Schedule 2 (excluded items),
the applicant submits the NDIA has discretion
under s 10(6) of the Act to fund
them. He argues this discretion should be exercised as the products represent
better value for money
($2,000) than the NDIS support they would replace (a
linen service, costed at $70,000).
respondent submits the applicant's request is either for $2,000 in consumables
or $70,000 for a linen service. It argues the laundry
liquids and sanitisers are
‘day-to-day living costs’ and are expressly ‘excluded as NDIS
supports’ under
Schedule 2 of the Transitional Rules.
the extent the applicant seeks the $70,000 linen service, the respondent argues
this would duplicate the funding already provided
for 2:1 support workers, who
are able to do the laundry.
respondent also rejects any suggestion that this support is needed due to
inadequate funding for continence products, noting the
applicant's plan already
contains over $8,300 for such products.
Consideration
applicant seeks $2,000 for laundry liquids and cleaning products. The respondent
submits these are ‘day-to-day living costs’
and are excluded from
funding under Schedule 2 of the Transitional Rules, which adopts the language of
rule 5.1(d) of the Supports
the respondent's submission is based on a misconstruction of the rule 5.1(d)
and, indeed, it would appear the same misconstruction
that has been rejected by
the Full Court of Federal Court. The proper construction of the phrase
‘relates to day-to-day living
costs (for example, rent, groceries and
utility fees) that are not attributable to a participant's disability support
was considered by the Full Court of the Federal Court in
National Disability Insurance Agency v Warwick
[2025] FCAFC 100.
5.1(d) needs to be read with rule
The exclusion in rule
5.1(d) only applies if both parts of its test are met: the cost must be a
‘day-to-day living cost’
and it must be an ‘additional’
cost which is ‘not attributable’ to disability support needs. In the
applicant's
case, the support fails both parts of this
the support is not a ‘day-to-day living cost’ as properly construed.
The Full Court in Warwick held that the term
‘day-to-day’ imports an
element of ‘regularity or routine’ and does not apply to
‘one-off, remarkable...
or extraordinary costs’. While the purchase
of laundry liquid is, for an ordinary household, a routine expense, the evidence
before me establishes that the applicant's circumstances are extraordinary. Due
to his significant incontinence, the applicant requires
multiple loads of
laundry each day. The cost of products required to service this level of need is
far removed from the ordinary,
routine expenditure contemplated by the examples
in the rule (rent, groceries, utilities). It is an extraordinary cost arising
from the applicant's impairment.
even if the support were considered a ‘day-to-day living cost’, the
exclusion in rule 5.1(d) is not engaged because
of the inclusion of the words
'not attributable to a participant's disability support needs' in rule 5.1(d).
confirms, this requires a ‘direct causal
connection’ between the cost and the disability
This is a ‘specific
and fact-intensive inquiry’. Here, the evidence establishes that direct
causal link. The need for
this extraordinary quantity of laundry products is not
a standard living expense; it is a cost caused solely and
by the applicant's
significant, disability-related incontinence. The cost is therefore clearly
‘attributable to’ his
disability support needs and as such comes
within the exclusionary words in rule 5.1(d).
both reasons, the exclusion in rule 5.1(d) does not apply. I am otherwise
satisfied that the support is a reasonable and necessary
support that meets each
of the criteria in s 34(1) of the Act. Neither party contended otherwise.
Accordingly, the $2,000 for laundry
liquids and cleaning products will be
included in the applicant's plan.
Duration of plan
party made submissions on the duration of the plan.
the circumstances, I am satisfied that a plan duration of two years (24 months)
is appropriate in the circumstances. This decision
provides for the funding of
SDA, which the evidence indicates will require new construction. It is
reasonable to conclude this process
will take a significant period, likely 12
months or more.
two-year plan will provide the applicant with necessary stability during this
period of construction and subsequent transition.
It also provides a logical and
practical point in time for a review. At that review, the applicant’s
successful transition
into his new accommodation and the corresponding removal
of the significant provider travel funding can be properly managed.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
the reasons set out above, the applicant has been successful in establishing
that the supports sought in relation to SDA, Transport
Funding, Positive
Behaviour Support, and Gardening and Laundry Services are reasonable and
necessary supports that should be funded.
The respondent’s position in
respect of the notation for communication devices is upheld.
decision under review will be set aside and substituted with a decision giving
effect to these findings.
decision of the delegate of the CEO of the NDIA made on 19 May 2024 and as
amended by the plan dated 30 September 2025 is set
substitution for the decision set aside, the matter is remitted to the CEO of
the NDIA with a direction that the applicant’s
Statement of Plan Supports
be approved in accordance with the findings in these reasons, namely that the
applicant's plan is to include
funding for:
(a) specialist disability accommodation for a 'House, Robust' design category,
for one resident with two on-site overnight assistance
rooms, located in or
around the Albany, Western Australia area;
(b) provider Travel - labour costs in the amount of $251,878.64 and
activity-based transport in the amount of $54,614.98;
(c) positive behaviour support, to include 90 hours of behaviour management and
(d) assistance with household tasks for five hours per week; and
(e) consumables - laundry liquid in the amount of $2,000;
the purposes of s 33(2)(c) of the Act, the plan is to be reassessed 2 years from
the date of this decision or 3 months after the
applicant transitions into SDA,
whichever is earlier.
certify that the preceding one-hundred and
thirty-nine (139) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for the decision
General Member F Robertson
..........................[SGD].........................
Date of hearing:
7–9 October 2025 (final submissions 3 November 2025)
for the Applicant:
Mr I R Freeman
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms L Martin, of counsel
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Mr A Geronimos, Lavan Legal
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Ms A Lean, Mills Oakley
Palmanova Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth of Australia
[2025] HCA 35
Palmanova Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth of Australia
[2025] HCA 35
YBFZ v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 40
(2024) 99 ALJR 1
[2024] HCA 40
419 ALR 457
National Disability
Insurance Scheme Act 2013
National Disability
Insurance Scheme Act 2013
National Disability
Insurance Scheme Act 2013
National Disability
Insurance Scheme Act 2013
National Disability
Insurance Scheme Act 2013
National Disability
Insurance Scheme Act 2013
(Cth), s (3)(b).
National Disability
Insurance Scheme Act 2013
McGarrigle v National Disability Insurance Agency
[2017] FCA 308
, [88], [91].
National Disability Insurance Agency v
[2020] FCAFC 79
(2020) 276 FCR 415
See, for example,
National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
Re Drake and Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (no. 2)
(1979) 2 ALD 634.
Re Drake and Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (no. 2)
(1979) 2 ALD 634.
Commissioner of Taxation
(2014) 227 FCR 265
[2014] FCAFC 162
That said, the plan also
includes: ‘We’ve added a $1.00 placeholder amount for your SDA
eligibility. You’re eligible
for SDA as follows: the design category is
Robust, building type is Villa/Duplex/Townhouse, 1 Resident, location is WA
-Perth - South
West. The maximum we’ll pay for your SDA supports is
$76,490.00.’
SDA Rules, s 11.
SDA Rules, s 15(b).
SDA Rules, s 15(c).
SDA Rules, s 15(d).
See e.g., Respondent’s
written closing submissions, [23].
Respondent’s written
closing submissions, [23].
Respondent’s written
closing submissions, [53].
Applicant’s written
closing submissions, [49].
Applicant’s written
closing submissions, [57].
Allen and CEO, National
Disability Insurance Agency (NDIS)
[2025] ARTA 1359 at [29].
In this regard, I agree with
the analysis of Senior Member P French in
Allen and CEO, National Disability
Insurance Agency (NDIS)
[2025] ARTA 1359 at [29].
Commissioner of Taxation
(2014) 227 FCR 265
[2014] FCAFC 162
The respondent only submits
that under s 16(b), (c), and (e) that a villa/duplex/townhouse is more
appropriate than an apartment.
Otherwise, the respondent’s submissions in
relation to s 16(h) relate to a villa/duplex/townhouse is inappropriate, having
regard to the safety of others.
National Disability
Insurance Scheme (Specialist Disability Accommodation) Rules
(Cth), s 18(a).
National Disability
Insurance Scheme (Specialist Disability Accommodation) Rules
(Cth), s 18(d).
National Disability
Insurance Scheme (Specialist Disability Accommodation) Rules
(Cth), s 18(e).
Respondent’s written
closing submissions, [13].
Applicant’s written
closing submissions, [10].
Applicant’s written
closing submissions, [10].
J1, pp 822-867;
National Disability
Insurance Agency v Warwick
(2025) 311 FCR 18;
[2025] FCAFC 100
National Disability
Insurance Agency v Warwick
(2025) 311 FCR 18;
[2025] FCAFC 100
National Disability
Insurance Agency v Warwick
(2025) 311 FCR 18;
[2025] FCAFC 100
National Disability
Insurance Agency v Warwick
(2025) 311 FCR 18;
[2025] FCAFC 100
RTF format (13.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format