A and Financial Institution [2012] AICmrCN 1 (1 May 2012)
Case citation: A and Financial Institution
[2012] AICmrCN 1
(1 May 2012)
Subject heading
of personal information
National Privacy Principle 2.1 in Schedule 3 of the
The complainant was a customer of a financial
institution. The financial institution required the complainant to provide their
phone number when it set up internet banking for the complainant. The
financial institution told the complainant that it would only
use the mobile
phone number to provide security identification for internet banking. Five years
later, a direct marketing company
made several calls to the complainant to sell
insurance products on behalf of the financial institution.
NPP 2.1 provides that an organisation must not use or
disclose personal information about an individual for a purpose other than the
primary purpose of collection, unless an exception in NPP 2.1(a)–(h)
NPP 2.1(a) permits the use or disclosure of personal information for a
secondary purpose where that purpose is related to the primary
collection, and the individual would reasonably expect the disclosure.
NPP 2.1(b) permits a use or disclosure of personal information with the
individual’s consent.
NPP 2.1(c) permits the use of personal information that is not sensitive
information for the purposes of direct marketing if various
conditions are
The Commissioner investigated the matter under
section 40(1)
The financial institution advised that it sent the complainant a letter about
its insurance products a week before the complainant
received the telephone
calls. A notice in fine print at the back of the letter stated that the
financial institution would send the
complainant’s mobile phone number to
the financial institution’s contract company, to call the complainant,
complainant contacted a specified number to advise they wanted to be
excluded from the calling program.
The financial institution sought to rely on NPP 2.1(a). The financial
institution considered that, because the complainant had not
responded to the
letter by calling to advise it did not want to participate in the calling
program, it was entitled to assume that
its disclosure of the
complainant’s personal information, including the mobile phone number, was
within the complainant’s
reasonable expectations.
To satisfy NPP 2.1(a), the disclosure must first, in accordance with NPP
2.1(a)(i), be related to the primary purpose for which the
personal information
was collected. The financial institution did not deny the complainant’s
claims that the complainant had
provided their mobile phone number for security
identification purposes. The Commissioner considered the context of the
of the mobile phone number, and took the view that the primary
purpose of collection was to provide extra security protection for
transactions. The Commissioner took the view that disclosing the mobile phone
number for the secondary purpose of enabling
the direct marketing company to
collection.
Additionally, NPP 2.1(a)(ii) requires that the individual reasonably expect
the organisation to use or disclose their information
for the secondary purpose.
The Commissioner took the view that the complainant would not have reasonably
expected their mobile phone
number to be passed to a third party to conduct
direct marketing. The Commissioner accepted that the complainant was unlikely to
have closely read the correspondence as the letter sent by the financial
institution was about a service that the complainant was
not interested in
receiving from that organisation.
Further, the Commissioner noted that the information aimed at advising the
recipientof the intention to disclose the mobile number
for direct marketing
purposes was included as part of additional information located on the back of
the correspondence. This information
entitled ‘Important
Information’, was not only on the back of the correspondence but was also
in extremely small font
which could seem contrary to it being important
Information.
Therefore, the Commissioner took the view that the disclosure was not
authorised by NPP 2.1(a) and the financial institution had interfered
the complainant’s privacy.
Consideration was also given to whether other provisions of NPP 2.1 may have
been applicable in the circumstances.
The financial institution did not seek to rely on NPP 2.1(b) by suggesting
that the complainant had implicitly consented to the disclosure
responding to the letter. However, the Commissioner expressed the view that this
provision would not have been applicable.
In this regard, the Commissioner took
into consideration the NPP Guidelines issued by the OAIC which note that an
organisation would
have difficulty in establishing consent to a use or
disclosure where it wishes to rely on a failure to object to a use or disclosure
when the option to opt out was not clearly and prominently presented and easy to
Further, NPP 2.1(c), the direct marking provisions, did not apply as the
financial institution did not use the information itself
for the purpose of
direct marketing, but rather disclosed it to a third party for that purpose.
The parties conciliated the matter. To resolve the matter the complainant
accepted a letter of apology and assurances from the financial
institution that
the complainant would not be included in any future marketing campaigns. The
financial institution also undertook
to conduct a review of its marketing
campaign procedures.
Satisfied that the matter had been adequately dealt with, the Commissioner
closed the matter under
section 41(2)(a)
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
RTF format (814 KB)
Signed PDF/A format