R v Retailer [2010] PrivCmrA 21 (24 December 2010)
Case Citation:
R v Retailer
[2010] PrivCmrA 21
Subject Heading:
Disclosure of personal information
National Privacy Principles 1.3 and 2.1 in Schedule 3 of the
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner prior to 1
November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the powers of the Privacy
Commissioner under the
were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
A retailer disclosed a complainant’s personal information to a third
party insurer so that it could offer the complainant extended
warranty on a
purchased product. The complainant said they did not expect to receive the offer
of an extended warranty in the mail
because they had declined to take up the
extended warranty in store.
The complainant alleged the retail company had inappropriately disclosed
their personal information and had not provided an adequate
collection notice.
NPP 1.3 provides that at or before the time (or if that is not practicable,
as soon as practicable after) an organisation collects
an individual's personal
information, it must take reasonable steps to ensure the individual is aware of
a number of factors. These
include, among other things, the purposes for which
the information is collected and the organisations (or the types of
organisations)
to which the organisation usually discloses information of that
NPP 2.1 provides that an organisation must not use or disclose personal
information about an individual for a purpose other than the
primary purpose of
collection unless an exception in NPP 2.1(a)-(h) applies.
NPP 2.1(a) permits an organisation to use or disclose personal information
for a secondary purpose where that purpose is related to
the primary purpose of
collection, and the individual would reasonably expect the use or disclosure.
The Commissioner conducted preliminary inquiries into the complaint under
In response to the inquiries the retailer said that it had provided notice to
the customer given its privacy policy outlined the information
required in NPP
1.3. The privacy policy also outlined that a third party would contact customers
retailer’s privacy policy was available
in all stores and on its website.
Although the complainant and respondent disagreed as to whether the
disclosure was authorised, they wished to resolve the issue. The
Commissioner
had not taken a view as to whether the retailer had interfered with the
complainant’s privacy.
The retailer agreed to change its procedures so that staff specifically
referred customers to its privacy policy when collecting customer
information.
It also agreed to retrain staff about the content of its privacy policy. The
complainant was satisfied with the respondent’s
changes to its procedures.
Satisfied that the matter had been adequately dealt with, the Commissioner
closed the matter under
section 41(2)(a)
Office of the
Australian Information Commissioner
December 2010
RTF format (140 KB)
Signed PDF/A format