Field Engine Wildlife Research and Management LLC [2025] APO 36 (23 October 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
PATENT OFFICE
Field Engine Wildlife Research and Management LLC
[2025] APO 36
Application: 2022263584
Title: Animal trap
Patent Applicant: Field Engine Wildlife Research
and Management LLC
Delegate: Dr W.E. Guinea
Decision Date: 23
October 2025
Hearing Date: Written submissions filed on 27 May 2025
Catchwords:
– Examiner’s objection –
inventive step –Examiner’s objections not sustainable –
claims may be broader than the contribution to the art –
utility – claims may not achieve promised benefit – time
for further examination
Representation: Patent attorney for the Applicant: GLMR - Patent and Trade
Mark Attorneys
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Application: 2022263584
Title: Animal trap
Patent Applicant: Field Engine Wildlife Research
and Management LLC
Date of Decision: 23 October 2025
The Examiner’s objections are
unsustainable.
I am satisfied that the invention so far as claimed does
not lack an inventive step in view of the cited prior art.
I direct that
the examination of the application continues to allow for the Examiner to
consider whether the claims meet the requirements
for support and usefulness.
Under subregulation 13.4(3), in conjunction with subregulation 13.4(1),
paragraph (g) of the
Patents Regulations 1991
, I direct that the period
to gain acceptance of the patent request and complete specification in relation
to the application is twelve
(12) months from the date of this decision.
REASONS FOR DECISION
present matter concerns Australian patent application 2022263584 (
the present
application
) which was filed on 4 November 2022 in the name of Field Engine
Wildlife Research and Management LLC (
the Applicant
). The patent request
claims divisional status from Australian application number 2020264312 (
parent patent
) which has been granted. The parent is a Convention
application filed on 04 November 2020 which claims priority from three US patent
applications: US 62/935,272, filed on 14 November
2019; US 63/011
,546, filed on
17 April 2020; and US 17/084,944, filed on 30 October 2020.
Examination
of the present application was requested on 18 January 2023 and was subject to
three examination reports as detailed below.
Examination
Report No. 1 was issued on 22 February 2024. Examination Report No. 1 raised an
objection for a lack of unity, consequently
the examination opinion was
restricted to claims 1-7, to which there were no further
objections.
Examination
Report No. 2 was issued on 11 July 2024, and raised objections that claims 7-12
were not novel and/or lacked an inventive
step in view of two prior art
documents (considered independently).
Examination
Report No. 3 (
) was issued on 20 February 2025. The report
maintained that claims 7-16 lack an inventive step over D1 and D5 (again
considered independently),
and these remain the only outstanding
objections.
to the claims of the specification have been proposed by the Applicant on 12
June 2024 and 18 February 2025. No objection
has been taken to these amendments
during examination, and I cannot see any reason for which they would not be
allowable. All further
references to the specification will be to that as
proposed to be amended on 18 February 2025 unless stated
21 February 2025, the Applicant wrote to the Commissioner requesting to be heard
in relation to the outstanding objections. On
15 April 2025, the Commissioner
wrote to the Applicant, advising them that the hearing would be by way of
written submissions due
within six weeks. The Applicant filed their submissions
in this regard on 27 May 2025 (
submissions
final date for acceptance of the application was 22 February 2025, however
paragraph 13.4(1)(g) of the Patent Regulations extends
the time for gaining
acceptance to 3 months from the date of the present decision, since the
Commissioner provided an opportunity
to be heard under s45 and notified the
Applicant of the date by which written submissions must be filed. Alternatively,
Reg 13.4(3)
allows the Commissioner to substitute a period longer than 3 months
if the Commissioner is satisfied that acceptance of the patent
request and
complete specification should be postponed.
Applicable Law and Scope
present application is governed by the
Patents Act 1990
) as amended by the
Intellectual Property Laws Amendment
(Raising the Bar) Act 2012
) which commenced on 15
April 2013.
Subsection 49(1), I must accept the application if satisfied on the balance of
probabilities that the application complies with
the Act. If I am not so
satisfied, then I can refuse the application pursuant to subsection 49(2). I
will, however, only refuse the
Application if I am also satisfied that providing
the Applicant with an opportunity to amend and/or undergo further examination
serve no useful purpose; for example, if I consider that any potential
negative findings are not rectifiable by an allowable amendment.
The Invention as Described
invention as described in the full specification relates to an animal trapping
system and method which utilises collapsible netting.
In particular, the animal
trapping system is directed primarily, though not exclusively, towards the
capture of feral swine. The
background to the specification discusses several
problems with existing trapping systems, particularly in the context of trapping
wild pigs, at paragraphs [0008]-[0009]:
“Various traps are known, but none of these traps are capable of
readily being used in all settings and therefore are limited.
For example, feral
swine are often present in remote areas, not easily accessible by vehicle. Box
traps are typically large, heavy
structures not easily carried, if at all, to a
remote location. Indeed, the size and weight of box traps often not only limits
they can be utilized, but also how many swine may be caught therein. In
some instances, box traps may be disassembled for transport,
but then must be
reassembled in the field – but the overall weight of the trap does not
change. Box traps also typically have
an elaborate door mechanism that permits
ingress, but no exit, or remotely controlled doors that require a user to
monitor the trap
(e.g., via camera).
Some corral traps formed from stiff wire fencing may overcome the
shortcomings of box traps, but they too have their own shortfalls.
lighter than box traps, and typically larger than box traps, corral traps can
also be prohibitively heavy and difficult
to transport. The time required to set
up stiff wire corral traps is typically significant, often requires some amount
of environment
clearance to enable the stiff wire fencing to be installed, and
may be limited to use on flat ground areas. Like box traps, corral
typically utilize elaborate door mechanisms.”
overcome the limitations of these prior art trapping systems, the Applicant has
developed an animal trap which utilises a netting
structure as outlined in Fig.
1 and paragraph [0084]:
“Once the operator is ready to capture animals, some amount of bait is
disposed in the interior region 26 of the trap 20 and
the net structure 22 is
closed (e.g., the lengthwise ends 32,
of the net structure 22 attached
to one another, and the ground portion
secured to the ground; i.e., the
set configuration). As can be seen in FIGS. 1, 5, and 6, in this set
configuration, at least a portion
of the wall portion 48 curves radially
inwardly and eventually contacts the ground. The inward radial curvature of the
wall portion
48 is understood to facilitate animal entry into the trap 20. The
collapsible, flexible, and lightweight nature of the net structure
animals to work their way under the net structure 22 with minimal resistance,
past the lower lateral edge 38
the net structure 22, to access the bait. Feral swine, in particular, naturally
root with their snouts, and this rooting behaviour
will naturally raise some of
the wall portion 48 and the ground portion 50, thereby providing access to the
interior region 26 of
the animal trap 20. Once the animal has travelled
completely under the net structure 22, gravity causes the net structure 22 to
traps or corral traps formed from stiff wire fencing that
only permit ingress
through a particular door structure, the present disclosure trap 20 allows an
animal to enter the trap 20 at
any circumferential position of the trap 20. This
aspect is believed to increase the confidence of the animals being trapped and
consequently the yield of the trap 20.”
apparent from Fig. 1, the trap
comprises supports for the net
. In Fig. 1 these supports are posts
, which are driven into
the ground so as to allow for secure mounting of the net
application refers to the use of metal posts, but notes that the invention is
not limited to the use of these, and one could,
for example, simply make use of
trees that are present where the trap is to be set. Tensioning structures
may also be used to ensure that the posts adequately tension upper
. Whatever the case, it is clear that supports of
some kind are necessary to enable the trap
to be operable. In
particular, there does not appear to be any disclosure of or suggestion that any
of the net structures disclosed
in the application would, per se, be able to
capture animals when not in the “set
configuration”.
is apparent from the application that the Applicant’s invention improves
on the traps in the prior art by implementing a
flexible net structure in a
particular animal trap arrangement exploiting, in the case of wild pigs, the
behaviour of the same. Paragraphs
[0085] and [0089] outlines advantages of the
present animal traps over the prior art alternatives in that they
lighter and
collapsible, allowing for greater transportability,
substantially
less expensive,
operation, owing to the absence of an intricate door mechanism,
more versatile,
in that they do not require the trap area to be cleared and may be used on
sloped ground, and that
once set-up, the
animal traps do not require any human intervention.
specification describes several embodiments all directed to further improvements
of the animal trapping system/methodology and/or
modifications made to the
flexible net structure to deal with additional issues particular to the trapping
of wild pigs. Of relevance
for this decision are those embodiments dealing with
the use of a secondary net layer and the suitable/preferred dimensions of the
net structure per se.
may be seen from Fig. 6, reproduced below and discussed at [0063], a secondary
is present on the interior of the lower part of primary net
so as to comprise a secondary wall portion. In such embodiments, the
net opening size of the secondary wall portion may be smaller
than the net
opening size of the adjacent net, and further that the secondary wall portion
may have a lighter twine size than the
adjacent net. For these nets, the heavier
twine size of the (primary) net
strength, while the light twine size and smaller openings of the secondary net
in the lower wall region helps prevent the
entanglement of the captured animals.
In addition, the lighter twine size and smaller openings also possess greater
drapability to
maintain ground contact and prevents animals from escaping.
[0068] discusses the design of the net structure to ensure it has the desired
behaviour when in the “set configuration”.
This paragraph outlines
that the net structure, when configured, requires the lower lateral edge to have
a smaller circumference
relative to the upper lateral edge. The purpose of this
is two-fold such that it ensures that the net, when in the set configuration,
can arcuately transition radially inward with sufficient ground contact portion
as well as ensuring that the net is prevented from
being pushed radially
outwards beyond the supporting posts. These effects help to prevent captured
animals from escaping the trap.
[0068] also outlines that the relatively smaller lower lateral
length/circumference may be achieved in two ways: (a) by
having a net structure
having “a tapered configuration that produces the smaller diameter at the
lower lateral edge”
(as shown in Fig. 3, reproduced below), or (b)
alternatively the ground portion may be “cinched up” by way of
and fasteners to create a smaller diameter/circumference at the lower
lateral edge (Fig. 3A, reproduced below).
Application comprises 16 claims of which claims 1 and 7 are independent. Claim 7
as proposed to be amended is reproduced below;
the full claim set can be found
at Annex A to this decision. For convenience I have indented and enumerated the
features of claim
7. A flexible net structure comprising:
7.1 a collapsible net
7.1.1 formed from a plurality of spaced apart flexible lines that define a
plurality of openings within the net,
7.1.2 the net having a width that extends between an upper lateral edge and a
lower lateral edge, a first length that extends between
a first lengthwise end
and a second lengthwise end at the upper lateral edge, and a second length that
extends between the first
lengthwise end and the second lengthwise end at the
lower lateral edge,
7.1.3 wherein the second length is less than the first length;
7.2 a flexible upper cord attached to the collapsible net at the upper
lateral edge extending the first length of the net;
7.3 wherein the collapsible net is configurable in a closed configuration
where the first lengthwise end and the second lengthwise
end are disposed
proximate each other, and the lower lateral edge defines a trap opening; and
7.4 a secondary net
7.4.1 attached to the flexible net structure and
7.4.2 disposed on an interior side of the flexible net structure between the
upper lateral edge and the lower lateral edge,
7.4.3 extending between the first lengthwise end and the second lengthwise
end and extending downwardly toward the lower lateral edge.
The appended
claims 8-16 serve to further define features of the animal trap net structure.
As the Applicant has made no submissions
regarding the appended claims, I will
not have regard to them unless it becomes necessary to do so.
The Person Skilled in the Art
specification is to be construed through the eyes of the person skilled in the
art (PSA). The skilled person may be an individual
or team of people, having a
practical interest in the subject matter of the invention. While well versed in
the relevant field, the
person skilled in the art is taken to be non-inventive
Root Quality Pty Ltd v Root Control Technologies Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 980
- [72]; referring to
Catnic Components Ltd v Hill & Smith Ltd
[1982] RPC 183
The General Tire & Rubber Company v The
Firestone Tyre & Rubber Company Ltd
[1972] RPC 457
identity of the person skilled in the art does not appear to have been discussed
in the process of examination. I expect this
is largely because there is little
contention on the matter. For the sake of completeness, I consider it clear that
the relevant
person or team would include those with a working knowledge of the
design, construction, and implementation of free-standing animal
(especially those used to trap wild boar). Moreover, I consider the skilled
person/team would include a materials engineer
familiar with selection of, in
particular, rope/twine materials.
Construction
were no matters of construction in contention during examination, nor do I
consider it necessary to construe the claims in detail,
the claims themselves
for the most part being quite plain in their own terms. However, prior to
turning to the specifics of the Examiner’s
objections, I consider it
convenient to construe certain aspects of the claims that will be of assistance
in considering the outstanding
objections.
rules of construction for an Australian patent specification are well summarized
Decor Corp v Dart Industries
[1988] FCA 399
, however the
correct application of these rules to the construction of claims was discussed
by Bennett J in
H Lundbeck A/S v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2009] FCAFC 70
at [118] – [120]:
“[T]he words in a claim should be read through the eyes of the skilled
addressee in the context in which they appear...while
the claims define the
monopoly claimed in the words of the patentee's choosing, the specification
should be read as a whole ... it
is not permissible to read into a claim an
additional integer or limitation to vary or qualify the claim by reference to
of the specification...terms in the claim which are unclear may be
defined or clarified by reference to the body of the specification.”
would also note what was said in
Eli Lilly and Company Limited v Apotex Pty
[2013] FCA 214
) at [139]:
“It is well settled that the Court should, from the outset, approach
the task of patent construction with a generous measure
of common sense. The
Court must place itself in the position of a person skilled in the relevant art,
being the subject matter of
the patent. From this perspective, the patent is to
be read as a whole, in the context of the specification and in light of the
common general knowledge and state of the relevant art at the
priority date.”
Flexible net structure, collapsible net, and the secondary net
7 defines a flexible net structure (feature 7, claim pre-amble) which comprises,
inter alia, both a collapsible net (7.1) and
a secondary net (7.4). In this
regard I note that a “net structure” may be plainly construed as any
structure which deals
with and/or comprises at least one net. I further note
that the net structure as claimed is different to a “net trap”
fairly includes net structures for purposes other than trapping
the adjectives “flexible” and “collapsible” each serve
to functionally limit the net structure and
net integers. However, these terms
do not limit these integers to be sufficiently flexible or collapsible for any
particular purpose,
and hence I do not construe them to limit the scope of the
claim beyond excluding strictly rigid structures.
wherein the
collapsible net is configurable in a closed configuration where the first
lengthwise end and the second lengthwise end
are disposed proximate each other,
and the lower lateral edge defines a trap opening
term “configurable” creates a functional definition of the
collapsible net. That is, the collapsible net here is limited
such that it must
in a closed configuration, wherein the
lower lateral edge defines a trap opening. The limitation imparted by this
phrase does not
require that the collapsible net
this way, nor that the lower lateral edge strictly defines a trap opening,
merely that it is able to be configured as such. I
note, nominally, that this
functional definition is defined against the collapsible net, not the overall
net structure to which the
claim preamble is drawn.
the secondary net is attached to the “flexible net structure, between the
upper and lower lateral edge”. While
the claim language is somewhat
circular and cumbersome, the reference to the secondary net being disposed
between the upper and lower
lateral edges and extending between the first and
second lengthwise ends indicates that the secondary net would be understood as
being attached to the collapsible net and in effect be subject to the same
functional limitations as the collapsible net.
A collapsible
net [...] wherein the second length is less than the first length
plainly, features 7.1.2 and 7.1.3 limit the [primary] net (7.1) such that it has
a second (lower) length which is less than
a first (upper) length. I note that
lower and upper absent the context of the trapping system are arbitrary
designations. Such nets
include the annular sector of Fig. 3 (supra), however
extends to other nets such as those with a trapezial shape, or other irregular
is not immediately apparent from the language of the claim is whether the
defined lengths relate strictly to the net “as
manufactured” (that
is the net as defined only by its unmodified reticulated structure), or may
include nets which are manipulated
in some manner (e.g. folded, pleated, or
cinched) to define the lengths (the net as arranged). That is, does claim 7
include nets
similar to that of Fig. 3A?
my view, I think provided a modification is made to a net that is of a fixed,
(semi-)permanent character then the modified net
may be considered as a net
itself possessing its own second length distinct from the length of the
non-modified net. An impermanent
arrangement however, such as merely folding or
bunching the net absent any fixings, would merely be a folded net having the
length associated with the net in the unfolded, unbunched
...disposed on an interior side of the flexible net
structure between the upper lateral edge and the lower lateral edge... &
...extending
between the first lengthwise end and the second lengthwise
construing the relationship between the secondary net and the (primary) net it
is helpful to refer to some relevant entries from
Macquarie English
(Macquarie Dictionary Online, 2023, Macquarie
Dictionary Publishers, an imprint of Pan Macmillan Australia Pty Ltd,
www.macquariedictionary.com.au,
hereinafter the “
Macquarie Dictionary
most relevantly
provides the following:
to put in a particular or suitable place.
(formatting in original)
to stretch, draw, or arrange in a given direction, or so
as to reach a particular point, as a cord or a line of troops.
to reach, as to a particular point.
(formatting in original)
preposition
in the space separating (two or more points, objects,
connecting:
a link between parts.
(formatting in original)
regards to the secondary net being disposed between two edges, I have read this
to mean that the secondary net is substantially
located in the space between the
two lateral edges in agreement with definition 1 of “between”. The
Applicant's submissions
seem to suggest, in view of the disclosure of D5 which I
will come to later, that extension beyond (in addition to between) the edges
would not be within the scope of this meaning. While I notionally agree that
being “disposed between” excludes embodiments
where the secondary
net extends substantially beyond the lateral edges of the net, I do not consider
that the skilled person would
exclude from their construction arrangements
wherein such an extension beyond the edges is of a trivial
the secondary net extending between the two lengthwise ends, I prefer the
construction that the secondary net must connect
the two edges (definition 3 of
“between”, and compatible with both provided definitions of
“extend”). The
alternative interpretation of the secondary net being
merely arranged in a direction (i.e. from the first end to the second end;
part of definition 2 of “extend”) and located in the space between
the two ends (definition 1 of “between”)
appears to be an unnatural
use of language. In my view, the preferred construction not only more closely
purports with how these
words would be understood in an everyday context but is
also supported by the apparently deliberate drafting choice to distinguish
“extending between” from “disposed ...
Flexible cord
most relevant entry in the
Macquarie Dictionary
and “rope” is reproduced below.
a string or small rope composed of several strands twisted or
woven together.”
(formatting in original)
a strong, thick line or cord, commonly one composed of
twisted or braided strands of hemp, flax, or the like, or of wire or other
(formatting in original)
this basis, I do think the scope of the term “cord” does not include
merely “a strand” and requires multiple
"strands" combined by some
means to form a string or rope. I however do not consider cord in the context in
which it appears in the
claim to be otherwise particularly limited in material
and could include for example braided wire ropes (provided that they could
considered as “flexible”). I further do not think the term
“flexible” to be particularly limiting in this
context, and merely
serves to exclude entirely rigid structures (that is the cord need not be
particularly longitudinally elastic
to be considered
“flexible”).
Inventive Step – Legal Basis
statutory basis for inventive step is set out at s7(2) and s7(3) as reproduced
“(2) For the purposes of this Act, an invention is to
be taken to involve an inventive step when compared with the prior art
unless the invention would have been obvious to a person skilled in the relevant
art in the light of the common general knowledge
as it existed (whether in or
out of the patent area) before the priority date of the relevant claim, whether
that knowledge is considered
separately or together with the information
mentioned in subsection (3).
(3) The information for the purposes of subsection (2) is:
(a) any single piece of prior art information; or
(b) a combination of any 2 or more pieces of prior art information that the
skilled person mentioned in subsection (2) could, before
the priority date of
the relevant claim, be reasonably expected to have combined.”
question of what it means for an invention to be obvious has been considered
extensively by the courts. In
Aktiebolaget Hassle v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2002] HCA 59
212 CLR 411
Aktiebolaget
”), the High
Court accepted the approach taken in
Olin Mathieson Chemical
Corporation v Biorex Laboratories Ltd
[1970] RPC 157
at [187] where
Graham J posed the reformulated Cripps question:
“Would the notional research group at the relevant date, in all the
circumstances, ... directly be led as a matter of course
to try [the claimed
combination] in the expectation that it might well produce a [useful or better
considering whether or not an invention is obvious it is important to avoid
ex post facto
analysis. Such an analysis which leverages the
benefits of hindsight knowledge of the invention may result in an incorrect
that an invention would have been obvious over the prior art. A
common method to mitigate such hindsight reasoning is the problem-solution
approach as derived from
Wellcome Foundation Ltd. v VR Laboratories (Aust)
[1981] HCA 12
(1981) 148 CLR 262
Wellcome Foundation
”), where Aickin J.
“The test is whether the hypothetical addressee faced with the same
problem would have taken as a matter of routine whatever
steps might have led
from the prior art to the invention, whether they be the steps of the inventor
defining the problem, I am mindful of the statements of the majority of the Full
Bench of the Federal Court in
AstraZeneca AB v Apotex Pty Ltd
AstraZeneca
[202]-[203]:
“[I]t is apparent that the relevant provisions of
the Act do not expressly or impliedly contemplate that the body of
and information against which the question whether or not an
invention, so far as claimed, involves an inventive step is to be determined
be enlarged by reference to the inventor’s (or patent applicant’s)
description in the complete specification of the
invention including, in
particular, any problem that the invention is explicitly or implicitly directed
at solving.
If the problem addressed by a patent specification is itself common general
knowledge, or if knowledge of the problem is s 7(3) information,
then such knowledge or information will be attributed to the hypothetical person
skilled in the art for the purpose of assessing
obviousness.”
(emphasis added)
observe that the problem-solution approach may not be appropriate in
circumstances where the invention does not solve any particular
problem, however
the Applicant has not suggested that the problem-solution approach would be
inappropriate in the present circumstances.
Indeed, the Applicant’s
of the approach from
Wellcome Foundation
suggests that the Applicant considers that the
problem-solution approach is appropriate.
Applicant has emphasised in their submissions that the skilled person would not
be led specifically to the combination of the
particular features (as well as
arguing that specific features are non-obvious). Many inventions are defined by
such a combination
of features.
the invention may lie in a combination of features, I must consider whether the
combination is obvious, not whether each of
the separate integers of the
combination is obvious:
Aktiebolaget
Mining & Manufacturing Co. v Beiersdorf (Australia) Ltd.
Minnesota Mining
“The proper question is not whether it would have been obvious to the
hypothetical addressee who was presented with an ex post
facto selection of
prior specifications that elements from them could be combined to produce a new
product or process. It is rather
whether it would have been obvious to a
non-inventive skilled worker in the field to select from a possibly very large
range of publications
the particular combination subsequently chosen by the
opponent in the glare of hindsight and also whether it would have been obvious
to that worker to select the particular combination of integers from those
selected publications. In the case of a combination patent
the invention will
lie in the selection of integers, a process which will necessarily involve
rejection of other possible integers.
The prior existence of publications
revealing those integers, as separate items, and other possible integers does
not of itself make
an alleged invention obvious. It is the selection of the
integers out of, perhaps many possibilities, which must be shown to be
the level of inventiveness required to sustain a patent Full Federal Court in
Garford Pty Ltd v Dywidag Systems International Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 6
the following:
“The inventiveness required to sustain a patent for a claimed invention
is quite small. A ‘scintilla’ of inventiveness
is all that is
at [195]. However, there must still be ‘some
difficulty overcome, some barrier crossed’ (per Lockhart J in
& Co Inc v Bailey Aluminium Products Pty Ltd
[1989] FCA 57
at 574) or some contribution to the art “beyond the skill of the
Allsop Inc v Bintang Ltd
[1989] FCA 297
; (1989) 15 IPR
686 at 701).”
Inventive Step – Objections and
Submissions
The Examiner’s objections
outstanding objections as detailed in Examination Report No. 3 relate to the
ground of inventive step. At item 3 of the report,
the Examiner contends that
the invention as defined in claims 7-16 lacks an inventive step in light of the
disclosure of JPS56141088
U (D1) and the common general knowledge in the art
and, separately, that the same claims also lack an inventive step in light of
the disclosure of US2019/0208764 A1 (D5) and the common general knowledge in the
note that throughout the examination reports D1 had been incorrectly referred to
as JPS56141088
which is an unrelated patent document. It is apparent
from the Applicant's submissions that they were able to identify the correct
utility model upon which the Examiner based their objections. The Examiner has
indicated in their reports that the machine translation
has been relied upon for
the purpose of their assessment. For convenience I have instead relied upon a
J-platpat translation of the
examined version of the utility model –
JPS596715 Y2
. While this document
contains different claims, the description and drawings which were the basis of
the Examiner's original objections
(and in turn the Applicant's submissions)
appear to be identical.
Examiner objected to claim 7 as lacking an inventive step when prior art
document D1 is viewed in the light of the common general
knowledge. The Examiner
considered that figures 1-3 of D1 disclosed all the features of claim 7, except
7.1.3 wherein the second length [of the collapsible net] is less than the
first length; and
7.4 [wherein the flexible net structure comprises:] a secondary net
7.4.1 attached to the flexible net structure and
7.4.2 disposed on an interior side of the flexible net structure between the
upper lateral edge and the lower lateral edge,
7.4.3 extending between the first lengthwise end and the second lengthwise
end and extending downwardly toward the lower lateral edge
Examiner considered that feature 7.1.3 was a mere design choice over the
disclosure of D1 as follows:
“However, I consider that this difference is a mere design choice that
would depend on the specific application of the flexible
net structure. For
example, when the net structure is configured in a circular arrangement, it
would be obvious for a person skilled
in the art to provide a second length that
is less than the first length.”
Examiner further considered that features 7.4-7.4.3 were an obvious selection
over the teachings of D1 as follows:
“I consider that improving strength/reliability merely relates to
routine engineering practice. When faced with the problem
of providing added
strength to the flexible net structure disclosed in D1, a person skilled in the
art would be directly led to either
increase the size of the flexible lines,
change the material of the flexible lines, or provide a secondary net. Selecting
over the other does not require the exercise of inventive skill.
Furthermore, having a secondary net adds the known benefit of providing
redundancy, which is another routine engineering practice.”
Examiner further objected to claim 7 as lacking an inventive step when prior art
document D5 is viewed in the light of the common
general knowledge. The Examiner
considered that figures 1-4 and paragraphs [0020], [0024]-[0026] of D5 discloses
all the features
of claim 7, except for:
7.1.3 wherein the second length [of the collapsible net] is less than the
first length
Examiner considered that feature 7.1.3 was a mere design choice over the
disclosure of D5 as follows:
“However, I consider that this difference is a mere design choice that
would depend on the specific application of the flexible
net structure. For
example, when the net structure is configured in a circular arrangement, it
would be obvious for a person skilled
in the art to provide a second length that
is less than the first length.”
Examiner further objected to the appended claims as lacking an inventive step as
“Furthermore, appended claims 8-16 add only features that are either
disclosed in D1 and D5 or are common general knowledge
in the art/mere design
choices and which therefore cannot contribute to providing an inventive
The Applicant’s Submissions
the 27 May 2025, the Applicant filed a document titled “Hearing Written
Submissions”. Throughout the submissions, the
Applicant submits that the
Examiner had erred on a number of points in the assessment of the statutory test
for inventive step with
respect to the disclosure of both D1 and D5. I will
discuss the Applicant’s submissions as they become relevant in the course
of my consideration below.
The problem(s)
I am to apply the problem-solution approach of
Wellcome Foundation
will first be necessary to identify the problem solved by the invention. Since
the task is to determine whether the invention
involves an inventive step,
the identified problem must be solved across the full width of the claim.
Applicant has not provided a clear definition of the problem to be solved by the
claimed net in their submissions, however at
several points indicates key
functional and technical benefits of the net (especially features 7.1.3, 7.4)
when used in the specific
trap systems of the specification. As I have observed
, these key functional and
technical benefits do not seem to be realised by claimed net structure
but rather only when implemented in an animal trap/methodology to
which the specification is direction. Moreover, it is not clear
whether the
traps using the net structure as claimed would exhibit the alleged technical
benefits posited by the Applicant across
the full width of the claim(s). In
particular, with regards to the secondary net the specification only identifies
it performing
its technical function when it has a lighter twine size and
smaller openings in comparison to the (primary) net
. Where the problem is not
solved by the claimed invention across its full width, it cannot be an
appropriate problem definition for
the purposes of applying the problem-solution
the above in mind, and with reference to the description at paragraph [0068], it
appears the problem solved by the claimed invention
relates to:
How to help ensure a net structure,
when configured
circumferentially-closed terrestrial animal trap which forms an enclosed space,
prevents the escape of captured animals by preventing
said animals from pushing
the lower lateral edge radially outwards.
observe that this problem definition does not directly incorporate any of the
problems allegedly solved by the secondary net, such
as those suggested in
paragraph [0063]. This is simply due to the fact that the secondary net as
defined in claim 7 does not solve
all the problems said to be solved by the
secondary net as described; that is, the secondary net as claimed is less than
the secondary
net as described. Nevertheless, I am of the view that, standing in
the shoes of the PSA and considering the discussion of the secondary
application more generally, one can formulate the problem as above.
the examiner appeared to simply reduce the inventive step analysis to something
of a comparison between the prior art and
the D1 or D5. In this regard, the
Examiner did not formulate a problem that informed the entire inventive step
analysis, but rather
developed a problem that was relevant to some of the
missing features, whilst for others no problem was posed as
specifically, with regards to the secondary net (feature 7.4) and its
sub-features, the Examiner gave the explicit problem definition
“[P]roviding added strength [or redundancy] to the flexible net
structure.”
this formulation of the problem is perhaps not the problem as I have formulated,
it would seem to be a reasonable line of inquiry
I will consider in addition to
the problem definition derived with respect to the specification.
regards to the shape of the net (feature 7.1.3), the Examiner did not refer to a
problem as such but simply referred to feature
7.1.3 as a mere design choice
depending on the specific application of the net structure, for example when
configured in a circular
arrangement. This may be understood as a simple
assertion that feature 7.1.3 is obvious over the prior art concerned, as opposed
to solving any problem, although this could be considered as a potential
selection issue in the context of a problem to be solved.
In any case, for
completeness, I will consider this line of reasoning
The common general knowledge
General Knowledge (CGK) is the background knowledge and experience available to
all those working in the relevant art as was
described in
“The notion of common general knowledge itself involves the use of that
which is known or used by those in the relevant trade.
It forms the background
knowledge and experience which is available to all in the trade in considering
the making of new products,
or the making of improvements in old, and it must be
treated as being used by an individual as a general body of
knowledge.”
was no dispute regarding the CGK as asserted by the Examiner made in the
Applicant’s submissions. Nonetheless, I will
consider the validity of the
Examiner’s assertion of what forms part of the CGK as appropriate in my
assessment below.
Inventive Step - Consideration
D1 in view of the Common General
is addressed to a method of trapping reptiles, and in particular snakes, with a
mode of operation substantially similar to that
of the preferred trapping
methodology of the current specification. In D1, a net wall is arranged to form
a “J-shape”,
such that the target animal can traverse under the net
when approaching from one direction (the exterior of the trap), but is unable
traverse the net when approaching from the other direction as the animal will be
above the net. This operation is clear from Fig.
a preferred embodiment of D1, the netting is arranged to form an enclosed space,
such as a square pen as per Fig. 3:
Examiner referenced these figures in concluding that all the features of claim 7
were disclosed in D1, except features 7.1.3 (wherein
the second length is less
than the first length), and 7.4 (a secondary net and its manner of attachment).
The Examiner did not provide
a more granular assignment of the features
considered disclosed by D1 other than to indicate items
correspond to the collapsible net.
Applicant in their submissions agreed with the Examiner that D1 fails to
disclose features 7.1.3 and 7.4, and further submitted
that D1 fails to disclose
feature 7.2 (a flexible upper cord attached to the collapsible net at the upper
lateral edge extending
the first length of the
. I will hence focus on the
three potential distinguishing features of the flexible cord (7.2), the net
geometry (7.1.3), and the
secondary net (7.4) in my assessment
A flexible cord
Applicant argued two points supporting their assertion that D1 does not disclose
“a flexible cord”, essentially:
1 - D1 instead discloses an “electrical wire (5)”, and an
electrical wire is distinct from “a flexible cord”.
Moreover, the
electrical wire of D1 would not be suitable to contain wild pigs.
2 - D1 teaches that when applying the invention to animals which are unable
to climb, that the electrical wire (5) can be excluded
from the trap.
the first point, I agree in principle that a “cord” requires a
different structure than a “wire” as plainly
construed in English. A
cord, as I have construed
strictly a multi-filament string or rope, whereas I think wire would seem to
more typically evoke a metallic monofilament
“thread”. However, in
the context in which it appears the conductive wire of D1 refers to what is
functionally electrical
fencing “wire”, which is often implemented
in the form of a braided cord. For these reasons, I do not think a skilled
person in reading the disclosure of D1 would consider the “wire” as
limited to a metallic monofilament. Further, as a
relative term, I see no clear
reason why the skilled person would not consider electrical fencing wire to be
“flexible”.
With regards to the suggestion that the wire of D1 would
not be suitable for the containment of wild pigs, I note that there is no
functional limitation on the flexible cord, nor the flexible net structure as
claimed, requiring that it is suitable for any particular
application. For these
reasons, I consider that the selection of a flexible cord from the broader
“electrically conductive
wires” as per D1 is a mere obvious
selection available to the skilled person in implementing D1, however one wishes
the problem to be solved.
the Applicant’s second argument, I acknowledge that D1 teaches the
exclusion of the wire
when implementing the trap to capture
non-climbing animals. However, this is solving a problem that is not relevant
with respect
to the claims - nothing in the present claims limits the net
structure to the application of capturing of non-climbing animals, nor
any reason to believe that the net structure as claimed solves difficulties
peculiar to non-climbing animals. Consequently,
there is no reason to believe
that D1 would fail to deprive claim 7 of inventiveness due to not addressing
problems concerning non-climbing
of this is to say nothing of whether it would be obvious to otherwise include a
flexible cord at the periphery of a net structure.
I do not think it would be
unusual to include such a cord for the purposes of tensioning or otherwise
shaping a net.
... wherein the second length is less than the
first length...
Applicant, in agreement with the Examiner, submits that D1 does not mention or
suggest having a second length of the net being
less than a first length.
while I agree that D1 fails to
clearly and unmistakeably
second length less than the first length, the closed arrangement disclosed in
the embodiment of Fig. 3 would inevitably
require that at least the “lower
perimeter” of the combined net of
must be less than
the “upper perimeter”. This is evident from both the operation of
the trap in D1, as well as visible
in Fig. 3. The mode of operation of D1
requires that there is a ground contact portion (
) extending away from
the net walls, and hence the skilled person in view of constructing the
circumferentially-closed embodiment
would understand that the inner perimeter of
the combined net structure (analogous to the lower circumference of present
application)
must be less than the outer perimeter. As such the net must have,
in some manner, an
length at the lower lateral edge that is
less than the length at the upper later edge. If this was not the case, then the
embodiment of D1 would not work, and there could not be a ground contact
portion of the net
may be however that this lower perimeter could be formed in D1 by merely folding
or “bunching-up” of the net at the
lower end. As I have previously
, embodiments where the
second length is formed by an impermanent, non-fixed means are not fairly within
the scope of the claim when
construed purposively, but embodiments such as
“cinching up” of the lower lateral edge do fall within the scope of
claim. Hence, the collapsible net of this embodiment is distinguished from
the collapsible net of the claim by only the manner in
which the second length
to the problem derived from the specification and reformulated Cripps
Would the skilled person, in all circumstances, be directly led as a matter
of course to try permanent fixed means to form the second
length in adapting the
teachings of D1 in the expectation that it might well solve the problem of
preventing the escape of trapped
animals via said animals pushing the lower
lateral edge radially outwards,
when configured in or as
circumferentially-closed terrestrial animal trap which forms an enclosed
this, in my view, the skilled person in implementing the embodiment of Fig. 3 of
D1 is directly led to forming a lower perimeter
less than an upper perimeter (by
at least the visual representation in Fig. 3), and would as a matter of course
seek to implement
“permanent” fixings of some form such that the
“J-shaped” cross-section can be maintained because the alternative
solutions would seem to be impractical. It seems to me that the PSA would be
dissuaded from merely bunching up or folding of the
the lower lateral edge as this would potentially lead to escape paths for
captured reptiles. I further note that pegging-down
or staking of the net at the
lower end would also seem to be unfavourable as it would interfere with the
traps intended operation.
I therefore consider that this feature would be
obvious to the skilled person in their implementation of D1.
Applicant has submitted in rebutting the inventive step arguments of the
Examiner that the net geometry feature solves a problem
particular to the
capture of the feral pigs which would not be experienced in the context of
trapping snakes. The difference in target
animals is acknowledged, but the
claimed invention is not limited to the capture of wild pigs and hence nor
should the problem solved
for the purposes of assessing inventive step.
Regardless, as I have explained D1 Fig. 3 already provides clear directions
the lower perimeter being less than an upper perimeter.
In this context, the problem faced by the PSA is merely how to implement
“J-shaped” geometry in a trap having corners to prevent the escape
of the trapped animals. The fact that the Applicant
has allegedly identified a
new problem solved by this net structure in the context of wild pigs (the issue
of the net being pushed
beyond the supporting posts) does not on its own mean
the claims are inventive if the article per se requires no inventive
secondary net
agree with the Examiner and the Applicant that D1 does not disclose the use of a
secondary net attached to the flexible net. As
a result, the claimed invention
is distinguished over D1 by the inclusion of a secondary net.
assess whether this difference amounts to an inventive step I will now turn to
the legislative test in the form of the reformulated
Would the person skilled in the art of animal capture and net at the relevant
date, in all circumstances, be directly be led as a
matter of course to try
adding a secondary net to D1 in the expectation that it would help ensure that
the net structure,
when configured
in or as a circumferentially-closed
terrestrial animal trap
which forms an enclosed space, prevents the escape
of captured animals by preventing said animals from pushing the lower lateral
edge radially outwards?
key question here is
the skilled person be led to using a secondary
net, not merely
they add one. Given the simplicity of this feature,
it is clear the skilled person could incorporate a second net of some
description
with little difficulty. So, what is the motivation (if any) for the
skilled person to add a secondary net?
this question, I see little motivation for the PSA to alter the net structure of
D1 to incorporate a secondary net. There appears
to be no indication that
two-layer nets of any sort have been implemented in
circumferentially-closed
animal traps for any known benefit. Moreover, I
do not think that the incorporation of a secondary net could be said to be a
improvement which the skilled person would have come to as a matter of
routine. There does not appear to be any particular practical
difficulties which
I think would be apparent to the skilled person in such
circumferentially-closed
animal traps identified in D1 (or known in the
CGK) which would motivate the inclusion of a secondary net. Indeed, it appears
that the ground contact of the net in D1 would seem to solve the problem
posed and thereby tend to obviate any further modification
by the skilled
to the Examiner’s approach, as I have already outlined, the Examiner
considered that the skilled person would consider
modification of D1 to include
this feature as a matter of routine in solving the known problem(s) of adding
strength to the net structure
and/or providing redundancy.
Applicant in their submissions argued that the Examiner in their definition of
the problem did not consider the particular way
in which the secondary net is
attached to the flexible net structure. The Applicant emphasised that the
secondary net of the claims
is attached on an interior side of the net
structure, and is strictly located between the upper lateral edge and the lower
edge, and extends between the lengthwise ends. The Applicant alleges
that this matter of attachment is associated with key functional
do not think that the Applicant’s submissions meaningfully invalidate the
approach taken by the Examiner, as far as it goes.
Firstly, the allocation of a
side as the “interior” side is arbitrary given that claim 7 is
directed to a net per se
and is not limited in any way to a
circumferentially-closed trap structure or net arrangement, nor is the claim
limited to its application
in the trapping of wild pigs. Secondly, I do not
consider the mode of attachment is as limited as implied in the
Applicant’s
submissions. So long as the secondary net extends between the
lengthwise edges, and is not disposed (substantially) beyond the lateral
it will be within the scope of the claimed feature. In this, a reinforcing net
or a net provided for redundancy (as suggested
by the Examiner), which is the
same size as the primary collapsible net (i.e. a two-ply net) would fall within
the scope of the claims.
Applicant has further asserted that there are functional and technical benefits
associated with the secondary net and its particular
manner of attachment.
However, there does not seem to be any particular benefit identified in the
description or the Applicant’s
submissions associated with the secondary
net and its manner of attachment present as these exist in the
Paragraph [0063] is the only discussion of the secondary net in any detail.
According to this paragraph, the benefit of the secondary
net is that the
entanglement of captured pigs is minimised, and that improved drapability of the
net structure helps prevent the
escape of the captured pigs. These benefits are
only realised when the secondary net is of a “lighter twine size and [has]
smaller openings”, which is not claimed, and appears to have little to do
with the way the net is attached (at least insofar
as limited by the
the Examiner, the motivation to add a secondary net was that the skilled person
in seeking a solution to the problem of strengthening
and/or providing
redundancy to the net structure, would look to established solutions in the
common general knowledge.
there is no indication in D1, nor is it apparent from the CGK that there would
be any issue of net strength in the solution
of D1. Why then would the skilled
person consider, in any circumstance, that the net structure of D1 requires
further strengthening?
Given that the net of D1 is preferably designed to
capture snakes from which there is a desire to extract serums (venoms), and such
snakes tend to be smaller than their non-venomous counterparts, it is doubtful
whether insufficient net strength would ever be a
concern. Even if the skilled
person were to consider difficulties in facilitating the capture of larger
terrestrial animals (which
is not suggested in D1), to which the need for net
strengthening might be a consideration, it is not clear why they would try
a secondary net layer to D1, rather than turn to established techniques
known in the art for the capture of such animals, such as
stiff-wire traps.
Finally, even if such an adaptation were to be considered, there is the further
question of why the skilled person
would choose to add a second net layer over
alternative options of changing the net material, gauge, or weave to achieve
such strengthening.
this final point, it seems to me that when faced with a problem involving the
insufficient strength of a net, the default approach
of the PSA to provide
additional strength would likely be material substitution, that is selecting a
netting material of greater
strength, or in alternative simply increasing the
gauge of the operative net. In this manner, these solutions would appear to
solve the proposed problem of providing strength to the animal trap net,
so why would the skilled person be induced to choose the
solution of a secondary
net layer over other, perhaps simpler, solutions to the problem? In any case I
do not think the provision
of a secondary net layer could be said to be an
obvious solution to the problem of insufficient strength in an animal trap net
additionally observe that the use of a multi-layer snake net in D5, insofar as
it could be considered to form part of the CGK in
the art of animal capture,
relates to improving the ability of the net structure to
target animals (snakes and other reptiles). Such a modification would not seem
to solve any problem relevant to the solution
of the claimed invention. In fact,
such entanglement of the target animal in the net wall would seem to be
antithetical to the operation
of animal traps of the invention (and of D1) which
aim to trap the target animals in an enclosed space.
the claimed invention is not obvious over D1 when it is viewed in the light of
the common general knowledge because D1 does
not teach the incorporation of a
secondary net layer, nor is there any motivation for the skilled person to add a
secondary net layer
compatible with the disclosure and operation of D1 in view
of the problem to be solved, whether formulated as I have or as formulated
the examiner.
D5 in view of the Common General
outlines a multi-layer netting barrier or snare, designed to capture or deter
reptiles or rodents from approaching a property from
a certain direction. The
barrier/snare is either free-standing or set up along a fence line, and the
netting is sized such that when
reptiles (especially snakes) attempt to cross
the barrier they will become ensnared in the through holes of the netting
and that rodents will be deterred from crossing the barrier. Such a
barrier is exemplified in Fig. 2 as below, wherein layers
represent mesh layers of progressively smaller
through-holes
. The barrier in Fig. 2
is intended to stop animals crossing from left to right.
order to capture snakes (and deter rodents) of varying sizes, different sized
through holes of each layer is utilized. The preferred
operation of D5
outlined in paragraph [0032]:
“The netting is preferably translucent (preferably plastic) and has a
grid pattern designed to trap snakes and lizards of varying
sizes and deter
rodents from entering the protected area. Current technology will not
necessarily capture smaller snakes or deter
rodents like disclosed snare barrier
2. The different sized through holes 10,12, 24, 26 of the first and second
layers 6, 8 block
and/or snare multiple sized rodents and reptiles. Where
applicable, different sized through holes 10, 12, 24, 26 on third, and/or
(and/or fifth and/or sixth) layers 20, 22, for example, provide for effective
snaring for a broad range of replies. A preferred
embodiment of the snare
barrier 2 has first, second, and third layers 6, 8, 20 attached to one another
along the first seam 14, with
the first layer 6 having largest through holes 10,
the second layer 8 having medium through holes 12, and the third layer 20 having
smallest through holes 24. The smallest snakes in a given environment pass
through the first and second through holes 10, 12 and
are snared by the netting
4 of the third through holes 24. Medium sized snakes in a given environment pass
through the first through
holes 10 and are snared by the netting 4 of the second
through holes 12. The largest snakes in a given environment are snared by
netting 4 of the first through holes 10.”
Examiner referenced Fig. 1-4 and paragraphs [0020], [0024]-[0026] in concluding
that all the features of claim 7 were disclosed
by D5, except feature 7.1.3
(where the second length is less than the first length).
Applicant in their submissions further asserted that D5 also fails to disclose a
flexible upper cord (feature 7.2) and the particular
manner of how the secondary
net is attached to the flexible net structure (feature 7.4.2). The Applicant
contends that the flexible
upper cord as claimed is distinct from the
‘flexible lines’ of the collapsible net as recited in the claim, and
that D5 compensates for the absence of an upper flexible cord through
the presence vertical attachments
. The Applicant further submitted
that in the disclosure of D5 the first layer extends beyond the second layer,
and that as a result
fails to disclose “wherein the secondary net, that is
disposed on an interior side of the flexible net structure, is located
the upper lateral edge and the lower lateral edge”. The Applicant’s
submissions on this second point are reproduced
as follows:
“The Applicant further submits that D5 does not provide clear and
unmistakeable directions for the secondary net to be disposed
on an interior
side of the flexible net structure between the upper lateral edge and the lower
lateral edge. The layers of the structure
of D5 are said to be of identical
dimensions. ... the first layer 6 is disposed on an interior of the second layer
8. ... However,
the upper lateral edge of the first layer 6 is shown [in D5 Fig.
1] to be extending slightly beyond the upper lateral edge of the
second layer 8,
as shown in the zoomed-in portion [of D5 Fig. 1] below:
Thus, D5 does not disclose that the alleged secondary net (first layer 6),
that is disposed on an interior side of the flexible net
structure, is located
between the upper lateral edge and the lower lateral edge. Instead, D5 teaches
that a portion of the alleged
secondary net extends beyond the upper lateral
edge. There is also no suggestion or hint in D5 that the first layer 6 should be
entirely between the upper lateral edge and the lower lateral
will hence focus on the three potential distinguishing features of the flexible
cord (7.2), the manner in which the secondary net
is attached to the net
structure (7.4.2), and net geometry (7.1.3), in my assessment
A flexible cord
the claims do not provide any functional limitation to the cord feature beyond
merely being flexible, nor any limitation in how
the cord should be attached to
the flexible net structure, I have construed this feature to therefore include
the top-most “flexible
line” of the net in D5 (i.e. the right-most
line in D5 Fig. 3). The “long strands” of such netting material I
could be fairly described as flexible. For this reason, I do not consider
the flexible cord (7.2) to be a distinguishing feature
compared to D5. While the
“flexible cord” may be associated with some particular function in
the context of preferred
embodiments of the invention, this function is not
claimed. Nor do the claims include any sub-feature which distinguishes a
from a “line” of the net structure as disclosed
Applicant’s suggestion that D5 incorporates a different feature (namely
the attachment to vertical supports) to provide
the same functionality is not
relevant given D5 already has clear and unmistakeable directions to an upper
flexible cord as I have
construed it.
... located between the
upper lateral edge and lower later edge...
Applicant’s submissions as reproduced above regarding the manner in which
the secondary net is attached to the collapsible
net are not persuasive for
three reasons. Firstly, the definition of the “interior” side of the
net as claimed is arbitrary
since the claims do not require the arrangement of
the net in any manner as to necessarily define an “interior”. As a
result, the “second layer
” of D5 may be considered the
secondary net, and “first layer
” as the collapsible net. In
this assignment, the Applicant’s arguments are rendered moot, as the
second layer
does not extend beyond the first layer
and separately, D5 at paragraph [0063] discloses attaching the net layers by
rolling up the netting “like a jellyroll”,
which would also render
this distinction moot. In such an embodiment, the edges of both nets would
terminate at substantially the
same point, that of the
“jellyroll”.
I do not think that the PSA would understand the schematic emphasised by the
Applicant to teach that one net layer must be
longer than the other. Even the
extract of D5 presented by the Applicant would seem to
substantially
disclose the lateral edges of the two layers meeting at the same point. In this
way, I do not consider the zoomed-in figure sufficient
to direct the PSA away
from implementing an embodiment where the nets are of the same length,
emphasising D5 paragraph [0017]: “[t]he
first layer
second layer
preferably are of substantially equal widths
... wherein the second length is
less than the first length...
agree with the Examiner and the Applicant that D5 does not disclose a net
construction wherein the second length is less than the
first length. As a
result, the claimed invention is distinguished over D5 by only this
now to the problem derived from the specification and reformulated Cripps
Would the skilled person, in all circumstances, be directly led as a matter
of course to try a net structure wherein the second length
is less than the
first length in adapting the teachings of D5 in the expectation that it might
well solve the problem of
when configured in a circumferentially-closed
terrestrial animal trap
preventing the escape of trapped animals via said
animals pushing the lower lateral edge radially outwards?
this regard I observe that certain embodiments of D5 could be said to relate to
circumferentially closed traps, such as wherein
the net is used to protect a
property with a fence which encloses an area (from all sides), or the
embodiments referred to in the
paragraph [0026] and in the “Third
Scenario” (paragraphs [0056]-[0066]) of D5 wherein the net is implemented
as a stand-alone
trap/barrier. However, despite forming
“circumferentially-closed net animal traps”, the operation of these
traps is to
form a barrier to prevent ingress of animals to the area enclosed by
the trap entangling animals. In view of this, there is no motivation
D5 to deal with issues of animals pushing the lower lateral edge radially
outwards, as these issues simply do not arise
in view of the principle of
operation of D5.
while certain embodiments of the invention of D5 are reminiscent of the present
invention, they are in the context of animal
traps very different to that of the
present invention, to which the problem solved by the present invention would
these reasons, I do not consider the Examiner’s assertion that the
distinguishing feature is a mere design choice is sustainable.
at least the above reasons, I do not consider that the claimed invention is
obvious over prior art document D5 when viewed in
the light of the common
general knowledge.
Potential section 40 and utility issues
decision is directed to the issues outstanding from the examination
process. However, where new issues are identified the application
referred back to examination for consideration prior to either acceptance or the
issuance of a further examination report.
Considering new issues within the
context of examination ensures that the Applicant has a reasonable opportunity
to engage with these
considering the present patent application I have come to the view that claims
1-16 may be considered to lack support as required
under subsection 40(3) of the
to subsection 40(3) as amended by the RTB Act the claims must be supported by
matter disclosed in the specification. As
discussed in the Explanatory
Memorandum to the
at Schedule 1, item 9, the objective of the
amendment is to align the requirements with those of overseas jurisdictions like
United Kingdom and Europe.
TCT Group v Polaris
[2022] FCA 1493
expressly endorsed European patent decision
Fuel Oils/EXXON (T409/91)
[1994] OJ EPO 653 (
provided guidance
regarding the requirements for “support” at [659]:
“[T]he claims must be supported by the description, in other words it
is the description of the invention in the claims that
needs support. In the
Board’s judgment, this requirement reflects the general legal principle
that the extent of the patent
monopoly, as defined by the claims, should
correspond to the
technical contribution
to the art in order for it to be
supported, or justified (see
, OJ EPO 1988, 441). This means that
the definitions in the claims should essentially correspond to the scope of the
invention as
disclosed in the description. In other words, as was stated in
(OJ EPO 1982, 211, point 4 of the reasons), the claims
should not extend to subject-matter which, after reading the description,
still not be at the disposal of the person skilled in the art.
Consequently, a technical feature which is described and highlighted in the
description as being an essential feature of the invention,
must also be a part
of the independent claim or claims defining this invention.”
(emphasis in original)
summary, the requirement for support necessitates that “the description to
be the base which can fairly entitle the patentee
to a monopoly of the width
and that the
claims must not extend to embodiments beyond what the specification disclosures.
Moreover, the claims should not omit
technical features that are described and
highlighted in the description as being essential to the working of the
description of the present application appears to be directed exclusively to an
improved animal trap system and methodology. However,
the claims are drawn more
broadly to an animal trap net per se (or merely a net structure of general
application as per claim 7)
and hence are not limited to the traps which form
the focus of the specification. As a result, it appears that the claims extend
to subject matter broader than justified by the technical contribution to the
art. Notably, the claims exclude features which appear
to be essential to the
functioning of the trap system. The claims do not include any reference to the
support posts, tensioning lines,
or attachment means necessary to configure the
net structure as an animal trap. The claims also do not define any functional
relationship
between the net structure and these features so as to result in the
trap per se.
note that there does not appear to be any technical contribution in (animal
trap) nets of general applicability outlined in the
specification. All the
benefits associated with the features of the claimed net as identified in the
description appear to only be
realised in the context of the specific trapping
system/method outlined in the
specification
. Hence (save for
some consistory clauses) it does not appear that the description describes an
invention associated with the
net structure at all. Rather, the
description appears to exclusively describe an invention in the incorporation of
the net structure
in a specific animal trap system and/or methodology. I find
the circumstances reminiscent of those considered in
Atlantis Corporation Pty
Ltd v Schindler
[1997] FCA 1105
under the old requirement of ‘fair
basis’. Noting the comments of Rofe J in
Perfect Day, Inc. v
Commissioner of Patents
[2025] FCA 270
, I think the Examiner should
give consideration as to whether an analogous support issue arises in the
present claims. Further, while
perhaps somewhat different than the
“inconsistency” discussed in
Calix Limited v Grenof Pty Ltd
[2023] FCA 378
171 IPR 582
”), it does appear
that the differences between the invention described and the invention claimed
in the present circumstances
amounts to a material difference by the omission of
essential technical features, as discussed in
it appears that claims 1-16 lack support as required under subsection 40(3).
However, as the Applicant has not had an opportunity
to respond to this
objection, I do not make any decision regarding this matter.
similar reasoning it appears that the invention of claims 1-16 may be considered
to lack utility as required under subsection
18(1)(c) for failing to achieve the
promised benefit(s) identified in the description.
High Court in
Advanced Building v Ramset
(1998) HCA 19
the approach of
Lane Fox v Kensington and Knightsbridge Electric Lighting
(1892) 9 RPC 413
in which for a claimed invention to be considered
useful it must achieve the use promised by the Patentee (or Applicant) in the
specification.
Additionally I note that it is not sufficient that some subset of
the claimed invention be useful, but rather everything falling
within the scope
of the claim must be useful as established in
Welch Perrin & Co. Pty Ltd
(1961) HCA 91
Norton and Gregory Limited v
(1937) 54 RPC 271
at [276], and
Martin Engineering Co. and Another
v Trison Holdings Pty Ltd and Others
(1989) FCA 64
I have discussed above with respect to subsection 40(3), the claims appear to
exclude any feature which would limit the claimed
net structures to those
implemented into an animal trap. As I understand it, the promised benefit
relates to an improved animal trap
per se, of the type depicted in Fig. 1. While
the claimed nets may be said to have some use, absent their incorporation into
animal trap it is not clear how they would be able to achieve the promised
benefit outlined in the specification. It follows that
claims directed towards
the net alone do not appear to achieve the benefits promised by the Applicant in
the specification. Just
as for support, I stress I am not making any decision
concerning utility, and the matter is one for consideration in the context
further examination.
Other Matters
note that claim 12 which appends to claim 7 refers to “
flexible lines”, but there is no defined antecedent within claim 7 for
this feature. Both claims 8 and 10, separately
define an antecedent for this
term. While it is apparent that some form of drafting error has occurred here,
the intended form of
the claim is not apparent. It could be that claim 12 should
be appended to claim 8 or claim 10 instead of claim 7. Alternatively,
be that claim 12 should additionally have included “wherein the secondary
net is formed from a plurality of spaced
apart second flexible lines”. The
Examiner and the Applicant may wish to further consider this issue in
examination.
have noted some construction issues above concerning how the secondary net is
attached to the flexible net structure, in that the
secondary net is understood
as being attached to the collapsible net (rather than the “flexible net
structure”) despite
the literal language of the claim. The Applicant may
wish to consider clarifying how the secondary net is attached by
have found that the Examiner's objections are not sustainable. I am satisfied
based on the evidence before me that the invention
as presently claimed involves
an inventive step over D1 and D5 cited in the examination
I would accept the patent request and complete specification relating to the
application. In this instance I refer the application
consider potential support and utility objections in view of the reasoning I
have provided above. Following
Reg 13.4(1)(g) and (3) I fix the period to gain
acceptance to twelve (12) months from the date of this decision so that an
examination
report can issue and the applicant has an opportunity to
Dr W.E. Guinea
Delegate of the Commissioner of
1. An animal trap net structure, comprising:
formed from a plurality of spaced apart flexible lines that define a plurality
of openings within the net, the net having a
height that extends between an
upper lateral edge and a lower lateral edge, a first length that extends between
a first lengthwise
end and a second lengthwise end at the upper lateral edge,
and a second length that extends between the first lengthwise end and
lengthwise end at the lower lateral edge, wherein the second length is less than
the first length;
wherein the net includes a first net region contiguous
with the upper lateral edge and extending from the first lengthwise end to
second lengthwise end, and a second net region contiguous with lower lateral
edge and extending from the first lengthwise end
to the second lengthwise end,
the first net region extending toward and adjoining the second net
wherein the plurality of openings within the net includes a
plurality of first openings in the first net region and a plurality of
openings in the second net region;
a flexible upper cord attached to the net
at the upper lateral edge extending the first length of the net;
bottom cord attached to the net at the lower lateral edge extending the second
length of the net, wherein the bottom cord
has a weight per unit length and the
flexible lines of the net have a weight per unit length, and the weight per unit
length of the
bottom cord is greater than the weight per unit length of the
flexible lines; and
a secondary net attached to the net and disposed on an
interior side of the net between the upper lateral edge and the lower lateral
edge, extending between the first lengthwise end and the second lengthwise end
and extending downwardly toward the lower lateral
wherein the net is
configurable in a closed configuration where the first lengthwise end and the
second lengthwise end are connected
to one another, and the flexible bottom cord
attached to the net at the lower lateral edge defines a trap opening.
The animal trap net structure of claim 1, wherein the bottom cord is a weighted
cord having a lead core.
3. The animal trap net structure of claim 2,
further comprising a mid-cord attached to the net, extending lengthwise between
lengthwise end and a second lengthwise end, and disposed between the
upper cord and the bottom cord.
4. The animal net structure of claim 3,
further comprising a plurality of rib cords, each extending heightwise between
the upper lateral
edge and the lower lateral edge, the rib cords spaced apart
from one another.
5. The animal trap net structure of claim 1, wherein
the plurality of openings within the net each define a first area;
wherein the secondary net is formed from a plurality of spaced apart
second flexible lines that define a plurality of second openings
secondary net, and the plurality of second openings each define a second area,
and the first area is different from the
second area.
6. The animal trap
of claim 1, wherein the flexible lines are configured sufficiently durable to
prevent failure of the net resulting
from animal chewing.
7. A flexible
net structure comprising:
a collapsible net formed from a plurality of
spaced apart flexible lines that define a plurality of openings within the net,
net having a width that extends between an upper lateral edge and a lower
lateral edge, a first length that extends between a first
lengthwise end and a
second lengthwise end at the upper lateral edge, and a second length that
extends between the first lengthwise
end and the second lengthwise end at the
lower lateral edge, wherein the second length is less than the first length;
a flexible upper cord attached to the collapsible net at the upper
lateral edge extending the first length of the net;
wherein the collapsible
net is configurable in a closed configuration where the first lengthwise end and
the second lengthwise end
are disposed proximate each other, and the lower
lateral edge defines a trap opening; and
a secondary net attached to the
flexible net structure and disposed on an interior side of the flexible net
structure between the
upper lateral edge and the lower lateral edge, extending
between the first lengthwise end and the second lengthwise end and extending
downwardly toward the lower lateral edge.
8. The flexible net structure
of claim 7, wherein the plurality of openings within the net each define a first
area; and wherein the
secondary net is formed from a plurality of spaced apart
second flexible lines that define a plurality of second openings within
secondary net, and the plurality of second openings each define a second area,
and the first area is different from the second
9. The flexible
net structure of claim 8, wherein the plurality of flexible lines of the net
have a first twine size, and the plurality
of second flexible lines of the
secondary net have a second twine size, and the second twine size is different
from the first twine
10. The flexible net structure of claim 7,
wherein the plurality of flexible lines of the net have a first twine size;
wherein the secondary net is formed from a plurality of spaced apart
second flexible lines, and the second flexible lines of the
secondary net have a
second twine size, and the second twine size is different from the first twine
11. The flexible net structure of claim 7, wherein the flexible
lines of the net are configured sufficiently durable to prevent failure
net resulting from animal chewing.
12. The flexible net structure of
claim 7, wherein the second flexible lines are configured sufficiently durable
to prevent failure
of the net resulting from animal chewing.
flexible net structure of claim 7, further comprising a flexible bottom cord
attached to the net at the lower lateral edge
extending the second length of the
net. 14. The flexible net structure of claim 7, wherein portions of the net
contiguous with the
lower lateral edge are cinched to form the second length
extending between the first lengthwise end and the second lengthwise end
lower lateral edge having the second length that is less than the first length.
15. The flexible net structure of claim 7, wherein the flexible lines
have a first diameter and the flexible upper cord has a second
diameter, and the
second diameter is greater than the first diameter.
16. The flexible net
structure of claim 7, wherein the flexible lines and the flexible upper cord
comprise the same material
See Fig. 3 and 3A
See Fig. 3 and 3A
See Fig. 3 and 3A
Applicant’s
Written Submissions at page 2 para
Retrievable from
https://www.j-platpat.inpit.go.jp/
s 18(1)(b)(ii)
Patents Act
See above at paragraphs
See above at paragraph [
] discussing
the specification at paragraph
At page 2 paragraph 3
of the Applicant’s Written
Submissions.
Description at
paragraph [65].
See above at
Mullard Radio Valve Co. Ltd v British Belmont Radio Ltd and Juviler
(1939) 56 RPC 1
at page 15.
Schering Biotech Corp.’s Application
Description at
paragraphs [0063] and [0068].
RTF format (6.18 MB)
Signed PDF/A format