Galpin & Varley (No 3) [2025] FedCFamC2F 1037 (30 July 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Galpin & Varley (No 3)
FedCFamC2F 1037
File number(s):
NCC 1703 of 2018
Judgment of:
JUDGE BETTS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– CHILDREN – two
teenage girls – with whom the children live with – high parental
conflict – alignment
by the father – breakdown of the mother’s
parental relationship with the children – children’s mental health
concerns – weighing up of future risk factors – consideration of the
girls’ firm views – best interests require
the girls live with
father – only realistic option.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
9, 10, 11 and 12 December 2024
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr Guterres
Solicitors for the Applicant:
McGrath Dicembre & Company
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Rachael Brennan & Associates Lawyers
Counsel for the Independent Children’s Lawyer:
Mr Willoughby
Solicitors for the Independent Children’s Lawyer:
Legal Aid NSW Newcastle Family Law
NCC 1703 of 2018
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
JUDGE BETTS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
all previous parenting Orders are discharged.
father has sole decision-making responsibility in relation to all major
long-term issues regarding:
(a) X, born in 2011;
(b) Y, born in 2012.
(hereinafter ‘the children’)
the parents agree otherwise:
(a) All written communication between the parents concerning the children shall
be via the parenting application AppClose (“the
(b) Each parent shall download the App within seven (7) days;
(c) Each parent shall bear their own costs of and associated with the App.
father shall consult with the mother about decisions to be made in the exercise
of his sole parental responsibility as follows:
(a) The father will advise the mother in writing via the App of long term
decisions to be made for the children and all related information;
(b) Within fourteen (14) days, the mother will respond to the father in writing
via the App, providing her views and input, which
the father will genuinely
consider; and
(c) The father will advise the mother in writing via the App of his decision and
the reason behind the decision.
children shall live with the father.
children shall spend time and communicate with the mother at their sole
discretion, with the father to ensure that:
(a) The mother is provided with each child’s mobile number and email
(b) Any gifts or cards sent by the mother to the father’s address are
passed on to the children.
parent shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the other, in writing,
of any change of address of the parent, or serious
illness, injury, or emergency
admission to hospital suffered by either of the children.
parent shall, by authority of these Orders, be permitted to receive from the
children’s school/s, all school reports and
other documents which parents
would ordinarily be entitled to receive.
parent shall, by authority of these Orders, be permitted to receive from the
children's medical and allied health providers,
all information referable to the
children which parents would ordinarily be entitled to receive.
parent be and is hereby restrained by way of injunction from:
(a) Making critical or derogatory remarks in relation to the other parent or
members of the other parent’s family in the presence
or hearing of the
children, or allowing any other third party to do so and shall do all acts and
things necessary to remove the children
from any place in which any such
denigration is occurring.
(b) Discussing the Court proceedings with, or in the presence or hearing of, the
children, or showing the children any of the Court
documentation or allowing any
other person to do so except for the Independent Children’s Lawyer.
father be and is hereby restrained by way of injunction from:
(a) Addressing or referring to the mother by any derogatory, insulting or
belittling name or nickname in the presence or hearing
of the children.
(b) Allowing or permitting the children to refer to the mother by any
derogatory, insulting or belittling name or nickname.
(c) Addressing or referring to the mother by any name or nickname other than
‘mother’ or ‘mum’ in the presence
or hearing of the
(d) Referring to any person other than the mother as the children’s
‘mother’ or ‘mum’ in the presence
or hearing of the
parents are at liberty to provide a copy of these Orders and the Reasons for
Judgment to:
(a) Any school/s attended by the children;
(b) Any medical specialist or allied health professional engaged in treating
either of the children;
(c) Any hospital attended upon by the children;
(d) Any medical practitioner, counsellor or psychologist engaged by either of
the parents to provide that parent with medical or
therapeutic support.
the Independent Children’s Lawyer meet with the children at the earliest
available date.
Independent Children’s Lawyer’s costs application is adjourned to
9.30am on 6 August 2025
for hearing.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE BETTS
are difficult parenting proceedings which permit of no good or entirely safe
involve two sisters:
(a) X born in 2011 who is fourteen (14) years old; and
(b) Y born in 2012 who turned thirteen (13).
parents are Mr Galpin (“the father”) and Ms Varley (“the
mother”), who were in a relationship from September
1998 until October
2016. Like many separations theirs was acrimonious. But rather than getting on
with the job of co-parenting
the girls in a businesslike fashion, they chose
instead to continue the acrimony and the conflict.
is in fact the second round of parenting litigation. The first round involved
various allegations and counter-allegations, including
that the girls had been
sexually touched by the foster child of the father’s then-partner, Ms C.
Those allegations were unsubstantiated
and on 21 September 2018 the court made
final consent orders for equal shared parental responsibility, for the girls to
the mother and spend time with the father for four (4) nights per
fortnight (Wednesday to Sunday in alternate weeks) and half holidays.
consent orders should have worked adequately. But the parents’ attitudes
and behaviours got in the way; they were not able
to implement the orders in
good faith. Each continued to be disrespectful and non-communicative with the
other, each denigrated
the other (contrary to a specific injunction) or
interrogated the girls about events and happenings at the other’s home.
to escape from the parental conflict, the girls suffered emotional harm. With a
mutual preference to live with the father,
both girls began ‘acting
out’ at the mother’s home, disrespecting her and challenging her
boundaries. They would
report back to the father about the goings-on there.
Rather than supporting the mother as a parent, the father undermined the mother
by taking the girls’ side which only empowered them. The girls’
relationships with the mother came under increasing
strain, though to be fair
some of the mother’s own attitudes and behaviours contributed. In
particular, the girls hated the
untidy and at times unhygienic state of the
mother’s home. More significantly, the mother sometimes struggled to cope
the girls’ behaviour and ended up verbally abusing them, and on
occasions physically intervening, such as by separating them
when they were
fighting, resulting in minor injuries. The first such occasion was in 2021,
when the mother grabbed X to stop her
hitting her sister, accidentally
scratching X’s arm. In a healthy co-parenting dynamic, the event might
have passed unnoticed
but the mother rightly suspected the father would ask X
father later.
second and most significant occasion was in May 2022 when the girls were both
misbehaving badly at the dinner table and the mother
knocked Y off her chair,
causing her a minor injury. This matter will be discussed in more detail later.
Again the mother chose
not to tell the father about it. He only found out after
Y made a disclosure to the school, who in turn notified both the father
Police, who took out an Apprehended Violence Order (‘AVO’) against
the mother for Y’s protection.
father retained the girls soon after, triggering the current round of
litigation.
Regrettably,
the girls’ relationships with the mother has since broken down. This has
happened despite various interim orders
for the mother to spend time with the
girls either on a professionally supervised basis or an unsupervised basis. One
of the professional
supervisors, B Contact Centre, ultimately decided after some
twenty-three (23) visits to withdraw their services altogether - specifically
citing concerns that the father was aligning the girls against the mother, and
that they were deliberately rejecting her to help
him in the litigation. A
later attempt at an unsupervised visit resulted in both girls running away from
the mother and Police being
called. Other unsuccessful interventions have
included counselling, family therapy and a Child Impact Report and Family Report
by an experienced Court Child Expert (‘CCE’).
girls have not truly thrived while living with the father. X has twice been
suspended from school, both girls have experienced
anxiety and depression
requiring mental health care plans. X’s mental health appears to have
suffered the most. She is somewhat
easily led and has been exploited by both an
abusive boyfriend and an internet predator, to both of whom she sent naked
photographs.
(The abusive boyfriend lives close by the mother; both parents
agree that X needs to stay away from him. The internet predator
complicating factor in this case is that the children are Aboriginal as the
mother and maternal grandmother are part of the
Q People. Although the girls do
participate in some Aboriginal cultural activities at school and in the
father’s care, they
are not as fully immersed in their culture as they
could be if the maternal family had greater involvement.
the evidence there is no doubt that the girls’ relationship with the
mother is presently broken and that it is a tragedy
that could – and
should – have been able to be avoided. The father blames the mother for
the breakdown of the mother/daughter
relationships. His case is that the
girls’ strong adverse views about her are grounded in their lived
experience. The mother
blames the father, accusing him of alignment.
is common ground that the parents cannot share decision-making responsibility.
The parent with primary care will need to make
decisions solely. In broad
terms, the ‘live’ issues before the court are therefore:
which parent the
girls should live with;
how much time
and communication the girls should have with the other parent;
what ancillary
orders, injunctions and safeguards are necessary for the safety of the
father’s case is that the girls should stay living with him, spending time
and communicating with the mother only in accordance
with their wishes. The
mother’s case is that the girls should live with her, that there be a
three (3) month moratorium on
them spending time or communicating with the
father, following which they would spend three (3) months of professionally
time with him, graduating thereafter to unsupervised time culminating
in alternate weekends from Friday to Monday and half school
Reluctantly,
the Independent Children’s Lawyer (‘ICL’) supports the girls
staying in the father’s care. The
ICL contends that the girls’
strong adverse views about the mother make any other outcome unrealistic and
fraught with too
many risks, including the risk of emotional harm and
potentially physical harm if they ran away. The ICL contends that, rather than
time in accordance with the girls’ wishes, the girls have
with the mother if possible, such time to be unsupervised, proceeding
in a graduated fashion and culminating in alternate weekends
from Friday to
Monday and half school holidays.
ICL’s fallback position is that if the court decides that it
safely order the girls’ return to the mother’s primary care, there
needs to be a moratorium on the father’s time.
Thereafter the ICL
contends that the risk of the father de-stabilising remains so high that he
should only be spending time with
them every three (3) months, professionally
supervised.
the evidence I have come to the melancholy view that, notwithstanding the
father’s manifest parenting deficits, the girls’
best interests
require an order that they remain living with him and that they spend time and
communicate with the mother in accordance
with their wishes. I am also making
various other protective orders. Put shortly it is the only realistic option,
and though far
from satisfactory, it is the option which is ‘least
HEARING & MATERIAL RELIED UPON:
matter proceeded to final hearing from 9 – 12 December 2024. Mr Guterres
of counsel appeared for the father, Mr Bateman
of counsel appeared for the
mother and Mr Willoughby of counsel appeared for the ICL.
father relied upon Mr Guterres’ Case Outline Document dated 4 December
2024 (incorporating the father’s proposed Minute
of Order), the
father’s trial affidavit filed 7 November 2024, the father’s
further addendum affidavit filed 9 December
and the affidavit of the paternal
aunt Ms S filed 7 November 2024.
mother relied upon Mr Bateman’s Case Outline Document filed 6 December
2024, the mother’s Amended Response filed 11
November 2024 (although her
proposed Minute of Orders therein was later superseded by exhibit 26), the
mother’s trial affidavit
filed 26 November 2024, and the affidavit of
the maternal grandmother Mrs Varley filed 5 December 2024.
ICL read and relied upon Mr Willoughby’s Case Outline Document filed 8
December 2024.
parties tendered numerous exhibits, including CCE Mr T’s Family Report of
15 February 2024 (exhibit 1) and his Child Impact
Report of 3 November 2022
(exhibit 2). They tendered subpoenaed business records, affidavit annexures,
video recordings and various
other documents. All of the exhibits will be
referred to as relevant.
parent gave entirely reliable evidence. In broad terms, each blames the other
for the longstanding parental conflict and
each is in denial concerning their
own parenting deficits. In an endeavour to improve her parenting the mother had
at least undertaken
a number of courses; in contrast the father very much came
across as a concrete thinker who saw no need for self-improvement. The
of the paternal aunt and the maternal grandmother was of less significance but
will be referred to as relevant. I was assisted
by the thoughtful and
considered evidence of the CCE, who understandably found it difficult to make
solid recommendations.
THE LAW TO BE APPLIED:
proceedings are governed by the provisions of Part VII of the
Family Law Act
(“the Act”).
making ‘parenting orders’ under the
a court is required to regard
the ‘best interests’ of the children as the paramount consideration:
Section 60CC
of the Act goes on to set out the various mandatory
considerations for the court in this respect:
60CC How a court determines what is in a child’s best interests
Determining child’s best interests
...[I]n determining what is in the child’s best interests, the
court must:
consider the matters set out in subsection
if the child is an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander child
– also consider the matters set out in subsection
General considerations
For the purposes of paragraph
, the court must consider
the following matters:
what arrangements would promote the safety (including safety from
being subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, abuse, neglect
the child; and
each person who has care of the child (whether or not a person has
parental responsibility for the child);
any views expressed by the child;
the developmental, psychological, emotional and cultural needs of the
the capacity of each person who has or is proposed to have parental
responsibility for the child to provide for the child’s
developmental,
psychological, emotional and cultural needs;
the benefit to the child of being able to have a relationship with
the child’s parents, and other people who are significant
to the child,
where it is safe to do so;
anything else that is relevant to the particular circumstances of the
In considering the matters set out in paragraph
court must include consideration of:
any history of family violence, abuse or neglect involving the child
or a person caring for the child (whether or not the person
had parental
responsibility for the child); and
any family violence order that applies or has applied to the child or
a member of the child’s family.
Additional considerations – right to enjoy Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander culture
For the purposes of paragraph (1)(b), the court must consider the
following matters:
the child’s right to enjoy the child’s Aboriginal or
Torres Strait Islander culture, by having the support, opportunity
encouragement necessary:
with, and maintain their connection with, members of their family and with their
community, culture, country and language;
to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with
the child’s age and developmental level and the child’s
to develop a positive appreciation of that culture;
the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this Part
will have on that right.
“safety” is not defined for the purposes of
s 60CC(2)(a)
clearly a term of wide import which encompasses not just physical but also
psychological and emotional safety. Amongst other
things it includes keeping a
child safe from ‘family violence’ broadly defined in
violent, threatening or other behaviour that coerces or controls a member of the
person’s family (the
family member
or causes the
family member to be fearful.
court has power to impose injunctions that it considers
“appropriate” for the welfare of the children, including for
personal protection:
of the Act.
DETAILED CHRONOLOGY & FINDINGS:
with many high-conflict parenting cases, there are many disputed facts. I do
not intend to refer to all of them, nor make positive
findings except where it
assists in arriving at my decision.
The family:
father was born in 1969 and is fifty-six (56). He lives on a rural property at
Town U and works as a self-employed tradesperson.
flexibility in his work hours.
mother was born in 1975 and is forty-nine (49). She lives in a home at Suburb V
and works as a customer service officer. Like
the father, she has
flexibility in her work hours (likely more than him.)
driving time between the parents’ homes is about forty (40) minutes.
girls both attend W School in Suburb V; X is in Year 8 and Y has just started in
Year 7. The girls generally catch the bus to
and from school.
paternal grandmother lives quite close to the father, on a large rural property.
The girls are very interested in rural life,
having numerous pets at the
father’s home including dogs and birds. They are competent motorbike
riders and enjoy all aspects
of farm life including mustering and animal
husbandry. (The father and paternal grandmother run cattle.)
girls also have a good relationship with the paternal aunt, who lives in City Z.
They spend time with her when the father is busy
with work. She sometimes
transports the girls and attends appointments with them, either with or without
the father.
maternal grandparents live quite close to the mother, on a large rural property.
She is a member of the Region R Aboriginal Lands
The parents’ relationship:
noted, the parents were in a relationship from September 1998 until October
mother was the girls’ primary carer. As an infant, X had some
developmental delays and allergies, which the mother appropriately
followed up.
mother alleges that the father perpetrated family violence. She says that he
was emotionally abusive and physically violent,
including by dragging her
through the house on one (1) occasion, punching holes in the walls, punching
light switches, cracking shower
screens, slamming doors, and pulling the timber
front door off its hinges and smashing it up in the front yard. She says he
took out his aggression against the family pets by hitting the dog or
roughly throwing the cat outside the house. The father denies
the allegations.
am unable to make findings either way because the parties’ conflicting
affidavit accounts were not explored in any meaningful
way in cross-examination.
This was a deliberate forensic choice by counsel, no doubt informed by:
the historical
nature of the allegations;
the terms of the
subsequent 2018 consent order; and
opinion that the current concerns for the girls did not relate to family
violence, but rather the breakdown of their
relationship with the mother.
of this is to minimise the seriousness of family violence; the court is obliged
to consider it in every parenting case. To avoid
considered the mother’s allegations and taken them into account as
best I can. But ultimately I endorse the CCE’s opinion
father accuses the mother of being a
family violence allegations, these allegations are historical. Though I accept
the evidence of Ms S which does give rise
to some concerns in this respect,
there is no need to make a positive finding.
Separation:
the children in their acrimony.
quickly re-partnered, the father with Ms C and the mother with Mr AA, with whom
the girls quickly began spending substantial
time. They soon began calling Ms C
and the mother
“[by her first
. This was driven by the parental conflict and the
father’s ill-will towards the mother. Whether the father positively
it, or whether the girls did it merely to please him, it reflects
very poorly on the father’s attitude. By the same token,
in 2017 the
mother stopped communicating with the father altogether after concluding he had
with Ms C while the parents were still
together. The parents’ stony silence no doubt made changeovers more
difficult for the
2018 the girls made the sexual abuse allegations which were unsubstantiated as
referred to in paragraph [4] herein. Notably, the
Police investigation recorded
that both girls were
“visibly impacted by their parents current court
matter and feel torn about what they should be saying and to whom”
In their view, the litigation was
“impacting both [Ms Varley] and Mr
Galpin]’s capacity to be able to put the needs of the girls first.”
Implementation of the 2018 consent order:
the order for equal shared parental responsibility, the parents’
communication remained poor and there was little trust
or mutual respect. The
parents argued about exchange (or retention of) the girls’ clothes and
belongings, engaged in mutual
denigration and on many occasions the father did
not make the girls available when the mother telephoned them at the times set
in the orders.
both girls had problems with their teeth in 2019, the parents acted unilaterally
in seeking treatment. The father took X to
a dentist; the mother had Y admitted
to hospital. When X was badly sunburnt in the father’s care, the mother
photographed
it and took her to the GP. When Y bruised her back after falling
off a quad bike in the father’s care, the mother photographed
saw a photograph of the father’s penis on his mobile phone which he had
sent by text to Ms C with the caption that it
. The mother found out about this by reading X’s
private diary but never told the father; he does not believe it happened.
satisfied it happened and that the father did not intend X to see the text.
mother alleges that on occasions the father was emotionally abusive to the
girls; that he would still sometimes physically discipline
them; that he would
leave them in the care of Ms C’s underage children; that the girls
regularly slept in the same bed as he
and Ms C; that he let the girls access
inappropriate movies; that he drove dangerously with the girls in the car; and
that he had
a bad temper. The father denies it all. I make no finding and
refer back to paragraph [39] herein.
accept the mother’s evidence that the girls told such things to her as
“It’s your fault Daddy left”
“Daddy and [Ms C] say mean things about you and we
don’t like it”
“I believe Daddy not you”
“You are abusive and neglectful.”
I also accept the
mother’s evidence that sometimes they would apologise and tell her that
“Daddy wanted me to say it”
parents were contributing to the conflict as corroborated by
the notes of the school counsellor. On 25 July 2019, Y told the school
counsellor that
“Mummy is really angry at Daddy”
“both Mummy and Daddy ask lots of questions”
the face of the parents’ intractable conflict, at some point
girls seem to have decided that it would be better to live with the father.
They began complaining to him about the messy state
of the mother’s home.
They began to behave insolently or defiantly towards the mother, particularly X;
the mother increasingly
struggled to manage X’s behaviour.
August 2019 the mother arranged for X to see the school counsellor to assist
with behaviour management. X said she preferred it
at the father’s house
as she had more children to play with and didn’t get into trouble. X
admitted fighting with the
mother, saying they yell at each other and that X
goes to her room when sad.
father was alive to the increasing problems in the mother’s household
– he was to some extent fanning them - and
on 5 September 2019 he
expressed his concern to the school counsellor about the girls telling him that
things were
May 2020, pursuant to consent property orders, the mother and the girls vacated
the family home at Town U and temporarily moved
into a caravan at the maternal
grandparents’ home. The father moved back into the Town U home.
11 June 2020 Y told the school counsellor that when the mother was angry, it was
from the mother and X. She also said that
“real Mum is being mean”
by complaining about Y calling Ms C
mother proposed a change of schools; the father refused. In November 2020 the
mother and the girls moved into the mother’s
new home at Suburb V. She
again proposed a change of school and he again refused.
25 November 2020, the mother sent the father an email asserting that, as he
would not give her medical updates for the girls for
issues arising in his care,
she would take the same approach, save for things such as prescribed medication
they needed to take in
so, I accept the father’s evidence that:
17 February 2021, the children spent time with me. During that time I had a
conversation with [X]. During the course of the conversation
[X] said to me,
“Dad I’ve got an EpiPen”. I said, “What for?” [X]
said, “[Ms Varley] said I’ve
got an allergy to fish”. I said,
“Since when?” [X] had never appeared to be allergic to fish. I
said, “Have
you gone to the doctor to be tested or something?” [X]
said “No”. I said, “Well how do you know you’re
allergic?” [X] said, “Because [Ms Varley] said I am and [Ms Varley]
went and bought this EpiPen for me”.
EpiPen had been prescribed nine (9) days earlier when the mother took X to her
GP about allergic reactions to seafood.
As an EpiPen is designed to
from an anaphylactic reaction, this was too significant a
medical matter to leave to
to tell the father about. It is not to the
point that the mother says
both parents
already knew about X being
allergic to seafood; X had never been prescribed an EpiPen and the father
disputes knowing the seriousness
of the allergy.
The ‘cat scratch’ incident:
has been referred to at [6] herein and was accidental. The father photographed
the scratches, took X to the GP and made a report
to Police and the NSW child
welfare agency. Once again X was caught in the middle of the parental conflict.
The authorities took
after, Y told the school counsellor she wanted to live with the father.
More allegations about the mother and her household:
father became concerned about the girls coming over with flea bites, telling him
that the cat had put fleas all through the house,
including their bedding. One
of the girls had brought home a stray cat with fleas but the issue was soon
fixed. It was just another
negative talking point about the mother’s
girls complained to the father about the mother hitting them. X said to the
father that
“I told [Ms Varley]
that I don’t want to live
in a shithole and when I said this [Ms Varley]
slapped me across the arms
. The girls made numerous other complaints about the mother
smacking them, yelling and screaming at them by calling them
. The father reported these matters to the Police, the NSW
child welfare authorities, the school and the children’s doctors
none of whom took any action.
am satisfied that the mother’s household was at times volatile, with the
girls behaving defiantly. As observed at [6] herein,
the mother sometimes
struggled to cope and on occasions verbally abused them or physically
intervened. I am not satisfied that she
gratuitously
violent towards them or that her actions otherwise exceeded the bounds of
reasonable discipline.
girls also complained to the father about Mr AA yelling at them; it is likely he
did so on occasions.
X is struggling emotionally / the girls are making their voices
this time the mother arranged for X to see Dr P, Psychologist at K Families to
assist her with emotional regulation. The father
was not informed.
a visit in April 2021, X told the father that she wanted to speak to the Kids
to complain about the mother.
He later spoke with X who said that she couldn’t live with the mother
anymore, that the girls
didn’t get fed, were always being hit and were
being neglected. X was grossly exaggerating things.
father arranged for X to see a psychologist, Dr CC. It then came out that X had
already seen Ms P. The father asked X about
it and X told him that the mother
had asked her not to tell him. This is most likely true. Dr CC told the
parents that any work
she did with X would have to be in consultation with Ms P.
long afterwards, the mother emailed the father again wanting to change the
girls’ schools. The father disagreed as the
change would require Y to
repeat a year. He told the girls and Y then told him that they hadn’t
wanted to change schools and
[Ms Varley] was making us go
because it was easier for her”
. Y’s statement was denigrating
and disrespectful of the mother; the father did nothing to correct Y as he most
likely agreed
May 2021, Y told the school counsellor that she wanted to live with the father.
6 July 2021, X told Dr CC that she sometimes felt unsafe with her mother who
would yell, swear at and hit her. Unsure whether
to make a mandatory report, Dr
CC sought clarification and was reassured when X explained that her mother would
grab her and stand
between her and Y when they were fighting.
, X described feeling settled and safe with the father and said she
had been told that once she turned twelve (12) she could decide
for herself
where to live, which would be with him.
November 2021 and February 2022, Y told the school counsellor she wanted to live
with the father.
The girls are actively evidence-gathering against the
3 March 2022, the girls texted the father some photographs taken from inside the
mother’s home, depicting general clutter,
piles of clothing and mess. The
father did not ask for the photographs, nor admonish the girls for sending them.
6 March 2022 the father took the girls to an appointment with his
then-solicitor. One of them asked his then-solicitor when they
could live with
the father; she did not answer directly but mentioned an ICL. This emotionally
abusive meeting should never have
7 March 2022, Y told the school counsellor about the solicitor’s visit,
saying the father had taken them there to discuss
their wish to live with him.
She also said that she couldn’t discuss a change of residence with her
mother as she becomes
“very angry”
and says things like
“oh ok, so I’m not good enough for you then”
counsellor noted that Y appeared
in her mood and
suggested that Y start journaling her emotions at
29 March 2022, Y told the school counsellor she was upset because the mother had
found her journal at home, taken it and read it.
She said her mother was angry
she had written that she wanted to live with the father.
In the witness box, the mother
claimed that she was
that Y had been keeping a journal and,
although she denied reading it, she accepted she had
doing so. I am satisfied that she did so.
The mother’s alleged assault of Y in May 2022, her
subsequent disclosure of the assault, Police investigation and AVO
proceedings:
are conflicting accounts before me as to what happened. Regrettably, the morass
of subpoenaed documents did not include a transcript
of the findings of the
learned Magistrate who had the benefit of
evidence from the
girls and, on this topic, was in a better position to make a specific
event occurred while the mother and girls were having dinner. In her oral
evidence, the mother clarified that the dinner table
was rectangular in shape,
with Y seated at the head, the mother sitting to Y’s left and X sitting to
mother’s affidavit gives the following version of events:
recall that [in] May 2022 I was at home with the children. We were having
dinner, and I was also on the telephone to my father
at the same time. I recall
that both girls began laughing and I said words to the effect:
the laughing and get on with eating your dinner.”
[Y] then went to
the toilet before returning to the table. On her return both girls started
laughing again. [X] did have a mouthful
of water and when she started laughing
she spat the water onto me and the table. [X] then turned her head towards [Y]
and she spat
water onto [Y] and [Y]’s chair. I said to my father words to
the effect:
“Would you look at that, [X]
has just spat water
everywhere”
. I recall that [Y] was a bit startled that [X] had
sprayed her with water. [Y] started to rise up out of her chair and at the same
time I tried to reach over and tried to grab hold of [Y]’s chair. In the
process of me reaching over to grab [Y]’s chair
my hand did come in
not come in contact with [Y]’s
head. [Y] did come off the chair. This
was not because of my contact with [Y], it was because [Y] was off balance at
girls spent time with the father from Wednesday 11 May to Sunday 15 May and this
event was not mentioned.
17 May 2022, Y made a disclosure to the school counsellor. She said that she
“being silly”
“laughing a
, that the mother had asked them to stop a number of times, and
when they didn’t stop her mother had hit her across the head
hard enough
to knock her off her chair, leaving her with a mark on her arm and telling Y
“That will teach you to not be silly”
. Y said the mother had
not done anything like this before and that she had not since discussed it with
the mother, reasoning that
the mother would
“just get angry”
Y said she wanted to live with the father. The counsellor said she would talk
to the Principal and later made a mandatory notification
to the NSW child
welfare authorities.
father first heard about the incident when the Principal telephoned him that
day. He then made his own follow-up complaint to
May 2022, Police formally interviewed Y at school.
Y said that it was sometimes
fun at the mother’s house and sometimes not fun. She said that her mother
, but mostly at X. Y said that X
“backchats”
the mother and sometimes Y copied. Asked about
the alleged assault, Y said that it was upsetting:
“Um so [X] and I were laughing at the dinner table and um mum. Mum told
us to stop, so we stopped, but I needed to go to the
bathroom and wash my hands,
so I washed my hands then [X] was drinking water so, she drank the water, but I
started laughing again,
and she spat the water out all over mum and on the
floor. So, then I went back to the toilet, and I came back out and [X] and I
started laughing again and mum smacked me, and I fell off the chair...so it was
like a smack/push, and I landed on the cord and it
like my arm got hurt.”
where on her body the mother had smacked her, Y thought it was the back of her
head and that she fell off the chair, her leg
just stopping her from hitting her
face on the ground. Asked on a scale of 1 to 10 how hard the mother hit her,
she described it
as a 5, 6 or 7 – although hitting her arm on the cord
hurt more than the smack. The Principal later rang the father to say
Y’s account to Police was consistent with what she had told the school
counsellor. The father followed up with Police
who said that they would be
applying for an AVO against the mother and considering possible criminal
May 2022, Police took out a Provisional AVO against the mother for Y’s
protection, serving the mother at the front door while
the girls were inside the
house. At their request, the mother brought the girls to the door for a welfare
check. Police then left.
The mother was in a state of shock; she spoke to the
girls afterwards but could not recall what was said.
2022 (the father’s birthday), he texted X a photograph of his breakfast.
She responded by saying she had not yet had breakfast
“I messaged
[Ms Varley] to make it and she hasn’t yet. I don’t even know where
she is. Probably in the car again
Later that day, the girls
visited the father and he asked Y why she hadn’t told him about the
incident. Y responded
“Dad, I’m scared of [Ms Varley]. I
didn’t want to tell you because she would then stop us from seeing you.
don’t know when [Ms Varley] is going to go off. Please don’t
send us back. If you send us back we’re just going
. X told the father that
“She hits us all the time and
yells and screams and we live in a pigsty. Please don’t send us
. The father said he had to send them back as there were court
orders, that he didn’t have a choice but that if the mother
hit them or if
they were scared they should call him and he would call the Police. X
threatened to run away from the mother’s
her, saying she should ring him if the mother scared or hit her.
May 2022, X secretly sent the father a video depicting the inside of the
mother’s home – again in an obviously untidy
and messy state, with
cat faeces in the bathroom, and unwashed clothes lying in piles on the floor. X
boasts to the father that
she had told the mother she was
“not scared
and that the mother had gone outside to the car.
that day, X texted the father to say that if the mother came inside
“looking for an argument”
then she would tell Y to get her
coat and phone and they would leave and call the father. The father responded
by asking her if she
was scared or in danger and that, if so, he would call 000.
When X responded that she was
“not that scared”
ring him if needed, the father texted her to say
“You let me know
immediately if you leave for this reason. Remember she can NOT touch
When X asked the father
“what about me”
asked her what the mother had said or done to make X scared. X responded that
“gave me that look she does”
to which he responded
“the Police will need to know if I call them and you will also need to
tell them. Has she threatened you or [Y]
responded that the mother had tried to make them scared or worried by saying
“do you not want to live with mummy”
and that she had scared
Y by almost grabbing her arm. The father advised her that
“the Police
won’t act unless she actually threatened you or [Y]
or herself.
Who’s she talking to n what did you hear to make you scared?”
“IDK whose she’s talking or what she’s saying.
That’s what scares me”
that evening the father texted X about the mother, asking
to which X responded
again the father offered to get the Police involved if needed but X declined.
Father retains the girls:
father had the girls in his care from Wednesday 25 May to Sunday 29 May. This
time he kept them, sending the following message
to the mother on the
Hi, just letting you know that the girls have asked to stay here for the time
being. Due to the DVO in place, the legal advice we
have been given is that the
girls can stay with the other protective parent until matters at [sic]
sorted out in their best interest. Thanks
mother contacted Police, who declined to assist, reasoning that it was a family
law matter.
Did the mother assault Y in May?
atmosphere in the mother’s home was extremely challenging that evening;
the girls were behaving impishly and in that instant
the mother was at the end
of her tether and reacted suddenly. On balance she
did strike [Y]
the upper shoulder area, not the back of the head, causing Y to lose her balance
and fall. While this may constitute an ‘assault’
it needs to be
looked at in context; it does not give rise to any real safety issue. It
however give Y a fright and was unhelpful for the mother/daughter
relationships.
this event was regrettable, the die had already been cast. The girls wanted to
live with the father; even if this event had
not occurred, something else would
inevitably have happened to put them into his care.
Unsettling times:
the mother was not seeing the girls, they did maintain some telephone contact.
The girls felt relief at living with the father,
but he and the girls were
anxious about the mother attending the school and taking them. On 31 May 2022,
the school counsellor met
the girls, who said they had recently spoken with a
lawyer. They felt safe at school, but had some concerns about the mother
them. Both girls used the expression
“supervised
in the context of seeing the mother.
Later that day the mother
emailed the school, withdrawing her consent to the counsellor speaking to them.
This created uncertainty
in the counsellor’s mind as to her ethical
responsibilities, particularly as the father was still consenting to
counselling.
In the context of
the upheaval in the girls’ lives the mother’s attempt to cease the
counsellor’s involvement
was not child-focused but reactionary.
3 June 2022, Y attended school with a bandaged thumb. She told the school she
had broken her thumb at school the day before while
playing sport and that the
father had taken her to the doctor, where an x-ray showed
“a bone was
sticking out”
. When the school contacted the father, he said the
story was made up.
7 June 2022, the father telephoned the school expressing concern about the
mother collecting the girls. The school contacted Police,
who advised that the
AVO case had been adjourned and that the mother could collect them. The school
advised the father.
school on 22 July the mother and maternal grandmother waited in the carpark in
the mother’s car. The girls did not approach.
X later told the mother on
the phone that she hadn’t realised she was there, telling the mother that
if she had gotten out
of her car X would have
“gone over and said hello
or whatever”
6 September 2022, Y told the school counsellor that she was happy to live with
the father and did not want to go back to the mother’s
8 September the father instituted the current proceedings; the mother had filed
Contravention proceedings earlier, but these were
sensibly abandoned.
mother was still contesting the AVO application and the girls were anxious about
the upcoming Local Court hearing. On 18 October
2022 Y spoke to the school
counsellor about it, who
tried to explain the court process and reassure
Child Impact Report of 3 November 2022
CCE interviewed the girls on 2 November. Y spoke very negatively about the
mother, saying she did not like calling her ‘mum’.
blamed the mother for the parents not getting along. She wished for her life
“to be happier”
, which to her meant living with the father
and spending supervised time with the mother once per month. X disliked that
“interrogate”
the girls and denigrate Ms C.
Like Y, she was well aware the parents did not get along and mostly blamed the
mother. She described
the parental animosity as
“ridiculous”
and said their conflict
“made me who I am, that’s for
She also wanted to stay living with the father and spend time
with the mother, initially supervised. She missed the mother but
wanted her to
be more honest with them.
CCE observed that the girls’ exposure to parental conflict placed them at
greater risk of adverse outcomes emotionally and
behaviourally. He was
concerned that they may feel they have to choose one parent over the other and
that the girls’ reporting
strongly aligned with that of the father. The
CCE noted that the father wanted the views of the girls to be respected and did
seem to value their relationship with the mother. The CCE recommended that
the girls spend time with the mother and, given the concerns
consequent emotional harm, suggested the court consider returning the girls to
the mother’s primary care
if there were no unacceptable risk issues in her
household (which was somewhat of an unknown).
X has fallen victim to an internet predator:
Saturday 12 November 2022, Y showed the father a naked photograph of X on the
iPad. He saw that X had been texting someone and
immediately contacted the
paternal aunt to terminate X’s internet access. He then spoke to Police
on the Sunday and Ms C emailed
Dr CC seeking an urgent appointment for X.
Her email recorded that X seemed very easily led and had shown signs of
self-harm including
wanting to cut all her hair off and picking at her nails and
skin until they bled. The email also noted that the girls had been
for the upcoming Local Court hearing. (Dr CC later responded that it was better
that she not get involved given X’s
level of risk of self-harm and the
ongoing Police involvement. She suggested that they follow up victim
counselling with Police.
She also recommended a referral for CAMHS or Headspace
given that X was self-harming.)
was not until Thursday 17 November that the father advised the mother about the
online predator by way of solicitor correspondence.
The mother was told that she
could make her own inquiries with Police and the school and did so.
Local Court hearing in late 2022:
mother had her legal representative cross-examine the girls, which was likely
damaging to their relationship, particularly Y who
was accused of being
dishonest. The upshot of the hearing was that a twelve (12) month AVO was
Interim orders of 6 December 2022:
an interim hearing, a Senior Judicial Registrar ordered that the girls live with
the father and spend time with the mother
each alternate weekend, increasing in
a stepped fashion every eight (8) weeks. Initially the time was for two (2)
hours on a Saturday
supervised by B Contact Centre; then unsupervised time
from 9.00am to 5.00pm Saturday; then 9.00am Saturday to 5.00pm Sunday; and
culminating in time from conclusion of school Friday until 5.00pm Sunday. The
girls were also to have private telephone communication
with the mother at
6.30pm each Monday, Wednesday and Friday. The parents were to implement family
therapy through K Families.
8 December 2022, the mother acknowledged to B Contact Centre that the
recommencement of visit was going to be awkward and emotional.
This is true, but the
father’s attitude did not assist. On 14 December he filed an Application
for Review, seeking that the
supervised time continue for a further eight (8)
weeks before becoming unsupervised. Notwithstanding the orders for telephone
communication,
the girls had decided between themselves that only
them would answer the mother’s calls and that they would alternate talking
to her. The father was aware of this and supported
the girls’ decision.
It is common ground that those calls did not much assist in maintaining or
restoring the mother/daughter
relationships.
father did at least propose that the mother see the girls on Christmas Day,
supervised by the paternal aunt. Regrettably, the
mother declined.
The girls are struggling / unsupervised time fails:
4 January 2023, X’s GP placed her onto a mental health care plan, noting
“ongoing mental stress with relationship problems and guardianship
arrangements between the parents”
and that X had been feeling anxious
and depressed as a result.
seems to have been placed onto a mental health plan at or around the same
first unsupervised visit was to occur on 11 February 2023. The day before, the
father’s solicitor advised that the father
would not make the girls
available; he proposed supervised time for six (6) hours instead. The mother
refused, insisting on compliance
with the order.
11 February the father attended changeover with his neighbour (Ms BB) and the
mother attended with the maternal grandmother. The
father did not actively
encourage the girls to go but stayed in the car while Ms BB brought them over.
The mother and grandmother
greeted the girls but were met with stony silence. X
“We don’t want to come to the visit today because it’s
not supervised and we don’t feel safe.”
The maternal
grandmother did not hear it so the mother asked X to repeat it. As she did so,
X was visibly anxious and blinking repeatedly
and Y was close to tears. After a
few seconds Ms BB and the girls went back to the father’s car and as they
drove off X looked
back at them and waved.
March 2023 the girls had two (2) sessions of family therapy with Mr EE of K
father enrolled X at W School, nominating Ms C as the ‘other parent’
and listing the paternal aunt as emergency contact.
The mother’s name
does not appear anywhere in the enrolment document.
Review & variation of the interim orders:
31 March 2023 a Judge discharged the earlier orders for time. In lieu, it was
ordered that the children have three (3) x three
(3) hour visits with the mother
supervised by B Contact Centre, stepping up to unsupervised time thereafter
albeit more modest in
scope and limited to daytime only. The other orders,
including for telephone communication, remained extant.
May 2023 the mother followed up Mr EE about further family therapy but the
father had no interest and did not even respond to the
mother’s requests
in this respect.
Attempts at unsupervised time:
13, 20 and 27 May 2023 there were unsupervised visits with the mother –
but only X attended. The maternal grandmother was
present on the first two
visits. They went to the markets, and to the shops. Through his solicitor, the
father later asserted that
X had become withdrawn and had been rude to him when
he asked her what was wrong. In all likelihood he was interrogating her,
her mired in the conflict, and it was probably easier for X to just stop
dynamic. Following an
abortive attempt at changeover on 29 June 2023, they decided to withdraw their
services. The supervisor’s
account of this day, which I accept to be
true, is set out below:
[Mr Galpin] was waiting in his car with the girls on my arrival, they hopped out
and greeted me. [Mr Galpin] began to say things
such as “last time she
told me to tell the girls they HAVE to stay, so I did”. As the girls were
standing right next
to us I did not wish to engage in any conversations of the
sort and looked to the girls and asked how they were. [X] smiled and
responded, [Y] with her head down, looking at the ground. After a short
discussion with [Mr Galpin], telling me they don’t
want to go etc, I asked
him to leave and advised him that we would phone him if required. [Mr Galpin]
appeared shocked by this and
asked where he could go. I suggested there was a
festival on in [Town J] and perhaps go and check that out if he didn’t
to go home. We said goodbye to [Mr Galpin] in the car park of [a
supermarket] and walked towards the park, 2 doors down. The girls
chatted with
me, answering my questions. I asked them about their time with mum and what had
been happening. [Y] said that she
was scared and didn’t want to be with
her. I made suggestions about coming to the same location as me, so they knew
was nearby, and public places, but [Y] wasn’t open to this. Once
we reached [Ms Varley]
she said hello and asked for a hug, [X] hugged
her, [Y] refused. [Ms Varley]
spoke with the girls about what they might
do and [Y] told her that she didn’t want to go. [Ms Varley]
her why and she stated that she was scared.
I remained with [Ms Varley]
and the girls for approximately 50 minutes.
[X] appeared relaxed and engaged in conversation with [Ms Varley]. [Y] was more
off, no eye contact, twirling with her fingers, playing with rocks etc.
During this time both [Ms Varley]
and I reassured the girls that Mum
would listen to them and respect their words, they could do whatever they liked
(beach, park, [...]
etc) and they had their phone and call Dad or myself
whenever they felt they needed. No matter what we said, [Y]’s position
remained a firm no. [X] was non-committal and had not said no, but did mention
that if she stayed she would like [Y] to stay. I
asked the girls if they had
spoken with the ICL and [Y] advised me that “she doesn’t listen and
she is on [Ms Varley]’s
side”. I advised the girls that was not the
case, they are being listened to, but they are not old enough to make long-term
complex decisions, which is why an ICL is appointed. The ICL will take on board
their wishes as well as a number of other factors,
including the law. I became
firm with the girls, telling them that I trust mum when she says she will let
them call Dad if they
wish and I cannot see any risk of harm, so I was going to
leave. [Y] became upset, crying and saying she wants her Dad. [X] remained
quiet. I spoke with [Ms Varley]
she agreed for me to call [Mr Galpin] to collect them. [Mr Galpin] arrived very
quickly after
I text him and [Y] jumped up and ran to him. [X] remained still,
which surprised me. I asked [X] what she was going to do. She
wasn’t sure and I asked her to tell me what her thoughts are. What is
stopping her from staying and what is stopping
her from leaving. [X] gave me
two reasons. Number one was that she didn’t want to be alone without [Y].
Number two was that
she was worried how it would affect court if she did stay.
I advised [X] that was an adult subject and it makes me really sad that
has been put on her. I asked her what her heart wanted to do – spend time
with Mum or go with Dad. [X] hesitated and
took and minute and decided to
remain with [Mr Galpin].
Based on what occurred on this Saturday [B Contact Centre] has made the decision
that we are no longer able to assist with the change
overs. The outcome was no
different for the family versus when [B Contact Centre] were not involved. It
is clear that the children
had already decided what they were going to do before
I arrived, and the father was aware of that, as he remained close by. The
children are clearly aware of court proceedings, and that burden has been put
upon them. For the best interest of these girls, I
hope that the courts make a
decision sooner rather than later, as they appear to have been placed right in
the middle of the fight.
record was sent to the ICL on 17 August. The father’s reaction at the
commencement of the visit set the tone; he was letting
the girls know that the
visit was occurring against his will. The father was also aligning the girls;
X’s concern about how
the Court proceedings might be affected if she did
decide to stay with her mother is highly disturbing.
father then belatedly contacted K Families. Mr EE telephoned him back. The
father told him about the failed changeovers and
B Contact Centre withdrawing,
that neither he nor the girls
family therapy, and stressing that
the girls were happy, didn’t want to change anything and remained scared
of the mother.
Mr EE emphasised that unless the father was committed to family
therapy, including funding it, the process would not be effective.
nominated an alternative therapist if the father
interested.
that time, the father and Ms C separated. Y met with the school psychologist.
They talked about the separation and about
the Court proceedings. Y said she
was scared of ‘[Ms Varley]’ due to previous incidents of abuse
and hoped the Court
proceedings would be resolved soon and she would not have to
One-off unsupervised visit occurs in the shadow of the next
court event:
26 August 2023, the mother and maternal grandmother had an unsupervised visit
with the girls. They met at Region R and the children
had brought along
Y’s new puppy. After the father left, the girls, mother and maternal
grandmother had a reasonably good time,
although a few notable things happened.
Y said they were spending time with them because
“Dad said we had
. When the mother said she was very pleased about it, Y said she
“feeling stronger about being able to spend time with you.”
The girls made various disparaging references to Ms C, including potential
litigation between she and the father. After an hour Y
asked if she could call
the father and the mother acquiesced. She thought it may have been pre-planned
that they call him after
an hour, which is possible. In any event, though a
short visit it was reasonably good overall. The girls were not fearful of the
mother and were willing to spend time with her – provided it was of short
Interim orders of 7 September 2023:
a Family Dispute Resolution Conference, on 7 September 2023 the court made
further interim orders by consent whereby the
children were to attend further
family therapy. Pending four (4) sessions of family therapy, the girls were to
spend supervised
time with the mother each Saturday for up to three (3) hours,
supervised by B Contact Centre, at locations nominated by B Contact
Centre which
could include the mother’s home. After the four (4) sessions, the girls
were to spend unsupervised time with
the mother, from after school Tuesday to
7.30pm each week and on alternate weekends increasing in a stepped fashion every
weeks. The weekend time was initially from 10am to 1pm Saturday,
culminating in alternate weekends from 10am Saturday until 6pm
Sunday. The
telephone communication was to occur at 7pm Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays,
with the girls to be given privacy.
11 September 2023, the school psychologist noted that the girls were meeting the
ICL that afternoon to discuss the orders and that
Y was anxious.
More supervised visits:
her phone call with the mother, Y was very negative about the upcoming
supervised visit. The visit occurred at the mother’s
2023 from 2.30pm to 4.30pm. The girls were initially ‘standoffish’.
X went to her room and Y then
became quite talkative with the mother, telling
her about things she would be buying online and showing her clothes etc. Y,
painted a love heart for the mother to wish her a happy birthday.
Overall the girls had a
reasonably good time and the mother was responsive.
Notwithstanding,
on the 7 October visit the girls talked about
“bad memories”
although the supervisor thought they sounded overly dramatized and Y seemed
to move about the mother’s home freely, engaging
with the mother in a way
that was not fearful.
10 October, Y told the school counsellor that having to spend time with the
mother made her distressed and angry; she also complained
ignoring her wishes when she wanted to leave. The counsellor suggested some
possible ways to help manage visits,
such as taking her phone or asking the
mother to provide craft or drawing supplies.
the 14 October visit, Y complained about being bored, not wanting to be there or
“missing the father”
. On the 21 October visit, Y huffed
and tapped her feet although she settled down after a while. X at one stage
seems to have threatened
Y by saying she would tell the father that she (Y)
wanted to live with the mother – again highlighting the girls’
in the parental conflict.
On 24 October 2023, Y again
complained to the school counsellor about having to attend supervised visits
although she gave no reasons
beyond saying
“I don’t want to be
October the visit was more positive but in November the girls’ behaviour
then regressed again.
Supervised visit on 2 December 2023 – B Contact Centre
again decide to withdraw their services:
2 December 2023, the girls visited the mother’s house, supervised by Ms DD
of B Contact Centre. Highly resistant to spending
time, Y told the supervisor
that her lawyer said she did not have to go at which point X corrected her by
saying it was
. The supervisor tried to encourage
the girls, reminding them they have a good time when they visit. The visit was
unsuccessful,
with Y being very rude and hostile, glaring at the mother and
“Why are you looking at me, take a picture it will last
. X was following Y’s lead, smirking and saying,
“yeah I’m probably not coming in”
. Y told the
supervisor she couldn’t force them to go in and she couldn’t touch
mother told Y she was not giving her a chance. In the opinion of the supervisor
(which I accept), Y was not distressed; rather
“had attitude and
came to the visit with her mind set on her decisions”
. At one point Y
asked X to call the father, and X did. The supervisor hoped that the father
would speak to the supervisor first
before saying anything to the girls, as the
supervisor would have tried to get him to hold off. Instead, the father told X
he would be back in twenty (20) minutes. There followed an awkward
exchange between the mother, the supervisor and the girls at
the front of the
house witnessed by the neighbours. Embarrassed, the supervisor suggested that
the girls come to the front stairs,
behind a shrub out of view of the street.
Eventually Y agreed and said she would go into the house to find some Christmas
the mother had hidden there.
went inside with the mother, quickly finding all of the elves and playing with
them. Notably, her demeanour changed and she appeared
relaxed and happy and was
being polite and calm with the mother although she would not accept her offers
of food. Y soon went outside,
taking one of the elves with her. Outside on the
steps, the supervisor made room for the mother by joking that she would go and
invade Y’s personal space and let the mother sit in hers. The supervisor
then sat next to Y on the cement. When the father
arrived, he stayed in the car
and the girls ran over to him without saying goodbye to the mother.
supervisor regretted the father’s decision to return so promptly as she
noted that the girls were
by the time the father arrived; given
more time the visit may have been successful. She noted the mother appeared
defeated, disheartened
and worried about future visits failing.
Monday 4 December, the father contacted B Contact Centre to complain about the
conduct of the supervisor. On 6 December, B Contact
Centre emailed the ICL and
the legal representatives to advise that the children were coming to visits
adamant that they would not
attend and that despite encouragement they were
unwilling to fully participate. X was open to visits, but refused to
participate
if Y did not, and Y could not be swayed. The email noted that the
girls had enjoyed themselves during visits but that both of them:
have made comments about how their attendance at visits “looks for
dad” in Court and if they have fun the court will
make them move back with
mum. The girls have been aligned with dad from the beginning and are very
clearly aware of the adult issues
within the proceedings. This case
demonstrates strong alienation which is deeply impacting the girls. Ethically I
cannot sit by
and continue to put the girls through this on a weekly basis. [B
be making a
report to DCJ with our concerns.
For the best interests of the girls, we believe this case needs to be settled
sooner rather than later.
8 December, both girls saw their GP in the company of the father and paternal
aunt. The father and the paternal aunt wanted Y
seen by a psychologist, noting
that her previous mental health plan had expired. The father told the GP that Y
became very anxious
with visits to the mother and was not keen to see her.
invited the mother to her Year 6 Graduation Ball. She accepted X’s
invitation and they interacted during the night. Y was
also there but was rude
to the mother.
20 December 2023, the father’s solicitors wrote to B Contact Centre to
formally complain about the conduct of the supervisor
on Saturday 2 December
2023. The letter accused the supervisor of threatening the girls that unless
they spent time with the mother,
the court would change their residential
arrangements back into the mother’s care. It accused the supervisor of
ignoring Y’s
wishes, and telling her that she was speaking
. It also accused the supervisor of threatening to
invade Y’s personal space and later laying on top of her to prevent her
from leaving.
There was no
merit in the complaints.
this time the mother and Mr AA separated. The mother again rejected the
father’s proposal to see the children on Christmas
Day with his sister
supervising.
More mental health care plans & a new family
both girls feeling depressed and anxious, 2024 began with mental health care
plans for each of them.
were referred to Dr FF, psychologist, to whom the paternal aunt provided a short
one-sided written summary highly critical
of the mother and portraying the
father as a victim of circumstances. The paternal aunt emphasised that the
paternal family were
concerned that they
needed to be seen to be acting
on the mental health care plans, while at the same time emphasising that the
girls should not be forced to see the mother.
Centre had been unable to provide family therapy pursuant to the interim orders,
but in January 2024 the parties agreed upon a
new family therapist – Mr HH
of JJ Clinic.
25 January 2024, the father and paternal aunt took X for medical review which
confirmed her seafood allergies, with a risk of anaphylaxis
if she were to eat
multiple seafoods together. Her EpiPen prescription was renewed.
February 2024, X commenced high school at W School. The mother attended for her
first day and X was pleased about it.
Family Report:
13 February 2024, the CCE conducted Family Report interviews and observations.
The girls appeared unimpressed, Y even turning
her back on him and seeming
resentful about being inconvenienced by having to participate. As the day went
on, X became quite cooperative
and polite. Y also became more cooperative, but
was also strong-willed, tenacious and at times oppositional and discourteous.
did not show proper respect.
girls wanted to live with the father, speaking positively about him and
negatively about the mother. X was somewhat ambivalent
and less negative about her; in contrast Y was staunch in not wanting to spend
time with her or even speak
to her. She described the mother as
“unpredictable”
. She said “
If you do send me back there
I’ll run away and this could be the last time you hear of me”
Asked why the mother was scary, Y said that she
“just got that look on
“can do anything”
. She said the
father encouraged her to spend time with the mother but she did not want to, and
was upset at the supervisors for
trying to trick her into staying with the
mother when she didn’t want to. Y wished she did not have to have court;
was to continue to live with the father for the rest of her life and
she wanted the mother to know this as well.
the end of the interview, Y asked the CCE at what age children got to choose
where they live, saying
“We’ve been told it’s twelve”
and that the father had told her different things, namely that it could be
from twelve, thirteen or fourteen. The CCE told her that
children were
considered by law to be children until they were eighteen. Evidently unhappy, Y
“Aren’t we old enough to know what we want?”
She also told the CCE that a lawyer (which he assumed was the ICL) had told her
that she didn’t have to go back to the mother’s
didn’t want to, as had a school counsellor. In the CCE’s view, Y
“seemingly empowered by her belief that the children’s view
should hold significant weight and that they cannot be forced
to do anything
they do not wish to do”
. I respectfully agree.
also talked to the CCE about the mother being violent, including digging her
fingernails into her arm; she also talked about the
mother lying. Like Y, she
used the word
“unpredictable”
to describe the mother, which
suggests potential coaching, or at least discussion between the girls themselves
going to say. X said she did not really enjoy going to
visit the mother and did not want to have a set regime of time, even if it
only every few weeks. She said she had only gone to see the mother because Y
had done so and that sometimes she had felt scared.
She denied ever having felt
comfortable with the mother, which was inconsistent with B Contact
Centre’s observations. She
said she wanted the Judge to know
“That I don’t want to go back to live with [Ms
“I don’t really want to do the visits
although it felt rude to say no.
her interview, the mother was respectful and cooperative albeit largely
inexpressive and emotionless. In my view, she presented
as a person who felt
‘defeated’. The father presented as a concrete thinker who
struggled to separate his own experiences
and views from those of the children.
The father lacked insight in relation to denigration, reporting for instance
that he had asked
the girls if he had ever called the mother a
as he wanted to satisfy himself that he had not done so. He
admitted asking the girls about various disputed events. Nonetheless,
that he was doing all he could to encourage the girls to see the mother and
complained that he was the one
“in the firing line”
the girls were happy and just wanted
“to be left alone”
was unconvinced the girls, especially Y, would comply with an order for time.
He blamed the mother for abusing the girls and
alienating them through her
but said that they may want to go back to the mother
when they get older.
parent/child observations were telling. Y asked how long the observations with
each parent were going to take and, when told
that there would be a quick break
between them, she said
“So what are we supposed to do, just sit
At that point, the father chuckled.
observations with the father were very positive and the girls were clearly
happy. But upon meeting the mother, the girls changed
dramatically. Y declined
a hug and, while X agreed to a hug, the CCE describes it as
and lacking any real warmth”
. The mother sat next to X at one end of
the lounge, seemingly aware that Y would dislike her sitting near her. Despite
by the mother to initiate conversation, she was met with minimal
responses. Y’s were largely one-word responses, whereas X
was a little
more responsive but appeared to take Y’s lead in consciously limiting what
she said. At one point X pulled her
sunglasses up over her eyes seemingly in an
attempt to disengage from the mother although she did continue talking with her
flat, disinterested way. Just five (5) minutes in, Y began asking how long
the observations would go for, going on to repeat the
question a further eight
(8) times. She moved away from the mother and turned her back. The mother
tried to reassure Y by telling
her that the CCE would advise when it was time.
Y got up and walked to the door after about fifteen (15) minutes but did not
the room until the session was over; both children gave the mother a cold
Family Report raised concerns about the ongoing level of parental conflict, its
impact on the girls, alignment with the father
and disproportionate negative
attitudes towards the mother. The CCE was concerned about the father’s
capacity to nurture the
girls’ emotional needs and set proper boundaries
and considered that the mother had more insight into her own parenting
than the father had in relation to his own.
Ultimately,
the Family Report raised real concerns about both parents’ proposals. The
father’s proposal carried the real
risk of the girls losing their
relationship with the mother. The mother’s proposal carried the real risk
of the girls being
destabilised and her struggling to manage them. Beyond
observing that the girls should not be separated, the Family Report made
that a judicial decision was required and there were no easy or risk-free
options available.
More counselling & mental health treatment for the
12 March 2024, Y met with the new school counsellor, appearing worried. After
the counsellor explained her role, Y said she was
worried that the counsellor
was from the court, saying she hadn’t felt comfortable with the CCE.
26 March 2024 the father took X to Dr FF pursuant to the mental health care
plan. X had engaged in self-harming behaviours by
superficially cutting her leg
(including carving her boyfriend’s name into her leg). X said she had
first started doing it
when she was living with the mother but had recently
started doing it again although she
“doesn’t know why”
X admitted to past suicidal ideation and had recently those thoughts again, but
did not have any plan, and did not know
“when or how”
might self-harm. She was able to distract herself and it was noted that she had
protective factors in the form of family and
friends and a safety plan in place.
Overall Dr FF considered her to be a low risk of suicide.
2 April the girls attended family therapy with Mr HH.
11 April, X had an appointment with Dr FF to discuss better emotional management
strategies. She was self-harming once or twice
per week using the metal part of
a pencil sharpener on the top of her legs. She said it made her feel better
although she felt guilty
afterwards. The parents had been made aware of what
was happening by the school counsellor; the father had not spoken to X about
X said she was feeling down about the legal situation that the mother was
reportedly creating, as well as the father asking her
to break up with her
boyfriend and taking her devices.
23 April the girls attended family therapy with Mr HH.
30 April, Y met with the school counsellor, saying she was confused as a
previous person/counsellor had told X that she should
not run away from her
mother’s house if she wasn’t scared, whereas a new counsellor had
told the father that she
run away. The father had presumably
shared that with her. They discussed safety plans in the event that contact
with the mother
7 May the girls attended family therapy with Mr HH.
9 May the father took X to see a psychologist. The father spoke for the first
ten (10) minutes, saying that he wanted to move
beyond initial observations and
start therapeutic support for X. The notes record that she had been groomed by
an internet predator.
X talked about having a current boyfriend who was
“supportive”
but the father told the psychologist he had seen
messages from him calling her a
“little cunt”
“little whore”
, asking her for nudes and threatening to harm
Y when they were arguing. The father had removed X’s access to all
to stop them communicating. X later went on to talk about seeing her
mother at family therapy and feeling a bit nervous. She said
she had not had
her phone for six (6) to seven (7) weeks but that it was
“the happiest
she has ever been”
as she did not have to talk to anyone. X discussed
not being close with the father and not spending much time with him. She also
reported frequently feeling tired.
21 May the girls attended their fourth and final session of family therapy with
Attempt at unsupervised time on 25 May 2024
to the orders of 7 September 2023, the girls were now to spend unsupervised time
with the mother, starting with a visit at
10am on Saturday 25 May 2024 where the
parents were to meet at Region R.
accept the father’s evidence that in the morning he told the girls that he
had to take them to the park to see the mother
and they were resistant. I do
not however accept his evidence that he
“reassured them they had
nothing to worry about”
. As will become apparent, whatever
‘reassurance’ he did give was at best tokenistic. He wanted a
witness and so again
brought his neighbour and friend along, Ms BB.
father and Ms BB arrived at a service station at Region R, at which point the
children refused to get out. The father did not
instruct them to do so, nor did
he tell them to get into the mother’s car parked nearby. In the witness
box he justified his
non-encouragement by saying that, in his mind, the girls
in the mother’s care
. This was a convenient way of
shifting all responsibility onto the mother, while abrogating his own. After
telling the girls to
“Have a nice day with your mum”
exited the car with Ms BB, handing Y the car keys
“in case they locked
themselves in the car, so they could put the windows down.”
BB then walked to a café some two hundred (200) metres away. The girls
also had their mobile phones on them.
the next half hour or so the mother tried to talk to the girls, who remained
sitting in the back of the car being oppositional
and rude, particularly Y. X
then exited, walking towards the service station nearby and saying she wanted to
go to the toilet.
Y followed, asking the mother if she could close X’s
car door and then locking the car when she did. The mother followed them
while the maternal grandmother stayed behind. But instead of going to the
toilet, X and Y ran across the highway and down the
street. The mother soon
lost them, and decided to return to her car and wait.
the meantime the father, still at the café, saw the girls running along
the opposite side of the street. (I reject his oral
evidence was that he had
warned them
to run away as it was
“dangerous”
He telephoned X and asked what was happening and after a few minutes the girls
came to him. He and Ms BB walked them back to
the mother. The father told the
“Please go with your mum”
but they resisted. The
father and Ms BB then walked away but the girls followed. The father telephoned
his solicitor.
after, the father, Ms BB and the girls walked back to the mother. X handed the
car keys to the father, saying they were ready
to go. With the girls nearby and
in earshot, the father asked the mother
“Well what do you want me to
She told him she wanted him to encourage the girls to come with
her and then he needed to drive away. The father simply got into
his car with
Ms BB at which point the girls again ran off. The mother went to the
father’s car, telling him he needed to get
them. Apparently unconcerned,
he responded that
“Well I told you they would run away”
before driving off.
mother and maternal grandmother drove around looking for the girls and saw them
attempting to cross the highway. X rang the father
to say that
They’re fucking chasing us down the road in [Ms Varley]’s
car and yelling at us”
. Notwithstanding that he claims to have told
the girls they had nothing to worry about and would be safe with the mother,
he in fact told X that if they
were frightened and scared they should call the Police.
and disingenuously, the father texted the mother asking if she had found the
girls and expressing concerns about their safety.
When the mother said no and
asked for X’s number, he did not provide it.
mother and maternal grandmother soon found the girls hiding in the supermarket
carpark. By then Y had already called 000 and
X had called the father to say
they were hiding. Upon finding the girls, the mother and maternal grandmother
got out of the car
and the mother told them to stop it or they’d have to
call Police. (At some point she did call them.) The maternal grandmother,
believing the father had set this all up, said as much to the girls at which
point X told her
“No, it was all our idea, you both can get
The girls then left again.
after, Police telephoned the father who told them what had happened. He then
picked up the girls from the park; they were
both very upset. He hugged them
and took them home.
Fallout from the aborted visit:
28 May, Y spoke to the school counsellor, distressed about what had occurred.
The counsellor spoke with Y about the dangers of
running away. Y said she was
upset because, as a result of overhearing some discussions between the father
and X, she was now fearful
that “[Ms Varley]” may try to pick her up
from school later that day. She said the father had gotten upset with her
told her not to listen into other people’s conversations and that he
couldn’t tell her about court matters. The
school counsellor encouraged Y
to stay near safe adults, and to explain why she was scared to go to the mother.
Y said she felt frustrated
that the court was not listening to the girls’
4 June, Y saw Dr FF. They discussed the aborted visit and Y became elevated.
Explaining why they had run away, Y said she
“didn’t want to
and that when X ran away, she followed. Attempts to explore why Y
was apprehensive about seeing the mother elicited vague responses
maternal grandmother being
, and that Y
the mother. Asked about future visits she said,
“I’d just run away again, they can’t make me go.”
They discussed self-soothing and self-care strategies.
same month, X was suspended from school for spraying ‘silly stream’
in the girls’ toilets.
father proposed to the mother that her time with the girls occur with the father
in eyesight of the girls, the mother to be on
her own, and the girls to be
informed that they could leave at any time. The mother rejected this proposal.
16 July 2024, both girls saw their GP about ongoing depression and anxiety.
Their mental health care plans were renewed. X was
unhappy at her new school
and talked about sending naked photographs to her boyfriend.
Y discussed problems in her
relationships and emotional regulation.
Events in the leadup to hearing:
July and August 2024, the mother and maternal grandmother attended various
Church events for Y – culminating in her being
baptised and confirmed. On
the day of the ceremony itself, the mother and maternal grandmother brought
presents for both girls,
who came over to open them and were happy to talk
amicably with them.
12 August, Y decided to ‘prank call’ another student by saying that
she had tried to take her own life over the weekend.
The student was upset, the
Principal was advised and spoke to the parents. In the witness box the father
said he had told Y not
to do this again but did not otherwise discipline her.
23 August, the mother telephoned the school to see how Y was going. They
advised that she was working below stage level in mathematics
but was otherwise
performing adequately, with a good attendance record, always dressed
appropriately and with all of the things she
needed for school. The mother
asked if Y was still seeing the school counsellor, and was told they now had a
school psychologist
who saw Y as frequently as possible but that there was high
demand for the service.
September, X obtained a casual Saturday job at a business at Town U. This made
it impossible for her to be able to spend time
with the mother pursuant to the
interim orders but the father texted the mother to suggest that she meet with X
(and Y if possible)
after X finished work at the business on Saturday 7
September. The mother agreed,
although in a phone call on the Friday night Y was sarcastic about it, saying
she didn’t like seeing the mother and didn’t
know why the father
wanted them to. In the result, X interacted with the mother for about twenty
(20) minutes and Y for a few minutes
12 September the father texted the mother to say that he had asked the children
if they wanted to see the mother again on the weekend
but that they had said
17 September 2024, the school counsellor noted “[
Y] prefers choice and
chooses not to see mum”
. The counsellor recorded that the father told
Y he needs to show he is trying to let the mother see the girls as
will look better in Court”
was again suspended, this time for buying a vape. On 26 September 2024, she
told her GP that she felt isolated at school and did
not want to follow the
(At a subsequent school
meeting attended by the parents, the father said the paternal aunt had told him
a couple of months; this was the first the mother had
heard of it.)
15 October, X attended upon her GP, subdued and wanting to be
“home-schooled”
. She said no-one would talk to her and she
had prepared some home-schooling arguments to present to the father and paternal
On 24 October 2024, X
again attended her GP accompanied by the father. The father told the GP about
having a barrister for the
upcoming hearing and said that the mother had a new
solicitor. X said she was not fearful about the upcoming court date but was
unwilling to expand further.
18 November 2024, X met Dr FF and was unable to explain why she ran away from
the mother in May. Dr FF thought that it was anxiety-related.
the leadup to the hearing date, save for the brief one-off interaction on 7
September 2024, the mother could only see of the girls
by attending school, or
Church events.
BEST INTERESTS DISCUSSION & FINDINGS
considerations are somewhat overlapping and I will discuss them
holistically, assisted by the detailed factual findings I have already
girls have the
strident view
that they want to live with the father; they
cannot conceive of returning to live with the mother and will not accept any
such outcome.
Their desire to live with the father is hardly new; X started
talking to counsellors about it from 2019 and Y from 2021.
girls also have the
strident view
that they want to spend time with the
mother and communicate with her on their own terms. No court-ordered regime of
specific time
or communication has ever worked.
girls’ views are partly due to their ongoing immersion in the parental
dispute. It is a basic rule of good co-parenting
that children should be
shielded from parental conflict as much as possible. Yet these girls were never
shielded from the dispute,
girls’ views have been reinforced, at times strongly, by the father
aligning them to his cause and undermining the mother.
As noted, some of the
mother’s behaviours have also contributed – including the state of
her home, her volatile interactions
with the girls including striking and
frightening
Y at the dinner table in May 2022, and her decision
to have both girls cross-examined in the Local Court.
may also be other factors at play in the girls’ decision-making, such as
their enjoyment of the ‘farm life’
offered by the father.
is to her enormous credit that the mother has continued attending school (and
Church) events despite the dismissive and at times
disparaging responses the
girls, particularly Y, have given her. The CCE was firmly of the view, and I
respectfully agree, that
the girls’ rejection of the mother has been
disproportionate to her parenting and home environment and that the girls had
overly empowered, developing a sense of entitlement and a lack of respect
for authority figures which reflects poor role modelling
on the father’s
part. The CCE also acknowledged that there were ‘push’ and
‘pull’ factors at play
for the girls. That is, the mother did
things to ‘push’ the girls away and the father did things to
the girls closer to him.
do not accept the father’s self-serving view that the children are
“very mature”
. X is somewhat easily led, as evidenced by her
interactions both with an online predator and with her abusive boyfriend. Y is
immature in her attitude to authority figures. But at fourteen (14)
and thirteen (13), their views must be considered.
the evidence before me, an order for the girls to live with the mother would not
only be unsuccessful, it would also give rise
to unacceptable safety risks to
the girls, both physically and emotionally. It is simply not a
The girls have run away before and the risk that the girls would do
so again is very real and gives rise to significant dangers.
In X’s case,
she could for instance run to her abusive boyfriend who does not live far from
the mother. The mother had thought
including potentially late at night which she accepted would be
could also engage in more self-harming behaviours, particularly in the context
of having had her wishes stymied by this court.
I am mindful of her having been
troubled by past suicidal thoughts. Y’s mental health would also be
jeopardised by orders
forcing her to engage in a parenting regime she adamantly
opposes. Both girls have had extensive counselling and psychological
assistance.
Y saw Dr FF from March 2024 until September 2024 and X has been
seeing Dr FF on an ongoing basis.
is also a near-certainty of the girls ‘acting out’ in the
mother’s home and becoming unmanageable and a high
chance they will
confect or exaggerate events in her home in order to get her into trouble or
otherwise de-stabilise the arrangements.
mother acknowledged that having the girls placed back in her care would be
“an extremely challenging time initially for the children and
“will be a process”
but said that she
was ready to engage with whatever supports were required.
my view the mother
hopes rather than
that a change of
residence would work. Notably, her orders do not propose how the girls are to
leave the father’s care and
go into hers. In the witness box she said
that it would probably need to happen in the precincts of the Court building,
ICL can meet with the girls and explain what is to happen. Asked how
they would get the girls over this ‘first hurdle’,
ie. the girls not
wanting to live with her, she said
“I don’t know”
that if the girls became angry all she could do was
. She accepted that both girls were at times oppositional,
“They’re not the girls who left my house.”
mother’s proposed Minute of Order proposes a three (3) month moratorium on
time with the father, graduating to supervised
and then unsupervised time, with
a requirement that he return the girls to her if they attended at his home other
than in accordance
with the orders or as agreed between the parents. Asked
going to run away, the mother acknowledged that there may need to be a
‘carve-out’ for the father to be able to
speak with the girls during
the moratorium period to dissuade them doing so; she said that re-integrating
the girls into her home
“would work better if both parents were on the
same page.”
This is no doubt true but given the history of the matter
it is highly aspirational – she promptly conceded that she didn’t
how she could keep the girls safe and stop them running away, the mother said
that the key was to explain to the girls that
“this is it”
and they cannot decide for themselves. She said she would drive the
children to and from school, make sure she was home engaging
with them, and that
they talked and enjoyed their time with her. She said she was content to take
them to Dr FF and to family therapy
if necessary. She had the understandable but
simplistic view that if the father left them alone the girls would
“become their normal selves.”
mother has undertaken various parenting courses. At the date of the hearing she
was also undertaking other parenting courses.
The CCE thought that this was
mother also deposed that she was willing to recommence family therapy, to
continue the school counsellor involvement, to engage
the children in sport and
cultural activities, to take them to the maternal family farm and to generally
keep the girls busy and
stay actively engaged with them. The courses she has
undertaken should improve her capacity to communicate with the girls and help
defuse conflict through better emotional regulation strategies (including better
self-regulation by the mother.)
mother would also have support from the maternal grandmother - physically,
emotionally and financially. But her support has its
limits. Through no fault
of her own, she is not currently very emotionally attuned to the girls. She did
not for instance know
to punch the mother.
CCE thought that the mother’s proposed scaffolding measures were
appropriate. But even so, the CCE said it was
“really difficult to
envisage how the girls would cope with a change of residence”
not have much confidence that the process would be a success, suggesting that
there may be benefit to making
interim orders
to see how things go.
Asked what, if anything, the mother could do to try to improve the situation,
the CCE had no real solutions.
The ICL contended that although the girls’
rejection of the mother was disproportionate to their lived experience of her as
a parent, their views were
made these observations, it needs to be said that there are also multi-faceted
safety risks to the girls remaining in the father’s
am concerned about the father not being particularly aware of, or forthcoming
have allowed her to cease
counselling once she moved in with him, only to restart it later when she
deteriorated. He had never seen
her pick her skin. While he admitted she had
cut herself superficially on the leg and that he had confiscated her pencil
blade, he had not included these matters in his trial affidavit
because they did not advance his case. He had the simplistic but
genuine view X’s suicidal thoughts related to the
I was left with the impression that the father wants to ‘normalise’
his daughter’s mental health as much
as possible, which is understandable,
but he did not seem to have enough day-to-day awareness of how she was really
going. Asked
specifically what the impact of the parental conflict on X, he
said he didn’t know as she had never said anything to him.
thought X was
“going pretty good at school”
notwithstanding
that she had twice been suspended. He had not seen a ‘safety card’
for X which the school had emailed
am concerned about the father’s role modelling in relation to authority
figures; Y in particular can behave rudely.
be fair to him, the father does have
protective capacity. In
relation to X’s boyfriend he removed her phone and discourages contact.
He went to Police about the
internet predator as well as trying to arrange
counselling for X (Ms C sending the email to Dr CC.) The father has also
that the girls’ devices have parental controls on them to stop
them accessing adult websites. These insidious risks exist
in both households
and, in X’s case, the risk of her ‘reaching out’ to her
abusive boyfriend is likely greater
in the mother’s home given the
emotional upheaval that a change of residence would involve.
the court’s overwhelming concern about the father as primary carer –
as emphasised by Mr Bateman – is the potential
loss of the
mother/daughter relationship. The CCE described such an outcome as
“catastrophic”
for the girls. The CCE said that the girls
needed emotional nurturance from, and a relationship with,
I respectfully agree that it is a risk, giving rise to a range of safety issues
- both physical and emotional.
father’s destructive attitude in this respect is longstanding. Since not
long after separation, the girls have called the
in the father’s household. His own affidavit even
deposes that, in his attempt to get the girls to visit the mother, he has
‘reassured’ them by saying:
There is nothing to worry about. [Ms Varley] loves you and wants to see
the father has at times made
effort to promote a relationship
between the girls and their mother, he has done so with an eye to how he will
look in court rather
than because of a genuine desire to foster a relationship.
I reject his evidence that he has done all he can. Simply getting the
handover and then ‘walking away’ is nowhere near good enough. On
any reasonable view, the father has
the girls to reject the
girls are not currently thriving in the father’s home. While they have
good relationships with the paternal extended family,
their relationship with
the mother and the extended maternal family has unreasonably and unnecessarily
dwindled away. This also
means they are unable to fully explore their Q People
Aboriginal culture. The cultural expectation is that they learn their culture
through the women in the maternal family, including the mother, maternal
grandmother and other ‘aunties’. The father
admitted that he did
not know much about the girls’ Q People culture and was happy to leave it
to the school and to his neighbour
to explain cultural matters to them. At
school the girls attend NAIDOC celebrations and his neighbour, Ms LL, is
connected with
the Town KK Land Council. She is an Aboriginal woman and artist
who has been teaching X painting. (Both girls produce First Nations
Bateman acknowledged the risks in returning the girls to the mother’s
primary care but forcefully submitted that it was risky
to empower teenage girls
in the way the father had done, saying that it
“opens a Pandora’s
for them. I respectfully agree.
however, there are limits to what the court can do in this case, particularly
given the unworkability of changing the primary
care arrangements with all its
attendant risks. There are real emotional risks to the girls no matter which
household they live
in. But changing their primary care back to the mother is
simply unworkable and poses the greatest risks.
is also critically important that the girls be spared from the parental conflict
so that each of them can attend to their educational,
social and personal
development. It is the girls’ right and the parents’ obligation to
given them that opportunity,
particularly as they come to their most important
high school years and approach adulthood. Although the mother is willing to
future litigation, I consider same to be strongly contra-indicated for both
girls, particularly X given her school struggles, suspensions
and past traumas.
whether it would be better to make an order for defined time with the mother, or
an order for time as agreed, the CCE had no
preference and said it was a
decision for the court.
I do not consider that it would be in the best
interests of the girls to
them to have defined time or
communication with the mother. Attempts to force things have been
counterproductive. While it is superficially
tempting to continue the weekly
phone calls with the mother, it is common ground that these calls have not been
successful at improving
the mother/daughter relationships and the girls’
decision to only have
of them answer her calls has, if anything,
empowered them to be disrespectful towards her. Moreover, orders for defined
communication keep pressure on the girls as well as giving rise to the
risk of future litigation. It is time for a new approach,
one which in my view
accepts the realities on the ground.
CONCLUSION & ORDERS:
far from ideal, the girls continuing to live with the father, and spending time
and communicating with the mother in accordance
with their wishes, is the
‘least worst’ outcome and ultimately in their best interests. While
there is a risk of the
girls losing their relationship with the mother, the
removal of the pressure on them also creates
opportunities
relationship with her to be re-kindled as well. I am also mindful that in the
not-too-distant future, the girls will be
able to ‘vote with their
feet’ anyway. Adulthood looms in the background for both of them; they
will not be children
these Reasons, I have broadly adopted the ICL’s proposed Minute. The
orders are self-explanatory but I make a few further
observations.
the extent the parents need to communicate, I consider that in the interests of
transparency they should use a parenting app such
as AppClose. The father
wanted communication by email and, while he might initially have some struggles
adapting to an App, it would
be a step in the right direction and would give the
parties some more scaffolding around communication.
father needs to give the mother the girls’ phone numbers and an email
address (if they have one) so that she can communicate
with them if they wish.
injunctions are self-explanatory and ‘appropriate’ as required by s
68B of the Act. The authorities and information-sharing
set out in the orders
are in the best interests of the children and will help ensure transparency for
all concerned.
am not making the ICL’s proposed orders for the girls to obtain updated
mental health care plans and attend upon treaters.
It is a matter for the
girls, the father and their treaters to respond to the girls’ needs as
they arise; their GP and treaters
may review these Reasons in any event.
will hear the parties as to costs.
I certify that the preceding two hundred and
twenty-one (221) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment
Dated: 30 July 2025
The father’s trial affidavit
was filed on time but the mother filed hers late. Not only did her affidavit
respond to his,
it also alleged various historical acts of family violence /
poor parenting on his part. In those circumstances, the father was
given leave
to reply by way of this short addendum affidavit.
The affidavits were late but
the mother was given leave to rely upon
orders’ are broadly defined in s 64B(1) of the Act and include orders
allocating parental responsibility,
and orders for a child to live
with, spend time with and/or communicate with a parent or other person.
Exhibit 1, paragraph
This finding is broadly
consistent with what Y told Police when they interviewed her in 2022 (exhibit
44), namely that the injury
occurred when the mother grabbed
This was on 17/02/21; see
It was not necessarily
intentional on the solicitor’s
Exhibit 1, paragraph 21;
Exhibit 1, paragraph
Exhibit 1, paragraph
Exhibit 1, paragraph
Exhibit 11. B Contact
Centre categorically denied the
allegations.
Exhibits 29 &
Exhibit 36. Skin tests
soon after confirmed her allergies: exhibit
Father’s trial
affidavit, paragraphs 133 &
See exhibits 28 &
Father’s trial
affidavit, paragraph 133
RTF format (769 KB)
Signed PDF/A format