Re Young; Re Young [2020] HCA 13 (15 April 2020)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Matter No S12/2020
IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION BY
MAUREEN MARY YOUNG FOR LEAVE TO
ISSUE OR FILE
Matter No S13/2020
IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION BY
MAUREEN MARY YOUNG FOR LEAVE TO
ISSUE OR FILE
[2020] HCA 13
of Judgment: 15 April 2020
S12/2020 & S13/2020
Application
for leave to issue or file the proposed application for leave to appeal in
Matter No S12 of 2020 refused.
Application
for leave to issue or file the proposed application for leave to appeal in
Matter No S13 of 2020 refused.
Application
for leave to issue or file the proposed writ of summons in Matter No S13 of 2020
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject
to formal revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
High Court – Leave to issue or file proceeding – Removal of
proceedings – Where causes said to be pending in Supreme
Court of New
South Wales said to involve matter "arising under any treaty" within meaning of
Constitution
– Where applications for removal of
causes into High Court under
Judiciary Act 1903
were refused – Where applicant sought to file documents in the form of
applications for leave to appeal and accompanying summons
Registrar directed to refuse to issue or file documents without leave of a
Justice first had and obtained – Whether
appellate jurisdiction of High
Court extends to hearing and determining appeal from order granting or refusing
removal of cause –
Whether order is under implied exception to appellate
Constitution
– Whether conditions for grant of leave to appeal
established.
Words and phrases – "abuse of process", "appellate jurisdiction",
"cause", "exception", "federal jurisdiction", "incidental
judicial power",
"leave to issue or file", "order granting or refusing removal of a cause",
"original jurisdiction", "preliminary
and discretionary nature", "proceedings
inter partes", "removal", "special leave", "substantial injustice",
Constitution
ss 51(xxxix)
Court Rules 2004
(Cth), rr 6.07.1, 6.07.2, 6.07.3, 26.07.1.
(1), (2)(b),
For much of the past 25 years, Ms Maureen Young has been engaged in disputes
with Roads and Maritime Services or its statutory
predecessors ("RMS")
concerning a mooring at Pearl Bay near Mosman in Sydney at which she has berthed
a houseboat in which she has
lived. From 2009 until 2018, she occupied the
mooring under a registered Lease from RMS. The Lease was entered into pursuant
Deed of Release under which she agreed to forgo claims to pre-existing
interests in the mooring.
proceedings commenced in the Local Court of New South Wales in 2013 which were
later transferred to the Supreme Court of New South
Wales, RMS claimed from Ms
Young unpaid rent under the Lease and Ms Young cross-claimed against RMS and the
State of New South Wales
for damages ("the 2013 proceedings"). In 2016, the
cross-claim was struck out. In 2017, RMS obtained default judgment. On 21 May
2018, the Court of Appeal refused Ms Young leave to appeal from the striking out
of the cross-claim and the dismissal of an application
to set aside the default
judgment in a
which special leave to appeal to the High Court was
termination of the Lease for unpaid rent in 2018, RMS commenced further
proceedings against Ms Young in the Supreme Court
claiming possession of the
mooring, further unpaid rent to the date of termination, and an occupation fee
in respect of her occupation
of the mooring from the date of termination until
the date of vacating possession ("the 2018 proceedings"). On 13 August
obtained summary judgment in a decision from which Ms Young was
refused leave to appeal by the Court of Appeal on 31 October
in 2019, Registrars of the Supreme Court had made orders having the effect of
precluding Ms Young from filing amended cross-claims
in the 2013 proceedings.
The Court of Appeal on 31 October 2019 also refused her leave to appeal from
those orders. The Court of
Appeal commented, however, that the 2013 proceedings
had arguably not been concluded so far as they related to Ms Young's
cross-claim
and that it remained open to her to apply for leave to file an
amended cross-claim in those
proceedings
to the Court of Appeal delivering its decision, Ms Young filed two applications
in the High Court seeking orders under
or (2)(b) of the
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth). By the first application, filed on 29 July
2019, she sought an order removing "the interlocutory causes" then said to be
in the Supreme Court in the 2018 proceedings. By the second application,
filed on 30 September 2019, she sought an order removing
into the High
Court "the whole of the causes" then pending in the Court of Appeal.
to r 26.07.1 of the
High Court Rules 2004
(Cth), Keane and Edelman JJ on
13 November 2019 directed the Registrar of the High Court to draw up, sign and
seal an order dismissing
each of those applications for removal. In respect of
each application, their Honours' published reasons stated that "[i]t is not
appropriate in this matter to fragment the ordinary judicial process by an order
for removal"
Young subsequently sought to file documents in the form of applications under
Judiciary Act
for leave to appeal from the orders
entered at the direction of Keane and Edelman JJ. In connection with one of
those applications,
she also sought to file an "urgent summons" by which she
sought interlocutory relief against RMS. Pursuant to r 6.07.2 of the
Court Rules
, Nettle J on 23 December 2019 directed the Registrar to
refuse to issue or file each of the three documents without the leave of
Justice first had and obtained by Ms Young.
applications pursuant to r 6.07.3 of the
High Court Rules
filed on 14 and
17 February 2020 respectively, Ms Young now seeks leave to file and issue the
two applications for leave to appeal
together with the accompanying summons in
relation to the second of them. Although the grounds on which she relies are not
decipher, the gravamen of her complaint appears to be that Keane and
Edelman JJ failed to appreciate that the causes she sought to
have removed
involve a matter "arising under [a] treaty" within the meaning of
Constitution
and a matter "arising directly under [a] treaty" within the
Judiciary Act
. Her contention is that the
matter is therefore within the original jurisdiction of the High Court under
Constitution
and excluded from the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court by
Judiciary Act
"treaty" under which the matter arises is said by Ms Young to be an "internal
treaty": the Commonwealth and State Housing Agreement
entered into by the
Commonwealth and each of the States on 19 November 1945, execution of which by
the Executive Government of the
Commonwealth was authorised by the
Commonwealth and State Housing Agreement Act 1945
(Cth), since repealed
Omnibus Repeal Day (Autumn 2014) Act 2014
(Cth). Her contention is
that, notwithstanding the Deed of Release and the Lease, she is the successor to
rights and interests in
the mooring which were "granted by the Executive
Government of the day in the 1940's" in fulfilment of the Commonwealth and State
Housing Agreement.
Grant or refusal of leave
direction of a Justice pursuant to r 6.07.2 of the
High Court Rules
available to be sought by the Registrar under r 6.07.1 of the
in respect of a document which "appears" to the Registrar "on its
face" to be "an abuse of the process of the Court, to be frivolous
or vexatious
or to fall outside the jurisdiction of the Court".
discretion to refuse leave on an application made under r 6.07.3 of the
High Court Rules
falls to be exercised by a Justice by reference to the
same criteria as those which inform the action of the Registrar under
The discretion will ordinarily be exercised to refuse leave to
issue or file a document where the document appears to the Justice
determining
the application "on its face" to be an abuse of the process of the Court, to be
frivolous or vexatious or to fall outside
the jurisdiction of the Court.
Edelman J has recently emphasised, it is implicit in the requirement that a
document the subject of an application under r 6.07.3
be considered "on its
face" that the application falls to be determined without an oral
Unlike an interlocutory application governed by
, in respect of which r 13.03.1 provides that the Court or a Justice
may direct that the application is to be determined without listing
hearing, no direction of a Justice is needed for an application under
r 6.07.3 to be determined without listing it for hearing.
concept of abuse of process cannot be confined within closed categories.
Sufficiently for present purposes, it encompasses an
attempt to invoke the
original or appellate jurisdiction of the High Court on a basis that is confused
or manifestly untenable. Needless
to say, exercise of the discretion to nip a
proceeding in the bud is appropriate only in the clearest of
Constitution
confers appellate jurisdiction on the High
Court to hear and determine appeals from all orders "of any Justice or Justices
the original jurisdiction of the High Court". That jurisdiction is
constitutionally conferred "with such exceptions and subject to
such regulations
as the Parliament prescribes".
scope of the appellate jurisdiction conferred by
Constitution
and not excluded by parliamentary prescription is amplified
by the prescription in
Judiciary Act
that, except as
provided by that Act, the High Court has "jurisdiction to hear and determine
appeals from all judgments whatsoever
of any Justice or Justices, exercising the
original jurisdiction of the High Court whether in Court or Chambers". Absent an
or implied contrary intention, the term "judgment" in the context of the
Judiciary Act
includes "any ...
only "exception" within the meaning of
for which the
makes express provision is more precisely a "regulation" within the
Constitution
It is that by force of
"[a]n appeal shall not be brought without the
leave of the High Court from an interlocutory judgment of a Justice or Justices
the original jurisdiction of the High Court whether in Court or
the amplitude of
Judiciary Act
, there are in my
opinion real questions as to whether the appellate jurisdiction of the High
Court extends to hearing and determining
an appeal from an order under
or (2)(b) of the
Judiciary Act
and (2)(b) of the
Judiciary Act
respectively authorise the High
Court to order that a cause "arising under the
Constitution
or involving its
interpretation" or "involving the exercise of federal jurisdiction" that is
pending in a State court be "removed
into the High Court". An order for removal
of such a cause, if made, simultaneously divests the State court of such federal
to hear and determine the cause as is invested in it under
Constitution
and enlivens such original jurisdiction with
respect to that cause as the High Court may have under
Constitution
or as may be conferred on it under
Constitution
Judiciary Act
(in the case of
an order under
as supplemented by
(in the case of an order under
Granting or refusing an application for an order for removal, other than on the
application of an Attorney-General, involves the
exercise of a broad judicial
discretion the object of the conferral of which is "to secure early resolution
of constitutional questions
and other issues of public
importance"
Making an order for removal enlivens an ability on the part of the High Court to
exercise the equally broad discretion, conferred
Judiciary Act
, at any stage to remit the whole or part of the cause to
the court from which it was removed. Refusing an order for removal creates
impediment to making a later application for removal of the same cause that is
not frivolous or vexatious.
is a real question as to whether an order granting or refusing removal of a
cause under
or (2)(b) of the
Judiciary Act
involves an exercise
of the original jurisdiction of the High Court so as to fall within the ambit of
Constitution
. Arguably, an order granting or refusing
removal of a cause is an exercise of an incidental judicial power conferred on
Court under
s 51(xxxix)
Constitution
exercise of
which is distinct from, and antecedent to, exercise of such original
Constitution
be enlivened by the making of an order for removal. There might be thought in
that respect to be an analogy between an order
granting or refusing removal of a
cause in the exercise of the power conferred by
or (2)(b) of the
Judiciary Act
and an order granting or refusing special leave to appeal
in the exercise of the power conferred by
as an incident of the power of the Parliament to regulate the appellate
Constitution
The grant or refusal of special leave to appeal is not itself an exercise of
Rather, grant "is an essential preliminary condition to the existence of the
appeal" and refusal "denies the existence of an
The result is that "[u]ntil the grant of special leave there are no proceedings
inter partes before the
an order granting or refusing removal of a cause under
or (2)(b) of
Judiciary Act
does involve an exercise of the original jurisdiction
of the High Court from which an appeal can lie under
Constitution
, there might be thought to be a further question as to
whether the preliminary and discretionary nature of such an order and the
Judiciary Act
imply an "exception" within the
Constitution
of a kind the potential existence
of which is acknowledged in
questions, which are of some complexity, do not lend themselves to determination
in the context of the present applications.
Neither of them could be determined
without full argument and without notice having been given to Attorneys-General
Judiciary Act
Bienstein v
the Full Court of the High Court assumed that an appeal would lie under
Constitution
from the refusal of an application for
removal under
Judiciary Act
. The Full Court did so in
the course of holding that the purported appeal in that case was incompetent in
the absence of an application
for, and grant of, leave to appeal under
Judiciary Act
. It is open to me to proceed in the
context of the present applications on the same
and appropriate that I do so.
on the assumption that the purported applications for leave to appeal are not on
their face outside the jurisdiction of
the Court, I therefore turn to consider
their merits.
Abuse of process
the Full Court pointed out in
Bienstein v
"The principles that govern the grant of leave to appeal are well established.
An applicant for leave must establish that the decision
in question is attended
with sufficient doubt to warrant the grant of leave. The applicant must also
show that substantial injustice
will result from a refusal of leave to
of those standard conditions for the grant of leave to appeal is capable of
being established here.
is no doubt whatsoever as to the soundness of the discretionary decisions of
Keane and Edelman JJ. Their Honours' reasons for
each of those orders reflected
the observation in
Bienstein v Bienstein
that "[o]rders for removal
interfere with the processes of the courts hearing the proceedings sought to be
removed" and that "[o]nly
where the issues are important and require this
court's urgent decision should the court make an order for
is no reason to consider that their Honours failed to appreciate the nature of
the jurisdictional argument which Ms Young sought
to propound. The Supreme Court
of New South Wales has jurisdiction to determine its own jurisdiction. Subject
to the grant of special
leave, an appeal lies to the High Court under
Constitution
from a judgment or order of the Supreme Court on the
ground that the judgment or order was rendered without
The mere circumstance that an applicant for removal raises a jurisdictional
issue therefore provides no basis for departure from
the general approach to
removal articulated in
Bienstein v Bienstein
and reflected in their
Honours' reasons.
is there any reason to consider that substantial injustice might result to Ms
Young from a failure to obtain leave to appeal
from the orders refusing removal.
relation to Ms Young's attempt to obtain leave to appeal from the order refusing
removal of "the whole of the causes" pending
in the Court of Appeal, it is
important to recognise that those causes were concluded by the decision of the
Court of Appeal on 31
October 2019. The causes are no longer pending. Indeed,
the causes were no longer pending at the time she sought leave to file the
application for leave to appeal on 14 February 2020. There is now and was then
nothing left to remove. Ms Young has instead the decision
of the Court of Appeal
from which she is entitled to apply for special leave to appeal albeit that she
might now be required to seek
and show justification for an extension of time to
in relation to Ms Young's attempt to obtain leave to appeal from the order
refusing removal of "the interlocutory causes"
then said to be pending in the
Supreme Court in the 2018 proceedings, the material filed in support of her
application for leave
to appeal on 17 February 2020 does not establish that any
such causes then remained undetermined.
I be taken to suggest otherwise, it is appropriate that I record my rejection of
Ms Young's contention that
Judiciary Act
presents or
presented an impediment to the exercise of jurisdiction by the Supreme Court.
There may be room for debate about the
nature and degree of the connection
required to justify characterisation of a justiciable controversy as a matter
"arising under"
and "arising directly under" a
There can be no doubt, however, that the term "treaty" in
Constitution
Judiciary Act
refers to an
international
– "a contract between two or more independent
The term has no application to an agreement made between the Executive
Government of the Commonwealth and the Executive Government
of one or more
Australian States.
Disposition
ex parte application for leave to issue or file will be refused.
Young v Roads and Maritime
[2018] NSWCA 106.
Young v Roads and Maritime
[2019] HCASL 17.
Young v Roads and Maritime
[2019] NSWCA 266.
Young v Roads and Maritime
[2019] NSWCA 266
, [20]-[21].
Young v Roads and Maritime
[2019] HCASL 363
Young v Roads and Maritime Services
Re Simmonds
[2020] HCATrans
034 at 3/53-72.
Smith Kline & French
Laboratories (Aust) Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1991] HCA 43
; (1991) 173 CLR 194 at
Ex parte Walsh and Johnson; In
[1925] HCA 53
; (1925) 37 CLR 36 at 72-73, 125, 129.
O'Toole v Charles David
[1991] HCA 14
; (1991) 171 CLR 232 at 248.
Attorney-General (Cth) v
Finch [No 2]
[1984] HCA 40
; (1984) 155 CLR 107 at 115.
Attorney-General (Cth) v
Finch [No 1]
[1984] HCA 1
; (1984) 155 CLR 102 at 105.
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v
Wright Prospecting
[2015] HCA 37
; (2015) 256 CLR 104 at 133
Roy Morgan Research
Centre Pty Ltd v Commissioner of State Revenue (Vict)
(2001) 207 CLR 72 at
78-81 [11]-[19].
(2003) 195 ALR 225.
Wilkie v The Commonwealth
(2017) 263 CLR 487 at 522 [57]-[58].
(2003) 195 ALR 225 at 231
(2003) 195 ALR 225 at 234
New South Wales v Kable
(2013) 252 CLR 118 at 133 [31], 140 [55].
Re East; Ex parte
[1998] HCA 73
; (1998) 196 CLR 354 at 361-362
R v Burgess; Ex parte
[1936] HCA 52
; (1936) 55 CLR 608 at 644.
Whitney v Robertson
[1888] USSC 25
; (1888) 124 US 190 at 194, quoted in Quick and Garran,
The Annotated
Constitution
of the Australian Commonwealth
(1901) at 769.
RTF format (315 KB)
Signed PDF/A format