John William Withers and Others v Ewamian People Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC and Another [2025] NNTTA 25 (1 September 2025)
NATIONAL NATIVE TITLE TRIBUNAL
John William Withers and Others v Ewamian People Aboriginal Corporation
RNTBC and Another
[2025] NNTTA 25
(1 September 2025)
Application No:
QF2024/0002; QF2024/0003
IN THE MATTER of an inquiry into a future act determination
application
John William Withers, Hamish William Bergerson and Jillian Vilma
(grantee parties)
Ewamian People Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC (QCD2013/007)
(Ewamian/native title party)
State of Queensland
DECISION ON WHETHER THE TRIBUNAL HAS POWER TO MAKE THE
DETERMINATION
Ms Lisa Eaton
Catchwords:
Native title – future acts – s 35 application for determination
– mining lease applications – power to make
determination –
whether grantee parties have negotiated in good faith – grantee parties
have not negotiated in good faith
– future act determination application
Legislation:
Resources Act 1989
(Qld) s 281 (
Title Act 1993
(Cth) ss 31, 148(a) (
Native Title
Barry Fisher & Ors on behalf of the Ewamian People #3 v State of
Queensland & Ors
Ewamian Determination
Brownley v Western Australia
[1999] FCA 1139
(1999) 95 FCR 152
Charles, on behalf of Mount Jowlaenga Polygon # 2 v Sheffield Resources
(2017) 257 FCR 29
FMG Pilbara Pty Ltd v Cox and Others
[2009] FCAFC 49
(2009) 175 FCR 141
Gomeroi People v Santos NSW Pty Ltd and Santos NSW (Narrabri Gas) Pty
John William Withers and Others v Ewamian People Aboriginal Corporation
RNTBC and Another
2023 decision
Kevin Alfred De Roma v Western Yalanji Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC and
Placer (Granny Smith) Pty Ltd & Ors v Western Australia & Ors
; (1999) 163 FLR 87 (
Placer (Granny Smith)
Rusa Resources (Australia) Pty Ltd v Sharon Crowe and Others on behalf
Rusa Resources
Walley v Western Australia
Western Australia v Dimer
(2000) 163 FLR 426
Western Australia v Njamal People
[1996] NNTTA 34
(1996) 134 FLR 211
Western Australia v Thomas
[1996] NNTTA
(1996) 133 FLR 124
Western Yalanji Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Edmund James Fitzgerald
and Another
Xstrata Coal Queensland Pty Ltd /Mark Albury (Karingbal #2);Brendan
Wyman (Bidjara People)/Queensland
Representatives of the native title party:
Verity Long-Droppert, Counsel
Julia Taylor, North Queensland Land Council
Representative of the grantee parties:
John William Withers
Representatives of the Government party:
Emma Brunello, Corey Johnston and Leilehua Fa’onevai, Crown Law
REASONS FOR DECISION
is a decision about whether Mr John William Withers, Mr Hamish William Bergerson
and Ms Jillian Vilma Withers (collectively
grantee parties
negotiated in good faith in accordance with s 31(1)(b) of the
[2] The grantee
parties have applied for the grant of two alluvial mining
north-westerly of Mt Surprise township in North Queensland.
People Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC holds native title in relation to the area
of the leases as agent for the Ewamian
[3] This matter
has a long history. In 2017, the
of Queensland notified the
proposed grant of the leases under the right to negotiate provisions of the
Native Title Act
. The effect of this notice
is that the negotiation parties, being the grantee parties, Ewamian and the
State, were then obligated
to negotiate in good faith with a view to obtaining
Ewamian’s agreement to the grant of the leases.
[4] From 2017
the parties did engage in some negotiations, however these attempts were
unsuccessful. In March 2023, the grantee parties
lodged a future act
determination application with the Tribunal seeking a determination that grant
of the leases may be done.
[5] In October
2023, the Tribunal found the grantee parties had not negotiated in good faith
and dismissed the future act determination
application under s 148(a) of the
Native Title Act
Tribunal also recommended the parties seek mediation by the Tribunal.
[6] Following
this decision, in late October 2023, the State contacted Ewamian’s
representative,
ouncil NTRB Aboriginal Corporation, and asked whether
Ewamian were willing to continue to negotiate with the grantee parties with
mediation assistance from the Tribunal. NQLC confirmed that mediation would only
be considered if Mr Withers offered an apology,
acknowledged the Ewamian People,
and made a genuine financial counteroffer. The State relayed this position to
the grantee parties.
representative for the grantee parties, Mr Withers, provided a lengthy response.
It is not clear from such response if the
grantee parties themselves agreed to
participate in mediation, however there was some attempt made by Mr Withers to
address the preliminary
matters raised by Ewamian.
event, the parties did not engage in any mediation and remained unable to reach
an agreement in relation to the grant of
the leases.
November 2024, Mr Withers once again applied to the Tribunal for a determination
that the leases may be granted. This second
application
was accepted by
the Tribunal on 2 December 2024.
[10] For the
reasons outlined below, I am satisfied that the grantee parties have not
negotiated in good faith as required by s 31
Native Title Act
Accordingly, I must not proceed to make a determination on the application, and
the application is dismissed under
MATERIAL AND EVIDENCE ADDRESSING GOOD FAITH
[11] Ewamian
lodged the following material in respect of this inquiry:
(a) statement of contentions;
(b) chronology;
(c) index of documentary
(d) Affidavit of John Cecchi with
(e) list of authorities;
(f) reply to good faith submissions of grantee
[12] The grantee
parties lodged the following material in respect of this inquiry:
(a) response to native title party’s
chronology;
(b) response to native title party’s index and
(c) response to native title party’s
contentions;
(d) list of authorities;
(e) extract of section 240 of the
Native Title
(f) extract of
section 281
Mineral Resources Act 1989
(g) document titled ‘QLD Native Title Work Procedures – Module J:
Dealings on continuing pre-Wik reservations and
(h) extracts from the
2023 decision
(i) spreadsheet of ML100019 and ML100104 site data
(j) letter from native title party to grantee parties, marked confidential and
without prejudice, dated 22 March
(k) further contentions;
(l) further response to native title party’s
[13] Unhelpfully,
the material lodged by the grantee parties in this inquiry is difficult to
follow and consists in large part of
extracts of other documents and various
pieces of correspondence interspersed with Mr Withers’ commentary or
response. Despite
directions, there is also no paragraph numbering. As NQLC
fairly contends, the material contains ‘interlineations and
commentary’
making it difficult to ascertain what the original
communication said.
[14] The State
did not lodge any material in respect of this inquiry and appeared to not play
an active role in the negotiation process
other than through the initial inquiry
regarding mediation.
proposed leases cover an area of approximately 77 hectares. The grantee parties
intend to conduct alluvial gold mining in
[16] ML 100019
is 26.83 hectares in size and is located, mostly, in Parallel Creek. This lease
is proposed to be granted for an initial
term of 23 years. The other lease, ML
100104, is located approximately 5 kilometres away and comprises 49.99 hectares
along Dickson
Creek. ML 100104 is proposed to be granted for an initial term of
set out in the
2023 decision
, the State’s Cultural Heritage
ML 100019 and
two engraving sites and one artefact scatter in the area of
[18] The grantee
parties referred to these recorded sites in their material lodged in this
inquiry, noting that the relevant surveys
were carried out on 1 June 2019 and
the sites recorded on 31 July
CONSIDERATION
What is the good faith obligation?
obligation to negotiate in good faith in the context of s 31 of the
has been considered on many occasions, including recently by the
of the Federal Court of Australia in
not displace the existing legal principles surrounding the obligation.
Full Court noted the obligation to negotiate in good faith involves both
objective and subjective standards, with the good
faith requirement directed
towards the quality of a party’s conduct. They reiterated good faith is to
be assessed by reference
to what a party has, or has not, done during
negotiations, and is concerned with a party’s state of mind, or intention,
importantly,
as manifested by its
[21] Justice
O’Bryan noted the objective standards do not import an obligation to make
‘reasonable offers’, instead
that the party is acting honestly in
their negotiations.
noted by Justice Carr in
, and affirmed by Chief Justice Mortimer
The Tribunal is after all doing no more at the good faith
constraint stage than assessing the course of a negotiation, and measuring
objectively against a standard of honesty, open mindedness and willingness to
listen. The fact of the making of a patently unreasonable
offer in particular
circumstances might be one indicia of a lack of honesty and fair dealing. It
might indicate an ulterior motive.
Or it may not. All will depend on the
evidence and the circumstances.
[23] Indeed, any
negotiating conduct may be found to be so unreasonable that the party
engaging in such conduct could not be said
to be sincere or genuine in their
desire to reach agreement.
[24] As Justice
Lee outlined in
, if a negotiation
purports to
engage in negotiation, but, in truth, its conduct serves an ulterior and
undisclosed purpose antithetical to the making
of an agreement with a native
title claimant, it will not be negotiating in good faith. Delay, obfuscation,
intransigence, and pettifoggery
the Chief Justice also analysed whether ‘payment’ is
synonymous with ‘compensation’ under the
Native Title Act
ability of native title holders, or registered claimants, to pursue payments as
part of their statutory right to negotiate serves
a different and wider purpose
from the ability to seek compensation for the doing of certain acts under
Division 2 of Part 5 of the
NTA, although the two purposes are not
mutually exclusive and there may be some overlap.
[26] Justice
O’Bryan also addresses this issue in
, noting it is not
inaccurate or inappropriate to use the word ‘compensation’ to
describe payments that may be negotiated
between parties under s 31, and further
there is no reason negotiating parties cannot agree that compensation payable
for the anticipated
effect of a proposed act is to be calculated on the
basis of a ‘royalty’, as recognised by s 33(1) of the
negotiation process set out in the right to negotiate provisions of the
Native Title Act
is a key part of the future act regime and should be an
effective and meaningful right. The right to negotiate should be construed
beneficially when balancing the rights of the native title party and the broader
[28] In the
often-quoted matter of
a set of indicia were proposed to assist in
assessing whether a party has acted in good
Whilst providing helpful
guidance, the
indicia are not exhaustive. I note Ewamian
referred to the
indicia in its contentions, as set out below at
[29] In the
, the Tribunal helpfully
categorised the
indicia into a series of related, though not
necessarily co-extensive,
obligations:
(a) an obligation to communicate with other parties within a reasonable time and
a reciprocal obligation to respond to communication
received within a reasonable
(i), (iii), (iv), (v), (vii), (ix));
(b) an obligation to make proposals to other parties with a view to achieving
agreement and a reciprocal obligation on other parties
to respond either by
making counter-proposals or by way of comment or suggestion about the original
(ii), (xv));
(c) an expectation that a party will make inquiry of other parties if there is
insufficient information available to make an informed
choice about how to
proceed in negotiations and an obligation on those other parties to provide
relevant information within a reasonable
(d) an obligation to seek from other parties appropriate commitments to the
process of negotiation or in relation to the subject
matter of negotiation and a
reciprocal obligation to make either appropriate commitments to process, or
appropriate concessions as
the case may be, (
(vi), (x), (xi),
(xii), (xiii), (xiv), (xvii)).
assessing good faith, the overall conduct of a party must be considered in
context of the matter and its particular facts.
Importantly, the conduct of one
party is normally influenced by the conduct and actions of the other parties,
and the conduct must
be viewed in this
[31] Importantly,
the obligation of good faith is intended to protect the native title party
particularly, as explained by Justices
North and Griffiths in the Full Court
although the obligation to negotiate in good faith is imposed on
all the negotiation parties, it is explicitly stated to be directed
to obtaining
the agreement of each of
the native title parties
to the specified
matters. It is evident that the object of the obligation is directed to
protecting the native title parties. This
is further reflected in the fact that
the s 36(2) prohibition on the arbitral body making a s 35 determination
operates by reference
negotiation party (i.e. Government party,
grantee party or native title party) satisfying the arbitral body that any other
negotiation
other than a native title party
, did not negotiate in
good faith as mentioned in s 31(1)(b). Thus, while a native title party has an
obligation to negotiate in good
faith pursuant to s 31(1)(b), this is a matter
of imperfect obligation and appears not to carry any relevant consequences under
if the native title party fails to discharge that obligation.
This stands in sharp contrast to the statutory consequences for the
categories of negotiation party.
Good faith contentions
[32] Ewamian
contends that the grantee parties have not negotiated in good faith as required
by s 31(1)(b). They say the grantee parties
have engaged in conduct throughout
the course of negotiations which is antagonistic and unreasonable and not
directed to reaching
agreement. By reference to the indicia set out by the
Tribunal in
, and adopting the
indicia numbering, Ewamian contends the grantee
(a) conducted themselves to adopt a rigid non-negotiable position
(b) failed to do what is reasonable in the circumstances (
(c) failed to take reasonable steps to facilitate and engage in discussion
between the parties (
(d) by refusing to acknowledge Ewamian’s native title rights in any real
sense harmed the negotiating process (
[33] Ewamian
also refers to the Tribunal’s decisions in
2023 decision
, all finding that the grantee
parties, by the negotiation conduct of Mr Withers, did not negotiate in good
faith, and contends that
despite these findings the grantee parties have
continued a similar pattern of behaviour in their approach to negotiations with
native title party. Ewamian contends the grantee parties did not put forward
any meaningful offers to resolve the critical issues
of compensation and
cultural heritage protection and continued to advance incorrect assertions about
the nature and extent of the
native title rights held which had characterised
the earlier communications.
[34] The grantee
parties say any reference to the
2023 decision
is unhelpful as those decisions have no bearing on the
current negotiations. However, the grantee parties then go on to address those
earlier decisions and quote from them extensively in their material. In their
responsive contentions, the grantee parties appear
to suggest that they had in
fact engaged in negotiations in good faith by indicating they would agree to the
$550.00 amount contained
greement, appearing to suggest
that this offer was made by them based on comments by Member Cooley in the
2023 decision
that such a figure was
reasonable.
[35] That is not
in fact what Member Cooley was suggesting in her
2023 decision
appears the grantee parties have misunderstood her reasons.
[36] The grantee
parties also say they agreed to the ancillary agreement on 6 November 2023, and
the native title party is simply
misleading the Tribunal and delaying the
In reply, Ewamian
denies this contention and says it was genuinely uncertain as to what the
grantee parties were proposing, and in
any event it was not required to agree to
the terms of an ancillary agreement from 2017, or the SSM ILUA, nor an agreement
unrelated parties.
[37] The State
has not lodged any contentions or expressed any view addressing good faith in
this inquiry.
What happened during the negotiations?
set out by Justice White in the matter of
, and confirmed by the
Tribunal in subsequent matters,
s 31 does not specify any period during which the obligation to negotiate in
good faith remains current. The obligation commences
upon the issuing of a s 29
notice by the relevant Government party and continues until the making of an
agreement as contemplated
[39] There is
already a Tribunal decision examining what occurred prior to the
. In this inquiry I am concerned with the course of negotiations
that occurred following that earlier decision, although my consideration
informed by the earlier
negotiations.
[40] As set out
above at [6], it was the State who first attempted to recommence negotiations
following the
2023 decision
. On 23 October 2023, the State contacted NQLC
and asked if Ewamian were willing to continue the negotiations with the grantee
with mediation assistance.
25 October 2023, NQLC confirmed that mediation will not be considered by Ewamian
unless the grantee parties offered an apology,
acknowledged the Ewamian People,
and made a genuine financial
counteroffer.
November 2023, Mr Withers, for the grantee parties, sent a lengthy, confusing,
and often inflammatory response to the State
and NQLC. To highlight the tone of
Mr Withers’ response, I note the following extract (his
I apologise for this RTN issue to be going on so long,
but if the Native Title Party had have mentioned in the first place that the
Bench Mark ILUA offered as well as the Draft Ancillary Agreements sent out by
the NTP in early December 2017 were meant to be set
rigid, static
stance and being Not Negotiable
, then all no doubt could have been
solved at a FAD prior to the NTP going out of their way in 2019 to make sure
that there were some
CH Points "MISLEADINGLY" put on the DATSIP Database within
the areas of the 2 (ML's).
cultural heritage points Mr Withers refers to in the extract above are the
engraving site in the area of ML 100019, and two
engraving sites and one
artefact scatter in the area of ML 100104, each of which were recorded in the
State’s Cultural Heritage
something misleading or improper in the native title party recording its
heritage places on the register maintained for such purpose is
confusing and no doubt offensive to the Ewamian People. Mr Withers
suggest, later in that same response, that the native title party should have
waited for an agreement to be reached prior
to doing any cultural heritage
inspections. Given the history of dealings between these parties, Ewamian may
not have regarded there
was reasonable prospects of reaching agreement with the
grantee parties. Whatever the reasoning, Ewamian acted reasonably to record
seek to protect and preserve their cultural heritage and to suggest the
recording of sites was ‘misleading’, as Mr
Withers does, carries
with it an entirely different set of allegations.
Withers’ response also contains other statements of an inflammatory or a
pettifoggery nature, for example (his emphasis):
I apologise for the
Tribunals Member mention of the GP not agreeing to Commercial Accommodation at
cost, no doubt the NTP complained
to the Tribunal about this matter. I thought,
and noted to all whilst at the FAD, that the Caravan Park at the O'Breins Creek
is the closest Accommodation area to the 2 ML's, and being a very
comfortable area to camp at, and to have hot or cold showers, and
toilets, small
shop etc. as being classed as a Commercial Accommodation area, and to be noted
for costs in the ACH Inspection at
Schedule 3 in the proposed AA's. I
that the reason why the NTP have not in the distant past, and
are not currently exercising their NT Rights and Interests in the Van
Pastoral holding area is because if the O'Breins Caravan Park is not good enough
accommodation then
that is the reason that they are not
exercising their Rights etc in or around the ML's is because they are more
happier to be closer
to a Township where there is far better accommodation,
better food, water and maybe
other reasons
they could give for not
exercising their Rights and Interests in the ML areas, or anywhere nearby.
[45] Mr Withers
completes his response with what he says is ‘a genuine counteroffer, and
such offer is my final genuine offer
if I have to again apply for a FAD’.
He goes on to detail what the ‘final offer’ is, largely by reference
agreements, including the ancillary agreement exchanged between the
parties in 2017. This financial offer was unclearly presented.
On plain reading,
it is unclear exactly what financial offer was being made by the grantee
parties, or the basis for such offer.
To add to the confusion, with attachments
this response was 120 pages in length.
[46] Importantly,
this offer was the first offer made following the
2023 decision
was presented by Mr Withers as a final offer. Although there was a history of
offers exchanged between the parties prior to
2023 decision
the first correspondence / ‘offer’ from the grantee parties made
during the relevant negotiation period I am
required to primarily consider for
the purposes of this inquiry. Presenting the offer as final demonstrates the
grantee parties adopted
a rigid non-negotiable position not indicative of good
[47] Mr Withers
also notes he is not open to providing further information in relation to his
‘final offer’,
commenting:
noted above is my final genuine counteroffers for the financial issues that is
noted by the NTP tor the present Contentions,
and I do not wish to give any
further details regarding the AA's other than the above mentioned, which is self
explanatory so that
I should never be misquoted AGAIN if we were AGAIN to be at
and to save time on agreeing to go, or not to go to
Mediation etc, and drawing out the Negotiations any longer than 3 months aft the
FAD decision was handed down on the 6/10/2023
conduct does not demonstrate good faith or an intention to meaningfully
negotiate with the native title party with a view
to obtaining the agreement of
the Ewamian people.
Withers’ conduct at the outset of this recommenced negotiation process,
including to make one ‘new’ offer
and note it as final; to suggest
that Ewamian had misleadingly or nefariously sought to have their cultural
heritage sites recorded;
and that they did not exercise their native title
rights and interests in the lease areas or anywhere nearby, did not demonstrate
an intention to reach agreement in good faith.
Full Court noted in
that for negotiations to be in good faith it is
not sufficient that the parties merely ‘go through the motions’ with
minds or rigid or predetermined positions, and engagement in disingenuous
conduct such as obfuscation and pettifoggery may lead to
a finding of absence of
good faith.
[51] In this
initial response, Mr Withers’ conduct on behalf of the grantee parties
demonstrated a rigid position. Further,
the ‘final’ offer was
presented in a confusing and obscure way and contained remarks of a pettifoggery
and inflammatory
including inflammatory comments and unconstructive remarks in their initial
response of 6 November 2023, the grantee parties
failed to demonstrate good
faith or a genuine intention to obtain Ewamian’s agreement to the grant of
the leases.
[53] Having
examined all the material exchange between the parties, I find this initial
response from Mr Withers set the tone of the
negotiations occurring thereafter.
When undertaking my assessment of good faith, this context is relevant when
considering the resulting
responses and approaches of the other
[54] Before the
State or Ewamian responded to the ‘final offer’, on 11 December
2023, Mr Withers sent further correspondence
on behalf of the grantee
parties. Again, this response was curious and at times confusing. The
correspondence opened (his emphasis):
First to this same email, I
attach a Fact Sheet that notes why the AG has noted that they wish to cut
finding [sic] for Negotiations
etc. and I agree, because of the numerous amount
of template
that have been developed and the numerous amount of
made in the past by no doubt taking into consideration of the
Legislation
that is in regards to Agreement making, then all should be
able to come to an Agreement easily.
correspondence then explained that the grantee parties intend to transfer the
leases to a Mr Tony Graham. Relevantly, Mr
Withers states (his
I ask the NTP to
ASAP agree to the
consented to AA's with the
up to date CPI increases
that they sent out me
in the past, and those were noted in the Email as attachments to all on the
PDF's 24. and 24. A
There is no doubt in my mind that the Tribunal Members are suggesting that
the Bench Mark ILUA offered by the NTP is the definite
way forward, and a copy
of what the ILUA contents offered just for Mining Leases only was copied to the
NTP and the State on the
was noted above being,
[56] Confusingly,
the correspondence Mr Withers referred to of 6 November 2023 attached an
unsigned and undated ancillary agreement
between the
orporation and the grantee parties, whereas the 11 December 2023
correspondence attached an unsigned and watermarked as draft ancillary
orporation and
Rai Pickering. Putting aside the confusion created by attaching or referring to
draft agreements with parties other
than the relevant negotiation parties, I
note the two draft ancillary agreements are different. For example, they note
annual payments and Aboriginal cultural heritage inspection costs. It
is not clear on plain reading which agreement Mr Withers says
Mr Graham, or
indeed the grantee parties, will agree to or are offering.
[57] It is also
concerning that Mr Withers states that Tribunal Members are suggesting that the
‘Bench Mark ILUA’ is the
‘definite way forward’. It is
not appropriate for the Tribunal to suggest what future act compensation package
the parties
ought to agree. That is not the role of the Tribunal in considering
and determining a future act application. Mr Withers quotes from
2023 decision
to support his statement, however
the excerpts he quotes from instead demonstrate the relevant Member considering
and referring to
contentions made by the parties on the issue of compensation,
with some commentary regarding the reasonableness of offers in the
considering good faith.
[58] There is a
difference between Tribunal Members forming a view as to the reasonableness of
an offer as an indicia of good faith,
and finding or suggesting that a
particular offer should be accepted by the parties.
[59] In response
to this further correspondence from Mr Withers, on the same day, NQLC for
Ewamian responded indicating they would
be unable to obtain instructions from
the native title party until the new year.
14 February 2024, Mr Withers again contacted NQLC for Ewamian and requested a
response, also noting:
[w]e the GP's definitely do not want to go
to Arbitration, and would certainly agree to mediation, but would prefer of the
NTP honoring
[sic] and agreeing to their own standing offers made to the GP's
that is noted with
CPI increases each year
since the offer.
[61] NQLC for
Ewamian responded, again on the same day, noting they were meeting with Ewamian
that week to discuss the matter.
16 April 2024, NQLC responded in detail and relayed that Ewamian still required
a genuine apology as the 6 November 2023 correspondence
was not sufficient, and
they also required a genuine current commercial offer. NQLC noted that any
commercial offer for the current
negotiations should not be informed by the SSM
ILUA or the ancillary agreement from 2017 as ‘[t]hese agreements are not
for current negotiations.’
evident NQLC were requesting a clear and direct offer, not one made by
references to other agreements.
[64] On 30 April
2024, Mr Withers replied for the grantee parties. In that response
Mr Withers raised that when negotiations between
the parties were occurring
in 2022, NQLC directed Mr Withers to provide his comments via marking-up a
version of the ancillary agreement
from 2017. Mr Withers also expressed his
frustration that Ewamian refused to participate in mediation save for under
certain circumstances,
and again invited the native title party to (his
emphasis) ‘honour one of their offers
, being the ILUA
contents, or Agreements noted in past attachments to an email being
or offer the Agreement that was consented to for ML
[65] The nature
of the outstanding issues between the parties in relation to this application
did warrant exploration via mediation.
The preliminary issue raised by Ewamian
regarding an apology is a sensitive and subjective matter best discussed in
person. There
was also clearly confusion on the part of the grantee
parties’ representative regarding the way he should present any financial
offers, a matter that could have been discussed via a facilitated, confidential
exploration of the issues at mediation. I directly
expressed this view to the
parties at a preliminary conference regarding this matter, and strongly urged
all parties to consider
attempting mediation, even if such mediation occurred in
parallel to the inquiry process. Unfortunately, this suggestion was not
[66] However, as
noted earlier in this decision, the initial inflammatory and pettifoggery
response of Mr Withers following the
2023 decision
set the tone of the
ongoing negotiations between the parties and provides some context for the
native title party’s ongoing
refusal to participate in mediation. Further,
2023 decision
, the pre-requirement that Mr Withers apologise
and provide a clear commercial offer, was not an unreasonable request from
in the circumstances.
[67] On 6 May
2024, NQLC responded for Ewamian. NQLC stated the correspondence of 30 April
2024 does not offer an apology or a genuine
commercial offer, rather it appeared
to be in the form of a submission and, in their view, does not constitute a
response demonstrating
reasonable steps toward reaching an agreement under the
right to negotiate process. They also reiterated the request that Mr
(a) stop referencing or bench marking the SSM ILUA,
referring to earlier Tribunal decisions finding ‘Mr Withers has sought to
use the SSM ILUA as a mechanism to generate distraction and in effect, stymie
negotiations and prevent agreement making’; and
(b) not refer to negotiations between WYAC and Rai Pickering in relation to
ML 100207, as they have nothing to do with Ewamian, noting
‘[p]revious or ongoing negotiation between other parties have no bearing
or relevance to current negotiations.’.
[68] NQLC also
reminded Mr Withers that negotiations are confidential between the parties and
requested Mr Withers stop including
the Department of Resources in
correspondence surrounding the negotiation of an ancillary agreement, noting
they are not proposed
to be a party to any such agreement and should not be
included in genuine financial offers.
[69] Despite
this request, I note Mr Withers continued to generally include the Department of
Resources in the correspondence exchanged
between the parties throughout the
negotiation period, a matter repeatedly raised by NQLC.
[70] On 10 May
2024, Mr Withers replied for the grantee parties, including the Department of
Resources. Mr Withers started by addressing
the request for an apology, stating
he made an apology on 6 November 2023 and Ewamian have not otherwise detailed
why I should make any further apologies for.’
[71] In the 6
November 2023 correspondence Mr Withers did broadly apologise for some matters.
Mr Withers apologised for the right
to negotiate issue ‘going on for so
long’; for not attaching the compensation agreements that the grantee
parties have
with the pastoral holder for the lease areas; for not attaching the
debt collectors’ documents; and for the Tribunal’s
mention of the
grantee parties not agreeing to commercial accommodation at cost.
the context of the articulated issues between the grantee parties and Ewamian,
and the offensive remarks made by Mr Withers
and noted in the
, none of the qualified apologies given appear to address the
concerns of the native title party. Further, NQLC made it clear in their
responses of 16 April and 6 May 2024 that the
Ewamian People still required a genuine apology and did not accept that the
apologies offered were sufficient. Mr Withers did not
attempt to address this or
seek further clarification.
[73] I also note
Mr Withers did not lodge in this inquiry the compensation agreements that the
grantee parties have with the pastoral
holder for the lease areas, or the debt
collectors’ documents, both referred to in his initial apology. Nor is
there any evidence
before me that such documents were provided to Ewamian
following the apology. In this context, the purpose of these apologies remains
[74] In the 10
May 2024 correspondence, Mr Withers also repeats the offers he says he put in
the 6 November 2023 correspondence and
explains, largely by reference to earlier
Tribunal decisions, why he feels this is an appropriate position. He states (his
‘I ask the NTP:
"Why should the GP's make any further
commercial offers when they are already agreeing to the standing instructions on
by the NTP?"
Again, Mr Withers’ response
demonstrates a rigid, non-negotiable position not conducive to reaching
agreement, as NQLC for Ewamian
had clearly stated several times that was not
their instructions, and had invited Mr Withers to make a direct and clear offer
reference to other agreements.
[75] In response
to NQLC’s comment that negotiations should remain confidential between the
parties to such negotiation, Mr
Withers replied that he was not referring to the
negotiations between WYAC and Rai Pickering, but the executed agreements made. I
note that Mr Withers did not provide a copy of any such executed agreement, and
the draft agreement he did provide contained the
usual confidentiality terms
suggesting it should not have been obtained or shared by Mr Withers for the
purposes of the negotiations.
In any event, his explanation misses the point
made by the native title party entirely.
[76] The point
repeatedly made by NQLC was what may have been agreed between other parties in
relation to other tenements, or indeed
the parties to this negotiation in
relation to other tenements, or historically, is not relevant, helpful or
binding to the negotiations
occurring between the parties now.
[77] Following
2023 decision
, Mr Withers only made disjointed and confusing
‘offers’ by reference to other agreements, despite Ewamian
making it clear this was confusing and not acceptable. Based on the
material before me, the ‘offer’ consistently presented
by Mr Withers
was not in a form capable of acceptance by the native title party. At best, this
rigid approach appears to be unhelpful
and not conducive to obtaining the
agreement of the native title party, and at worst, as suggested by Member Kelly
mechanism to generate distraction and stymie the negotiations. Either way, it
does not demonstrate good faith.
[78] On 21 May
2024, NQLC again responded for Ewamian. NQLC clarified to Mr Withers that the
apology requested was for ‘the
offensive and disrespectful correspondence
from yourself in the past, as acknowledged by the NNTT’, referring to
excerpts of
2023 decision
including ‘Mr Withers’
correspondence descended from civility to hostility and was often rude or
belligerent. Much of
it was outright offensive and disrespectful of the Ewamian
People and their native title
repeated the request for a current, relevant offer not made by reference to
historical agreements, and that the grantee
parties stop including the
Department of Resources in the confidential negotiations for an ancillary
agreement which the Department
will not be a party to.
[79] On 31 May
2024, Mr Withers replied for the grantee parties. Mr Withers’ response
again focused on why he says the agreements
referred to in the 6 November 2023
correspondence were, and remain, an appropriate position of the grantee parties.
In relation to
the apology, Mr Withers thanks NQLC for their clarifications and
says that he can now remember that the native title party and ‘Member
Cooley’ were ‘upset’:
when I was trying to use
past Judgements (Case/Law) and Legislation for trying to reduce the costs for
Compensation and for the ACHI
cost for that Survey. It seems that I certainly
did not know and understand the Judgements meanings or Legislation Regarding
of the NTA, S281 of the MRA or S104 of the ACHA.
I unconditionally apologise for using those issues that then became offensive
and disrespectful to the NTP. I know now that I should
have agreed to your
offered agreement noted as at References
24. and 24.A
noted with CPI to be added to bring the costs up to date, or as noted using past
template ILUA's that was noted in the Fact
Sheet that was attached to my email
sent to the NTP on the 11/12/2023.
[80] Unfortunately,
despite clear and direct responses from NQLC for Ewamian, Mr Withers continued
to reference previous agreements
and continued to apologise for matters
unrelated to the offence caused to the native title party. It is not clear if Mr
Withers simply
failed to understand the nature of the apology sought by Ewamian,
or the apologies he did offer were provided in a tactical way to
appearance of attempting to address their concerns. If the grantee parties were
not prepared to give the apology sought,
it may have assisted all parties if Mr
Withers simply said so.
[81] On 12 July
2024, Mr Withers sent further correspondence to Ewamian and the Department of
Resources. He requested
these NTP offered Commercial Agreements for these 2 Mining Leases that we have
agreed to more than 7 months ago, as noted
in our letter 31/5/2024, so that we
can get them signed and executed ASAP. I ask the State to also ASAP send out the
S31 Deed for
signing as well, as I am sure that they will agree that we, since
the Determination that was made by the NNTT in October 2023 is
that we have in
good faith agreed to
that the NTP has asked for since the FAD
was made about 9 months ago.
[82] In the
context of the well documented engagement between the parties since October
2023, there was no basis for Mr Withers to
assert Ewamian offered an agreement
that the grantee parties agreed to. To continue to make this assertion, when it
had been corrected
many times, was misleading and harmful to the negotiations.
The continued rigid approach of the grantee parties, in the face of numerous
clarifications from NQLC, does not demonstrate negotiating in good faith with a
view to obtaining the agreement of Ewamian.
[83] On 15 July
2024, NQLC wrote to the Department of Resources, who had been included in the
correspondence by Mr Withers, to confirm
that there was no agreement in place
between the parties. On the same day they also wrote to Mr Withers and repeated
that the SSM
ILUA is historical and no longer considered by Ewamian for new
tenement applications. Further, NQLC once again requested an apology
genuine commercial offer.
21 July 2024, Mr Withers responded for the grantee parties. Unhelpfully, Mr
Withers repeats a confusing reference to a fact
sheet regarding native title
respondent funding, followed by a reference to two mediations Mr Withers says
occurred in the past between
small scale miners and the native title party
involving two different areas, and convened by former Tribunal Member Valerie
He goes on to state (his emphasis):
[i]t seems to us now,
is that the NTP and their legal representatives are aware of these past
mediation outcomes, and
maybe? (Only Guessing?.)
is that this is the
reason that Mediation is not being considered by the NTP?
unfortunate that this far into the negotiation process Mr Withers continued to
ignore the numerous requests made by NQLC
that he not refer to confidential
negotiations involving other parties. In fact, in this reply he not only ignores
the request but
refers to additional confidential matters. It is also
unfortunate he suggests there is some alternative reason Ewamian required an
apology and clear financial offer before they would participate in mediation.
Once again, such conduct does not demonstrate that
the grantee parties were
genuinely negotiating in good faith with a view to obtaining the agreement of
[86] On 22 July
2024, NQLC replied confirming that Mr Withers’ response ‘still does
not constitute a commercial offer,
or an apology’ and again reminded Mr
Withers that negotiations are confidential.
[87] The tone
and substance of these repetitive exchanges did not materially change over the
course of July and August 2024.
October 2024, NQLC wrote to Mr Withers and attached a draft ancillary agreement
in relation to the leases, provided on a
confidential and without prejudice
basis. They noted the agreement set out a current commercial offer and repeated
that any previous
agreements are no longer suitable for the negotiations.
[89] This was
positive progress. It appears Ewamian had formed the view that Mr Withers was
unable or unwilling to make a clear commercial
offer, so the native title party
took it upon themselves to do so in an attempt to create some momentum in the
negotiations.
October 2024, Mr Withers replied stating that the grantee parties did not agree
to the draft agreement provided and felt
as though they were being
into paying costs for compensation’, noting that
they are not the Government ‘making Acquisition’ and are not
to extinguish native title. This response demonstrates Mr
Withers still failed to understand the right to negotiate process established
Native Title Act
. Mr Withers goes on to repeat that the grantee
parties remain of the view that the way forward is entry into the historical
referred to in their earlier correspondences.
October 2024, NQLC responded repeating their previous statements regarding the
irrelevance of historical and unrelated
agreements and noting that the grantee
parties had indicated they would not be engaging with the draft ancillary
agreement provided
whatsoever, and would not be making a counteroffer, thereby
demonstrating they were not negotiating in good faith.
November 2024, Mr Withers replied again. The reply was lengthy, confusing and
repetitive, and in essence, it relayed the
position of the grantee parties
remained unchanged and their view remained that the historical agreements
referred to by Mr Withers
in November 2023 should be agreed by the native
title party.
[93] The grantee
parties and Ewamian exchanged several correspondences over the course of
November 2024, all along the same line,
with NQLC requesting that the grantee
parties respond to the current draft agreement presented for the native title
party, and Mr
Withers responding to insist that Ewamian agree to the historical
agreements.
November 2024, the grantee parties made the application now the subject of this
Did the grantee parties negotiate in good faith?
[95] Having
regard to the negotiations between the parties throughout the relevant period,
Mr Withers’ conduct does not demonstrate
that the grantee parties were
negotiating in good faith with a view to obtaining the agreement of
Withers failed to make a reasonable attempt to address the concerns raised by
Ewamian in their request for an apology, with
such request made at the outset of
the recommenced negotiations immediately following the
2023 decision
[97] As noted in
earlier Tribunal decisions,
this matter the tone of Mr Withers’ correspondence was typically confusing
and offensive. Regrettably, Mr Withers made comments
which were offensive and
disrespectful of the Ewamian People and their native title rights.
[98] Further, Mr
Withers adopted a rigid approach in his unwavering insistence on making unclear
offers by reference to historical
or unrelated agreements. As NQLC note in their
contentions, this included agreements such as the SSM ILUA that the grantee
had in fact opted out of in 2017, when it was used by Ewamian with other
proponents between 2014 and
[99] Despite
multiple invitations from Ewamian to make a clear, commercial offer
Mr Withers was unable or unwilling to do so. This
conduct is not a
reasonable basis from which to expect agreement to be reached.
[100] Unfortunately,
it appears Mr Withers has still not understood the concerns with his conduct
raised in earlier Tribunal decisions.
[101] While Mr
Withers purported to engage in negotiation and stated the grantee parties wished
to reach agreement during the negotiations,
other statements and the overall
conduct for the grantee parties indicated otherwise. The conduct of Mr Withers
was antithetical
to reaching agreement with the native title party.
actions of Mr Withers instead demonstrate an intention to say and do what he
understood earlier Tribunal decisions and the
Native Title Act
for the negotiations to be regarded as in good faith and nothing more. I am not
satisfied there was a genuine intention
to reach agreement with Ewamian.
[103] It is
unfortunate that NQLC refused to participate in mediation unless certain
preconditions were met. Whilst the preconditions
may have been reasonable
requests, mediation offered the parties a useful mechanism to explore the
outstanding issues between them,
including those raised in the preconditions. It
may have also assisted the negotiations if the native title party themselves put
forward a clear financial offer at an earlier stage of the recommenced
negotiations.
[104] However,
the grantee parties’ initial correspondence following the
contained inflammatory and pettifoggery comments that unfortunately
set the tone of the dealings between the parties moving forward.
conduct continued. As noted above, I must consider the conduct of the native
title party in this context.
[105] I agree
with the contentions made by Ewamian that over the course of the negotiations
the grantee parties adopted a rigid non-negotiable
position. I am also satisfied
that the conduct of Mr Withers directly harmed the negotiation process through
his refusal to meaningfully
acknowledge Ewamian’s native title rights or
meaningfully engage with the apology sought. Mr Withers’ ongoing
inflammatory,
pettifoggery and at times offensive comments also harmed the
negotiation.
negotiation process set out in the right to negotiate provisions of the
Native Title Act
must be construed beneficially for the native title
party. It is a meaningful right embodied in the future act scheme.
[107] Having
regard to all the material before me, I am satisfied Mr Withers’ conduct
for the grantee parties, including adopting
a rigid and unhelpful approach
throughout the negotiations, did not indicate an intention to negotiate in good
faith with a view
to obtaining the agreement of Ewamian, and did not meet the
standard required under s 31(1)(b) of the
Native Title
am satisfied that the grantee parties did not negotiate in good faith as
required by s 31(1)(b) of the
Native Title Act
and, therefore, I
must not proceed to make a determination under s 38. I dismiss the application
under s 148(a) of the
Native Title Act
ML 100019 and ML 100104.
Ewamian Determination.
Note the Tatampi Puranga Aboriginal Corporation ICN 7950 was the RNTBC as at the
date of determination. The corporation name was
changed to Ewamian Tatampi
Puranga Aboriginal Corporation in 2019, and then to Ewamian People Aboriginal
Corporation in 2021.
2023 decision
Native title party,
title party statement of contentions on good faith
, dated 7 February 2025
NTP contentions
Native title party,
title party chronology
, lodged 7 February 2025.
Native title party,
documentary evidence
, lodged 7 February 2025.
Affidavit of John Cecchi,
affirmed 7 February 2025 (
Cecchi Affidavit
Native title party,
authorities
, lodged 7 February 2025.
Native title party,
title party reply – good faith submissions of grantee party,
March 2025 (
Grantee parties,
party response to the cronology
of the native title party
lodged 21 February 2025.
Grantee parties,
Re_Index, and Re_Affidavit
, lodged 21 February 2025.
Grantee parties,
response to the native title party statement of contentions on good faith,
lodged 21 February 2025 (
GP response to contentions
Grantee parties,
authorities
, lodged 21 February 2025.
Grantee parties,
Title Act 1993
lodged 21 February 2025.
Grantee parties,
lodged 21 February 2025.
Grantee parties,
Native Title Work Procedures – Module J: Dealings on continuing pre-Wik
reservations and leases
, lodged 21 February 2025.
Grantee parties,
from determination 6/10/2023 QF2023/0001 & QF2023/0002 – Member Nerida
, lodged 21 February 2025.
Grantee parties,
and ML100104 site data points 2
, lodged 21 February 2025.
Grantee parties,
20230322 Ltr John Withers (AHR) RE MLs 100019 100104 response to 21.3.23 Ltr JKT
, lodged 21 February 2025, dated 22 March 2022.
Grantee parties,
further submissions re direction 4
, lodged 7 March 2025.
Grantee parties,
copied index of relevent
documentary evidence from. re: NTP
, lodged 7 March 2025.
NTP contentions at [14].
Queensland Government,
100019 Resource authority public report
ML 100104 Resource authority
public report,
printed 9 November 2016, submitted by the grantee parties
with the application; Cecchi Affidavit pages 136 and 137.
2023 decision
GP response to contentions
(Mortimer CJ) and [406] (O’Bryan J).
Ibid at [406] (O’Bryan
Placer (Granny Smith)
at [419] and
at 7 citing
NTP contentions at [25].
NTP contentions at
GP response to contentions
Ibid at page 7.
NTP reply at [9]-[11].
See for example
at [12] and [15].
Rusa Resources
Cecchi Affidavit at page
Cecchi Affidavit at page
at [24]-[26].
2023 decision
2023 decision
[61], [77]-[79], [86]-[88];
at [172]-[173]; and
at [142]-[143].
NTP contentions [15]-[21].
RTF format (485 KB)
Signed PDF/A format