Linh Tran v Westpac Banking Corporation [2025] FWCFB 234 (20 October 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 234
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
—Appeal of decision
Banking Corporation
(C2025/8571)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT GRAYSON COMMISSIONER CRAWFORD COMMISSIONER SLOAN
SYDNEY, 20 OCTOBER 2025
Appeal against decision
of Deputy President O’Neill in matter number U2025/9591
– permission to appeal refused.
Linh Tran has lodged an appeal under
Fair Work Act
(Cth) (‘the
’) against a decision of Deputy
President O’Neill to dismiss his application for an unfair dismissal
remedy against Westpac
Banking Corporation (‘
Tran’s application was dismissed pursuant to
s.587(1)(c)
of the Act on the
basis that it had no reasonable prospects of success because a binding
settlement agreement had been reached during
a staff conciliation conference on
10 July 2025.
Rule 128(2)
Fair Work Commission Rules 2024
requires a notice of appeal to be filed within 21 days after the date of the
relevant decision or order, or within such further time
as allowed by the
Commission. Mr Tran’s notice of appeal was filed on 2 September 2025.
That was within 21 days of when the
Deputy President published an edited
version of the decision on 12 August
However, as is
made clear at the beginning of the decision, it is “an edited version of
the decision delivered ex tempore and
recorded on transcript on 7 August
Both the decision that Mr Tran’s notice of appeal is directed
at, and the order for Mr Tran’s application to be dismissed,
were made by
the Deputy President on 7 August 2025. Mr Tran’s notice of appeal was not
filed within 21 days of the decision
and order being made on 7 August 2025. As a
result, Mr Tran requires an extension of time from the Commission to lodge his
pursuant to
Rule 128(2)(c).
We will return to this issue later in the
A hearing was conducted by the Full Bench via video on 8 October 2025
regarding whether Mr Tran should be granted permission to appeal
President’s decision. Permission was granted for Westpac to be represented
by a lawyer at the hearing on the basis
that granting permission would enable
the matter to be dealt with more efficiently given the complexity of the matter.
Mr Tran did
not oppose the granting of permission.
Permission to appeal
An appeal may only be brought with the permission of the Commission
under s.604(1) of the Act.
The “public interest” is important in relation to the
Commission’s power to grant permission to appeal a decision.
Under the general appeal provision in s.604 of the Act, the
Commission’s discretion to determine whether to grant permission
a decision is subject to a condition that the Commission “must grant
permission if the FWC is satisfied that it is
in the public interest to do
The situation is different in relation to the appeal of decisions
of the Act, which is directed at unfair dismissal
applications. Section 400(1) of the Act states that the Commission “must
not” grant permission to appeal a decision made under
“unless the FWC considers that it is in the public interest to do
so.” Section 400(2) of the Act then states that an
appeal on a question of
fact in relation to a decision made under
, can only be made on the
ground that there was “a significant error of fact.”
The applicability of the limitations on appeals concerning unfair
dismissal applications in s.400 of the Act is not entirely clear
decision is made to dismiss an application pursuant to s.587 of the Act. That
section does not fall within
of the Act. The authorities suggest
the proper approach is to assume that the limitation in s.400 of the Act applies
to the decision
to dismiss an unfair dismissal application under s.587 of the
Act, but to alternatively state the conclusion that would be reached
did not apply.
Consideration of the public interest involves a broad value
that may engage the public interest include issues of importance and general
application, a diversity of decisions at first
instance, or where the decision
manifests an
In deciding whether to grant permission to appeal, it is unnecessary
and inappropriate to conduct a detailed examination of the appeal
However, it
is necessary to engage with the appeal grounds to consider whether they raise an
arguable case of appealable error. An
appellant must ordinarily demonstrate
that there is an arguable case of appealable error to be granted permission to
appeal, as an
appeal cannot succeed in the absence of
However, the
fact that a member at first instance may have made an error is not necessarily a
sufficient basis to grant permission
Grounds of appeal and public interest
contentions
Mr Tran’s notice of appeal identifies the following
1. The Deputy President erred in finding Mr Tran was
represented, which deprived him of the benefit of a cooling off period.
2. Mr Tran was denied procedural fairness because he did not get the benefit
of a cooling off period merely because Westpac indicated
a cooling off period
did not apply.
3. The Deputy President erred in finding there was a binding settlement
agreement given that any agreement reached was conditional
and Mr Tran did not
sign a deed or settlement agreement.
4. The Deputy President erred in finding the application had no reasonable
prospects of success given that Mr Tran should have been
provided with a cooling
off period and as there was not a binding settlement agreement.
Mr Tran advanced a fifth ground of appeal in his written
submissions. Mr Tran argued that he was denied procedural fairness at the
hearing before the Deputy President on 7 August 2025, because the Deputy
President requested that the union official who represented
Mr Tran at the
conciliation conference on 10 July 2025 attend the hearing to provide evidence
had been reached, the effect of which was to
leave Mr Tran self-represented at the hearing.
Mr Tran identified the following matters as making it in the public
interest for permission to appeal to be granted:
1. Granting permission will allow the meaning of representation
to be clarified.
2. Granting permission will ensure cooling off periods are applied properly
and fairly by the Commission.
3. It is in the public interest to grant permission given that Mr Tran was
denied procedural fairness concerning a cooling off period.
4. Granting permission will allow the proper application of the principles
concerning where a binding settlement has been reached
to be clarified.
5. The appeal raises questions of fairness and practice that extend beyond
the interests of the parties.
Additional evidence
Mr Tran included several documents in the Appeal Book that were not
before the Deputy President when the application was dismissed.
confirmed during the hearing that he was seeking to rely on the documents as
additional evidence for the appeal.
The additional evidence that Mr Tran seeks to rely upon is primarily
correspondence between Mr Tran and his union representative prior
conciliation conference on 10 July 2025 and then after the conciliation
conference had concluded. There is also correspondence
between Mr Tran, his
union representative, and the Commission, which was exchanged prior to, and
after, the hearing convened by the
Deputy President on 7 August 2025. We have
reviewed all the additional documents.
Westpac did not oppose the admission of the additional evidence.
The principles relating to the exercise of the discretion to admit
additional evidence for an appeal under section 607(2) of the Act
are summarised
Power Projects International Pty Ltd v Automotive, Food, Metals,
Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries
It must be shown
that the evidence could not have been obtained with reasonable diligence for use
at the trial;
The evidence
must be such that there must be a high degree of probability that there would be
a different verdict; and
The evidence
must be credible.
We do not consider that the additional evidence Mr Tran seeks to
rely upon is likely to lead to a different outcome in the case. Many
documents are directed at preparations for the conciliation conference on 10
July 2025 and about the extent of assistance
that the union was agreeing to
provide to Mr Tran. These documents are not relevant to the issue of whether a
binding settlement
agreement was reached during the conciliation conference on
10 July 2025. There was already a significant amount of evidence before
Deputy President about what had occurred during the conciliation conference on
10 July 2025 and we are not satisfied that any
of the additional evidence
provided by Mr Tran sheds any new light on the matters canvassed by Mr
Tran’s appeal grounds including
whether a binding settlement was reached.
In addition, most of the relevant messages and emails were available
to Mr Tran prior to the hearing on 7 August 2025 and could have
been relied upon
at first instance.
Although we are satisfied that the additional evidence is credible,
that alone is not a sufficient reason to exercise our discretion
to admit the
We are not satisfied we should exercise our discretion under
s.607(2) to admit the additional evidence that Mr Tran seeks to rely
Appeal Grounds 1 and 2: Finding that Mr Tran was
represented at the conciliation conference and no provision of a cooling off
Mr Tran’s first two appeal grounds proceed on a
misunderstanding about the operation of cooling off periods in the Commission
and the purpose of the definitions of a “lawyer” and “paid
of the Act.
Contrary to Mr Tran’s submissions, a cooling off period is not
a “statutory safeguard” in relation to unfair dismissal
settlements
under the Act. The only reference to a cooling off period in the Act is in
relation to the Commission’s power to
suspend industrial action pursuant
to s.425. Statutory cooling off periods do exist in other jurisdictions such as
property and consumer
law, but they are not a statutory safeguard for unfair
dismissal settlements under the Act.
Mr Tran has correctly identified that it is common for unrepresented
parties to be provided with a cooling off period by staff conciliators
relation to unfair dismissal settlements. Mr Tran has also correctly identified
that the Commission refers to this common practice
on its website. The
Commission’s website states: “Unrepresented parties are usually
offered a 3-day cooling off period
following conciliation to decide if they wish
to opt out of any agreed settlement.” The Commission’s website also
that: “If an agreed settlement has been reached, a written
agreement will be prepared for both parties to sign. Unrepresented
parties may
be offered a 3-day cooling off period to decide if they wish to opt out of any
settlement.”
The advice provided on the Commission’s website appears to deliberately
use the words “usually” and “may”
to convey that a
cooling off period will not apply to unrepresented parties in all cases.
It is important to understand that parties attending a conciliation
conference are not bound to make or agree to any settlement offers.
An employer
respondent is also not bound to make a settlement offer which involves a cooling
off period. There are understandable
reasons for the common practice of
providing cooling off periods to unrepresented parties. However, a common
practice is not the
same thing as a statutory entitlement. Mr Tran was entitled
to request a cooling off period. Equally, Westpac was entitled to advise
conciliator that it did not agree to one.
Mr Tran has not identified an arguable case of appealable error in
relation to him not being provided with a cooling off period because
not a legal right or entitlement.
Mr Tran’s argument that he should have been provided with a
cooling off period because he was not represented by a lawyer or
falls away when it is understood that Mr Tran was not legally entitled to a
cooling off period, even if he was not represented
at the conciliation
conference.
In any event, Mr Tran was represented at the conciliation conference
on 10 July 2025 by a union official. It is expressly contemplated
by s.596(4) of
the Act that an organisation, being a registered organisation such as a trade
union, can represent a person before
the Commission. However, Mr Tran did not
need permission from the Commission under s.596 of the Act to be represented by
official even if they fall within the definition of a
“lawyer” or “paid agent” given the exclusion in
The definitions of “lawyer” and “paid agent”
have been included to clarify where a party needs permission from the
Commission to have a particular type of representative. The
definitions do not
serve the purpose of specifying the only situations where a party will be deemed
to be represented before the
Commission.
Mr Tran’s first two appeal grounds do not disclose an arguable
case of appealable error.
Appeal Ground 3 – binding settlement
Mr Tran argues that the Deputy President erred in finding that there
was a binding settlement where the parties had completely agreed
upon all the
terms but had made performance of one or more of the terms conditional upon the
execution of a formal agreement. The
Deputy President identified this type of
agreement as falling within Category 2 of the High Court’s well-known
judgment in
The Deputy President provided detailed reasons for finding that
there was a binding settlement agreement. This included reference
sending emails acknowledging there was a binding agreement and indicating that
he wished to withdraw from that agreement.
The Deputy President utilised
the power in s.590 of the Act to gather evidence from Mr Tran’s
representative about what occurred
during the conciliation conference. The
Deputy President referred to the staff conciliator’s email to the parties
the substantive settlement terms after the conference on 10 July 2025.
The Deputy President also took account of Mr Tran’s
arguments that there
was not a binding agreement.
The Deputy President undertook the required assessment in an
orthodox and detailed manner. The evidence identified by the Deputy President
supports a finding that there was a binding settlement agreement. We do not
consider that Mr Tran has identified an arguable case
of appealable error in
relation to the Deputy President’s finding that there was a binding
settlement agreement.
Appeal Ground 4 – no reasonable prospects of success
Mr Tran’s fourth appeal ground is that the Deputy President
erred in finding his application had no reasonable prospects of
success because
he was not provided with a cooling off period and because there was not a
binding settlement agreement.
This appeal ground largely falls away given we have not found an
arguable case of appealable error in relation to the absence of a
cooling off
period for Mr Tran or the Deputy President’s conclusion that the parties
reached a binding settlement agreement.
The existence of an accord and satisfaction between the parties
means that Mr Tran’s application had no reasonable prospects
of success.
Mr Tran’s fourth appeal ground does not disclose an arguable case of
appealable error.
Appeal Ground 5 – denial of procedural fairness
Mr Tran argues he was denied procedural fairness because the Deputy
President requested that the union official who represented Mr
Tran at the
conciliation conference on 10 July 2025 attend the hearing on 7 August 2025
to provide evidence about what occurred during
the conciliation conference and
that he was unrepresented.
As referred to above, the Commission has a broad discretion to
inform itself in a manner that it considers appropriate. Given the
views between Mr Tran and Westpac about whether a binding agreement had been
reached, it is readily apparent why the Deputy
President considered that
evidence from Mr Tran’s union representative may assist. Mr Tran heard his
representative’s
evidence and was able to challenge the evidence and make
submissions about it. As it turned out, the representative’s evidence
not assist Mr Tran’s argument. We do not consider Mr Tran was denied
procedural fairness merely because his former representative
provided evidence
that did not support his position. Further, we do not consider that he was
denied procedural fairness by virtue
of being unrepresented before the Deputy
President. Mr Tran could have sought an adjournment to obtain representation but
no evidence before us that he did so.
Mr Tran’s fifth ground of appeal does not disclose an arguable
case of appealable error.
Public interest factors
Mr Tran’s misunderstanding about whether he was entitled to a
cooling off period and about the meaning of representation under
the Act does
not mean that these are issues of importance and general application in relation
to the appeal.
The principles for determining whether a binding settlement
agreement has been entered into have been established by the High Court
well-known. The Deputy President applied the principles to the particular facts
of this case as required.
We are not satisfied that Mr Tran’s appeal raises issues of
importance and general application, nor that there is a diversity
of decisions
at first instance, or that the decision manifests an injustice, the result is
counterintuitive or that that the legal
principles applied appear disharmonious
when compared with other recent decisions.
We do not consider that the appeal raises matters that engage the
public interest.
Extension of time
The following matters are generally relevant to whether a further
period should be granted for the filing of a notice to appeal:
Whether there is
a satisfactory reason for the delay;
The length of
The nature of
the grounds of appeal and the likelihood of one or more of those grounds being
upheld if time was extended; and
• Any prejudice to the respondent if time was
Given we are not satisfied that Mr Tran has identified an arguable
case of appealable error in the Deputy President’s decision,
public interest is not enlivened, there is no sensible basis to extend time to
file the notice of appeal.
We accept that a self-represented party may find it difficult to
identify when a decision was made by the Commission where the decision
delivered ex tempore and an edited written decision is subsequently provided. It
is likely we would have extended the time for
the filing of the appeal if there
was a stronger case for the granting of permission to appeal.
Conclusion and disposition
We refuse to grant a further period for the filing of the notice of
appeal. The application for permission to appeal is therefore
In any event, we would have refused permission to appeal due to the
limitation in s.400 of the Act concerning appeals of unfair dismissal
We would not have been satisfied that it is in the public interest for
permission to appeal to be granted.
In the alternative, if the limitation in s.400 is not applicable to
the decision, we would not have granted permission given the absence
arguable case of appealable error and as we are not satisfied that Mr Tran has
advanced any discretionary ground which would
justify the grant of permission to
Finalisation of the settlement
We consider a major reason that controversy has arisen in relation
to the settlement between Mr Tran and Westpac is that Westpac sent
Mr Tran what
appears to be a standard template deed of release to finalise the settlement.
The document contains provisions that
appear additional to the substantive terms
recorded in the email sent by the staff conciliator to the parties following the
conciliation
conference on 10 July 2025.
We consider the appropriate course of action is for Westpac to
urgently provide Mr Tran with a settlement agreement that is limited
matters identified in the staff conciliator’s email.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances:
for himself.
Ms F Edwards
from Sparke Helmore
for Westpac.
Hearing details:
By Video using Microsoft Teams.
Linh Tran v
Westpac Banking Corporation
Clermont Coal
Pty Ltd v Brown
, [9] - [14].
Allied Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler and others
(2011) 192 FCR 78, [44].
GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty Ltd v Makin
[2010] FWAFB 5343
(2010) 197 IR 266 (Makin)
Trustee for
the MTGI Trust v Johnston
[2016] FCAFC 140
Allied Operations Pty Ltd v AIRC
(2000) 203 CLR 194
(2011) 210 IR
, [12], citing
Akins v National Australia Bank
(1994) 34 NSWLR 155
‘Conciliation’,
Fair Work Commission
(Web Page) Outcomes at
Conciliation <https://www.fwc.gov.au/conciliation>.
[1954] HCA 72
(1954) 91 CLR
Workers’ Union v The Corporation of the Trustees of the Roman Catholic
Church Archdiocese of Brisbane
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (1.73 MB)
Signed PDF/A format