Self Care Corporation Pty Ltd v Green Forest International Pty Ltd (No 9) [2021] FCCA 1866 (31 August 2021)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Self Care Corporation Pty Ltd v Green
Forest International Pty Ltd (No 9)
[2021] FCCA 1866
File number(s):
SYG 2771 of 2019
Judgment of:
JUDGE BAIRD
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE – application in a
case brought on day 2 of final hearing – further search sought of forensic
of storage devices made in 2019 – delivery up and searching of
further electronic storage devices used by sixth respondent
– prejudice – no delay found –paragraph 1 allowed as varied -
paragraphs 2 to 4 of application dismissed.
Cases cited:
Brookfield v Yevad Products Pty Ltd
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v BHP
Ltd (No. 3)
[2012] FCA 61
Microsoft Corp v Goodview Electronics Pty Ltd
[1999] FCA 754
(1999) 46 IPR 159
Suzlon Energy Limited v Bangad
[2011] FCA 1152
(2011) 198 FCR
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
3, 4 and 5 August 2021
Counsel for the First and Second Applicants:
Mr Hennessy SC and Mr C McMeniman
Solicitor for the First and Second Applicants:
Gilbert + Tobin
Counsel for the Sixth Respondent:
Mr B Le Plastrier, Mr R Sud, and Ms C Nguyen
Solicitor for the Sixth Respondent:
Taylor David Lawyers
SYG 2771 of 2019
SELF CARE CORPORATION PTY LTD ACV 132 213
First Applicant
SELF CARE IP HOLDINGS PTY LTD ACN 134 308
Second Applicant
GREEN FOREST INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD
ACN 607 602 988
First Respondent
YAOAN (ERIC)
Second Respondent
YILIN TRADING PTY LTD ACN 626 244 479
(and others named in the Schedule)
Third Respondent
JUDGE BAIRD
DATE OF ORDER:
1. DISMISSES paragraphs 2, 3, and 4 of the applicants’ application in a
case dated 3 August 2021.
2. NOTES the Court will hear the parties as to any argument as to costs on a
date to be advised administratively.
REASONS FOR
Judge Baird
INTRODUCTION
1 On 3 August 2021, the second day of the final
hearing in this matter, conducted electronically by video‑conferencing
of current COVID-19 restrictions on movement in New South Wales, the
applicants,
Corporation Pty Ltd and Self Care IP Holdings
Pty Ltd, brought an
application
in a case seeking orders against the
sixth respondent, Mr Pascal
, in substance:
, varying orders made in the proceeding in 2019 to enable
further search of the forensic image made in 2019 of Mr Skelin’s
storage devices further to orders made 25 October 2019 (as
existing forensic image
) applying the search terms set out in
Annexure B to the application, and any other terms identifying privileged
material to be notified
by Mr Skelin’s solicitors (together,
(b) secondly
, seeking delivery up by Mr Skelin to the
applicants’ independent engaged computer expert, Mr Rodney
External Storage Devices (including any
inoperable or dissembled internal and external storage devices)
Mr Skelin’s possession, power, or control used by him at any time
since the commencement of the proceeding on 25
October 2019, and whether or not
owned by him (
further devices
), the taking of a forensic image of the
further devices by Mr McKemmish, and the search of the forensic image
applying the Search
2 The applicants also seek consequential orders for (i) the provision by Mr
Skelin of usernames and passwords and the like to enable
the search of the
forensic image of the further devices to be done, (ii) the progressive provision
of the results of the above searches
simultaneously to the applicants’ and
Mr Skelin’s solicitors, (iii) the identification of terms to be applied to
legally privileged or confidential material, and (iv) for a regime
enabling the applicants to use the balance of the further results
purposes of enforcing any rights against any person and otherwise for the
purposes of this proceeding.
3 The application was made returnable instanter, and was brought as a matter
of urgency.
4 After briefly hearing from the applicants’ junior counsel,
Mr McMeniman, I stood the application down to later in the day
enable Mr Le Plastrier, counsel for Mr Skelin, to obtain
instructions. Mr Skelin opposed the application. I heard the balance
the application on 4 August 2021. Both parties relied on the affidavits I
describe below. Neither party objected to the other’s
5 On 5 August 2021, I informed the parties I was persuaded that it is
appropriate to allow further search of the existing forensic
image in accordance
with a modified regime and search terms, which I then outlined, and to dismiss
paragraphs 2 to 4 of the application
(concerning the further devices).
I invited the applicants to draft and circulate proposed orders. After
Court on 5 August 2021,
by consent, counsel for the applicants and
Mr Skelin informed my Chambers that their respective clients agreed to
orders which they
submitted, which orders I then made. I indicated to the
parties I would subsequently deliver reasons for my decision. These are
THE APPLICATION
6 The application is brought by reference to a
notice to produce
dated 27 July 2021 issued by the applicants to
Mr Skelin, and Mr Skelin’s production in answer to the call, and
supported by
two affidavits made by Mr Daniel
to which I refer
7 The notice to produce was first before me at pre-trial directions on
28 July 2021 and stood over to the first day of final hearing.
to produce in substance seeks any documents held by Mr Skelin concerning
certain counterfeit activities in relation to
freezeframe‑branded
products, and any documents recording or referring to communications between
Mr Skelin and various Chinese
entities, and various named individuals,
including the non‑participating fifth respondent,
, and in respect of communications with
Emilio Wang, concerning certain subject matter, including freezeframe products,
or Ms Sonia
, Self Care’s CEO.
8 The extent of Mr Skelin’s production in answer to the notice to
produce was 5 pages comprising screenshots of what appear
messages in the period 1 May 2021 and 5 May 2021, some of which make
reference to Ms Amoroso, and including copies of
text messages from her to a
third party (
Applicants’ evidence in support
9 In support of the application the applicants rely
on Mr Skelin’s production of the 5 Pages, the affidavit of
Mr Daniel Plane
dated 31 July 2021 and supporting exhibits
), and a further affidavit of Mr Plane dated
3 August 2021 (
). The applicants say that
Mr Skelin’s production in response to the notice to produce is
inadequate, on their face it is apparent
the 5 Pages are obviously
extracted from a larger chain of communications which involve Mr Skelin and
Emilio Wang, that this submission
is supported by Mr Plane’s
evidence, and that there is an identified basis set out in affidavits on which
they rely for the
orders sought in the application.
Mr Plane’s evidence
10 The applicants rely on Plane #3 and
Plane #4. Mr Plane is a partner at Simone Intellectual Property
Services Asia Limited (
), and is the attorney and IP consultant
acting for the applicants in Hong Kong and mainland China. He is located in
Hong Kong, and
is fluent in Mandarin Chinese. He gives evidence on his own
account, and on information and belief, as to investigations undertaken
Chinese authorities, and attendances and observations made by named SIPS
employees acting under his direction and located in Shanghai
and Hangzhou,
mainland China.
11 In Plane #3, Mr Plane gives evidence of certain investigations
by the Chinese authorities in mainland China concerning alleged
counterfeit
activities relating to freezeframe‑branded products by named Chinese
entities and named individuals, and the recent
arrest in mainland China of
Emilio Wang. Mr Plane gives evidence on information and belief of apparent
communications between Emilio
Wang and Mr Skelin sighted during raids on
Emilio Wang at his residence. In Plane #4, Mr Plane sets out some further
evidence of
those communications.
Limitations on ability of mainland Chinese SIPS employees to
give evidence on oath
12 In Plane #3, Mr Plane gives evidence why
SIPS employees located in mainland China are not in a position to give affidavit
themselves in this proceeding. Simply put, his understanding and
experience of Chinese law is that residents of mainland China are
only permitted
to give evidence in overseas proceedings such as the present proceeding after
getting express permission from China’s
Ministry of Justice. In
Mr Plane’s knowledge and experience, China rarely, if ever, grants
such permission. He is aware of
no recent examples where permission has been
granted. In the absence of such permission, the administration of the oath
could subject
the attorney administering the oath to criminal prosecution.
13 It is impractical, if not impossible, for members of SIPS Shanghai team to
execute affidavits in this proceeding, particularly
under the present COVID
related travel restrictions that prevent their readily travelling outside of
mainland China to where those
restrictions do not apply. Thus, the practice of
SIPS and other firms of which Mr Plane has knowledge is that evidence sourced in
China and given under oath for use in foreign proceedings is to be taken in
of China, such as Hong Kong
or Taiwan, and where there are no such restrictions. Accordingly, Mr Plane
gives such evidence because
he is resident in Hong Kong, and neither he nor the
attorney administering his oath when making his affidavit are subject under the
restrictions placed within mainland China. I accept Mr Plane’s
explanation.
Investigations and raids by Chinese authorities
14 Suspected counterfeit freezeframe products have
been the subject of investigations by Chinese authorities, including the Public
Security Bureau (
) in the Baoshan district of Shanghai (
). Mr Plane lists a number of Chinese entities that are also identified
in a criminal complaint prepared by SIPS on behalf of the
applicants and filed
with the Shanghai PSB, and states that a number of those entities have been the
subject of investigations by
the Shanghai PSB following on from that complaint.
15 Many of the entities Mr Plane lists have been named in the final hearing
in this proceeding.
Brand Management (Shanghai) Co., Limited
Yunyin International
Trading (Shanghai) Co., Ltd were also named in
the criminal complaint, and/or have been the subject of Shanghai PSB’s
investigations in response to that complaint. A number of people have
been taken into custody in connection with the investigations,
and follow-on
criminal raids conducted by Shanghai PSB, including on Emilio Wang at his
residence. The arrest warrant dated 9 July
2021 issued by the PSB in
relation to Emilio Wang and its English translation is in evidence. A number of
other people have also
been detained, and arrest warrants dated 9 July 2021 are
in evidence before me in respect of Mr Dingqing Yang, and Mr Peike Li
worked for Mr Dingqing Yang.
16 Mr Plane gives evidence on information and belief that on 4 June 2021 the
Shanghai PSB, in the presence of Mr Qing
a member of the SIPS
Shanghai office who reports to Mr Plane, attended the residence of Emilio
Wang, in Hangzhou. On the same day,
Shanghai PSB, in the presence of another
member of the SIPS Shanghai office who reports to Mr Plane, attended the
office of the company
Fuli Ruizi, and the Shanghai residences of
Mr Dingqing Yang, Ms Feng Han and Mr Peike Li. Photographs taken
during those attendances
are reproduced in the evidence.
17 The Shanghai PSB issued a request for verification in relation to
suspected counterfeit freezeframe products identified during
the visit to Fuli
Ruizi’s premises, requiring a verification report to be prepared by 24
June 2021. In evidence before me
is a copy of the responsive verification
report dated 23 June 2021 prepared by SIPS for the Shanghai PSB in relation to
counterfeit freezeframe products identified during the visit to Fuli
Ruizi’s premises on 4 June 2021.
18 On 23 June 2021, the Shanghai PSB attended the Shanghai
residence of Ms Weiwei Lin, a Canadian national who goes by the English
’, and is a representative of Yangfeng (Shanghai)
Biotechnology Co., Limited. Mr Zhao observed that Ms Lin was taken
Baoshan Shanghai PSB Station by the PSB for questioning.
19 Additionally in Plane #3, Mr Plane gives evidence that on 4 June
2021, in the presence of a member of SIPS Shanghai office who
reports to him,
the Shanghai PSB visited premises of a Hangzhou‑based Taobao seller, whom
Mr Plane had identified as being
involved in the sale of products purporting to
be freezeframe products. Mr Plane gives evidence that the SIPS employee
certain WeChat messages on the Taobao seller’s phones, and
Mr Plane names persons identified within those messages.
Mr Skelin is named on Emilio Wang’s
20 Mr Plane gives evidence that Mr Zhao has informed
him, arising out of Mr Zhao’s presence with the Shanghai PSB at
Wang’s residence in Hangzhou on 4 June 2021 (see above, [16]), and
subsequent communications and meetings between Mr Zhao and
the Shanghai PSB,
At Mr Emilio Wang’s residence in Hangzhou, at
around 9:34am on 4 June 2021, Mr Zhao observed that Mr Emilio
Wang’s locked
phone screen indicated that he was receiving a WeChat call
from somebody with the contact name “Pascal
Mr Plane observes that the Chinese characters in the contact name are
pronounced PAN SHI GAO.
Two mobile phones, one iPad and two laptop computers in
the possession of Mr Emilio Wang were also seized by the Shanghai PSB and
removed for further investigation.
21 In Plane #4, Mr Plane expands on the above evidence. He gives evidence
that Mr Zhao has informed him, and he believes:
that he observed from Mr Emilio Wang’s phone
[on 4 June 2021] (which phone had been unlocked by a PSB agent at the start of
the raid action) that there were records of extensive text and voice
communications over WeChat between Mr Wang and Mr Pascal Skelin
(“Pascal (潘世高)”) up until 4 June 2021. Due to
the Shanghai PSB’s ongoing investigations,
further details about those
communications cannot currently be disclosed.
Applicants submit no prejudice arises
22 The applicants say that no prejudice arises in
relation to the further searches of the existing forensic image, as the image
already been produced, and Mr Skelin’s previous solicitors were
provided with a copy of the existing forensic image, and reviewed
the results.
23 The applicants say in relation to the search of the further devices, the
regime proposed would limit production to the applicants’
Mr Skelin’s solicitors and counsel, provide for a regime for
identification and removal of any legally privileged or confidential
The applicants say that what would be left is material that can be dealt with in
the present proceeding, and no prejudice
would arise because the material is
squarely in Mr Skelin’s camp, and should have been dealt with in his
evidence, or earlier
in a Norwich Pharmacal affidavit he made in late 2019, or
in response to discovery orders made in December 2020.
24 The production of the further devices, and the searching of the forensic
image of those devices would be targeted to documents
bought into existence
since the existing forensic image was made in late 2019. The applicants propose
that the further devices could
be collected by Mr McKemmish from
Mr Skelin’s residence in Sydney’s eastern suburbs, and be
delivered back to him within
a number of hours.
Mr Skelin’s evidence
25 Mr Skelin relies on an affidavit of
Mr Gregory Alberto
, sworn on 4 August 2021. Mr Grunert
is a solicitor in the employ of Mr Skelin’s instructing solicitors,
trading as Taylor
David Lawyers. He is located in Brisbane, whilst
Mr Skelin is located in Sydney. Mr Grunert makes his affidavit on the
records and files maintained by his firm. He gives evidence in
relation to the notice to produce and the application, and on instructions
Mr Skelin and from Mrs Anne Skelin. Additionally, Mr Skelin relies on the
to search the existing forensic
image, to demonstrate that there is some duplication of terms in the Search
26 Mr Grunert gives evidence of:
(a) telephone and email communications and discussions
he had with Mr Skelin and Mrs Anne Skelin in the period 27 July to
2021 regarding his request that they search for and produce
documents within the scope of the notice to produce, their searches and
production of documents, and his instructions in relation to those searches, and
production;
(b) his receipt on 3 August 2021 of an unsealed copy of the application,
and forwarding it to Mr Skelin, and his subsequent receipt
of a sealed copy;
(c) several telephone conversations with Mr Skelin and Mrs Skelin on 3 August
2021, and instructions from them;
(d) his subsequent receipt of a further bundle of text messages from
Mr Skelin via WhatsApp, which are annexed to his affidavit;
(e) an explanation Mr Grunert sought from Mr Skelin of the genesis of the
(f) Mr Skelin’s instructions about the devices he uses, the number of
documents generated since 2019, and the prejudice Mr
Skelin is likely to
suffer should the application be allowed; and
(g) searches that Mr Grunert has taken of “all outlook items” via
Microsoft Outlook of the Taylor David email account
which he uses on a
day-to-day basis of email addresses he believes Mr Skelin uses and he receives
emails from and to which he sends
emails, which Mr Grunert attests returned some
2,274 emails, and the review he believes his firm would have to do to discharge
professional obligations to Mr Skelin before it could release any
As to the notice to produce
27 In relation to the notice to produce,
Mr Grunert’s evidence is that he asked Mr and Mrs Skelin to
conduct a search and provide
copies of any documents within the scope of the
notice to produce, he received instructions from Mr Skelin that “
didn’t have any documents other than maybe a couple of text messages from
Mr Emilio Wang
”, and Mr Grunert was provided by way of emails
from Mr Skelin a number of text messages stated by Mr Skelin to be
text messages he had received from Emilio Wang and were responsive to
the [notice to produce]
”. Mr Grunert then sent an email to both Mr
Skelin and Mrs Skelin which attached a bundle of text messages together with the
notice to produce, and asked them both to confirm that they had no other
documents in their possession, power, custody or control
which would be
responsive to the categories in the notice to produce. He received those
instructions. Mr Grunert then produced
the bundle he sent to the Skelins,
being the 5 Pages.
As to the application
28 In response to the application, Mr
Grunert’s evidence is that:
(a) in response to his enquiry whether they had any other documents which
could be responsive to the categories in the notice to produce,
he has obtained
confirmatory instructions that Mr Skelin had already provided everything which
comes within the categories of the
notice to produce;
(b) Mr Skelin’s instructions are that he has only one mobile phone and
a laptop, and they are the same devices he produced in
late 2019, and he has no
other devices;
(c) Mrs Skelin’s instructions were to the effect:
There’s nothing – we don’t have
(d) Mr Grunert asked Mr Skelin to send him the text messages he received
from Emilio Wang both before and after those which were provided
response to the notice to produce, a further bundle of text messages was
received on 3 August 2021, which he annexes.
Mr Skelin described them to
him as relating
“to commodities and nothing else
(e) on being pressed by Mr Grunert, Mr Skelin’s instructions to Mr
Grunert were to the following effect:
No, I don’t have anything else that comes under
the notice to produce;
Emilio and I would talk about commodities trading and mining deals.
Mrs Skelin said: “there’s nothing
29 Mr Grunert also sets out Mr Skelin’s instructions of the
circumstances in which Mr Skelin uses his mobile phone and laptop,
prejudice he would suffer if he had to deliver them up, being:
(a) Mr Skelin is currently providing consulting
services to a company and is in the middle of a capital raising which requires
communicating with investors located in both the United States of America
and Europe, he is the lead on communicating with these
investors, and he is
required to be available for phone calls and emails at all hours of the day and
night, given the differing time
(b) if he had to deliver up his devices he was likely to be terminated and have
(c) he needs the devices to communicate with his solicitors;
(d) further, there would be tens of thousands of emails created since November
30 Mr Grunert states that Mr Skelin has said to him to the effect that
after the fourth respondent, Freezeframe China Co Pty Limited,
was placed in
liquidation in January 2020, he did not speak to Emilio Wang until around March
2020, when he received a telephone
call from him during which they discussed him
sourcing protective equipment and testing kits for COVID-19 as a business idea
never eventuated. Thereafter, Mr Skelin did not recall speaking to
Emilio Wang until May 2021, when he received a telephone call
concerning commodities trading. Mr Grunert states Mr Skelin
instructed him that Emilio Wang knows Mr Skelin used to work
in this area,
and Mr Wang wanted to discuss it with him further.
31 As I have said above, Mr Grunert also sets out the substance of
Mr Skelin’s explanation to him of the genesis of the 5 Pages,
and Mr Skelin’s understanding as conveyed to him of the text
32 Mr Grunert also makes submissions to the effect that if Mr Skelin is
compelled to deliver up the further devices, it would be necessary
for his firm
to perform a privilege review of potentially thousands of documents before his
firm can discharge its professional obligations
to Mr Skelin, and that the
the subject “re”,
significantly delaying any review process. Whilst
I accept that Mr Grunert genuinely holds these concerns, in my view it
not be beyond the efforts of competent lawyers, acting in good faith, and
with the expert involvement of Mr McKemmish, to resolve
such concerns.
Mr Skelin’s submissions
33 Mr Le Plastrier for Mr Skelin vigorously opposed the application.
34 Mr Skelin submits
, that the application is vexatious and
should be dismissed. Its timing – on the second day of final hearing - is
it has no legitimate purpose. The delay is inexcusable and has not
been explained. He emphasises the extreme care that the Court
must take before
exercising its jurisdiction to grant Anton Piller relief, which he submits the
application in substance seeks, and
draws attention to Justice Branson’s
statements in
Electronics Pty
[1999] FCA 754
, especially at [13] and [26], (I note also [25]). In
sum, there must be clear evidence that the respondent has in his possession
incriminating documents or things, and there must be a real possibility that he
may destroy such material before any application
can be made. Counsel
emphasises that the Court must be careful to avoid the extraordinary
Piller order from being subverted to
a mere investigatory tool for applicants or, indeed, from being used for any
purpose other than
the preservation of vital evidence pending the hearing and
determination of proceedings.
35 It is relevant that I observe here that I consider the application is not
framed as seeking relief in the nature of an Anton Piller
order, which order
seeks ex parte relief based, inter alia, on the strength of a concern that if
given notice there is a real possibility
the defendants may destroy the material
sought. Nonetheless, what her Honour said in
Microsoft v Goodview
repetition:
[13] Although the power of the Court to make
an Anton Piller order is now beyond doubt it is a power which will only be
in exceptional circumstances. As Lee J observed in
Broadcasts Ltd v Nguyen
The grant of an Anton Piller order
is a peremptory and severe interference with the ordinary rights of a party when
it is done without
the support of any binding judgment and care must be taken to
see that the order is only granted in appropriate cases and with due
“First, there must be an extremely strong prima facie case. Secondly, the
damage, potential or actual, must be very serious
for the applicant. Thirdly,
there must be clear evidence that the defendants have in their possession
incriminating documents or
things, and that there is a real possibility that
they may destroy such material before any application inter partes can be
(Anton Piller KG v Manufacturing Processes Ltd [1976] Ch 55 per
Ormrod LJ (at 62)).”
[25] I was not satisfied that the above material was sufficient to
support a finding that there was a high risk that the respondents
evidence or remove it from the jurisdiction. In a sense the situation was
similar to a case in which a party is shown
to have made inadequate discovery.
Although regrettable, it is the case that it is not uncommon for litigants to
fail to comply
fully with orders for discovery. Rarely does this prove to be
because they have hidden evidence or removed it from the jurisdiction.
Ultimately I was not satisfied that the manner in which the first respondent had
deployed the purchase orders and invoices referred
to in its defence provided
evidence of a high risk that the respondents might hide evidence or remove it
from the jurisdiction.
[26] It is probably appropriate that I record my suspicion that the
concern of the applicants with respect to the documentation
of the respondents
is not so much that it may not become available to be placed in evidence in this
proceeding, but that they may
not be able to inspect it for the purpose of
identifying whether or not there are other persons against whom they might
proceedings. As Bryson J observed in
EFG Australia Ltd v
, the caution with which courts have entertained applications for
Anton Piller orders has increased, rather than diminished, as their
with such orders has increased. The Court must, in my view, be careful to avoid
the extraordinary jurisdiction of the
Court to make an Anton Piller order from
being subverted to a mere investigatory tool for applicants or indeed, from
being used for
any purpose other than the preservation of vital evidence pending
the hearing and determination of a proceeding.
36 Mr Skelin also relied on
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy
Pty Ltd (No. 3)
[2012] FCA 61
where Collier J at [7] observed that:
... service of a notice to produce shortly before trial, imposing a
considerable obligation and thus disruption on parties and practitioners
deeply immersed in the preparation for and conduct of the trial, may be
unreasonable and vexatious.
37 Her Honour observed on the facts in that case that the notice to produce
was unreasonable, particularly as orders for discovery
had been made six weeks
before in specific terms.
38 Mr Le Plastrier submits that given the timing of the notice and the extent
of the search upon delivery up, the application is brought
only to vex Mr
Skelin, and it is outrageous that Mr Skelin is required to engage with it
at all. He tells me I should have stopped
it in its tracks when it was first
raised. He submits this is because there is no evidence explaining delay, and
also why a further
affidavit (Plane #4) was subsequently put on. He urges
me to find that there is a dearth of forensic purpose.
39 Mr Skelin’s
point is that the application should be
, as a mere investigatory tool, which is not permitted:
Microsoft v Goodview
at [26]), and,
, as an attempt to
circumvent ordinary Court processes of discovery.
40 In response to the applicants’ submissions that the evidence sought
by delivery up should have been produced by Mr Skelin
either in a Norwich
Pharmacal affidavit, in compliance with existing discovery orders, or in his
evidence, Mr Le Plastrier submits
there is no obligation on Mr Skelin
first, to give evidence, or secondly, to give any particular type of evidence,
and simply because
the applicants thought he should have, does not entitle them
to the benefit of the application.
41 Relying on
v Yevad Products Pty Ltd
Mansfield J at [21], counsel submits that a verified list of documents
is generally conclusive of its contents, and the Court is
concerned to prevent a
contest between two competing oaths that only a trial could resolve. Thus, Mr
Le Plastrier reminds me that
Mr Skelin has made affidavits in response to
Norwich Pharmacal orders, and two discovery affidavits, one on 19 January 2021
on 8 February 2021.
42 Mr Le Plastrier submits that, if the applicants were concerned about the
inadequacy of discovery, there are limited responses that
the law allows.
, in narrow circumstances to allow the request for a second
affidavit, or cross-examination on the existing affidavit: see
at [21]. Counsel emphasises that it cannot be shown by a contentious affidavit
that the affidavit of documents is insufficient,
and submits there was no
attempt by the applicants to engage with the limited circumstances in which a
further affidavit might be
required, as referred to by Mansfield J in
, nor to engage with the consequence of production under a
notice to produce. In this latter regard, in
Limited v Bangad
[2011] FCA 1152
, Rares J explains the historical purpose
for the issue of a notice to produce:
[13] ...that if the party served with it does not
produce the document or thing called for, his or her opponent may lead secondary
evidence of the contents or nature of the document or thing.
43 Mr Le Plastrier submits that there is no proposition that an Anton Piller
order logically follows from a failure to provide an
affidavit of discovery that
is complete.
44 Returning to the circumstances in which an Anton Piller order may be
granted, and the application for delivery up of the further
devices, Mr Le
Plastrier’s next submits that the applicants’ case does not satisfy
either the requirement for clear evidence,
or the requirement that there be
evidence of a real possibility of the destruction of this new material.
45 Mr Le Plastrier submits that Mr Plane’s evidence is no more than
inference. At its highest, the applicants’ case comprises
a reference to
a phone call that occurred, and screenshots that have been produced (the 5
Pages), and the inference that there are
other texts, such that the sample
produced is not the complete picture. Mr Le Plastrier submits that Mr
Grunert’s evidence
in contrast provides further context to the production
of the 5 Pages, and further, evidences surrounding text messages, which, on
their face relate to commodities and mining and, do not appear to have direct
relevance to this proceeding. Thus, the further production
addresses any
concern that production was inadequate – the surrounding texts are not
46 Mr Skelin has disclosed material, and there is no evidence of risk of
destruction. Phone calls are admitted, and there is positive
evidence they do
not relate to the search terms. The fact of the content of a conversation in no
way contributes to establishing
the clear evidence required that Mr Skelin
has in his possession incriminating documents containing the Search Terms.
47 Turning to discretion, Mr Le Plastrier points to the alleged delay, the
significant time and effort that would be taken to have
to sift through the
results, submits the timing is unfair and deeply prejudicial, given that the
matter is in week one of a two-plus
week hearing, that the Search Terms include
those that have previously been done on the existing forensic device, and the
possibility
that searches of the further devices will encompass privileged
48 In the orders I outlined I have taken into account Mr Skelin’s
further submissions as to the scope of the Search Terms and
the potential use to
which the results are sought to be made.
Applicants’ submissions in reply
49 Mr McMeniman drew attention to the investigations
and recent arrests, evidenced in Mr Plane’s evidence, and the
and individuals only recently identified further to those
investigations, submitting that they demonstrate that the application is
delayed, nor is it vexatious. This evidence also reveals that previously known
names are now shown to be relevant to the subject
matter of the proceeding.
50 The Court does have power to order further discovery. Such an order for
further discovery can be made where an applicant can specify
a particular
document or class of documents in respect of which further discovery is sought,
and can establish reasonable grounds
for believing the documents were or had
been in the opponent’s possession, and more broadly, relevant to the
pleadings, where
there is an evidential basis to believe that documents that
ought to have been disclosed have not been. The application does not
Piller relief, but compliance with discovery obligations.
51 Mr McMeniman points to the lack of evidence of what searches Mr Skelin
undertook. He explains the rationale behind certain of
the Search Terms, and
proposes certain modifications to the terms, noting that “RE” refers
Revitaleyes
, one of the freezeframe products.
CONSIDERATION
52 As I indicated on 5 August 2021, I do not accept
the submission that there has been delay, nor that the application is vexatious
or an abuse of process. I accept that the application is based on the
culmination of recent investigations in China and their results
set out in Mr
Plane’s evidence, including recent arrest of Emilio Wang following
the issue of an arrest warrant on 9 July 2021,
and the counterfeit analysis
that was undertaken shortly before that date. On the basis of Mr Plane’s
evidence I am satisfied
that the application could not reasonably have been
brought earlier.
53 Further, I am cognisant that the applicants and various respondents,
principally but not only Mr Skelin, recently have been much
significant interlocutory disputes in this proceeding, and that Mr Skelin and
the applicants are also engaged in two proceedings
brought by Mr Skelin in the
Federal Court on appeal from two interlocutory judgments that I have delivered
(on 12 May 2021, and 23
July 2021). I am also cognisant that in the context of
the first of those two appeals, and then expanded to encompass the second
appeal, Mr Skelin brought and maintained an application in the Federal
Court to stay this proceeding which was heard on 28 July 2021,
and determined on
29 July 2021, the Thursday before the commencement of the final hearing of
this proceeding. In these circumstances,
I consider that the application was
brought in a timely manner, and that it was reasonable to bring it early in the
first week of
the final hearing.
54 I consider that Mr Plane’s evidence and the 5 Pages,
evidencing as they do that Mr Skelin and Emilio Wang have been in recent
against Mr Skelin. The ambit of the application,
and the Search Terms are
reasonably founded on matters in Mr Plane’s evidence. I reject that the
application is vexatious,
or without legitimate forensic purpose.
55 I am also satisfied that it was appropriate that the applicants sought
first to issue the notice to produce before bringing the
application. There has
been no attack on the notice to produce. To the contrary, there has been
production. It does not follow,
however, that because the production is limited
to the 5 Pages, and on their face the screenshots form part of more
extensive communications,
Mr Skelin has further relevant documents to produce so
that it is appropriate to order delivery up and examination of the further
devices forthwith during the first week of final hearing. Mr Skelin’s
further production in answer to the application, and
his explanation, although
evidenced on information and belief, are matters I take into account.
56 In relation to those paragraphs of the application seeking delivery up,
forensic imaging, search and review of the further devices
(that is, paragraphs
2 to 4), as I have observed above, in my view it is not appropriate to
characterise the application as seeking
Anton Pillar orders, not the least of
which because it is not
, and I accept that the Court does have
power to order further discovery, and for that purpose production and limited
further devices. I consider that in the present circumstances,
however, the applicants have to establish on clear and persuasive
sound basis for the orders sought, and that any prejudice likely to be suffered,
weighed against that evidence, warrants
the relief being granted. I am not
persuaded, however, and in contradistinction to Anton Pillar relief, that it is
necessary that
the applicants establish on the evidence that there is an
imminent risk of destruction of documents.
57 Taking a forensic image of electronic storage devices such as a computer,
and conducting electronic search of the image applying
specific terms identified
on evidence as relevant to the proceeding, may be a practical and efficient way
to minimise time and expense
for a party under a continuing obligation to give
discovery. It seems to me that if able to be done efficiently, at less expense,
and in such a way to minimise production of results that are privileged or
irrelevant, this is a means that warrants further consideration
appropriate occasion. For the reasons that follow, I do not consider that this
is that occasion.
58 In relation to those paragraphs of the application seeking orders to
permit Mr McKemmish to apply the Search Terms to the existing
image, and consequent review, release and use, it is also inaccurate to
characterise the application as seeking Anton Piller
relief, including for the
reasons I have already stated. Rather, I apprehend the application is brought
to vary the extant orders
first made in 2019 at the commencement of the
proceeding having regard to the results of recent investigations in China of
Mr Plane gives evidence. The orders are sought to permit Mr
McKemmish to undertake further search, and thus vary the limitations
of the existing forensic device that the Court placed on Mr McKemmish. He
is not able to undertake such search without
first obtaining the Court’s
order. It is appropriate that the applicants apply to the Court to seek that
variation of extant
The application relating to the further devices
59 In respect of the orders sought requiring urgent
delivery up of the further devices, forensic imaging, search and review, all to
take place in the first days of final hearing conducted electronically, I would
need more cogent and substantial evidence from the
applicants than was presented
in Plane #3 and in Plane #4 in order to be satisfied that I should grant the
relief sought.
60 I am not persuaded that it reasonably follows from Mr Zhao on 4 June
2021 seeing on a phone used by Emilio Wang a contact name
that is likely to be
Mr Skelin, or Mr Zhao observing on that phone instances of communications
between Emilio Wang and Mr Skelin,
that any such communications relate to
the subject matter encompassed by the notice to produce, or to the Search Terms.
In the circumstances
pertaining on 3 and 4 August 2021, I considered that more
was required to be persuaded it was appropriate to order delivery up of
further devices, forensic imaging and search. That is, I am not persuaded that
there is clear evidence before me of Mr Skelin
communicating or having
communicated with Emilio Wang on matters that could be said to be relevant to
this proceeding. I have had
regard to Mr Plane’s evidence, the 5 Pages,
and Mr Skelin’s further production, and instructions as evidenced in
Mr Grunert’s
affidavit, and annexed to it, in coming to this
conclusion.
61 Mr Grunert’s evidence, on instructions, of Mr Skelin’s present
use of the further devices, and his concerns if he was
deprived of them, even
for a few hours, as at 3 August 2021, are matters to which I have had
regard and take into account in weighing
the competing concerns of the parties.
62 Given I am not persuaded to allow the relief sought in respect of the
further devices, it is not necessary that I form a concluded
view as to the
balance of the discretionary matters raised by Mr Le Plastrier particularly as
to the extent of search and distraction
of resources. I do not consider,
however, that it necessarily follows that the application of the Search Terms
(or any modified
terms) to a forensic image of the further devices would result
in an unmanageable number of results, notwithstanding Mr Grunert’s
concerns about the number of emails passing between his firm and Mr Skelin, or
the thousands of emails that Mr Skelin informs Mr
Grunert he has on his devices.
63 As to the extent of searches that Mr Grunert considers his firm would then
have to undertake to meet their obligations to Mr Skelin,
before releasing
the results, as I have said above, I observe that it should not be beyond the
ingenuity of both parties’ legal
representatives acting in good faith,
complying with their obligations to this Court under the Rules, approaching the
matter practically,
and with the assistance of Mr McKemmish, readily to be
able to exclude likely privileged material.
64 As to the submission that as Mr Skelin had produced documents, it
followed that any risk of destruction was unlikely, I express
Further search of the existing forensic image
65 Turning now to paragraph 1 of the application
which seeks a further search of the already captured existing forensic image
the Search Terms, in the light of the further evidence that is now
before me – which relates to recent investigations and events,
self-evidently not known in October 2019 – I am persuaded it is
appropriate to allow further discovery by a further search
of the image. It
seems to me that an efficient and practical course is to vary the extant orders
to allow Mr McKemmish undertake
a further search of the existing forensic
image applying the Search Terms, but excluding some of those terms that have
been searched (and thus I apprehend would return some results already
generated), or would be likely to be unproductive, such as
66 I am persuaded that the evidence that Mr Plane gives of the named Chinese
entities and individuals, the investigations of the Shanghai
PSB, the June 2021
raids and July 2021 issue of arrest warrants, the recent arrest of Emilio Wang,
and the verification reports of
counterfeit freezeframe products provide a
clearly sufficient basis on which to vary the extant orders to permit
Mr McKemmish to
undertake the further search.
67 Given that Mr McKemmish has a master copy of the existing forensic image,
the further search could be undertaken readily. It does
not require
Mr Skelin to produce any devices.
68 I note that the unfiltered previous search results were reviewed by the
former solicitors for Mr Skelin, and privileged, confidential
irrelevant material was identified and excluded (I apprehend including by
the use of exclusionary terms provided by them to Mr
McKemmish), and that a
master copy of the search results was provided to Mr Skelin by provision to his
former solicitors.
69 I am informed by Mr Le Plastrier, however, that Mr Skelin’s current
solicitors do not have a copy of that master. I have
not been provided with any
explanation why that is so, however, given that Mr McKemmish was ordered to
retain a master copy, in order
to progress the matter without further
disputation, I will require Mr McKemmish to provide a further copy of the master
forensic image to Mr Skelin’s current legal representatives.
DISPOSITION
70 Having regard to the above matters, orders in
terms of paragraph 1 of the application in a modified form should be made, and
2 to 4 of the application should be dismissed. Mr McKemmish
should provide a report to the Court regarding the further searches
undertaken,
further to which I will make further orders to progress in an orderly manner the
production of certain results that may
be released to the applicants.
71 Accordingly, I made the orders dated 5 August 2021, and will now dismiss
paragraph 2 to 4 of the application.
72 I will hear the parties on costs.
I certify that the preceding seventy-two (72)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 31 August 2021
SYG 2771 of
Respondents
Fourth Respondent:
FREEZEFRAME CHINA CO PTY LTD ACN 621 016 975
Fifth Respondent:
KEFEI (EMILIO) WANG
Sixth Respondent:
PASCAL SKELIN
Seventh Respondent:
EPAQ INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD ACN 608 870 588
Eighth Respondent:
QUANJIAN PTY LTD
Ninth Respondent:
YIPING YANG
Tenth Respondent:
Eleventh Respondent:
KEFEI (IVAN) WANG
Twelfth Respondent:
ZUREN INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD
Thirteenth Respondent:
Fourteenth Respondent:
Fifteenth Respondent:
E-GO CHANNEL PTY LTD
Sixteenth Respondent:
AUSTRALIAN VITAMIN PLUS PTY LTD
Seventeenth Respondent:
YAN (CYNTHIA) LI
RTF format (554 KB)
Signed PDF/A format