Applicant v Respondent - re Summary: termination of employment - clinical neuropsychological evidence - mitigating circumstances - reinstatement - continuity of service [2009] AIRC 950; (18 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
- Application for relief re (Harsh, Unjust or Unreasonable) termination of employment
(U2008/698)
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT RICHARDS
BRISBANE, 18 DECEMBER 2009
Summary: termination for misconduct – clinical neuropsychological evidence - mitigating circumstances – reinstatement
– continuity of service.
This matter concerns an application under
s.643(1)(a)
Workplace Relations Act 1996
”) by the Applicant (whose identity will remain anonymous for purposes of this decision) regarding relief in relation to the
termination of his employment by the Respondent (whose identity also will remain anonymous).
The Applicant, who is 56 years of age, had worked variously as a production line and process worker and as a Plant Operator, it appears,
continuously for some 38 years with the Respondent and its predecessor at the production site, in Brisbane.
At the time of the termination of his employment, the Applicant was performing Plant Operator duties.
His principal tasks appear to have concerned wrapping and packing pallets.
Following a show cause process, the Applicant’s employment was terminated on 29 October 2009. The termination letter gave the
reasons as follows:
“...the reason for the termination of your employment is for Serious Misconduct. Specifically, by your own admittance, during
your rostered shift of 1 October 2008 you performed an indecent and a lewd act on yourself in the presence of other work colleagues
in the Lunch Room of the Packing Department.
The indecent act was that you exposed […] [yourself], applied a lubricant […] and fondled yourself.
The lewd act occurred later, on the same shift when, having received a package addressed “Happy Birthday […]”, you
used an item from this package to rub in a circular motion around your groin area.
Company management views your actions as unacceptable behaviour which constitutes serious misconduct.”
The above conduct occurred on the night shift in the Lunch Room. The indecent act around 1.00am and the lewd act later in the shift,
around 3.00am. The detail of and the context in which these acts were carried out are set out below.
It is important to set out, firstly, however, the Applicant’s personal circumstances.
The Applicant lives at home with his father. He is unmarried.
His father (who is 84 years old and whose identity will also remain anonymous) gave evidence that the Applicant “suffered brain
damage at birth and was developmentally slow… […] [the Applicant] did not crawl until 18 months and was over two years
old before he walked.”
The Applicant was also believed to be deaf for some time.
There was no independent expert evidence led to this end, however.
The Applicant’s former General Practitioner for some 7-8 years described him as having a “mild intellectual impairment”.
The Applicant is a diabetic (Type II).
He has also been treated for anxiety and depression in the past.
The evidence showed that the Applicant attended Darling Point Opportunity School from 10-17 years of age, whereupon a teacher obtained
a position for him at the current facility.
The Applicant, upon referral from the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service, was the subject of a cognitive functioning assessment
in relation to his vocation on 6 March 2009 by Dr Shelley Keane, a Clinical Neuropsychologist. Two reports followed from Dr Keane.
The first report was dated 19 March 2009. It stated in summary:
• The Applicant’s Full Scale IQ fell within the Low Average range, which meant that his overall thinking and reasoning
abilities exceed those of 12% of the adult population for his age. His performance on non-verbal reasoning tasks was much higher
than his verbal reasoning tasks, which were classified as “borderline” (that is, his verbal reasoning exceeded 7% of
adults his age).
• Testing of his verbal comprehension abilities (which produces a measure of acquired knowledge, verbal reasoning, and comprehension
of verbal information but unrelated to working memory) demonstrated that the Applicant was again in the “borderline”
range (that is, his verbal abilities exceeded 4% of adults his age). Dr Keane noted that a “relative weakness in comprehending
verbal information may impede […] the Applicant’s ability to learn new material.”
• On a task measuring his knowledge of word meanings his performance fell into the Extremely Low Range (2
percentile).
• On a task measuring his verbal abstract reasoning ability his performance was borderline (5
percentile).
• His general knowledge fell into the Low Average range (25
percentile).
• His non-verbal reasoning skills were in the average range (25
percentile), whilst his Perceptual Organisation Index score (which measures spatial processing and attentiveness to detail but without
reference to speed in processing) exceeded that of 37% of his peers.
• The Applicant’s “information processing was slow but consistent with his well below average verbal abilities.”
• His ability to store information (verbal memory) was in the Low Average range (16
percentile). His ability to learn a task from unstructured verbal information was borderline.
• The Applicant’s “ability to read words fell into the Extremely Low Range (4
percentile).”
• His ability to read short passages aloud and answer questions about the passage fell into the Extremely Low range (2
percentile).
• The report noted that the functional reading age is considered to be 8.5 years, and [the Applicant’s] ability is well
below this level, consequently, [he] is functionally illiterate. This indicates that [he] would have difficulty reading and understanding
most written documents.”
• Consistent with the above, the report concluded that the Applicant would have been able to accommodate a structured, familiar
and repetitive motion-based work environment which was not dependent upon verbal direction.
Dr Keane’s report also stated that:
• “[…] in my opinion, although the chances of […] [the Applicant] harming food product cannot be totally eliminated,
I think the risk that […] [the Applicant] may act in a way […] [that] damages product security is extremely slight. I
think that this risk would be further reduced if […] [the Applicant] were to be linked up with a support network, which could
provide supervision at work.”
• Dr Keane further noted that since the Applicant lost the support provided by his Mother on her death, he has also lost the
structure, direction and mentoring she brought to his daily life.
His almost 84 year old father has not been able to fill that role.
Dr Keane’s second report is dated 15 October 2009.
This report was in response to a series of questions put to Dr Keane by the Applicant’s union representative, the Liquor,
Hospitality and Miscellaneous Union (“
Dr Keane concluded that the Applicant is “below average intellectually”, “is easily led” and that he is an
“immature na�ve person who is easily influenced by stronger more intellectually able individuals” and “persuadable”.
In so commenting Dr Keane drew from her knowledge of the Applicant’s “intellectual deficits elicited on assessment and
the history as presented to me both at clinical interview with [the Applicant’s] father and in the workplace”.
Dr Keane was also of the view that the Applicant “would find it difficult to think beyond the present moment of the joke to
appreciate the consequences of his actions”. Further, because of the Applicant’s literalism and the absence of verbal
dexterity, he finds “lewd jokes, which are concrete and involve basic humour are more easily appreciated” and his “ability
to understand social conventions is […] diminished by his intellectual deficits”.
These commentaries appear to reflect the evidence of the Applicant’s father (obtained during the clinical interview) that the
Applicant is easily manipulated and in the past had been led to buy a $10,000 car (and almost a second) for a family that exploited
his na�vet�.
The Applicant’s personnel file also contains references to this issue and concerns held in the workplace as to the Applicant’s
I have had the benefit of listening to the Applicant’s evidence under questioning, and I have asked him to read some limited
materials incidental to his evidence. The Applicant clearly lacks to important degrees many of the communication skills an ordinary
person might be expected to possess, and his thought processes are often confused, or else made incoherent through his speech patterns.
One example will suffice:
“There are a lot of things you need to be able to understand in your job?---Yes, I do, yes.
Could you explain some of those, please?---Some jobs I set the machines up. We get up - when I do - come in at 5.30 in the morning
we set the machine up and do, you know, whatever and then do other jobs too, do you know what I mean, set the machine up, yes.
And from time to time you picked up other duties around the place?---Yes, I do.
And you're able to adjust to performing those other tasks?---Yes.
Could you give me some examples?---Sometimes they could ask if one person, sure, they could put us on tubs and lids if they need be.
My job is not there. They can pick and choose any job in that factory or across over warehouse.
And you're capable of performing all those jobs?---Yes, I do.”
Mr Pilkington, the Human Resources Manager for the Employer, stated that in his view the Applicant had a “disability”
(the definition of which was not explored).
Dr Hishon, the Applicant’s General Practitioner for some years stated that the Applicant gave evidence that the Applicant suffered
from a “mild impairment”.
It would appear also that the Applicant was subject to some teasing in the workplace over a lengthy time, but the degree and impact
are not accurately discernible on the evidence.
Mr Mark Webster for the Respondent stated he understood that there had been no complaints of bullying of the Applicant
Mr Pilkington gave evidence that in his record of interviews with employees that there was a history of some benign and less benign
teasing, though the Applicant himself did not believe that he had been teased in a substantive way.
The Respondent was not aware of any complaints about teasing and concluded there was “no evidence of complaints or specific
instances of teasing” of the Applicant.
Notwithstanding this, it appears, however, from Dr Keane’s evidence that Mr Pilkington told her that the Applicant had been
the subject of teasing in the workplace and that he had been goaded by other employees and that sometimes this became out of hand.
This evidence went unchallenged, though it is uncertain whether Mr Pilkington at the time of the conversation was reflecting at all
times on the Applicant’s history as it was known prior to 1 October 2009.
The evidence also suggested that the Applicant could act foolishly in order to attract attention and make new friends.
This evidence went unchallenged. It correlated with Dr Keane’s evidence as to the Applicant’s susceptibility to suggestion
or persuasion, which I have set out above.
FIRST INCIDENT: 1
OCTOBER 2009
Sometime around 1:00 am when in the lunch room, Mr Mitch Reid, a co-worker, threw a small tube of liquid to the Applicant he found
on a bench. The Applicant had been minding his own business at the time. Apart from the Applicant, two other employees were in the
Mr Reid stated he knew the tube he threw to the Applicant to be a sample of personal lubricant that was from a men’s magazine.
Mr Reid stated when he threw to tube to the Applicant he (Mr Reid) stated:
“Here, you might like this”.
Upon being given the tube of lubricant, the Applicant started to drink or lick its contents, believing it to be a confectionary.
Mr Reid claims he then said to the Applicant something to the effect that:
“[…] don’t do that, that’s not for drinking, that’s a lubricant”.
Mr Reid admitted stating further that the lubricant was “intended for [your] penis”.
The Applicant said Mr Reid said “something like, “it is for your dick”.
The Applicant then proceeded, whilst seated, to pull down the top of his trousers and the place the lubricant on his penis, to the
amusement of some of the employees in the lunch room.
The Applicant said the incident occurred “very quickly”.
Mr Reid said it occurred “over just a few moments”.
But in cross examination Mr Reid appeared to suggest the totality of the events (from his entry into the lunchroom to his exit) lasted
a few minutes.
The Applicant appears to have told the Respondent at interview on 8 October 2008 that the incident lasted for “about three
minutes”, but his evidence in this respect appears to have merged with the second incident as he referred to being interrupted
by two female employees (an event which occurred in the second but not the first incident).
Mr Pilkington under cross examination agreed that there was uncertainty as to what was in the Applicant’s mind when he referred
to the incident occurring over three minutes.
Mr Reid, in his written statement in these proceedings, states that he did not see the Applicant expose himself, only that “he
appeared to put his hands down the front of his trousers”.
There is a further discussion of this matter below.
Mr Reid gave evidence under my questioning that the incident occurred whilst the Applicant was seated at an angle and his waist was
below the line of the lunch room table. Mr Reid was making a cup of coffee some 2-3 metres away from the Applicant at the time. Consequently,
Mr Reid’s evidence was whilst he had stated in his original interview that the Applicant had applied the lubricant to himself,
he intended to say that the Applicant appeared to do so:
“He [the Applicant] was sitting on an angle to the table he was sitting at and just the action he was doing just it looked like
Mr Reid stated that his attention (“probably”) was only drawn to the Applicant’s conduct after he heard laughter
from behind him after such time as he had thrown the sachet of lubricant to the Applicant and informed him of its purpose.
Mr Reid’s further evidence was that “we all told […] [the Applicant] to stop and then went outside for a smoke”,
believing if they left the Applicant alone he would cease his apparent conduct.
There is nothing further to the first incident.
SECOND INCIDENT: 1
OCTOBER 2009
Later in the shift that morning, seemingly around 3.00am, the Applicant returned to the lunchroom and found a package marked “Happy
Birthday […]” on it.
It was not the Applicant’s birthday.
The Applicant opened the package and found inside a pair of rubber gloves, tissues and a piece of cardboard with a target on it and
the words “suck it hard”.
In his witness statement the Applicant stated that he disposed the items, bar the cardboard target, which he “placed”
on his “groin area” or “his front”).
This evidence is consistent with the record of interview
in which the Applicant is recorded as stating that he “rub[bed] it [the cardboard target] around the crotch” and “rubbed
[it] around [his] groin.”
Under cross examination, however, the Applicant appears to have had no recollection of what he did in respect of the second incident:
“I'm not quite sure what I done with that target, you know, whether groin or put it through I'm not quite sure.”
Nor did the Applicant recall if he was standing up or sitting down at the time of the second incident.
For reasons discussed below, there was no other direct evidence bearing on this issue.
In his clinical interview with Dr Keane, the Applicant stated that he put his penis through the cardboard target.
Dr Keane’s evidence under cross – examination was equivocal as to the coherence of the Applicant’s narrative of
this event.
There might have been two other male employees in the lunchroom at the time. Two casual female employees appeared at a certain point,
and the Applicant told them to “stay away girls, this is men’s business”, or some such similar words.
There is no evidence that any female employee was witness to the incident, or knew what was proceeding.
Again, the Applicant recalled some employees “laughing at [him] doing silly things”.
There was no direct evidence, apart from the above, that added anything material to this incident.
(a) Whether there was a valid reason for the termination related to the employee’s capacity or conduct (including its effect
on the safety and welfare of other employees)
The Respondent’s principal arguments are that:
It investigated the workplace discussion that the Applicant had engaged in the conduct as alleged;
The conduct was found to have occurred by the Applicant’s admission;
It was inappropriate conduct;
The Applicant had attended EEO and Drug, Alcohol and Discipline Policy training a year prior to the incidents;
The Applicant appreciated at the interview with the Respondent that the his conduct was inappropriate conduct, and by so admitting,
gave evidence that he knew the difference between right and wrong (and those interviewed in the workplace so attested generally);
There was no excuse for the conduct in relation to the first incident as the Applicant was not enticed nor encouraged to act in any
particular way;
Any other employee would have been treated in the same manner about such allegations and would have been dismissed from their employment;
Whilst the Applicant was “slow” he was “able to function in all aspects of his job and comply with all other workplaces
requirements [and] that impairment could not be used as an excuse […]”
The Applicant accepted the decision to terminate his employment with “a high level of decorum and aplomb” and stated
to another co-worker who sought to defend him upon his termination being announced:
“Shut up, Mal…Please I understand why, I know the code of conduct. I love the company, they’ve looked after me.”
The Respondent also claimed that the conduct of the Applicant was inconsistent with the training it had provided to its employees.
The Respondent contended that the Applicant had completed EEO training in 2007, with the intended implication being that the Applicant
ought to have been guided by that policy in respect of the circumstances as discussed.
Generally, the Respondent’s view was that the Applicant appreciated the content of the material, knew there was a difference
between appropriate and inappropriate behaviours, and understood there were consequences for breaching the policies.
Mr Pilkington also stated that in his “opinion, he was one of those employees who if you showed him something once, he grasped
it and never forgot it. I would describe him as meticulous.”
The Applicant alerted him to workplace bullying and harassment and sexual harassment and discrimination policies he had completed.
The Applicant remembered attending some training but did not understand it all.
It appears to me that the conduct of the Applicant taken on its face and as admitted (in relation to the first incident
was conduct that was inappropriate to the workplace.
The Applicant admits that in relation to the first incident that:
“[…] he did expose [his] penis for about 15 seconds” [and that I] pushed my underpants down and applied a small
amount of the lubricant with 2 fingers for the short time described above.”
This conduct took place in an area in which employees of the employer regularly congregate and, of course, are known to so congregate.
The conduct was of the kind to which the
Summary Offences Act 2005
(Qld) might apply.
It was conduct, demonstrably in my view, that could cause offence and embarrassment to other employees. It hardly warrants an EEO
Policy or a Code of Conduct to establish an ordinary expectation of civility in the workplace.
The Applicant now recognises, as he did after the event at the interviews, that his conduct was inappropriate in the workplace as
it would be in the wider community.
It appears to me that for the purpose of s.652(3)(a) of the Act, that little turns on whether the actual conduct was directly witnessed
by any employees. The Applicant admitted the conduct in relation to the first incident and that conduct was well enough known by
the employees present.
On its face, therefore, the Applicant’s conduct establishes a valid reason for the termination of the Applicant’s employment.
I note that the Applicant is described by the Respondent as “fondling” himself in relation to the first incident. This
is a verb with sexual connotations. It is not a verb that arises naturally from the evidence, and it would be surprising if it did.
The circumstances of this matter (involving the two incidents) were about risky social behaviour (of which there is further discussion
below), not private self gratification having occurred in a public place (which is an issue of a different dimension altogether).
Mr Davis for the Respondent appeared under cross examination to have adopted the same perspective on the Applicant’s conduct.
I have not reached my finding above, therefore, in the context of the Applicant having ‘fondled’ himself. The evidence
did not support this characterisation of his conduct.
I should add further that I have not found it necessary to have recourse to a consideration of the second incident (in so far as
there is any suggestion the Applicant exposed himself at that time) for the purpose of establishing a valid reason for the termination
of the Applicant’s employment.
The reason why I have not had regard to the second incident is that I do not find that the Applicant exposed himself or otherwise
acted in a manner (in this particular regard) that would, taken on its own, amount to serious misconduct, or misconduct warranting
the termination of his employment.
The evidence by way of the Applicant’s written statement and his original record of interview is that he took the target from
within the so-called “birthday present” and rubbed it in a circular motion around his groin area.
Mr Pilkington, however, gave evidence through his written statement that Mr Andrew in his interview had stated to him (Mr Pilkington)
that the Applicant placed his “Johnny” through the hole in the target.
This account wrongly constructs the evidence from the record of interview.
The record of interview suggests that Mr Andrew had no direct knowledge of what transpired either the first or the second incidents.
This was because he claimed he was not in attendance in the lunchroom for either incident. And in respect of the second incident,
his record of interview reveals that he heard three different stories about the Applicant’s conduct arising from that incident.
Mr Pilkington’s written statement only recounts one of the three stories about the Applicant’s conduct that Mr Andrew
states in the record of interview that he heard from others in the workplace.
Dr Keane also gave evidence that the Applicant had told her that he put his penis through the hole in the target.
Mr Andrew was not available for cross examination and provided no statement in these proceedings.
I have tended to prefer the evidence of the Applicant himself as he gave it at the more contemporaneous time of his original interviews.
The Applicant’s responses as given to Mr Pilkington at the time were strikingly frank. The Applicant firstly stated that he
had placed the lubricant on his penis. And without any suggestion in the interview notes of hesitation or contrivance, the Applicant
then went onto described how he had rubbed the target in a circular motion around his groin in respect of the second incident.
It appears to me that this evidence was given in a continuous stream of candid recollection. Not only had the Applicant demonstrated
remorse and made admissions, the Respondent noted at the time that the Applicant had “volunteered” further information
If the Applicant had done something else with the target other than rub it around in a circular motion around his groin it would
have been expected in the context of the interview that he would have said so. Having heard the Applicant’s evidence, I very
much doubt the Applicant was capable of dissembling or motivated to dissemble in such a manner (by delineating between his conduct
in the two incidents) at the initial interview without there being discontinuity in his narrative or some evidence of hesitation.
Mr Pilkington, for his part, gave evidence that during the investigation the Applicant did not “avoid questions about the incident”
and that he appeared to have given “frank and honest” answers at the interview.
The Applicant’s evidence, I should also add, was unchanged over the course of his initial Statement in these proceedings and
in his Supplementary Statement. His evidence in relation to the second incident, however, became more equivocal the course of his
cross examination for reason he states his recollection had failed him (with the incident having occurred over 14 months ago).
As best I can determine it, to now claim that the Applicant acted to mislead his employer at the original interviews about his conduct
in relation to the second incident does not sit at all comfortably in the structure and context of the evidence overall.
I cannot explain why the Applicant said what he may have said in his discussion with Dr Keane. It may well be, as Dr Keane suggested,
that his narrative was always in a state of confusion.
That said, on the balance of probability, I find that the Applicant did not expose himself in the second incident. The Applicant’s
actions as I have found them to be (and what Mr Pilkington described as the Applicant’s “little dance”)
might constitute an unsavoury gesture in the context in which they occurred, which may warrant, arguably, some lower level disciplinary
response, but I would put it no higher than that in the context.
That said, the employer was entitled to take the conduct as I have identified it in the second incident together with the conduct
in the first incident for the purpose of founding a valid reason for the termination of the Applicant’s employment. Be that
as it may, however, as I have said above, in my view the conduct on the first incident was sufficient in its own right to establish
a valid reason for the termination of the Applicant’s employment.
(b) whether the employee was notified of that reason
It appears not to be in contest that the Applicant was notified of the reason for the termination of his employment. The decision
was presaged by an extended investigation.
The only issue that does arise is that in the correspondence in which the Applicant’s employment was terminated it was said
that his misconduct included a claim that he had “fondled” himself.
Whatever that was intended to mean, such a verb was not referred to in the show cause correspondence that had previously been directed
to the Applicant and to which he was invited to respond.
In this limited sense, the Applicant was not notified of the full suite of reasons for the termination of his employment.
That said, I do not see the characterisation of the Applicant’s conduct by use of the verb “fondled” as being determinative
in establishing the valid reason for the termination of the Applicant’s employment that I have discussed it above. As I have
discussed above, the stark fact of the Applicant’s admitted conduct is sufficient to ground the valid reason.
Notwithstanding this, so far as the characterisation of the misconduct in sexual terms was not put to the Applicant at the time,
this might be a consideration that may have some weight in any decision as to whether the termination of the Applicant’s employment
was harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
(c) whether the employee was given an opportunity to respond to any reason related to the capacity or conduct of the employee
There is no evidence that the termination process was procedurally unfair (other than in the confined sense I have discussed it above).
The Applicant was issued a show cause letter on 14 October 2008 following the investigation into the two incidents. The LHMU replied
on behalf of the Applicant on 22 October 2009. The Applicant’s father replied on his behalf on 15 October 2008.
The decision to terminate the Applicant’s employment was taken in a further meeting of 29 October 2009.
This process is sufficient to demonstrate that the Applicant was given an opportunity to respond to the allegations put to him.
(d) if the termination related to unsatisfactory performance by the employee—whether the employee had been warned about that
unsatisfactory performance before the termination
The termination of the Applicant’s employment was for reason of his conduct, not the performance of his duties as such.
(e) the degree to which the size of the employer’s undertaking, establishment or service would be likely to impact on the procedures
followed in effecting the termination
The size of the Respondent’s undertaking did not impact negatively upon the procedures it followed in effecting the termination
of the Applicant’s employment. Nor is it likely to have given the operation of s.643(10) of the Act.
(f) the degree to which the absence of dedicated human resource management specialists or expertise in the undertaking, establishment
or service would be likely to impact on the procedures followed in effecting the termination
The Respondent did not labour under any absence of dedicated human resource management specialists or expertise. Because of this,
it cannot be said that there was any negative impact on the procedures followed in effecting the termination arising from the absence
of such resources.
(g) any other matters that the Commission considers relevant
I consider the following matters to be relevant to a determination as to whether the termination of the Applicant’s employment
was harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
Length of Service
The Applicant has had one job since he was 17 years of age, and that is with the Respondent and its predecessor. He was in this job
for 38 years without disruption before such time as his employment was terminated.
His long work history was to a very large extent was unblemished. I have provided some discussion of the Applicant’s work history
below, and have there cited two relatively minor incidents in which some mild disciplinary counselling might have been given to the
Applicant, some years ago.
Impact on Applicant
The uncontested evidence is that the Applicant is upset about losing his job and has not been successful in obtaining alternative
work. He is enduring loneliness, watches DVDs or TV in his room and eats fast food which affects his diabetes. He has also been observed
to be depressed and to have stopped caring about himself.
This evidence was not challenged.
Impact on Employees
The impact of the Applicant’s conduct might to some measure at least be reflected in the number of witnesses to the conduct.
Were the actions of the Applicant as he admitted
witnessed by his co-workers (or by anyone)? I have discussed this to some limited extent above, but a more detailed exploration of
the circumstances is warranted.
Mr Reid was the only witness who was aware of the circumstances in relation to the first incident, but even he only gives evidence
by his written statement to the following extent:
“After I told […] [the Applicant] the lubricant was for his penis he appeared to put his hands down the front of his trousers.
I did not see […] [the Applicant] expose himself at all during this instance which occurred over just a few moments.”
This is consistent with Mr Reid’s evidence as given under my questioning (as I have discussed above).
I should add that I am aware that the evidence of Mr Pilkington was that Mr Reid had said to him in interview on 7 October 2009 that
the Applicant had “poured [the lubricant] on his penis and started “fiddling with himself” and the Applicant “wasn’t
stopping so we left the room”.
Mr Davis, who interviewed Mr Reid the day prior, on 6 October 2009, stated that Mr Reid said to him that “[…] [the Applicant]
pulled out his penis and started to fondle it.”
Mr Reid’s supplementary evidence was that despite signing the record of interview documents, which he said he did when under
pressure and without careful consideration
, he did not at any time use the word “penis” or “fondle” during the interviews with his employer, nor does
he recall stating that the Applicant was “fiddling” with himself.
Further, Mr Reid said that he did not mean to imply, if he did, that he had ever seen the Applicant expose himself.
At best, Mr Reid states that he had “thought” that the Applicant had exposed himself.
Mr Reid’s interview with the Respondent took place on 6 October 2008 at 10.30am (five days after the incident). At that time
Mr Reid stated that he flicked (or thrown) the lubricant to the Applicant, and after observing that the Applicant had commenced to
consume it, Mr Reid told him its purpose, and after being so informed, the Applicant took the action to which he has admitted.
In the record of interview of 7 October 2008 Mr Reid stated that after he had informed the Applicant of the purpose of the lubricant
and returned from making himself a cup of coffee “it looked like he was pouring it onto his parts […] and he kept doing
it and then I looked out and I noticed his penis was out. He wasn’t doing any kind of masturbation.”
There are difficulties reconciling Mr Reid’s evidence and the records of interview. But as I have discussed above, at a practical
level (given the Applicant was seated and angled away from Mr Reid, and the Applicant’s waist was below the table line, which
was some metres from where Mr Reid was standing) it appears to me to have been most unlikely that the Mr Reid could have directly
observed the Applicant.
Another employee, Mr Pilkington stated, only witnessed the event from behind but did not state that he saw the Applicant expose himself
No other persons appeared in these proceedings to give evidence in this matter.
Mr Pilkington also gave evidence that another employee, Yuki Andrew, had said in his interview statement that in respect of the second
incident, that the Applicant “ put his Johnny through the hole in the target [then] he started rubbing it in a circular motion
on himself.”
Mr Andrew, it was said, had prepared the so-called birthday present for the Applicant and admitted as much, according to Mr Pilkington.
Mr Andrew’s employment was terminated for conduct in relation to the second incident.
However, as I have discussed above, Mr Andrew did not observe this conduct and in effect only relayed to Mr Pilkington three separate
stories he had heard about the Applicant’s conduct in relation to the second incident. Mr Andrew was not himself in attendance
in the lunchroom at the time of the second incident, it appears.
On what has been presented to me, there is no evidence upon which I could make a finding that the Applicant exposed himself in relation
to the second incident, or was observed so doing by any person. The Applicant does not admit to exposing himself and no one witnessed
him so doing.
Therefore, there is no direct evidence before me, and no evidence upon which I could reasonably draw an inference, that anyone witnessed
the Applicant exposing himself in relation to either of the two incidents which occurred in the early hours of 1 October 2008. But
such a finding only takes the matter so far.
Did anyone make a complaint in relation to the conduct involved in the two incidents?
It appears that no employee made a complaint about the Applicant’s conduct in relation to either of the incidents set out above,
though the Applicant’s conduct was the subject of conversation among employees.
Nor was any evidence was led that any employee knowing of the incidents was offended, or believed they were unable to work with the
Applicant as a result.
I very much doubt, given the scope, concern for process and duration of the investigation carried out by the Employer that any employee
was dissuaded from filing a complaint about the Applicant.
The only evidence led was that of co-workers who were expressly willing to work with the Applicant in the future, despite their knowledge
of the Applicant’s conduct.
A petition was annexed to the Supplementary Statement of Ms Corless. It was signed by 37 co-workers. It carried the sentiment that
the co-workers “appealed for clemency” on the Applicant’s behalf and had been directed to the Respondent at the
time of the investigation of this matter. The petition’s preamble makes no mention of the full circumstances of this matter,
so it is unclear with what degree of knowledge or information the signatories might have signed their names. The petition is of little
weight in these proceedings.
Did the Applicant act wilfully?
The Respondent’s claim is that the Applicant acted without incitement or encouragement and that this was demonstrative of his
accountability for his actions.
This matter requires examination.
I have previously set out the evidence of Dr Keane in summary.
That evidence demonstrates that the Applicant’s social interactions are grounded in concrete acts and not through verbal cues
and nuances. Hence Dr Keane’s observation that the Applicant’s “ability to understand social conventions is […]
diminished by his intellectual deficits”. And that he:
“would find it difficult to think beyond the present moment of the joke to appreciate the consequences of his actions”
[and that] “lewd jokes, which are concrete and involve basic humour are more easily appreciated.”
This is evidence that is not incompatible with the fact that the Applicant, at the interviews, appreciated upon reflection, after
the “present moment” had passed, that his conduct was inappropriate.
The evidence from Dr Keane is that given his deficits as demonstrated, the Applicant is “persuadable”. There are some
elements of this in the context of the incidents on 1 October 2008.
Both incidents recounted above involve actions by co-workers that have an implicit element of enticement or prompting to them, and
to which the Applicant responded in concrete (and lewd) ways.
In relation to the first incident, upon trying to consume the personal lubricant, thinking it was a confectionary when it was first
given to him, the Applicant was told of its purpose by a co-worker, Mr Reid.
The Respondent characterised Mr Reid’s actions in this regard as a form of enticement:
Employer: “[…] why would you prompt him?”
Mr Reid: Firstly, I didn’t know state of mind.
Employer: What did you think?
Mr Reid: He likes cute things.
Employer: What point do you take ownership.
Mr Reid: I wasn’t encouraging him.
Employer: You did tell him what it was for.
Mr Reid: […] It seems that he is of that state of mind he is quite easily suaded with doing things.” (sic)
The Applicant, upon being prompted as the Respondent put it at the interview, applied the lubricant to himself. The interview notes
recorded by Mr Pilkington (when interviewing Mr Reid) show that the Applicant’s actions were responded to with laughter amongst
the three co-workers room, who told him to stop before leaving the room.
This is consistent with the wider evidence referred to above. The Applicant claimed Mr Reid stated words to the effect that you
are a “dirty thing you are” after he was alerted by the laughter to the Applicant’s conduct.
At the original interview with Mr Pilkington, Mr Reid gave evidence that he and the others left the lunch room (to have a cigarette)
as they felt the Applicant was carrying on because they were there.
In circumstances of the evidence, it appears to me that the Applicant responded to being provided the small lubricant sachet as it
were a proposition which involved some social risks, which he took up. And he did so as to ingratiate himself with his male co-workers,
a number of whom were laughing. This is the sense in which the evidence reveals the Applicant was prompted or enticed in relation
to the first incident.
To my mind, this was a social test (put to the Applicant by his co-workers) to which a person in the Applicant’s circumstances,
as demonstrated by Dr Keane’s cognitive assessment, was likely to fail, and once “the present moment” had passed,
to later regret.
It is similarly so in relation to the second incident. Even if the Applicant had exposed himself in that incident (which I have found
above he did not), I would again find that the Applicant was inherently vulnerable to respond to a social challenge involving risky
male-only behaviour in that manner. And again, the second incident took place in the context of laughter by his male co-workers and
his own comment that it was “men’s business”.
Indeed, in my view, the exploitation of that inherent vulnerability by Mr Andrew was the very reason that his employment was terminated
by the Respondent. If the Applicant had no such recognisable vulnerabilities, the mere fact that Mr Andrew left the “birthday
present” out for him would have been of no import as the Applicant would have borne full responsibility for his subsequent
actions. It follows that the Respondent was well aware of the Applicant’s vulnerability to be persuaded or led by other persons.
I must state at this point that I am somewhat perplexed by the relative weight the Respondent gave to both the first and second incidents
in its decision to terminate the Applicant’s employment. The Respondent’s letter of termination cites both incidents
on 1 October 2008 as providing the basis of the decision to terminate the Applicant’s employment. But the Respondent appeared
to have differentiated between the two incidents at the time of its investigation. The first was perceived by the Respondent as being
an unambiguous case in which the Applicant, without any mitigating circumstances, exposed himself. In the second instance, the Respondent
appeared to have identified mitigating circumstances.
These latter mitigating circumstances were evident in the fact Mr Andrew’s employment was terminated because he appeared to
have exploited the Applicant’s vulnerabilities in a manner that was not “fair”:
Respondent: “Did you think it is fair to treat someone like this?”
Mr Andrew: “No.”
Mr Davis, for the Respondent, expressly recalled the Applicant being informed that the Respondent believed that he had been enticed
in relation to the second incident:
“Ross Pilkington informed [the Applicant] with words to the effect of “We’ve concluded all of our interviews, unfortunately
we can not find any mitigating circumstances that find you were enticed in the first act. In the second incident, we can find some
circumstances that show you were enticed.”
Again, the fact that the Applicant was enticed in relation to the second incident by Mr Andrew was the reason why Mr Andrew’s
employment was terminated.
Notwithstanding this, Mr Pilkington relied upon both incidents as providing the basis for the termination of the Applicant
, despite what appears to have been mitigating circumstances in relation to the second incident.
Mr Webster, in his evidence, believed the second incident to have not been segregated from the general issue of misconduct, for which
the Applicant’s employment was terminated. Mr Davis said the second incident was an act of misconduct which was taken in hand
with the first incident in the decision to terminate the Applicant’s employment. Neither Mr Webster nor Mr Davis appeared
to have eliminated the second incident from their reasoning for the termination decision, despite the mitigating circumstances in
While this may reflect on the logical inconsistencies in the decision making by the Respondent, it does not affect my findings as
objectively determined about the factual matrix.
I have found on the weight of evidence (particularly that of Dr Keane and my observations of the Applicant as a witness) that the
Applicant is a vulnerable person who is susceptible to persuasion, and markedly so beyond what might be ordinarily expected in the
He is a person who may be prone to adopt risky behaviour in the context of the social rewards (the laughter and perceived acceptance
of his peers) that it might yield.
Mr Pilkington himself described the Applicant has having a “disability”. That term may not have been used with any strict
definitional value, but it did reflect on how the Applicant was perceived by his HR Manager, at least.
Perhaps more to the point, the fact that Mr Andrew’s employment was terminated for reason that he took advantage of the Applicant’s
vulnerability for his own amusement also attests to the extent of the Applicant’s known susceptibility to persuasion. Presumably,
if the Applicant was fully competent and capable of resisting enticements as an ordinary employee, then Mr Andrew’s employment
would not have been terminated.
In light of the evidence before me, I cannot therefore find that the Applicant acted wilfully and\or is entirely accountable for
his actions on 1 October 2008.
In my view, the evidence in relation to both incidents indicates that the Applicant was enticed by his co-workers to embark on risky
social conduct. The Respondent described Mr Reid’s actions as prompting the Applicant to certain actions. I agree. And I agree,
too, that Mr Andrew’s conduct as described in the record of interview was not “fair” in relation to the Applicant
because it exploited the Applicant’s inherent vulnerabilities (as did Mr Reid “prompt”). It is therefore understandable
that the Respondent terminated Mr Andrew’s employment.
In both instances, I am of the view the evidence demonstrates that there were mitigating circumstances that better frame the Applicant’s
conduct than what it appears to have been on its face.
In so finding, I am not adopting what I would describe as a simplistic position of declaring the Applicant not to be responsible
for his actions to any degree. Though the Applicant may not live independently and still appears to be supported and to have his
day structured by his very elderly father (who prepared him a meal each day before he left to work), he remains a functional member
of society.
The Applicant drives a motor vehicle, conducts his financial affairs, has no criminal record and appears never to have had his workplace
competencies called into question (in the roles he was required to perform).
It would be naive to characterise the Applicant as being entirely helpless and without a capacity for evaluating social norms (as
evidenced in his remorseful comments cited earlier).
The Applicant, despite his cognitive limitations and\or “mild impairment”
, knows that his conduct has departed from community standards. Though in my view, in both incidents on 1 October 2008 he was enticed
or prompted by his male colleagues to act differently than he would otherwise, he retains some measure of accountability and this
must be made known to him.
The findings reached in the discussion above constitute matters which are relevant to my considerations as to whether the Applicant’s
employment was harshly, unjustly or unreasonably terminated.
Repeat Offence
The Respondent is concerned by the risk of the Applicant re-offending, perhaps in the sense of not looking beyond “the present
moment” in some prospective incident. Dr Keane states that in her opinion this is unlikely, because of the degree of shock,
as it were, this incident has caused the Applicant.
The Applicant has shown considerable remorse. There is no challenge to that claim.
I cannot find that the Applicant will not re-offend.
Perhaps a future incident in which the Applicant demonstrated an inability to observe important social behaviours within the contemporary
workplace might warrant revisiting his capacity to perform his duties in a place of work. But the two incidents on 1 October 2008
on their own do not provide evidence of that order. And after 38 years of continuous employment at the site, putting aside the above
matters, the Applicant has evinced no substantiated tendency to fall into social dysfunction.
I should also add that Mr Pilkington gave evidence the Applicant “was one of those employees who if you showed him something
once, he grasped it and never forgot it. I would describe him as meticulous.”
Mr Pilkington also gave evidence that the Applicant understood that “his behaviour was inappropriate” and consequently
was remorseful for his actions and “appeared very embarrassed” about his conduct.
There is some further discussion below these matters.
If all this be so, I am inclined on the evidence to think that the Applicant has grasped the consequences of his action on 1 October
2008 and would not be disposed to repeat them, having learned from the intensity of the experience.
Work History
I should pause to note the Applicant’s prior employment were not without occasional blemish. There was one incident involving
an angry exchange with a co-worker, it appears, in 1995. On another occasion he may have tried to kiss a female co-worker, but the
file note is uncertain and lacking any detail. Other materials are more suggestive of the Applicant’s social and personal
difficulties (replete with information about the ways in which the Applicant vulnerabilities to persuasion or to seek social acceptance
were allegedly exploited by persons outside the workplace) and the way in which Respondent was attempting to deal with his needs
sensitively.
This material speaks very highly of the Respondent’s management over the relevant time in seeking to understand and address
the Applicant’s “deficits”, as Dr Keane might put it.
In 1999, for example, the personnel records reveal that the Respondent was seeking to identify a range of psychological, financial
and social and counselling services to support the Applicant. It appears from the file notes of the time the Respondent’s representative
had met and discussed and subsequently corresponded with the Applicant’s parents about community services to which the Applicant
may be referred.
None of this material, in any event, appears to be pressed by the Respondent, to the extent it had any relevance in any event. The
Respondent pointed out in its submissions that “it is irrelevant whether or not the Applicant has engaged in inappropriate
workplace behaviours in the past as” the Respondent’s investigation was based on the events of 1 October 2008 and the
conduct there in evidence “is sufficient to warrant dismissal.”
Mitigation – Remorse
In respect both the incidents summarised above, the Applicant, upon being interviewed by the Respondent when it became aware of his
conduct, stated that he understood “what I did on the night of 1 October 2008 was the wrong thing to do” and that he
“would never expose himself in public again.”
According to the Respondent, the Applicant “appeared very embarrassed to be talking about the incidents” and stated that
“it was a silly thing to do” and that “he just didn’t think”.
The Applicant is demonstrably remorseful for his conduct.
Mitigation - Economic Loss
The Respondent contended that Applicant had failed to mitigate his loss for reason that he had not elected to obtain a disability
The evidence led by the Applicant was that he had been in receipt of New Start Allowance since on or about 5 February 2009.
So far as the Centrelink receipts are in evidence, I presume the Applicant has been meeting the job test requirements, but without
Impact Upon Employer
Mr Pilkington and Mr Davis gave evidence that in their views a behavioural incident of the kind that occurred on 1 October 2008 had
the potential to damage the Respondent’s brand in consumers’ minds.
It appears that the argument in this regard is that the corporate image would be damaged if it was publicly known that the Employer
tolerated conducted of the kind that occurred. This is an argument that is a matter of significance, particularly in an industry
where the brand is based on food hygiene and quality control standards and adverse public perception may have serious commercial
consequences.
Notwithstanding this, the impact upon an employer’s image or brand must be approached cautiously. The case must be properly
made out and recourse to commercial interests should serve to mask whether a termination was harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
In this matter, some measures have been taken to accommodate the Employer’s commercial concerns by not disclosing the identity
of either it or the Applicant, and I have confirmed that the transcript of proceedings is not publicly available.
The Act requires that upon having regard to the above matters, that I must determine whether the termination of the Applicant’s
employment was harsh, unjust or unreasonable, recognising the interest of both the employer and the former employee. Elementally,
this requires a matter of judgment, albeit one derived from an objective perspective on the evidence.
On balance, though I have found that the Respondent had a valid reason for the termination of the Applicant’s employment because
of his conduct on 1 October 2008, I find that that the Applicant’s employment, nonetheless was harshly, unjustly and\or unreasonably
terminated.
This is a judgment of fine balance in the circumstances of this particular case.
The Applicant’s conduct in the lunchroom (in relation to the first incident as admitted) would not in the ordinary course of
events be tolerated in the contemporary workplace. The Employer in my view was properly motivated to protect its employees from conduct
of the kind that is admitted (including the lower level misconduct as evidenced in relation to the second incident) and to take reasonable
steps to protect its brand image.
But in this case there are compelling and demonstrable mitigating factors.
I have no wish to ascribe particular weight to any one or more factors in this regard, other than to say that despite the valid reason
for the termination of the Applicant’s employment, I have had regard to such factors as:
The Applicant’s serious misconduct was restricted, principally, to the first incident only and reliance cannot be placed on
any claim that the he exposed himself in relation to the second incident as there is no evidence to that end;
the absence of any direct witnesses to the actual conduct in relation to the first incident (which would have gone unsubstantiated
but for the Applicant’s own admission);
no person has given evidence that they have lodged a compliant about the Applicant’s conduct, and the only evidence before
me is of support for the Applicant amongst his co-workers, despite them having knowledge of the reasons for the termination of his
employment;
the Applicant was prompted (as the Employer’s representative described it in the record of interview) to engage in the socially
risky behaviour as I have described it in relation to the first incident, and enticed in relation to the second incident
the challenges and vulnerabilities to which the Applicant is exposed (particularly his susceptibility to persuasion) because of his
cognitive profile, which marks him out from the ordinary person (who may have fared much differently in the same circumstances).
Mr Pilkington, the HR Manager for the Employer, described the Applicant as person with a “disability”, and Mr Andrew’s
employment was terminated for reason he exploited the Applicant’s vulnerable state of mind;
the remorse demonstrated and likelihood the Applicant will reproduce the same behaviour in the related circumstances;
the very extended length of the Applicant’s service (38 years); and
the impact upon him of the loss of the structure and familiarity of the only workplace he has known.
Section 654(1) and (2) of the Act read as follows:
“654 Remedies on arbitration
(1) Subject to this section, the Commission may, on completion of the arbitration, make an order that provides for a remedy of a kind
referred to in subsection (3), (4) or (7) if it has determined that the termination was harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
(2) The Commission must not make an order under subsection (1) unless the Commission is satisfied, having regard to all the circumstances
of the case including:
(a) the effect of the order on the viability of the employer’s undertaking, establishment or service; and
(b) the length of the employee’s service with the employer; and
(c) the remuneration that the employee would have received, or would have been likely to receive, if the employee’s employment
had not been terminated; and
(d) the efforts of the employee (if any) to mitigate the loss suffered by the employee as a result of the termination; and
(e) any other matter that the Commission considers relevant;
that the remedy ordered is appropriate.
I have considered many of the above circumstances earlier, albeit it in a different context. I am aware of the Applicant’s
remuneration, as that has been a matter of evidence. I do not consider that any order that I might contemplate might have an adverse
effect on the viability of the Respondent’s undertaking. I therefore consider that it would be appropriate to make the order.
Section 654(3) of the Act reads as follows:
(3) If the Commission considers it is appropriate, the Commission may make an order requiring the employer to reinstate the employee
(a) reappointing the employee to the position in which the employee was employed immediately before the termination.
(b) appointing the employee to another position on terms and conditions no less favourable than those on which the employee was employed
immediately before the termination.
(4) If the Commission makes an order under subsection (3) and considers it appropriate to do so, the Commission may also make:
(a) any order that the Commission thinks appropriate to maintain the continuity of the employee’s employment; and
(b) subject to subsections (5) and (6)—any order that the Commission thinks appropriate to cause the employer to pay to the
employee an amount in respect of the remuneration lost, or likely to have been lost, by the employee because of the termination.
I see no reason why it would be inappropriate for the Applicant to be reappointed in the terms of either s.654(3)(a) or 654(3)(b)
of the Act. As is revealed in the evidence, the Applicant carried himself with “a high level of decorum and aplomb”,
according to Mr Pilkington when his employment was terminated, cooperated with the investigation and spoke positively and generously
professionally” over the course of the investigation.
I have taken steps to ensure as best I can that the Respondent’s brand is not affected by the reappointment of the Applicant
(though I have not necessarily accepted its claims, as they were, in this regard).
The Applicant’s former workplace colleagues appear to be disposed to work with him once more, despite having knowledge of his
conduct on 1 October 2008.
The Applicant, in my view, could continue to work on with his employer in much the same way as he has over the past 38 years; with
the mindful support of his co-workers and his supervisors, and nothing more elaborate than that (despite some suggestion of additional
arrangements being warranted).
In all, I see no substantive evidence that there has been any demonstrable trauma to the employment relationship that would make
it inappropriate to reinstate the Applicant.
Accordingly, I order that the Applicant be reappointed to the position in which he was employed immediately before the termination,
or else be appointed to another position on terms and conditions no less favourable than those on which he was employed immediately
before the termination. It is a matter for the Respondent’s operational circumstances as to which of the options is given final
effect. Some time has passed now since the Applicant was an employee of the Respondent and I should therefore afford it some measure
of flexibility in these respects.
I also add that the order I make to this effect commences one week after the date of this decision. Though nothing was put to me,
I assume that this will afford an opportunity for the employer to make the necessary arrangements, which may cause some inconveniences.
This is particularly so given the time that has elapsed since the termination of the Applicant’s employment.
I will also make an order under s.654(4)(a) of the Act so as to ensure that while the Applicant is reinstated on the above terms,
his continuity of service is retained or maintained.
I do not so consider it appropriate, however, that I make an order under s.654(4)(b) of the Act. This is because I have made findings
above that despite the mitigating circumstances, the Applicant did conduct himself in a way that provided a valid reason for the
termination of his employment, and he cannot be completely absolved entirely from any form of personal responsibility for his actions,
despite his many challenges.
I discussed above that the Applicant is not comprehensively or profoundly dysfunctional such that he has no capacity for forming
social judgements. His remorsefulness is demonstrative of this fact, as are his other capabilities that have enabled him to work
continuously for 38 years and to conduct himself in the community without reproach.
BY THE COMMISSION:
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
of Counsel instructed by the Liquor, Hospitality and Miscellaneous Union for the Applicant
Mr T McDonald
of Sparke Helmore for the Respondent
Hearing details:
November 27, 28.
December 7, 8.
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 12
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 8-10
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 11
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at Annexure 1
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 2 and 18
Statement of the Applicant’s father dated 15 October 2009 at PN 6
Statement of the Applicant’s father dated 15 October 2009 at PN 10
Statement of Dr David Hishon dated 17 November 2009 at Annexure DH1
Statement of the Applicant’s father dated 15 October 2009 at PN 31-32; Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at
PN 19; Statement of Dr David Hishon dated 17 November 2009 at Annexure DH1
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 21-23
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 13 and Statement of the Applicant’s father dated 15 October 2009 at
Statement of Dr Shelley Keane dated 16 October 2009 at PN1-8
Statement of Dr Shelley Keane dated 16 October 2009 at page 6 of Annexure SK2
Statement of Dr Shelley Keane dated 16 October 2009 at page 7 of Annexure SK2
Statement of Dr Shelley Keane dated 16 October 2009 at pages 8-9 of Annexure SK2
Statement of Dr Shelley Keane dated 16 October 2009 at page 9 of Annexure SK2
Statement of the Applicant’s father dated 15 October 2009 at PN 49 and 50
Statement of Dr Shelley Keane dated 16 October 2009 at Annexure SK3
Statement of Dr Shelley Keane dated 16 October 2009 at pages 1 and 2 of Annexure SK3
Statement of Dr Shelley Keane dated 16 October 2009 at page 2 of Annexure SK3
Statement of the Applicant’s father dated 15 October 2009 at PN 28; Statement of Mr David Evans dated 26 October 2009 at PN32
and 41 and Statement of Mr Cornelis Spierenburg dated 27 October 2009 at PN 33
Statement of Ms Nichole Watson dated 11 November 2009 at Annexure NW3
Transcript of Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN 91-96
Transcript of Proceedings on 7 December 2009 at PN 1746
Statement of Dr Shelley Keane dated 16 October 2009 at page 2 of Annexure SK3; Statement of Dr David Hishon dated 17 November 2009
at Annexure DH1
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 14-18; Statement of Mr Jason Porter dated 26 October 2009 at PN 16-20; Statement
of Mr Ken Carkeet dated 28 October 2009 at PN 21-24; Statement of Mr David Evans dated 26 October 2009 at PN 22-33; Statement of
Mr Douglas Courtenay dated 26 October 2009 at PN 21-31; Statement of Mr Cornelis Spierenburg dated 27 October 2009 at PN 21-32; Statement
of Ms Carol Corless dated 26 October 2009 at PN 13, who in 11 years as a delegate was not aware of any teasing, though she did not
work in the immediate environment with the Applicant)
Statement of Mr Mark Webster dated 12 November 2009 at PN 12
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 55-66
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 68; Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009 at PN 107-112;
Statement of Mr Hinton dated 19 November 2009 at PN 14
Supplementary Statement of Dr Shelley Keane dated 20 November 2009 at PN 2
Statement of Mr Mitch Reid dated 26 October 2009 at PN 12 and 14; Statement of Mr Jason Porter dated 26 October 2009 at PN 15; Statement
of Mr David Evans dated 26 October 2009 at PN 10 and 32; Statement of Mr Douglas Courtenay dated 26 October 2009 at PN 17; Statement
of Mr Cornelis Spierenburg dated 27 October 2009 at PN 33
Statement of Mr Mitch Reid dated 26 October 2009 at PN 17
Transcript of Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN 616 and 618
Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009 at page 1 of Annexure GD-1; Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November
2009 at pages 2-3 of the record of interview dated 7 October 2008 at 5.15pm as contained in Annexure RP-2. Also see Transcript of
Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN 588-598; Statement of Mr Mitch Reid dated 26 October 2009 at PN 18; Statement of the Applicant
dated 26 October 2009 at PN33. The evidence suggests that the Applicant may have believed the lubricant to be a confectionary because
earlier that evening he had been given “a lolly” by Mr Reid. This was because Mr Reid had “yelled” at the
Applicant in what appears to have been a minor incident in which Mr Reid became frustrated with the Applicant.
Statement of Mr Mitch Reid dated 26 October 2009 at PN 19; Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 34; Statement of
Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 34
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 34; Transcript of Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN 170
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 35-36; Transcript of Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN 179, 197, 190-193
and 520 and 566-567 and 689; Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 18 and 24
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 35; Transcript of Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN 209
Statement of Mr Mitch Reid dated 26 October 2009 at PN 20
Transcript of Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN 655 and 663
Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009 at PN 72 and Annexure GD2
Transcript of Proceedings on 7 December 2009 at PN 1680 - 1969
Statement of Mr Mitch Reid dated 26 October 2009 at PN 20; Transcript of Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN 601
Transcript of Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN 563
Transcript of Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN 689
Statement of Mr Mitch Reid dated 26 October 2009 at PN 21; Transcript of Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN 635 and 691
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 38
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 40
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 42; Supplementary Statement of the Applicant dated 19 November 2009 at PN
9; Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 19
Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009 at Annexure GD-1
Transcript of Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN 477 and 311-313
Transcript of Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN 522-523
Statement of Dr Shelley Keane dated 16 October 2009 at page 1 of Annexure SK2
Transcript of Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN 249 and 259-262
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 43; Transcript of Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN 458-460 and Statement
of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 20
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 46 and Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN
Statement of Mr Mark Webster dated 12 November 2009 at PN 25. And see the Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November
2009 at PN 89-91 and 100; Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009 at PN 93
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 95
Statement of Mr Mark Webster dated 12 November 2009 at PN 15 and Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 77
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 76
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 54-57
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 35 and Supplementary Statement of the Applicant dated 19 November 2009 at
Summary Offences Act 2005
Transcript of Proceedings on 7 December 2009 at PN 1949
Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009 at Annexure GD2
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN39
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at Annexure RP3; Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009
at Annexure GD2
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 20
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 18
Transcript of Proceedings on 7 December 2009 at PN 1668
Supplementary Statement of Dr Shelley Keane dated 20 November 2009 at PN 3
Transcript of Proceedings on 7 December 2009 at PN 1595
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at Annexure 3
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at Annexure 1
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 84
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 65-74; Statement of the Applicant’s father dated 15 October 2009 at
PN 61-68; Statement of Mr Cornelis Spierenburg dated 27 October 2009 at PN 49
Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009 at PN 11
Statement of Mr Mitch Reid dated 26 October 2009 at PN 19
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 34
Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009 at PN 29
Supplementary Statement of Mr Mitch Reid dated 20 November 2009 at PN 14-16
Supplementary Statement of Mr Mitch Reid dated 20 November 2009 at PN 12-13
Supplementary Statement of Mr Mitch Reid dated 20 November 2009 at PN 9
Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009 at Annexure GD2
Transcript of Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN561-565 and PN 601-606
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 43
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 39 and Annexures RP2 and RP3
Respondent’s Outline of Submissions dated 12 November 2009 at PN 8; Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009 at PN39-40,
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at Annexure RP3; Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009
at Annexure GD2
Statement of Mr Cornelis Spierenburg dated 27 October 2009 at PN 36 and 40
Statement of Mr Cornelis Spierenburg dated 27 October 2009 at PN 50; Statement of Mr Mitch Reid dated 26 October 2009 at PN 27; Statement
of Mr Jason Porter dated 26 October 2009 at PN 30; Statement of Mr David Evans dated 26 October 2009 at PN 42; Statement of Mr Douglas
Courtenay dated 26 October 2009 at PN 55; Statement of Ms Carol Corless dated 26 October 2009 at PN 24
Supplementary Statement of Ms Carol Corless dated 17 November 2009 at Annexure CC1
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 96(c), (f) and (i)
Statement of Dr Shelley Keane dated 16 October 2009 at page 2 of Annexure SK3
Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009 at Annexure GD2 titled Record of Interview 7 October 2008 at 4.15pm
Supplementary Statement of the Applicant dated 19 November 2009 at PN5
See Transcript PNS171,197,198,202,203, 207 and 582
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at Annexure RP2; Supplementary Statement of the Applicant dated 19 November
2009 at PN3
Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009 at PN40 and see Annexure GD-1. See also Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington
dated 12 November 2009 at Annexure RP3; Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009 at PN40
Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009 at PN 79. And see the Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November
2009 at PN 91
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 82
Mr Pilkington had other suspicions in this regard, but these were not of any evidentiary weight – see Transcript of Proceedings
on 7 December 2009 at PN 1764- 1783 and 1794-1814
Transcript of Proceedings on 7 December 2009 at PN 1746
Transcript of Proceedings on 27 November 2009 at PN 292
Statement of Dr Shelley Keane dated 16 October 2009 at Annexure SK2
Statement of Dr Shelley Keane dated 16 October 2009 at page 2 of Annexure SK3 and Statement of Dr David Hishon dated 17 November
2009 at Annexure DH1
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 76
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN 18
Statement of Ms Nichole Watson dated 11 November 2009 at Annexures NW2, NW3, NW4, NW6, NW7
Statement of Ms Nichole Watson dated 11 November 2009 at Annexure NW7
Respondent’s Outline of Submissions dated 12 November 2009 at PN 46
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN51 and 53
Statement of Mr Edwyn Ross Pilkington dated 12 November 2009 at PN22 and 23 and Statement of Mr Geoff Davis dated 15 November 2009
Respondent’s Outline of Submissions dated 12 November 2009 at PN 39
Statement of the Applicant dated 26 October 2009 at PN 80 and Annexure 4
Transcript of Proceedings on 7 December 2009 at PN 1792 and 2081
See Footnote 101 above.
Statement of Mr Mark Webster dated 12 November 2009 at PN 23
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code G, PR991640>
No downloadable files available