Tenants' Union of Queensland Inc and Tenants' Union of NSW Co-op Ltd v TICA Default Tenancy Control Pty Ltd [2004] PrivCmrACD 3 (15 April 2004)
Complaint Determination No. 3 of
Federal Privacy
Commissioner
Table of Contents
Determination No. 3 of 2004
1. Made under the
section 52.
Parties to the
Complainants
2. The Tenants’ Union of Queensland Inc and Tenants’ Union of NSW
Co-op Ltd, and;
Respondent.
3. TICA Default Tenancy Control Pty
4. This determination relates to a complaint lodged by the Tenants’ Union
of Queensland Inc (TU QLD) in February 2003
5. The respondent to the complaint is TICA Default
Tenancy Control Pty Ltd (TICA). As set out below (see [10]) TICA’s
activities involve the collection, use and disclosure of personal
information. It is complained that certain acts and/or practices
of TICA may be
an interference with the privacy of individuals.
6. The complaint is a representative complaint, lodged pursuant to
. TU QLD has identified the class of members to the
representative complaint as ‘tenants or former tenants, who are listed on
the TICA default database’.
7. I also received a complaint made by the Tenants’ Union of NSW Co-op Ltd
(TU NSW). The individual the subject of that complaint
fell within the class of
members identified by TU QLD and, accordingly, that complaint was dealt with as
a part of the representative
complaint brought by TU
8. I decided to investigate the relevant acts and practices of TICA pursuant to
, being satisfied that there was an act or practice
which may have been an interference with the privacy of an individual and that
the complaints received were validly made under
9. I am also satisfied that the requirements for the making of a representative
complaint, set out in
, have been
Background,
allegations and remedies sought
10. TICA is one of a number of organisations that
operates what is known as a tenancy database. Its Tenancy History Database
personal information about many thousands of Australians relating to
alleged defaults on tenancy agreements, including failures to
pay rent or damage
to property. It also holds personal information about applicants for tenancies
in what is known as the Enquiries
‘members’ of
TICA and makes the personal information it holds on its
11. Information about individuals is stored on the TICA database for a period
between three years and indefinitely.
12. The complainants allege that the listing time frames used by TICA are
‘excessive and unjustified.’ Consequently,
the complainants
believed that some of the information held by TICA is out-of-date and therefore
it is in breach of National Privacy
Principle (NPP) 3 (set out below at [19])
and further that it holds out-of-date information, in breach of NPP 4.2 (set out
at [20]). In particular the complainants allege that:
balanced against the likely detriment suffered by the listed tenant, the listing
periods are excessive;
the length of
time the TICA listings are kept is inconsistent with other comparable
legislation. The complainants gave examples such
as the Consumer Credit
Reporting Code of Conduct and the Spent Convictions Schemes which afford
individuals the right to ‘clear
five years is an
excessive timeframe for a consumer to be denied access to
consumer detriment should be
weighed against the risks involved for the
circumstances of individuals
can change and information collected some time ago may not be
bond claims by lessors are on
average for relatively small amounts of
the Federal Privacy Commissioner
should take into consideration the views of other government bodies who have
examined the tenancy
Report of Special
Government Backbench Committee To Inquire Into The Operation of Tenancy
believed that listings should be removed either after the debt is
cleared; or otherwise after a period of two
a five year timeframe bears no
correlation to assessing tenancy risk and is akin to
punishment.
Section 38(2)
requires amongst other things that a
complaint identify the remedy sought. The remedy sought by the complainants is a
declaration
by the Federal Privacy Commissioner that TICA will delete personal
information from its
a debt is cleared; or
otherwise after a
period of two years.
14. TU QLD emphasise that they seek the removal of this information and the
order sought should also have the effect of prohibiting
TICA from keeping the
information on the database and merely describing it in another manner (such as
a listing of ‘Tenancy
History Only’ – discussed below).
15. The NPPs in Schedule 3 of the
outline standards for handling
personal information that legally bind organisations, as defined by
Section 13A
specifies that an act or practice of an
organisation will be an interference with the privacy of an individual if,
amongst other
things, the act or practice breaches an NPP in relation to
personal information that relates to that individual
17. The issues in this complaint are whether TICA is retaining personal
information for longer than it is permitted to by NPPs 2,
18. NPP 2 allows
organisation to use or disclose personal information freely for the purpose for
which it was collected but limits
secondary uses and disclosures to specified
circumstances including those the individual would expect. NPP 2 states
2.1 An organisation must not use or disclose personal
information about an individual for a purpose (the
) other than the primary purpose of collection unless:
(a) both of the following apply:
(i) the secondary purpose is related to the primary purpose of collection and,
if the personal information is sensitive information,
directly related to the
primary purpose of collection;
(ii) the individual would reasonably expect the organisation to use or disclose
the information for the secondary purpose; or
the individual has consented to the use or disclosure; or
(c) if the information is not sensitive information and the use of the
information is for the secondary purpose of direct marketing:
(i) it is impracticable for the organisation to seek the individual’s
consent before that particular use; and
(ii) the organisation will not charge the individual for giving effect to a
request by the individual to the organisation not to
receive direct marketing
communications; and
(iii) the individual has not made a request to the organisation not to receive
direct marketing communications; and
(iv) in each direct marketing communication with the individual, the
organisation draws to the individual’s attention, or prominently
a notice, that he or she may express a wish not to receive any further direct
marketing communications; and
(v) each written direct marketing communication by the organisation with the
individual (up to and including the communication that
involves the use) sets
out the organisation’s business address and telephone number and, if the
communication with the individual
is made by fax, telex or other electronic
means, a number or address at which the organisation can be directly contacted
electronically;
(d) if the information is health
information and the use or disclosure is necessary for research, or the
compilation or analysis of
statistics, relevant to public health or public
(i) it is impracticable for the organisation to seek the individual’s
consent before the use or disclosure; and
(ii) the use or disclosure is conducted in accordance with guidelines approved
by the Commissioner under
section 95A
for the purposes of this
subparagraph; and
(iii) in the case of disclosure--the organisation reasonably believes that the
recipient of the health information will not disclose
the health information, or
personal information derived from the health information;
(e) the organisation reasonably believes that the
use or disclosure is necessary to lessen or prevent:
(i) a serious and imminent threat to an individual’s life, health or
(ii) a serious threat to public health or public safety; or
(f) the organisation has reason to suspect that unlawful activity has been,
is being or may be engaged in, and uses or discloses the
personal information as
a necessary part of its investigation of the matter or in reporting its concerns
to relevant persons or authorities;
(g) the use or disclosure is required or authorised by or under law; or
(h) the organisation reasonably believes that the use or disclosure is
reasonably necessary for one or more of the following by or
on behalf of an
enforcement body:
(i) the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or punishment of
criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing a penalty
or sanction or breaches
of a prescribed law;
(ii) the enforcement of laws
relating to the confiscation of the proceeds of crime;
(iii) the protection of the public revenue;
(iv) the prevention, detection, investigation or remedying of seriously improper
conduct or prescribed conduct;
(v) the preparation for, or conduct of, proceedings before any court or
tribunal, or implementation of the orders of a court or
Note 1: It is not intended to deter
organisations from lawfully co-operating with agencies performing law
enforcement functions in
the performance of their functions.
Note 2: Subclause 2.1 does not override any existing legal obligations not to
disclose personal information. Nothing in subclause
2.1 requires an organisation
to disclose personal information; an organisation is always entitled not to
disclose personal information
in the absence of a legal obligation to disclose
Note 3: An organisation is also subject to the requirements of National
a person in a
foreign country.
2.2 If an organisation uses or discloses personal information under paragraph
2.1(h), it must make a written note of the use or disclosure.
2.3 Subclause 2.1 operates in relation to personal information that an
organisation that is a body corporate has collected from a
related body
corporate as if the organisation’s primary purpose of collection of the
information were the primary purpose for
which the related body corporate
collected the information.
2.4 Despite subclause 2.1, an organisation that provides a health service to
an individual may disclose health information about the
individual to a person
who is responsible for the individual if:
(a) the individual:
(i) is physically or legally incapable of giving consent to the disclosure;
(ii) physically cannot communicate consent to the disclosure; and
(b) a natural person (the
) providing the health service
for the organisation is satisfied that either:
(i) the disclosure is necessary to provide appropriate care or treatment of the
individual; or
(ii) the disclosure is made for
compassionate reasons; and
(c) the disclosure is not contrary to any wish:
(i) expressed by the individual before the individual became unable to give or
communicate consent; and
(ii) of which the carer is aware, or of which the carer could reasonably be
expected to be aware; and
(d) the disclosure is
limited to the extent reasonable and necessary for a purpose mentioned in
paragraph (b).
2.5 For the purposes of subclause 2.4, a person is
responsible
for an individual if the person is:
(a) a parent of the individual; or
(b) a child or sibling of the individual and at least 18 years old; or
(c) a spouse or de facto spouse of the individual; or
(d) a relative of the individual, at least 18 years old and a member of the
individual’s household; or
(e) a guardian of the individual; or
(f) exercising an enduring power of attorney granted by the individual that
is exercisable in relation to decisions about the individual’s
(g) a person who has an intimate personal relationship with the individual;
(h) a person nominated by the individual to be contacted in case of
2.6 In subclause 2.5:
of an individual includes an adopted child, a step-child
and a foster-child, of the individual.
of an individual includes a step-parent, adoptive parent
and a foster-parent, of the individual.
of an individual means a grandparent, grandchild,
uncle, aunt, nephew or niece, of the individual.
of an individual includes a half-brother, half-sister,
adoptive brother, adoptive sister, step-brother, step-sister, foster-brother
foster-sister, of the individual.
19. NPP 3 states that:
An organisation
must take reasonable steps to make sure that the personal information it
collects, uses or discloses is accurate,
complete and up-to-date.
20. NPP 4.2 states that:
organisation must take reasonable steps to destroy or permanently de-identify
personal information if it is no longer needed for
any purpose for which the
information may be used or disclosed under National Privacy Principle 2.
Section 6D(1)
defines a small business as one with an
annual turnover of ‘$3,000,000 or less’.
Section 6D(3)
provides for a small business to be classed as ‘a small
business operator’ and therefore not subject to the
specified circumstances, including where an organisation trades in personal
information.
also provides that small businesses which are subject to the
would not be subject to the provisions of the NPPs until 21 December
2002. Consequently, when investigating this complaint I have
been restricted to
examining evidence relating to the acts and practices of TICA which occurred
after 21 December 2002
except where
23. In this regard with respect to small
businesses:
provides that NPP 3, as far as it relates to the use
and disclosure of personal information, and NPP 4.2 apply to personal
information
regardless of when it was collected;
Section 16D(4)
provides that NPP 2 applies to personal information collected after
21 December 2002.
provides that after I have investigated a
complaint I may make a
determination:
the complaint; or
finding the complaint
substantiated and making a declaration
the respondent has engaged in conduct constituting an interference with the
such conduct;
the respondent should perform any reasonable act or course of conduct to redress
any loss or damage suffered by the complainant;
the complainant is entitled to compensation for any loss or damage –
including injury to the complainant’s feelings or
humiliation suffered by
the complainant.
25. In my view it is also within my powers under
recommendations which will promote compliance with the NPPs.
Investigation
Section 40(1A)
provides that I must not investigate a
complaint where the complainant has not first complained to the respondent,
unless I consider
that it was not appropriate for the complainant to have done
so. In the present case, I am aware that TU QLD has had ongoing contact
TICA in relation to a number of privacy issues arising out of its activities and
that this contact may be considered to be by
way of ‘complaint’. To
the extent that the present complaint falls beyond those
‘complaints’ made to the
respondent, which I note have not resulted
in the resolution of these matters, I am satisfied that the complex nature of
raised and their significance for the rights of the people concerned
makes it inappropriate for them to be the subject of direct
complaint to the
respondent.
27. My Office’s investigation of this complaint involved the
advising the parties that I was opening an investigation into the complaint
section 40(1)
and inviting the parties to
gathering evidence and
considering information provided by TU QLD, TU NSW, the individual complainants
and TICA in submissions or
in response to matters raised by my staff or the
complainants;
providing the respondent
and the complainants with opportunities to comment on an initial preliminary
view on the complaint in September
visiting TICA’s premises to
discuss the issues raised in the complaint, to observe its database in practice
and gather additional
information about the operation of the
providing the parties with
the current Office position on the complaint in February 2004 following changes
in some aspects of the
views since September 2003 and extending an invitation to
make oral and/or written submissions;
holding a hearing on 3 March 2004
affording the parties the opportunity to appear before me – TU QLD and TU
NSW accepted the
invitation to appear at the
considering written and oral
submissions and gathering information to clarify claims made by the
providing the primary
representative complainant (TU QLD) and TICA with the opportunity to see
information and submissions provided
by the other party;
checking TICA listings relating to 50
individuals to assess if the personal information in the listings was accurate,
complete and
up-to-date;
pursuant to
section 43(5)
and the principles of procedural fairness,
providing the parties with the revised preliminary view of March 2004 and a
final opportunity
to comment before I finalised the determination;
holding a further hearing on 8 April
2004 affording the parties the opportunity to appear before me – TICA
accepted the invitation
to appear at the hearing;
providing TICA and TU QLD with
copies of the submissions, excluding some material that involved personal
information of third parties,
made by the other party in response to my March
preliminary
considerations
28. Before setting out my findings and reasons in relation to this complaint I
will make some general comments about the context
in which this complaint is
29. Housing is essential for all people and is one of the basic human rights set
out in the Universal Declaration of Human
The operation of tenancy
individuals listed on the
tenancy databases, such as TICA, can be seen as a legitimate risk minimisation
for property managers.
30. A number of the NPPs relevant to this complaint require an assessment of
‘reasonableness’ (for example, the ‘reasonable
required of an organisation under NPP 3). I take the view that in making an
assessment of ‘reasonableness’,
it is appropriate to take into
account the purposes for which personal information is collected and the
consequences for the individuals
concerned. In this case I am satisfied that
tenancy databases, such as the one operated by TICA, do have an impact on an
individual’s
ability to obtain housing; my understanding is that this is
part of the intention when establishing such databases.
31. However, this is only one factor I have taken into account. I have also
considered the overall intention of the
including that business
needs to be able to operate efficiently and effectively and that the NPPs are
general high level principles
and are not prescriptive in how they apply.
32. In this complaint I need to consider TICA’s functions, activities and
purposes of collecting, using and disclosing tenancy
application and tenancy
history information and decide if it can lawfully keep personal information
for extended periods.
33. I have set out below issues that this complaint raises together with
information, evidence and discussion about the application
of the law that I
consider relevant to the question of whether TICA complies with its obligations
under NPPs 2, 3 and 4.2.
34. It is relevant to note that this complaint is against TICA, not its members.
Accordingly, I will not consider how the NPPs apply
to the acts and practices of
its members. That would be the subject of separate investigation should such a
complaint be made against
a member. I acknowledge TICA's request in its
submission in response to my March preliminary view that it be advised about
of its members that may be breaches of the
so that it can
assist to address these practices.
Small business provisions
35. I find that TICA is an ‘organisation’ as defined by
, and is accordingly bound by the NPPs.
36. I find that TICA does not fall within the exemption to the
applies to ‘small business
operators’.
‘small business’ in terms of the
, in that its annual
turnover is ‘$3,000,000 or less’. However, as TICA trades in
personal information, it does not fall
within the definition of ‘small
business operator’ by virtue of
37. Because of the delayed application of the NPPs to small business, it is open
to TICA to decide that it will use and disclose
personal information collected
before 21 December 2002 without taking account of NPP 2. However, if it
adopted that approach
would need to have in place practices to distinguish
between listings that are not subject to the
and those that are. I
understand that in practice TICA does not make a distinction between personal
information collected pre and
post 21 December 2002 and would, for example,
impute the same primary purpose to all the personal information it holds.
listing timeframes
38. As noted above (see [10]) TICA holds two separate databases of personal
information (to be referred to as ‘the database’).
‘Enquiries Database’ lists tenancy applications made by prospective
tenants and prospective approved occupants.
The ‘Tenancy History
The Enquiries Database
contains identifying information about the individual
concerned and the name of the member with which the prospective tenant lodged
the application.
39. Depending on the listing type, TICA states that
the information is held on the TICA Tenancy History Database and Enquiries
between three years and indefinitely, as explained
listing is recorded on the Tenancy History Database for a breach of a tenancy
agreement and no monetary sum has been recorded
the listing will remain for
three years. After the three years has expired and upon confirmation from the
listing member that no
monies are owed the listing will be changed to read
‘Tenancy History Only’.
a listing is recorded on the Tenancy History Database for a debt incurred which
arose in relation to the tenancy and a dollar value
has been recorded the
listing will remain for five years. Once the debt is paid TICA will record that
the debt was paid and the
listing will be altered to show the date on which it
was paid. After five years the debt amount will be removed and the listing
be changed to read ‘Tenancy History Only’. Default details will
remain on the database until such time as the debt
owed has been satisfied.
‘Tenancy History Only’ and
the other history listings (that is; past tenant no default recorded,
satisfactory payment
history and recommended tenant) are listed indefinitely.
40. The complainants submit that all TICA timeframes are ‘manifestly
excessive’, unjustified and therefore in breach
complainants argue against the TICA’s practice of keeping listings in the
category ‘Tenancy History Only’
indefinitely.
41. TICA argues that the information it holds in its database is relevant to the
real estate industry in assessing an individual’s
tenancy. Further, it
claims that this information is relevant for a number of years and in some cases
it is relevant for an indefinite
period. TICA states that disclosing
information to members about rectified rent defaults is essential and necessary
for one or more
of its functions. It claims this is the case because it provides
an indication of the individual’s ability to maintain the
property and pay
the rent. Rectified rent defaults indicate any arrears, how much and for how
long before outstanding money was paid.
42. TICA further states that the listing ‘Tenancy History Only’,
which is the notation given to defaults that have expired,
is necessary because
it confirms that a tenant has listed through a particular agency and the purpose
of this listing is to provide
a history of where a tenant rented. TICA states
tenancy databases are one of the tools available to property managers and
and agencies are entitled to know where a tenant previously
rented; and who they rented through. Tenancy History allows members to
tenancy application form’. TICA claims that this listing is used when
members do not want to give a ‘satisfactory’
‘recommended’ listing to tenants but there is no need to list a
43. The use of the ‘Tenancy History Only’ listing and its accuracy,
completeness and currency is discussed in Determination
No. 2 of 2004. I find
the ‘Tenancy History Only’ category appears to be, in effect, a
continuing adverse listing as
it frequently indicates that a listing concerning
the breach of a tenancy agreement has existed in the past. This listing is held
indefinitely and it is possible that a potential adverse implication may be
drawn and that the individual is branded a bad risk even
though the specific
default listing has been purged.
44. In this complaint I need to consider whether TICA’s practice of
holding personal information for periods ranging from three
indefinitely is consistent with its obligations in relation to NPP 3 to take
reasonable steps to make sure personal information
is accurate, complete and
up-to-date and in relation to NPP 4.2 to take reasonable steps to delete or
permanently de-identify
information if it is no longer needed for any
purpose for which it may be used and disclosed under NPP 2. To make this
TICA’s primary purpose of collection in terms of NPP 2 and for the
purposes of this complaint;
identify relevant considerations by
which I can decide if the personal information that TICA holds is accurate,
complete and up-to-date.
purpose of collection
45. TICA states that its functions and activities include the facilitation of
‘proper assessment of risk by landlords and agents
and the determination
of the suitability of an individual for tenancy of a premises’. It has
advised that it is ‘a tenancy
history database that allows its members to
store and recall information about tenants and their tenancy history. Members
to list tenants on the TICA database for various categories both good
and bad’. Although I was not initially convinced that
the collection of
information concerning tenancy applications was necessary for its functions or
activities, TICA has since advised
that the purpose of collecting information
assess the validity of tenancy applications by providing a tool to
confirm the accuracy of information provided on the tenancy application
46. TU QLD does not accept that the Enquiries Database has as its primary
purpose the assessment of risk by prospective landlords
and agents. A detailed
discussion of the purpose of the Enquiries Database as a risk management tool
can be found in Determination
No. 4 of 2004. In my opinion the Enquiries
for TICA’s functions or activities.
47. I find that TICA collects the personal information of individuals from its
members for the primary purposes of making this information
available to its
members to be used as a risk assessment tool to assess an individual’s
suitability for a tenancy.
information
48. I find that the length of time information is held may affect its validity
and usefulness. I disagree with TICA’s contention
that ‘the time
factor has no bearing on the information being accurate, complete and up-to-date
as TICA maintains and submits
that the information about accurate, complete and
up-to-date...is in relation to information that was recorded’.
49. In the context of making a risk assessment of a prospective tenant, it is
relevant to consider, for example, the fact that people
(including their
behaviour, circumstances and environment) change over time. It is also relevant
to note the difficulties that may
be encountered in verifying the accuracy and
completeness of information as time passes.
50. As such, time would appear to be a relevant factor in deciding whether the
information recorded in the Enquiries Database and
Tenancy History Database is
accurate, complete and in particular, up-to-date for the purposes of NPP 3 and
whether it is ‘no
longer needed’ and therefore required to be
destroyed under NPP 4.2.
51. I note the existence of legislative schemes relating to spent convictions as
well as the provisions of the
in relation to consumer credit
reporting, (for example
section 18F(2)
), which establish
‘purge dates’ to allow ‘fresh starts’. These would
appear to acknowledge that circumstances
and behaviour can change and that
information related to an individual’s past actions may become
irrelevant.
3 - Currency of personal information held by TICA
52. TICA advises that it takes a number of steps to make sure that the personal
information in its Tenancy History Database is, amongst
other things,
up-to-date. These steps include requiring its members to only make listings
that are true and correct and conducting
random checks of listings to ensure
they are supported by appropriate evidence. There are no steps taken to ensure
that the information
in the Enquiries Database is up-to-date even though, as
noted earlier, TICA has advised that one purpose of collecting information
tenancy applications is to enable its members to confirm the accuracy of
applications. TICA also advises that it moves information
from the Tenancy
History Database to the ‘dead tenant
expiration of the timeframes discussed above (see [
]). I have addressed whether this response
is sufficient for TICA to meet its obligations under NPP 3 and NPP 6 in
Determination No
53. The question I need to consider here is whether
or not TICA has taken ‘reasonable steps’ to ensure that personal
information is up-to-date in the circumstances in which it is not only
collecting but also using and disclosing the information.
In my opinion, it is
relevant to consider the potential significance of the listing for an
individual. This will impact upon what
is ‘reasonable’ in ensuring
currency. In the present case I am of the view that for the steps to be
‘reasonable’
they should include elements such as:
and mechanisms to assess the likely risk assessment value of different
categories of listings;
development of
listing timeframes that are appropriate given the risk assessment value of the
personal information;
mechanisms for
reviewing the utility of information on a case by case basis. For example
allowing individuals to provide submissions
to explain why information is
out-of-date and how their circumstances have
opportunities for individuals
to apply to have information reviewed on the basis that it does not adequately
reflect their current
tenancy risk. For example, inviting individuals to apply
for a listing to be deleted in certain
circumstances.
54. I have carefully considered TICA’s current
practices in relation to the steps taken to ensure the accuracy and currency
personal information. Although TICA has asserted that is does take reasonable
steps, I find that TICA’s current mechanisms
are inadequate to ensure
information is accurate, complete and up-to-date. Consequently, I find that,
taking into account of all
the circumstances, TICA has not taken reasonable
steps to make sure the personal information it collects, uses and discloses is
up-to-date.
I therefore find that TICA has breached NPP 3.
55. Another aspect of data management which may form part of the
‘reasonable steps’ taken in compliance with NPP 3 (as
well as NPP
4.2) is the adoption of a ‘uniform deletion timeframe’ under which
records are routinely deleted after a
certain period. Such a policy forms part
of TICA’s processes. However, I am concerned that information is held for
an inappropriate
length of time. I would recommend that TICA develops an
appropriate uniform deletion timeframe in conjunction with other appropriate
measures such as those that I have outlined above (see [
56. In considering what might be an appropriate timeframe in this regard, it is
appropriate to look to other legislative schemes
relating to the recording of
personal information. In particular, consumer credit reporting in the
may be a useful comparison as credit reporting seeks to perform a similar
function as reporting in the present case – namely
to report on the
failure to perform contractual obligations in relation to financial matters.
(section 18F(2))
, overdue accounts and credit
applications are purged from an individual’s consumer credit file after
five years. Serious credit
infringements are listed for a period of seven years.
57. The TICA database is distinct from credit reporting databases in some key
respects. These are that: listings are not confined
to financial matters;
listings in relation to non-financial matters are subjective (for example,
different property managers may
have a different view about how untidy a garden
should be before a listing is made); and the consequences of a listing are
potentially
more serious in that it may result in significant difficulty in
finding housing.
58. I note that the Federal spent convictions scheme [Crimes Act 1914, Part
VIIC] provides for a ‘clean slate’ in relation
to minor convictions
after ten years (five years for minors). However, these
timeframes relate to
criminal convictions rather than
to the failure to meet contractual obligations.
Consequently, I do not believe
that uniform deletion timeframes for tenancy
can mirror credit reporting timeframes and arguably should be shorter.
59. The Office’s view on appropriate deletion timeframes for tenancy
complaint. This is a complex issue and as the Office obtained additional
evidence and submissions about TICA’s processes
and its use of personal
information, the position has changed accordingly.
60. In considering all the material before me, I have also taken into account
the fact that the information on a tenancy database
may impact upon an
individual’s ability to obtain housing, distinguishing this situation
generally from, for example, that
of the provision of credit. I have concluded
that it would be appropriate under a uniform deletion timeframe policy to
delete personal
information in the Tenancy History Database after four years and
personal information in the Enquiries Database after three years.
that there is likely to be limited utility in such information as far as it is
useful or relevant in assessing an individual’s
current tenancy
suitability. I would encourage TICA to consider a shorter listing time, such as
three years, for non-financial listings
on the Tenancy History Database.
NPP 4.2 – destruction or de-identification of personal information no
longer needed
61. TICA believes that the listing timeframes are warranted and that all
personal information is being disclosed for a lawful purpose
permitted under NPP
2 or has been removed from the Enquiries Database and Tenancy History Database
and transferred to a ‘dead
tenant database’ where it cannot be
accessed by TICA members.
62. The question I have to consider here is whether TICA must destroy or
de-identify personal information that is out-of-date, because,
as it no longer
has utility as a risk assessment tool, it is no longer needed for the primary
purpose for which it was collected
or for other permitted purposes under NPP
2.1. If I find TICA must destroy or de-identify out-of-date personal
information then
I need to consider if the steps it is currently taking in this
regard are reasonable in the circumstances.
63. I find that TICA's primary purpose of collecting personal information is to
establish a risk assessment tool for property managers.
The personal information
TICA collects into its database loses its utility in relation to risk management
over time. As noted above
2 does not restrict the use or disclose of personal information for the purpose
for which it was
However, information that is no longer fit for the purpose for which it was
collected cannot, in my opinion, be properly said to
be needed for that purpose.
64. TICA should therefore be taking reasonable steps under NPP 4.2 to destroy or
permanently de-identify personal information from
its database that is
out-of-date and therefore no longer needed for a relevant purpose.
65. I find that TICA does not take such steps. The step that TICA currently
takes in relation to out-of-date personal
information is to remove it
to the ‘dead tenants’ database’. I find that this step is not
reasonable in the circumstances
for the following
does not appear to have in place reasonable measures to decide when personal
information is out-of-date;
not appear to take any steps to destroy (as opposed to move) personal
information that is out-of-date;
Although the ‘dead tenant
organisation, it does
not de-identify the information it
66. It is therefore my finding that TICA has failed to take reasonable steps to
destroy personal information which is no longer needed
for any purpose for which
the information may be used or disclosed under NPP 2 and is in breach of
Determination
67. I find that TICA has breached NPP 3 by failing to take reasonable steps to
make sure the personal information it collects, uses
and discloses is
up-to-date. I therefore find this element of the complaint substantiated and
declare that TICA has engaged in conduct
constituting an interference with the
that this conduct should not be continued or repeated.
68. I further find that TICA has breached NPP 4.2 by failing to take reasonable
steps to destroy or de-identify personal information
that is no longer needed
for any purpose. I therefore find this element of the complaint substantiated
and declare that TICA has
engaged in conduct constituting an interference with
the privacy of individuals who are members of the class identified in the
I declare that this conduct should not be continued or repeated.
69. The complainants have asked me to make declarations requiring TICA to remove
personal information from its database after specified
periods of time. I am
not satisfied that I should do so. While I have declared that TICA should not
repeat or continue conduct
which constitutes an interference with the privacy of
an individual, I do not, in my view, have the power under
section 52(1)(b)(i)(B)
to otherwise generally prescribe
how TICA should act. As I have made clear in the body of this determination, it
is in my view desirable
that a uniform deletion timeframe be adopted as part of
the measures designed to achieve compliance with the NPPs. Such a policy
however, only one of the measures that, in my view, will ensure TICA’s
compliance with the
. I have made recommendations relevant to this
issue below.
70. I am also of the opinion that
section 52(1)(b)(ii)
not provide the basis for making a declaration of the type sought by the
complainants as to the future conduct of TICA. I am
not, on the information
presently before me, satisfied that there has been any identifiable loss or
damage suffered by the complainants
that would be redressed by a course of
conduct required by such a declaration. If individuals can provide evidence of
loss or damage
that they have suffered by virtue of an interference with their
71. I recommend that the following steps be implemented by TICA to promote
compliance with the
of ‘history’ information being stored in the Tenancy History
Deletion of 'application' information
being stored in the Enquiries Database after a period of not more than three
Permit each default to be
listed only once; and
individual to be listed for multiple breaches simultaneously. These listings may
have different deletion dates;
Deletion of information moved to
the ‘dead tenant database’ (that is the database which stores
deleted listings) not less
than once a month. I believe it is acceptable to hold
information temporarily in the ‘dead tenant database’ to ensure
information which is ‘accidentally’ deleted can be
Federal Privacy Commissioner
Dated 15 April 2004
I note that
section 38C
gives me the power to amend a complaint so that it can be dealt with
as a representative complaint. In the event that it is necessary
to amend the
complaint received from TU NSW so as to make it a part of the wider
representative complaint, I would do so pursuant
section 38C
TICA is not bound by an
approved privacy code in terms of
section 13A(b)(ii)
Article 25 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights
http://www.un.org/Overview/rights.html
I note that TICA was offered the opportunity to make any submissions or provide
any material to me in relation to this exemption.
I did not receive any
submissions or material in relation to this
I note that
does not prevent a body corporate from being a
‘small business operator’ only because it discloses personal
information
with the consent of the individual, or as required or authorised
under legislation. I find that TICA does not have the consent of
individuals whose personal information appears on their database (in particular,
those individuals whose personal information
was collected before 21 December
2002) and is disclosed to TICA’s members. I note that TICA has not claimed
that it does have
such consent, although it was given the opportunity to do
The dead tenant database is
an internal database held by TICA and which cannot be accessed by its members.
Organisations using or
disclosing personal information for the primary purpose of collection still must
comply with the other provisions
of the NPPs.
No downloadable files available