Shane Wilding v Linfox Australia Pty Ltd - re Termination at the initiative of the employer [2009] AIRC 960; (15 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
- Application for relief re (Unlawful and Harsh, Unjust or Unreasonable) termination of employment
Mr Shane Wilding
Linfox Australia Pty Ltd
(U2009/10058)
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT CARTWRIGHT
SYDNEY, 15 DECEMBER 2009
Termination at the initiative of the employer.
Mr Wilding applied for relief under
Workplace Relations Act 1996
in respect of termination of his employment with Linfox Australia Pty Ltd
on 19 June 2009. Following unsuccessful conciliation, the matter came to me for arbitration of whether the termination of employment
was harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
At the outset of the hearing on 10 December 2009, Mr D’Apice, appearing for Linfox, raised the jurisdictional question of whether
Mr Wilding had resigned and accordingly there was no termination at the initiative of the employer as defined by
of the Act. He pressed that as an issue to be determined prior to consideration of the ground in
s.643(1)(a).
Consequently, the Commission decided to deal with that and heard each side’s views on how that was to be done.
Mr Wilding was represented, by leave, by Mr McGillivray, solicitor. Mr McGillivray argued that the listed hearing be used to hear
that question, despite the fact that he had come prepared to argue the substantive matter of whether the termination of employment
was harsh, unjust or unreasonable. Mr D’Apice sought an adjournment to a later day so that he could better represent Linfox
on the jurisdictional point he pressed. In the event, I decided to hear the jurisdictional question after a one and a half hour
adjournment to allow the parties to prepare.
Conflict of evidence was already apparent from the witness statements provided before the hearing, in accordance with directions.
The way in which the jurisdictional question came on for hearing did not make any easier the resolution of those conflicts.
I am called upon in this case to decide a most unsatisfactory position. There are two witnesses only, each giving a different account
of events. Further, I am satisfied on the internal conflicts in each’s evidence that neither has given a complete or accurate
account of the central events.
For example, Mr Elvin’s oral evidence makes plain that events reported in his statement as occurring in one meeting in fact
occurred over two meetings on different days. Nor does his statement or evidence-in-chief refer to the reference he provided to
Mr Wilding, the contents of which he agreed are
“pretty much”
untrue. Similarly, Mr Wilding’s statement is a self-serving simplified version of events. It fails to mention the contents
of a second meeting he had with Mr Elvin on 19 June. Moreover, Mr Wilding has given two conflicting accounts of his meeting on 22
June with Mr Elvin and of which documents he knew he signed on that day.
In my view, both were unreliable witnesses, whose evidence of events in question cannot be wholly accepted.
What is not in dispute is that at a meeting on Friday 19 June, Mr Elvin gave Mr Wilding a letter of termination, effective that day.
The letter said that a week’s wages would be paid
“in lieu of normal notice”.
Mr Elvin says that Mr Wilding then asked to resign instead and that he accepted the resignation, which was subsequently confirmed
when Mr Wilding signed a short letter which Mr Elvin typed for him. Mr Elvin sent Mr Wilding a personal reference, the contents
of which were kinder to him than Mr Elvin’s real assessment.
Mr Wilding says instead that, after giving him the termination letter, Mr Elvin then said
“Either you resign or I sack you.”
He says he refused to resign. How Mr Wilding came to sign the letter of resignation is not apparent, because it was not, on Mr Wilding’s
evidence, one of the three documents he signed when he returned to Linfox on 22 June. He says he first saw the resignation letter
when Mr D’Apice produced it in August. He accepts that his signature is on the resignation letter.
I am satisfied that Mr Wilding has signed a letter of resignation subsequent to receiving the letter of termination on 19 June 2009.
That letter of resignation was not withdrawn. The question I have to determine is whether Mr Wilding has proved on the balance
of probabilities, that he did not resign voluntarily but was forced to do so because of conduct, or a course of conduct, engaged
in by the employer
(s.642(4)).
I am not satisfied on the evidence that Mr Elvin somehow
Mr Wilding into signing the resignation letter by including it among the documents Mr Wilding signed on 22 June. Neither account
supports that possibility. Absent that occurring, I cannot see in this case conduct, or a course of conduct, by the employer which
forced Mr Wilding to provide a resignation letter after Linfox had already told him that his employment was terminated and confirmed
in writing that the termination was
“effective immediately”.
In my view, there was none. Rather, in the terms of
Mr Wilding signed and provided the resignation letter voluntarily. How it was provided remains ambiguous. Mr Elvin’s account
of events is far from convincing, but on the balance of probabilities the resignation letter was most likely to have been produced
and signed on 22 or 23 June when Mr Wilding returned to the site.
I accept Mr Elvin’s evidence that, as Mr Wilding elected to resign, he withdrew the termination letter, provided a favourable
reference and honoured the prior commitment to one week’s pay. Like so many agreements reached in this Commission, I am assuming
(since it was never referred to in evidence) that Linfox’s records are to show that Mr Wilding’s employment concluded
by resignation. I note that Mr Elvin’s post-dated reference for Mr Wilding says,
“Shane has left the employ of Linfox of his own accord, and with the good wishes of local management.”
At any rate, I am satisfied that Mr Wilding has not proved on the balance of probabilities as required by
I am satisfied that he signed the resignation letter voluntarily and in circumstances where it was not forced by the conduct of
the employer.
Consequently, in my view the position was that Linfox notified Mr Wilding his employment was to be terminated,
“effective immediately”,
Mr Wilding subsequently submitted a letter of resignation which Linfox accepted in place of its decision to terminate the employment
and that the net effect of the passage of events is that Mr Wilding’s employment terminated with an agreed resignation. Were
that the last step not to be the case, employers would not be able to give effect to a large number of settlement agreements concluded
in this Commission.
Deciding this matter has not been easy because of the unsatisfactory nature of the evidence and the unreliability of both witnesses.
However, having made the best assessment I am able of the credit of the witnesses and having made the findings above after careful
consideration of all that is before me, I find in this case that termination was not at the initiative of the employer as required
of the Act.
Mr Wilding’s application must be dismissed.
BY THE COMMISSION:
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
Mr I McGillivray
, solicitor,
for the Applicant
Mr L D’Apice
for the Respondent
Hearing details:
10 December
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code {A}, PR991880>
No downloadable files available