Watarra Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Robbie Leonard Utterson and Another [2025] NNTTA 11 (16 May 2025)
NATIONAL NATIVE TITLE TRIBUNAL
Watarra Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Robbie Leonard Utterson and
[2025] NNTTA 11
Application No:
WO2024/0846
IN THE MATTER of the
Native Title Act 1993
IN THE MATTER of an inquiry into an expedited procedure objection
application
Watarra Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC (WCD2022/002)
(native title party)
Robbie Leonard Utterson
(grantee party)
State of Western Australia
(Government party)
DECISION TO DISMISS OBJECTION APPLICATION
Mr Glen Kelly
Catchwords:
Native title – future act – proposed grant of special
prospecting licence – expedited procedure objection application
failure to comply with directions –
– objection application
Legislation:
Title Act 1993
Michael Daniel Teelow/Michael Page/Northern Territory
[2001] NNTTA 107
Teelow v Page
Representative of the native title party:
Rhianne Gerrard, Native Title Services Goldfields
Representative of the grantee party:
Robbie Utterson
Representatives of the Government party:
Michelle Rogers and David Crabtree, Department of Energy, Mines, Industry
Regulation and Safety
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
23 August 2024, the
of Western Australia gave notice under s 29 of
Native Title Act
(Cth) of its intention to grant
special prospecting licence P 37/9814-S to Robbie Leonard Utterson. The
notice included a statement that the State considers the grant of the
proposed licence to be an act attracting the expedited procedure
Native Title Act
(expedited procedure statement).
expedited procedure applies, the State may grant the proposed licence without
requiring parties to enter the right to negotiate
procedure per
Native Title Act
[3] The proposed
licence is located approximately 60 km in an easterly direction from Leinster.
The proposed licence sits wholly within
the Darlot native title determination
area, held in trust by the
Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC as the
registered native title body corporate (WCD2022/002, WAD142/2018).
October 2024, Watarra lodged an objection application with the National Native
in response to the State's assertion that the expedited
procedure applies to the grant of the licence. The objection application
lodged within the timeframe outlined in
Native Title Act
and therefore, under
, the Tribunal is required to determine whether the
grant of the licence is an act attracting the expedited procedure.
Relevant Facts
a delegation from the President of the Tribunal, I was appointed to constitute
the Tribunal for the purposes of the inquiry
in this matter.
February 2025, I made directions requiring all parties to provide contentions
and evidence for the conduct of the inquiry.
Watarra was directed to provide its
contentions and evidence by 9 April 2025. On the date of compliance, the
Tribunal did not receive
any contentions or evidence from Watarra.
[7] On 16 April
2025, the Tribunal emailed all parties, noting that Watarra had failed to comply
with directions and that the objection
was now at risk of dismissal. Parties
were provided until close of business 23 April 2025 to make comments. In
response, Watarra
sought an extension to 30 April 2025 to submit its contentions
and evidence. After seeking and considering the views of the grantee
the State, I granted this extension and made amended directions to this effect
on 17 April 2025.
[8] On 30 April
2025, the Tribunal did not receive any contentions or evidence from Watarra. The
Tribunal sent an email to all parties
on 7 May 2025 noting that Watarra had
failed to comply with directions and that the objection application was again at
risk of dismissal.
Parties were provided until close of business 14 May 2025 to
provide any comments. No response from Watarra was received.
Consideration of Dismissal
[9] Pursuant
Native Title Act
, the Tribunal may dismiss an
objection application at any stage of the inquiry in circumstances where the
native title party fails
within a reasonable time to proceed with the objection
application or to comply with a direction of the Tribunal. While the Tribunal
has broad discretion to dismiss an objection application, doing so has
significant consequences for the native title party and is
not an action taken
[10] The nature
of the expedited procedure and the principles relevant to the consideration of
dismissal for failure to comply with
directions are set out in the Tribunal's
decision in
Teelow v Page
([13]). I have applied those principles in my
consideration of this matter.
[11] On this
occasion, it is my view that Watarra has been afforded sufficient opportunity to
progress the objection application but
have failed to do so within a reasonable
time. The Tribunal granted an extension to enable Watarra to provide evidence
into the inquiry
however Watarra has failed to comply with directions set by the
[12] Having
regard to all of the facts and circumstances of this matter, I am satisfied that
the objection application should be dismissed.
Determination
expedited procedure objection application in relation to special prospecting
licence P 37/9814-S is dismissed under
Native Title
Mr Glen Kelly
RTF format (189 KB)
Signed PDF/A format