King and Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs (Migration) [2024] AATA 3610 (11 October 2024)
King and Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
(Migration) [2024] AATA 3610 (11 October 2024)
Division: GENERAL DIVISION
File Number:
Gabriel Agyenim KING
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
Senior Member Hon
The decision under review is affirmed.
...............................[sgnd].....................................
Senior Member Hon J Rau SC
MIGRATION –
mandatory cancellation of Class TY Subclass 444 Special Category (Temporary)
visa under section 501(3A) –
where Applicant does not pass the character
test – Applicant has substantial criminal record – Past visa
cancellation
on 3 December 2020 - cancellation revoked and warning issued on 2
November 2022 – on 28 March 2023 Applicant apprehended possessing
methylamphetamine with intent to sell or supply – convicted –
Applicant’s visa was mandatory cancelled again on
30 January 2024 -
consideration of Ministerial Direction No. 110 - decision under review is
LEGISLATION
Migration Act 1958
Uelese v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2016] FCA 348
YNQY v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] FCA 1466
Afu v Minister for Home Affairs
[2018] FCA 1311
Suleiman v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
FYBR v Minister for Home Affairs
[2019] FCA 50
SECONDARY MATERIAL
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, and Multicultural Affairs (Cth),
Direction No 110 – Visa refusal and cancellation under
section 501
revocation of a mandatory cancellation of a visa under
section 501CA
REASONS FOR DECISION
Senior Member Hon J Rau SC
October 2024
INTRODUCTION
Applicant seeks a review of the decision by a delegate of the Minister for Home
“the Respondent”
) made under
section 501CA(4)
Migration Act 1958
) on 26 July
not to revoke the mandatory
cancellation of his Class TY Subclass 444 Special Category (Temporary) visa
”). The visa was cancelled on 30 January 2024 under
section 501(3A)
on the basis that he did not pass the character
(7)(c) of the Act provide that a person does not pass the
character test if they have been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
months or more. The Applicant fails the character test on account of his
conviction of “
possessing methylamphetamine with intent to sell or
Applicant concedes that he does not pass the character test.
issue before the Tribunal is whether there is ‘
to revoke the mandatory visa cancellation pursuant to
501CA(4)(b)(ii)
of the Act.
hearing was held on 1 October 2024 via Microsoft Teams. The Applicant was
self-represented and the Respondent was represented
by Ms Elle Tattersall of
Minter Ellison.
Applicant gave evidence via Microsoft Teams from Yongah Hill detention centre.
He presented as a courteous, neatly dressed, intelligent
young man. His answers
to questions were generally responsive and to the point. He provided information
to the Tribunal that added
additional context to his story. Some of this new
information however, contradicted material previously provided by the Applicant
and others. This will be discussed in more detail below, but some examples
concern the nature and extent of his connection with a
youth gang in Sydney and
his relationships with his family, his partner and her son.
noted that when the Applicant was pressed on matters obviously relevant to the
merits of his case, he tended to become evasive.
He demonstrated limited insight
and a propensity to blame others for his conduct. For example, he said that
carrying a weapon such
as a knife, or in his case a machete, was normal
behaviour in western Sydney. He also demonstrated a reluctance to say anything
all concerning the identity of his gang friends or his drug contacts. This
remained so even after he was assured that the Tribunal
would not publish any
names revealed by him. These were relevant questions because they may have
assisted in understanding the Applicant’s
networks. This in turn is
relevant to assessing his risk of reoffending, if he has maintained those
Applicant did not call any witnesses. In this case, this omission adds to my
concern about the voracity of his statements. This
failure denied the Tribunal
the benefit of hearing from people who have provided supporting statements. It
denied the Tribunal the
opportunity of testing their evidence, and his.
explanation for this failure was offered.
Applicant places considerable emphasis on his relationship with his partner
(O.O) and her son (Child A). He makes various claims
makes claims about the nature of their relationship and their plans for the
future. She has provided written
material, but she was not called. None of her
family, with whom she lives, were called.
Applicant places considerable emphasis on his support for his immediate family
and to a much lesser degree, his extended family
in Ghana. He makes various
claims about the wellbeing and financial status of his mother, his sister and
his brother. None of his
immediate family were called. His brother did not
provide a statement.
independent expert evidence was called providing a current risk assessment. No
expert or independent evidence was provided regarding
the health, or financial
circumstances of any of his immediate family, his partner, or her son.
regard to all of the evidence, I have come to the view that the
Applicant’s evidence is unreliable. It contains convenient
lacunas and
misleading, if not false assertions. Unless his evidence is supported by
independent sources, I generally do not accept
critical assertions of fact made
by the Applicant.
Background Facts
Applicant was born in 2001 in Auckland, New
He is 23 years of age and
a citizen of New Zealand.
Applicant’s parents came to New Zealand from Ghana in
The Applicant says that he
has no family remaining in New
The Applicant has no
biological extended family in Australia although there are some long-term family
friends whom he regards as
if they were uncles, aunts or cousins. One of the
co-offenders in his 2019 violent crimes (R.J.T), is a
” in this sense. The Applicant has maintained contact
with R.J.T on a continuing basis, since these
21 February 2004, the Applicant arrived in
with his parents and his
older brother (G.J.K).
almost 3 years old.
20 March 2006, the Applicant departed Australia for 6
Applicant told the Tribunal that he went to visit family in Ghana. He lived with
his grandparents in the “
family house
”. He has relatives on
both of his parent’s sides still living in Ghana. His grandfather is now
deceased. The Applicant
agreed that he would have a right to live in Ghana
should he choose to do so. He could be supported by family there. He said that
this was not a desirable option however, because of the economic circumstances
30 September 2006, the Applicant returned to Australia, and he has remained here
family. The Applicant states that “
we have never seen him
He told the
Tribunal that there was also one isolated contact with his father, when he was
first imprisoned.
statement has been provided to the Tribunal by the Applicant’s
Applicant completed year 10. He left school at the start of Year 11 to support
his family.
He says that he left
school without his mother’s
Applicant says that after leaving school, he found a labouring job – doing
water proofing while also attending
20 January 2016, the Applicant was assaulted in his home, by his older brother
This occurred in the
presence of his younger sister (S.K). Both the Applicant and SK were minors at
1 February 2016, an AVO was made to protect members of the Applicant’s
family from G.J.K. This expired on 26 January
records dated 18 February 2017, state that the Applicant and other family
members were protected persons under a final Apprehended
Violence Order made
against G.J.K. This order prevented G.J.K from residing with the protected
persons, including the
Applicant was asked about this, but he could not recall details. He did say that
at some stage, his brother was required to live
elsewhere, although he would
return from time to time.
July 2018 – July 2019, the Applicant says that he was employed as a water
proofer and labourer.
working as a labourer briefly in January 2023 – February
8 June 2019, when he was 18 years old, the Applicant was involved in a police
pursuit. The police fact sheet says:
08/06/2019 a job was broadcast via Police radio regarding a male that had been
slabbed multiple times on Kidd
Close Bidwill. Police have arrived at the scene
and confirmed that a young male had been stabbed multiple times. Further
information
was broadcast via Police radio that
a vehicle of interest
involved in the stabbing had decamped with the alleged offenders on board
The description broadcast was a dark coloured ford falcon with a partial
registration of [x].
[x], a dark coloured ford falcon travelling west on Mackellar
Street Hebersham.
This is only a short distance from where the stabbing occurred. The vehicle has
turned right onto Carlisle Ave,
failing to indicate. Police have followed the
vehicle along Carlisle Ave and observed it tum left onto Manifold Road. The
has continued along Manifold and turned left onto Popondetta and right
onto Bougainville Road.
Based on the earlier incident and the description of
the vehicle, Police have activated the Police vehicles warning lights to stop
the vehicle. The vehicle has pulled over to the left and stopped.
Police have approached the vehicle and observed an occupant in the drivers
seat and the front passenger seat. Police have looked into
the vehicle and
observed a male laying down on the rear seat of the vehicle attempting to cover
himself with a blanket and hide.
Police requested that the male sit up to which
he complied.
Police observed what appeared to be a knife set and a hammer in the rear
off side foot well. All of the occupants of the vehicle appeared
nervous. Further information was provided to Police regarding islanders being
involved with this stabbing and an earlier
stabbing that occurred. Based on all
of the above information
Police believed that this vehicle and the occupants
were involved in the stabbing that had just occurred. Police requested a licence
from the driver of the vehicle. The driver has produced a Provisional drivers
licence in the name of Gabriel KING.
All of the occupants in the vehicle
continued to fidget and had to be told a number of times to leave there hands
where they could
Police requested that the rear passenger produce
some identification, At this time the rear passenger has produced an expired
identification, however as this was occurring the vehicle has accelerated
at speed and decamped.
Police have called for urgent assistance and initiated pursuit 2019/1287.
Police continued the pursuit due to the fact that this vehicle
and the occupants
were possibly involved in a serious offence of stabbing a male only minutes
earlier. At the time the pursuit commenced
the roads were dry sealed bitumen and
the traffic was light.
The vehicle continued along Bougainville Road towards Lethbridge Park.
Whilst travelling along Bougainville Road the vehicle reached
speeds between
40km/h to 70km/h in a 50km hour zone. The vehicle has turned right onto Luxford
Road and left onto Palmyra Ave. The
vehicle has reached speeds between 60km/h
and 90km/h in a 70km/h zone.
The vehicle has turned left onto Australis Drive, however
has lost control of the vehicle and collided with the medium strip on Australis
Drive where the vehicles off side front
tyre has blown and the front guard of
the vehicle has fallen off. The vehicle continued along Australis Drive at a
speed no greater
than 40km/h in a 50km/h zone.
The vehicle has turned right onto Taradale Ave and continued for about 300
metres at a speed of 30km/h to 40km/h due to the damage
occasioned to the
vehicle. At the end of Taradale Ave the road sweeps to the left onto Semaphore
Street. On this bend the vehicle
has stopped parallel next to a parked vehicle
on the western side of the road. This restricted the driver from exiting the
The passengers of the vehicle were attempting to get out of the vehicle
from the near side. Police have attempted to block the rear
passenger of the
vehicle opening the rear door to escape by placing the front of the Police
vehicle near the door. As this occurred,
the rear passenger has flung open the
door which caused minor damage to the front of MD7. The rear passenger has
retreated to the
other side of the vehicle and has some how exited the vehicle,
possibly via the window.
At this time all three occupants of the vehicle have decamped in
opposite directions. A perimeter was immediately fanned with the
assistance of
both PolAir and the dog squad
. A short time later an informant has
spoken with Police and stated that he observed three islander males crossing
into Wilmott. Police
extended the perimeter, however
the occupants could not
It has been confirmed that the driver of the vehicle was Gabriel
The school identification was later located and the rear
passenger of the vehicle is confirmed as [x]. At this time Police are still
making enquires in regards to the third occupant.
Police have searched the vehicle and located a large amount of weapons and
gloves. These weapons included a medium size kitchen knife
on the foot well of
the front passenger, knuckle dusters with a knife attached in the glove box, a
large axe under the front passenger
seat, a large kitchen knife in the pocket
behind the front passenger seat, a hammer behind the drivers seat and two sets
within the vehicle.
Between the 15th of June and the 20th of July Police have attended the
accused address and no persons have been home. Police have
spoken with the
accused via phone and his next of kin where appointments were scheduled.
However, each appointment was broken and
the accused did not attend the Police
was put to the Applicant. He agreed that most of the facts in the police record
were correct. He was at pains to clarify however,
that the stabbing referred to,
had nothing to do with him, or his passengers. When asked to do so, he initially
refused to name them.
He said that “
saying any name can be highly
frowned upon
”. He eventually gave a first name for each. He said that
he was unaware that there were any weapons in the car, including those
front of the vehicle. I do not accept that this was true. He also stated that at
the time he was in a “
financial panic......after I gave the police my
documents. I was under pressure from people in the vehicle to escape...... I
into peer pressure and committed the offence
note that this is a different account to that contained in his statement
provided to the Respondent on 11 February 2022. In that
account, he said that he
did not stop the vehicle before taking
In his recent statement, he
I was not coping well with the
and started to fall in
with the wrong crowd, this caused me to panic when getting stopped by the police
and driving away
17 August 2019, the Applicant was involved in the commission of serious violent
offences in the company of others. The particulars
are set out in the sentencing
remarks, reproduced below. The Applicant was as the time, associated with
a self-styled gang known as the Greater Western
the Applicant’s recent submissions, he states: “
Around this time
I had just lost the job I had been working with since I left school and had been
given a great deal of financial
responsibility by my immediate family here as
well as family
asked about this the Applicant said that he was supporting his mother and
sending money to Ghana. When pressed for details, he
insisted that he was not a gang member. He drew a distinction between being a
member and associating with friends who were gang
members. A Gang styled jumper
found by police in his house when they conducted a search, belonged to someone
else, he said. He said
that he carried a weapon for his own protection, and that
this was commonplace in western Sydney.
is also significant that the Applicant was filmed during the assault by a
co-offender. A “
points system
” apparently allocated different
scores to gang members performing different crimes. The highest points were
given for a stabbing.
if it is not filmed, it didn’t
”. He was also photographed wearing the victim’s stolen
watch. He sought to pass this off by saying that it was a different
watch, given
to him by his mother.
or not the Applicant was recognised as a formal member of a gang, as the
Sentencing Judge observed, “
is a matter of
21 August 2019, the Applicant was taken into
He remained in prison
until 20 June 2022.
16 September 2019, a search of the Applicant’s shared cell discovered a
gaol made weapon, hidden behind a mirror in the shower.
The Applicant told the
Tribunal that he was new to the cell and knew nothing about the object.
sentencing Assessment Report dated 3 October 2019 relevantly
Mr King took
minimal responsibility for his offending and did not consider his actions to be
that his evasion of police was an impulsive decision. He was concerned with the
consequences associated with entering the
environment.
acknowledged that his reckless driving was dangerous however did not appear to
consider the offence as serious.
Insight into impact of
stated that he "felt pretty bad" about the consequences his offending may have
had on the community. He acknowledged the negative
impact his offending has had
on himself.
Substance abuse
stated that he engages in recreational alcohol use on a weekly basis. He denied
that his use is problematic.
Willingness and ability to
undertake intervention
stated his willingness to complete the Traffic Offenders Intervention
Willingness and ability to undertake community
service work
stated he was unwilling to undertake community service
Risk assessment
Mr King has
been assessed at a Medium/Low risk of reoffending according to the Level of
Service Inventory- Revised
9 October 2019, the Applicant was convicted of “
police pursuit - not
stop – drive recklessly
” in the Mt Druitt Local Court. He was
eventually sentenced to 8 months imprisonment back dated to 17 August 2019. He
was ordered
to serve a non-parole period of 3 months. He was also disqualified
from driving for 3 years.
9 December 2019, NSW prison records note that the Applicant was involved in a
fight with another inmate.
asked about this, he said that he was acting in self-defence.
3 June 2020, the Applicant’s solicitor signed a statement of agreed facts
on sentence. This included the following
AGREED FACTS ON SENTENCE
GABRIEL KING
2 x Assault occasioning actual bodily harm in company, s 59(2)
Maximum penalty: 7 years imprisonment
1 x Aimed with intent to commit an indictable offence,
s 114(1)(a)
Maximum penalty: 7 years imprisonment
1 x Receive stolen property,
Crimes Act 1900
Maximum penalty: 10 years imprisonment
1. The offender is associated with the ‘Greater West’ gang,
also known as ‘14’, or ‘27 District’.
The gang is based
out of Mount Druitt, postcode 2770. It has received some media attention from
its hip hop / rap music videos on
social media.
2. The ‘Greater West’ are presently in a long running, turf
war style feud against the 'Inner West' gang, also known as
this gang is based in Guildford. The feud has been ongoing and has involved
public acts of violence by other members,
spurred on by provocative postings on
social media and the creation of hip-hop songs which taunt the other side.
3. The offences in question· relate to three sets of offending in the
Parramatta precinct along the riverside end of Church Street.
The offending
started on the Church St bridge (“the first offence”), proceeded
along the bridge onto Church St itself
(“the second offence”) then
ended up in a Church St convenience store (“the third offences.) They
involved, at
various points, five separate offenders and 2 victims (in addition
to another man who was chased by them in the lead up to the second
The night in question:
4. On 17 August 2019, [A.S] and [D.S] were in the Parramatta area with a
friend, [F.G]. [A.S] posted a photograph of himself on Snapchat
identifying that
he was in Parramatta. [A.S] is apparently an associate of the Inner West gang.
[A.S] and [D.S] had been the victims
of a stabbing 2 weeks prior, to which R.J.T
has pleaded guilty and for which B.S stands charged. The bases for their
responsibility
are outlined in the statement of facts for that matter. There is
no allegation of the accused having any involvement with that matter.
5. On the same evening, the offender, along with co-offenders R.J.T, A.A
and B.S were together at the North Parramatta McDonalds.
Jbis is at the "stadium
end" of Parramatta. At around 11:04pm, the offenders and an unidentified male
walked south down Church Street
away from the stadium precinct towards the
Parramatta CBD. At that point, Church Street becomes a sandstone bridge which
the Parramatta River.
6. Around 11:15pm, [A.S], [D.S] and [F.G] walked across the sandstone
bridge, heading north. The offenders crossed the bridge walking
in the opposite
direction. R.J.T approached [A.S] and blocked his path; he was quickly joined by
the offender, B.S and the unknown
male. A.A, who had walked past [A.S]
originally, jogged back towards the group to join them.
The first offence:
- Assault occasioning the actual bodily harm of [A.S] in
Crimes Act 1900
, B.S and R.J.T)
7. One of the offenders told [A.S] to “get on your knees”;
[A.S] responded, “I don't want any trouble”. The
offender punched
[A.S] to the face before R.J.T grabbed hold of him, tripping him and punching
him as he fell to the pavement.
8. Whilst he was on the ground, R.J.T kicked and kneed [A.S]. B.S then
kicked [A.S] to the face and stepped on his shoulder, before
the offender
stomped twice on his head (see still 1). As [A.S] sat up, the offender punched
him to the face (see still 2). At some
point during the assault, [A.S]’s
watch was removed.
9. [A.S] managed to get up off the ground and ran across the road to the
other side of the bridge. As a result of this assault, [A.S]
received cuts to
his upper lip. He did not seek out medical treatment.
10. A.A recorded the assault in slow-motion on his mobile phone; this
footage is to be played at sentence.
11 . After the assault on [A.S] the co-offender B.S left the
The second offence:
Common Assault.
Crimes Act 1900
(R.J.T and A.A only)
12. The other offenders ran after [D.S] and [F.G] who were walking down
Church Street. R.J.T approached [F.G] from behind and punched
him to the back of
13. [D.S] ran towards the road and the offender followed him. [F.G] ran
further down Church Street, whilst A.A swung three punches
at his head from
behind. The offender, King and the unknown co-offender follow shortly after,
running at pace.
14. The offender is not charged arising from this incident.
The third offences:
- Assault occasioning the actual bodily harm of [F.G] in
Crimes Act 1900
, and R.J.T)
Armed with intent to commit indictable offence,
Crimes Act 1900
15. The pursuit continued into the “Eat Street” precinct.
R.J.T caught up with [F.G] outside of the Xpress Mart on Church
Street, opposite
the Bay Vista Cafe. R.J.T placed a hand on [F.G]'s shoulder and instructed him
to kneel. When [F.G] did not comply,
R.J.T said “get on your knees or I'll
blow your brains out”. The third offences were recorded by A.A on his
mobile phone
and on the Xpress Mart CCTV. This footage will be played upon
16. [F.G] ran inside the store. The offender and R.J.T punched [F.G] to
the head before the offender produced a machete from his pants
and hit [F.G] to
the face once with the blade of the knife. The offender attempted a second blow
but was blocked by [F.G], causing
the offender to drop the machete. The machete
was 53 cms long, with the blade itself measuring 40 cms.
17. The offender and R.J.T continued to hit, kick and knee [F.G] who can
be heard pleading to be left alone. At one point, A.A approached
the group and
kicked the victim whilst he was held by the others.
18. R.J.T retrieved the machete from the floor as the unknown male
approached the Xpress convenience store and yelled “let's
go, let's go,
the cops”. The offenders fled on foot. As they fled, the offender removed
his grey jumper, abandoning it on the
street, and his hat which he placed in a
nearby bin.
19. Police attended and spoke to [A.S] and [F.G]. [F.G] received a cut to
his nose and [A.S] a cut to his lip.
20. Following the incident, A.A filmed himself and R.J.T cheering and
expressing their support for “Greater West”. This
is depicted in the
stills to the right.
- Receive Stolen Property,
Crimes Act 1900
21. Later that evening, A.A filmed the offender and R.J.T dancing and
rapping. The offender is seen wearing the gold watch belonging
to [A.S]. The
offender is depicted in the forefront of the stills below.
Investigation and arrest:
22. On 20 August 2019, the offender uploaded a photograph of himself and
R.J.T standing in front of the offender's black Mercedes
Benz to Facebook. In
the photograph the offender is still wearing the gold Nixon watch belonging to
Applicant was taken through these. He agreed that they were accurate. He agreed
that he entered a guilty plea. He also said that
” of the events, although he had taken no drugs or alcohol.
sentencing Assessment Report dated 3 September 2020 relevantly
History of anti-social behaviour
Mr King has
one previous offence of police pursuit - not stop - drive recklessly; he
indicated that it was due to
impulsivity.
In discussing
the current offences, Mr King said his actions were "stupid", and on reflection,
that he should have kept the argument
verbal or walked away.
Further, Mr
King said that he had become uncharacteristically angry, and indicated that he
may require assistance or treatment to
prevent him behaving in such a way
Social influences
Mr King was
resistant to the idea that he and his friends are involved in a "gang", and said
the word "gang" is just a term used to
describe young people who are
Although he
did admit his friends are labelled as gang members, he claimed he was not
influenced or pressured to commit the offences.
and aggression
Mr King said
he normally tries to avoid arguments by walking away before things "get heated".
However, on this occasion, he became
angry during a verbal argument with the
first victim, and made no attempt to de-escalate the situation.
In relation
to the machete, Mr King stated he had had purchased it about two weeks before
the offences, and had started to carry it
"here and there", and for "just in
case", but was noncommittal about how often he would have it on his
mother said she had never seen her son angry, and believed that this was
uncharacteristic of him.
Insight into impact of
acknowledged that his actions would have caused the victims and witnesses fear.
He considered that his actions may have long
term effects an those
Willingness and ability to undertake
intervention
Mr King said
that he is willing to engage with Community Corrections and participate in
interventions as required.
Willingness and ability to
undertake community service work
Mr King said
that he is willing to engage with community service
Response to supervision
Mr King has
had no previous supervision with Community Corrections. During the preparation
of this report he has engaged appropriately.
Mr King has
been assessed at a Low-Medium risk of reoffending according to the Level of
Service Inventory - Revised
20 November 2020, the Applicant was convicted in the Parramatta District Court
of the following offences relating to this offending
on 17 August 2019:
intent to commit indictable offence
occasioning actual bodily harm in the company of other(s) x 2
property-theft
He was sentenced to 4 years and 3
months imprisonment, concluding on 20 November
He was ordered to serve a
non-parole period of 2 years and 6 months, commencing from 21 August 2019 and
concluding on 20 June 2022.
sentencing remarks of Judge Harris contain very serious factual findings about
the Applicant’s conduct:
A.A, C.A, Gabriel King and
E.F appear before me today to be sentenced for their involvement in various
offences of violence committed
in the Western Sydney area in August 2019. A
fifth offender, B.S is to appear before me for sentence on 4 December 2020.
The commission of the offences is related to the offender’s association
with a self-styled gang known as the Greater West gang.
The victims of those offences are [J.J.M], [A.S] and [D.S].
offence carries a maximum penalty of ten years’ imprisonment and a
standard non-parole period of four years’ imprisonment.
Mr A.A and Gabriel King are to be sentenced for offences arising out of
two incidents on Church Street, Parramatta on 17 August 2019.
Mr A.A is to be
sentenced for two offences of assault occasioning actual bodily harm in company
contrary to
. The two victims of those offences are
[A.S] and [F.G]. The maximum penalty for this offence is seven years’
imprisonment.
The offender Gabriel King is to be sentenced for four offences related
to the same two incidents; two offences of assault occasioning
actual bodily
harm in company upon the same victims, one offence of being armed with intent to
commit an indictable offence contrary
penalty seven years’ imprisonment and an offence of receiving stolen
property contrary to
, maximum penalty ten years’
imprisonment.
The maximum penalty and standard non-parole period for an offence are
legislative guideposts for the Court to take into account along
sentencing practices and principles. The standard non parole period for an
offence represents the non-parole period for
an offence falling within the
middle range of seriousness taking into account only objective factors that
affect the seriousness
of the offence.
The parties have settled on agreed
facts in respect of all offences.
Turning now to the offences committed by Mr A.A and Gabriel King. On 17
August 2019 [A.S] and [D.S], the victims of the earlier offences,
were in the
Parramatta area with a friend, [F.G]. [A.S] posted a photograph of himself on
Snapchat identifying that he was in Parramatta.
On the same evening Mr A.A, Mr
King, T. and Mr B.S were together at the North Parramatta McDonalds at the
stadium end of Parramatta.
Just after 11pm the offenders and an unidentified
male walked south down Church Street away from the stadium precinct towards the
Parramatta CBD. At that point Church Street becomes a sandstone bridge which
crosses the Parramatta river. Around 11.15pm Mr [A.S],
Mr [D.S] and Mr [F.G]
walked across the sandstone bridge heading north. The offenders crossed the
bridge walking in the opposite
direction. Mr A.A walked ahead away from his
co-offenders. The co-offenders slowed down and were standing around on the
of the bridge. T. approached Mr [A.S] and blocked his path. He was
quickly joined by Mr King, Mr B.S and the unknown male. Mr
A.A then jogged back
towards the group.
Prior to Mr A.A joining the group
the co-offenders had surrounded [A.S]
and began to assault him. At some point during that interaction
Mr [A.S]’s watch was removed. One of the offenders told [A.S] to
“Get on your knees” and [A.S] responded “I
any trouble.” King punched [A.S] to the face before R.J.T grabbed hold of
him tripping him and punching him
as he fell to the pavement. Mr A.A filmed the
assault using the camera on his mobile phone. Whilst he was on the ground Mr
kicked and kneed Mr [A.S]. [x] then kicked [A.S] to the face and stepped
on his shoulder before Mr King stomped twice on his head.
As Mr [A.S] sat up Mr
King punched him to the face. Mr [A.S] managed to get up off the ground and run
across the road to the other
side of the bridge. As a result of the assault he
received cuts to his upper lip. He did not seek medical treatment.
Mr A.A recorded the assault in slow motion on his mobile
. His culpability is his participation in the joint criminal
enterprise to assault Mr [A.S] by filming the assault. After the assault
[A.S] the co-offender Mr B.S left the group. The other offenders, however, ran
after Mr [D.S] and [F.G] who were walking down
Church Street. R.J.T approached
Mr [F.G] from behind and punched him to the back of the head.
Mr [D.S] turned and ran towards the road and R.J.T followed him.
Mr [F.G] ran further down Church Street with A.A following behind him. Mr
A.A swung three punches at Mr [F.G]’s head from behind
hitting him on two
occasions. One of the punches is depicted in CCTV still included in the facts.
Mr A.A, Mr King, R.J.T and the
unknown co-offender followed Mr [F.G] down Church
Street running at pace.
I note that Mr King is not charged with this first
assault on Mr [F.G].
The pursuit continued into the ‘Eat Street’ precinct. R.J.T
caught up with Mr [F.G] outside the Express Mart on Church
Street, opposite the
Bay Vista Café.
R.J.T placed a hand on Mr [F.G]’s shoulder and
instructed him to kneel. When he did not comply R.J.T said “Get on your
knees or I’ll blow your brains out.” This incident was recorded by
Mr A.A on his mobile phone and on the Express Mart
CCTV. Mr [F.G] ran inside the
store. Mr King and R.J.T punched Mr [F.G] to the head before Mr King produced a
machete and struck
Mr [F.G] to the face, once with the blade of the knife. Mr
King attempted a second blow but he was blocked by Mr [F.G] causing Mr
drop the machete. The machete was 53 centimetres long with the blade itself
measuring 40 centimetres. Mr King and R.J.T
continued to hit, kick and knee Mr
[F.G] who can be heard pleading to be left alone. Mr A.A continued to film the
offending. At
one point Mr A.A himself approached the group and kicked the
victim on his leg whilst Mr R.J.T and King were assaulting him.
retrieved the machete from the floor as the unknown male approached the Express
convenience store and yelled “Let’s
go, let’s go, the
cops”. The offenders fled on foot. As they fled Mr King removed his grey
jumper abandoning if on
the street and placed a hat he was wearing in a nearby
Police attended and spoke to Mr [A.S] and Mr [F.G].
Mr [F.G] received a cut to his nose and Mr [A.S] a cut to his lip.
Following the incident Mr A.A filmed himself and R.J.T cheering support for
‘Greater West’. Later that evening Mr A.A
filmed King and R.J.T
dancing and rapping. Mr King was wearing the gold watch that belonged to Mr
[A.S]. Mr King is to be sentenced
for receiving that stolen item.
On 20 August 2019 Mr King uploaded a photograph of himself and Mr R.J.T
standing in front of Mr R.J.T’s black Mercedes Benz.
In the photograph Mr
King is still wearing Mr [A.S]’s watch.
On 21 August, four
days after the offences, police executed a search warrant at Mr A.A’s home
where he resided with his brothers
and other family. Police arrested Mr A.A and
seized clothing similar to that worn by him during the commission of the
Police also located a Greater West jumper in the offender’s
sister’s bedroom. Police seized the offender’s mobile
recovering the videos of the assaults upon Mr [A.S] and Mr [F.G].
then executed a warrant at the home of Mr King, arresting him at that address.
A large black machete, matching the one used
in the attack, was seized as well
as the gold watch belonging to Mr [A.S] and the Greater West jumper. Both
offenders declined to
be interviewed.
The facts demonstrate that each of the offenders was acting in
association with a gang known as the Greater West gang. The gang is
of Mount Druitt, according to the agreed facts
, the postcode of which is
[x]. The gang is also known as 14 or 27 District. The gang received some
social media attention in the
past for rap music or hip hop videos. At the time
of the offences Greater West was in a turf war style feud with the ‘Inner
West’ gang based in Guildford, also known as G40. Whilst some, if not
all, the offenders now deny being members of the Greater
West gang, whether they
can be defined or categorised as a member or not is a matter of semantics. At
the time of the commission
of the offences they were each acting as part of a
group closely associated with the Greater West gang joined with a singular aim
of targeting members or associates of a different group; although of the four in
the group, Mr E.F’s association with the Greater
West gang would appear to
be the weakest.
The facts in respect of all the principal offences represent
demonstrably serious offences of violence
. It is important that the
sentences ultimately imposed reflect a substantial degree of general deterrence
as a warning to others
who might see fit to involve themselves in these types of
criminal acts of violence. R v Duncan and Perre
[2004] NSW CCA 431
involving offences of actual violence and affray that arose from a fight
erupting between two groups of youths in the
Wollongong area. Wood J in dealing
with the manifest excess grounds said this:
“Young offenders who elect to respond to any form of confrontation
between different groups need to understand with crystal
clarity that sentences
of imprisonment await those who cause the confrontation to be elevated to one
involving extreme violence.
Particularly is that so if they band together in a
brutal and cowardly attack with weapons on a single, unarmed and defenceless
OBJECTIVE SERIOUSNESS – KING
Mr King was an active principal participant in the assaults upon Mr
[A.S] and Mr [F.G]. Mr King was the offender who punched Mr [A.S]
to the head
and after he was tripped to the ground Mr King stomped twice on his head. As
the victim sat up Mr King punched him in
the face. In the offence committed in
the convenience store Mr King was involved in the punching of Mr [F.G], punching
head, hitting, kicking and kneeing him. Mr King was in possession of
the machete, he produced it and struck the victim to the face
and attempted a
second blow. The assault upon Mr [A.S] is high in the mid-range of objective
seriousness and the assault upon Mr
[F.G] is substantially above the mid-range,
towards the higher end. The offence of being armed with intent, given the size
and dangerous
nature of the weapon and its possession in a public place is at
offence involved the receiving of a gold watch that the offender knew had just
been stolen from the victim of a serious
assault in which he was heavily
involved. It is, however, below the mid-range of objective
seriousness.
SUBJECTIVE FEATURES – KING
There was no subjective material tendered in the case for the offender
Gabriel King. He did not give or call evidence. I have taken
what I can from
the sentence assessment report of community corrections officer [M.B] dated 3
September 2020. Needless to say the
information I have about Mr King’s
background and upbringing is lacking. The offender’s mother, sister,
uncle and girlfriend
showed their support for him by their presence at Court on
the last occasion. The offender intends to return to his family home
released from custody. He holds the status of a lawful non-citizen. It is
reasonable to infer that he faces deportation as
a result of these proceedings
and the commission of the offences.
The offender completed year 11 and commenced work at an air conditioning
factory. He says that misunderstandings led him to being
fired. He was working
as a casual unskilled labourer at the time of the offences. He told Mr [M.B]
that he usually tries to avoid
arguments by walking away but at the time of the
offences he became uncharacteristically angry and made no attempt to de-escalate
the situation.
Of the machete he said that he had purchased it two weeks
earlier and had started to carry it here and there just in case. He resisted
the notion that he and his friends were gang members, however admitted his
friends are labelled as such.
Despite being one of the younger offenders to
be sentenced today he claimed he was not influenced or pressured to participate
the offences. When released to parole, community corrections intend to refer
the offender to an anger management programme or psychologist
and to supervise
his engagement in cognitive behaviour modules addressing conflict resolution,
communication, environment management
and a pro-social lifestyle.
Turning to questions of remorse. An offender’s remorse for his or
her offending can be an important mitigating factor on sentence.
represent self-reproach, a wish to make amends, a commitment to do better in the
future and insight into the impact of offending
on the victim and on the wider
community. As a sentencing judge it is generally easier, although not
necessary, to determine the
veracity of an offender’s expressions of
remorse if they give evidence and, in doing so, expose themselves to challenge
cross-examination. In that way it is easier to ascertain whether statements
of remorse are genuine or whether they are proffered
only in anticipation of a
more merciful sentence. As I have noted none of the offenders gave evidence
REMORSE – KING
Mr King told community corrections officer, Mr [M.B], that his actions
were stupid and that he should have kept the argument verbal
or walked away. He
acknowledged that his actions would have caused the victims fear and that they
may have long term effects on
those involved.
On balance I am also satisfied
that Mr E.F is genuinely remorseful.
Turning to considerations of the offenders prospects of rehabilitation and
risk of re-offending.
PROSPECTS OF REHABILITATION – KING
Mr King was assessed by community corrections as low to medium risk of
re-offending
. He expressed willingness to engage with community
corrections and to participate in interventions. He has not been the subject
misconduct charges in custody. At the time of the offences he was working as a
casual unskilled labourer and he plans to return
to the family home upon his
release. As I have noted there is a reasonable possibility that he may be
deported as a result of these
proceedings and his involvement in the offences.
He said that he was not influenced or pressured to commit the offences and
indicated that he may require assistance or treatment to prevent him from
becoming as angry as he did during the offences. He
said he had purchased the
machete that he used to strike Mr [F.G] two weeks before the offence and would
not say how often he would
carry it with him. Despite what I have found on
balance to be genuine remorse, and noting his young age, it is difficult on the
very limited material that was placed before me to assess Mr King’s
prospects of rehabilitation to be any better than guarded.
Given the role he
played and the very serious offences he committed there must also remain an
appreciable risk that he will re-offend.
SENTENCE – KING
Mr Gabriel King is convicted. I reject the submission advanced on Mr
King’s behalf that the s 5 threshold has not been crossed
as an arrant
failure to appreciate the objective seriousness of his offending. Only a
sentence of full time imprisonment will address
the gravity of what Mr King did.
I indicate the following terms of imprisonment.
1. Assault occasioning actual bodily harm in company upon the victim
[F.G], a term of four years’ imprisonment.
2. Assault occasioning bodily harm in company of A.S, a term of two years
and six months’ imprisonment.
3. Being armed with intent to commit an indictable offence, a term of 15
months’ imprisonment.
4. Receiving stolen property, a term of two months’
imprisonment.
The aggregate sentence I impose upon Mr King is a term of four years
and three months’ imprisonment to date from 21 August 2019,
the date he
was taken into custody and expire on 20 November 2023. I impose a non-parole
period of two years and ten months’
imprisonment. Mr King will be
eligible for release to parole on 20 June
3 December 2020, the Applicant’s visa was cancelled on the basis that the
Applicant failed the character test (“
cancellation
5 January 2021, NSW prison records note that the Applicant was involved in an
incident where chemical munitions were used by staff
to gain access to a part of
the prison.
relation to this, the Applicant said that he had been drinking “
” with other inmates. He was intoxicated. He could not recall
much, other than waking up “
in segregation
was a significant delay in the Applicant seeking a review of the first visa
cancellation. A request was eventually made through
the Applicant’s then
solicitors, on 1 April
24 May 2021, NSW prison records note that the Applicant received mail from his
sister (S.K), containing 22 Suboxone strips secreted
photographs.
I note that his
sister was only 16 years old at that time.
relation to this the Applicant said that this was “
the first I have
heard of this
”. He denied ever receiving any drugs in prison/
detention. He denied knowing why anyone would send him concealed drugs. He
denied that his sister ever sent him drugs or photographs.
1 February 2022, the Applicant completed a personal circumstances form in
support of his request for revocation of the first visa
cancellation.
I note that the
Applicant claimed no relevant relationship with any minor child in Australia,
other than his sister.
that he was single.
He gives his
reasons for revocation as:
1. I arrived Australia from New
Zealand aged 3. I have lived in the Australia community for most of my
2. please consider the Primary and secondary Considerations critical to my
personal situation.
a) I am aware of my offending behaviour to date. I admit that my conduct
to date are serious in nature. Violence offences are serious
in nature. But I
have utilised my time in gaol to address my offending behaviour. Evidence of
rehabilitation comprise undergoing
courses in foundations and aggression. This
courses have helped positively.
b) also consider the best interest of my sister S.K who is a
c) I do not have family members in New Zealand I will lack family support
if I am forcefully removed to New Zealand.
d) I have been in Australia since I turned 3 years old. I attended primary
and secondary school in Australia. I have also worked while
8 February 2022, the Applicant was involved in an assault on another detainee.
He said that he was defending an older detainee
who was being picked on.
11 February 2022, the Applicant completed a statement which relevantly
6. I am aware that the Delegate must have regard
to the protection of the Australian community from criminal or serious conducts.
I have lived in the Australian community for most of my life, since turning
three. This is a privilege that Australia conferred on
me. I admit that l have
not been law-abiding because I have misbehaved grossly and disrespectfully
towards pivotal institutions and
causing or threatening harm to people and the
Australian community.
8. As you may have noticed, I began to offend shortly after turning
eighteen (18) and will now have to live the rest of my life with
these shameful
records. I wish I could turn back the clock and achieve better things.
9. With respect to the offence of police pursuit -not stop; driving
recklessly, which occurred sometime in mid-2019 (I can’t
recall the actual
I was driving and noticed that the officers of the NSW Police were
behind me. Out of panic, I accelerated the vehicle in a reckless
manner and sped
This was a spur-of-the
moment decision. I sincerely regret my actions. I acted stupidly and
immaturely.
10. Police pursuits are one of the most challenging operational situations
facing police officers in New South Wales and Australia
at large. Our gallant
police officers are there to protect the Australian community, hence, leading
them in a pursuit can involve
life-and-death outcomes which should be condemned
in all ramifications. Reflecting upon my action. I am guilty, and I feel ashamed
of my action.
lf I could turn back the dock, l would stop to know why the
police were after
11. The other four convictions where offences of one day, being, armed
with a machete, receive property by theft, and assault occasioning
actual bodily
harn1 in company in two occasions. These are violent offences and I feel guilt
and tension about my offending behaviour
on that day. There is no excuse for
acting the way I did on the fateful day.
12. I lacked social maturity and the ability to demonstrate necessary
attitude for personal, interpersonal, and social attributes
of an individual.
which are fundamental for functioning appropriately in the Society. I have
insight into me offending and I regret
them because it led to physical and
psychological harm upon members of the Australian community.
I am determined to turn a new leaf and undergo various
rehabilitative plans to ensure I do not re-offend.
14. Growing up, I struggled with social skills. This is different from
being social.
15. I have realised that I love to interact with people. But when I do, it
may not go well. I developed difficulty with social skills
as a result of my
inability to manage a life event. My parent's separation when I was five (5)
affected my development and dampened
my academic performance and desire to
finish year 12.
16. As a single mother, my mother suffered financial hardship and
emotional hardship because she was subjected to raising 3 children
by herself. I
saw her make sacrifices to ensure that the basic needs of I and my siblings were
met. As a result, I suffered emotional
and social difficulties than other
children from stable families.
If l am accorded a privilege to remain in Australia. I will not
reoffend because I have sought aggression and foundation programs
to enhance my
ability to manage difficult life events and to decrease aggressive behaviour. I
achieved these whilst incarcerated
and the programs have also improved my social
competence and moral reasoning skills, and to better manage anger
18. I have a strong family and social network. including a very supportive
mother and Mr N.N my previous employer and mentor. Mr N.N
is the Founder &
Chief Executive Officer of [organisation]. He was also the Australian Day
Citizen of The Year [x] and I look
up to him for guidance. If I am released into
the Australian community. I will be employed as a mentor in training with
[organisation].
My role will include helping to feed the homeless, assist in
sports programs and leadership programs in the community.
19. I do not have any minor children, but l have a minor sister (S. KING)
who is sixteen (16). Please consider her best interest.
20. Although I am not [S. King]'s parent. I have been pivotal in her live
emotionally, and since I turned 16. financially as well.
I left school to
support my mother in running the family financially.
21. [S. King] looks up to me for emotional support. I do my best to
protect and guide her. My mother relies on me to discipline and
encourage her to
finish high school. Upon my incarceration, my mother had to take multiple shifts
as a support worker to pay household
and legal bills and there is no one
available to play the role I play in [S. King]’s life. I have been
important to her life
because I was able to help her communicate with our mother
across a cultural and generation divide. [S. King] trusts me with her
and emotional issues and retracts from my mother and brother.
My brother has
not been able been able to perform this role in my absence as he has battled
mental health problems
. Sometime last year 2021, my mother told me that my
brother was sick and had been admitted at [institution], a [x] Hospital
mental health unit. My brother has some serious mental health
challenges. I doubt that he can assist our minor sister to the extent
can in the future or replace the importance of my roles in her life.
22. I also provided day to day care or [S. King], including taking her to
school, helping her with homework and taking her out lo
social activities. My
Mother is a traditional African woman, and she does not understand the
importance of my roles to [S. King].
I am a father figure to my sister, and
I try to shield her from the hard things of
23. Please consider the extent of impediments I may face if I am removed
from Australia to New Zealand as this is relevant for your
consideration. The
thought of deportation has caused me deep depression. I do not have strong
family or social support in New Zealand
because my parents were African
immigrants in New Zealand. My mother inculcated in the minds of my siblings and
I, the importance
of us sticking together as a family. If I am deported to New
Zealand, I may never see my family again. My mother may not be able
to visit me
due to her stretched finances and my brother needs to be in Australia to follow
up with his health professionals. These
impediments will permit few if any
visits from my immediate family.
24. My mental health is likely to be adversely affected too if l try to
establish myself in New Zealand, a country I left 3 years
after my birth, as a
child of immigrant parents. I have never gone back to live in New Zealand since
I left there as a child. I have
no connection whatsoever there I will have to
try to find accommodation and work to support myself and my family in Australia.
isolated from them. In these circumstances, I fear that I may regress in
the steps I have taken towards relapse prevention, which
may result in
anti-social behaviour and reoffending.
25. Please consider the impact of the decision to cancel my visa to my
immediate family members in Australia who have indefinite right
to remain in
Australia. As I have mentioned earlier, my older brother is battling mental
health problems and a decision to deport
me may likely exacerbate his mental
26. Also consider the strength, nature and duration of any other ties I
have to the Australian community and have regard to the fact
that I arrived in
Australia as a child and the time I have spent contributing positively to the
Australian community.
27. I have resided in Australia since 2004 when I arrived aged three (3).
l attended [x] High School [x] and was awarded half scholarship
to play rugby at
representative level until required to leave school to work to help support my
family financially. l was active
in the church with my family.
28. The offences that led to my visa cancellation were committed when I
was 18 years old. I worked for about three years before I
was incarcerated.
Since leaving school, I have worked at [business], labouring work secured Air
conditioning Apprentice work through
the assistance of [organisation]. My
previous employer provided a reference letter to attest to my work ethic and
general behaviour.
29. As well as the adverse impact my deportation from Australia will have
on my brother and minor sister, my deportation will harmfully,
impact my mother
because my capacity to contribute financially to the family will diminish as
well as my capacity to provide emotional
support to my
note the Applicant’s assurances, highlighted above, that he would not
reoffend if his visa was returned.
supporting statement from his mother says:
4. I speak to
my son regularly since his incarceration. We have had mother-son discussion
offending covers a wide range of
behaviours from reckless acts, receive property by theft and physical assaults
causing injury. These
are very serious offences indeed. Notwithstanding, I plead
with the office of the Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant
and Multicultural Affairs to consider various factors that are personal to my
son, including his prospect of rehabilitation.
5. From my discussions with him following his incarceration, my son has
deep insight into his offending and has modelled his thinking
and behaviour so
he will, notwithstanding his past offending, re-establish himself in the
community with an awareness to reject wrongdoings,
criminal offending and to be
a worthy law-abiding resident.
6. I testify to various factors that can assist him in attaining a
reasonable prospect of rehabilitation. These include but not limited
character, criminal history, age, conduct between offending and sentence,
therapeutic treatment, offence targeted programs
and support networks. My son
has a good standing amongst family and our religious community in Sydney which
can assist his rehabilitative
7. My son's prospects of rehabilitation should not be low because he does
not have a history of repetition of offences.
8. It is also imperative to note that my son's aggressive behaviour may be
associated with witnessing family violence, when I was
a victim of physical and
psychological abuse, perpetrated by my ex-husband and the father of my children
who used to establish power
and control over me. All my children witnessed this
in our home, and I believe some of my children developed cognitive, behavioural,
and emotional problems from witnessing series of abuses from my ex.
9. My youngest child (S. KING) is sixteen (16) years of age, and my son
has played vital roles in her upbringing. He protects her
from harm, provides
her with food and clothing from his pay cheque and supports her financially. [S.
King] does not have relationship
with my ex, so she relies on my son for
emotional support, safety, supervision and control and assistance with
schoolwork.
15 February 2022, another mail item, addressed to the Applicant was intercepted.
This also contained drugs concealed in photos.
The sender was a woman named J.S.
The Applicant said that he had never heard of J.S. He said that he knew nothing
supporting statement from his Pastor dated 3 April 2022
Prospect of successful
rehabilitation
There is a 100% likelihood of recovery for Gabriel
the Sydney community. As a shepherd, to the best of my knowledge, he is very
submissive and listens to instructions. Coming
back would allow him to use his
experience to address his brethren and let them be aware that the Law is no
respecter of persons.
Mr King's role and commitment to the church
He was an active church member and a member of the church's youth
28 February 2022, the Applicant was involved in a group assault on another
4 April 2022, a NSW Justice pre-release report
Circumstances at the time of the
At the time of the offences, Mr King was living in the family home with
his mother, sister and brother
. He said he had been casually employed
as a labourer during the six months leading up to the offences. Mr King stated
he had previously
worked for an air conditioning company but had lost that
employment due to a “falling out” with his employer. He said
been associating with his “normal” friends one of whom was a
co-offender.
Current family and social circumstances
Mr King has a supportive relationship with his mother and siblings. He has
had regular contact and video visits from family members
and friends throughout
his incarceration. The latest video contact was on 27 March 2022 with a
Mr King's mother has agreed that he can return to live in the family
Inquiries with
Mr King's mother indicated it appears that it will be a supportive family
environment
. While his mother was aware of his criminal history it
appeared that she had limited knowledge of his associations outside of the
family home. However, she is willing to work with Community Corrections should
he be subject to parole supervision.
History of anti-social behaviour
Mr King's criminal history is limited to one prior conviction for his
involvement in a police pursuit. However, his current offences
serious level of violence committed in the company of co-offenders. Mr King has
also incurred several misconduct charges
during his incarceration for defiant
and aggressive behaviour.
Mr King has shown very limited insight into his offending
. He was unable to provide an explanation for committing the
offences, claiming he and his friends were “in the wrong place
wrong time” and that it had occurred a long time ago. While he said,
“words were said” and the situation
“escalated” he was
could not recall what the argument was about. He offered a strategy of having
stable employment and
keeping himself busy with hobbies, as a means of avoiding
involvement in a similar situation in the future, as well as just “walk
Social influences
The current offences were committed in company of co-offenders. The
Judge's Sentencing Remarks note that the commission of the offences
was related
to the offenders' (Mr King and his co-offenders) association with a self-styled
gang known as the Greater West gang [pages
1 & 14]. However,
denied being a member of this gang and only associates with friends from school,
although he thought one of the co-offenders
may have been associated with this
Mr King claimed that he had not been influenced by any of his
co-offenders when committing the assaults.
At the time of the offending, the ‘Greater West’ gang was
based out of Mount Druitt and were involved in a long running
turf war style
feud against the ‘Inner West’ gang [Agreed Facts on Sentence,
paragraphs 1 & 2].
Violence and aggression
Mr King was described in the JSR as being an active principal in the
assaults upon two of the victims [page 18]. The offences involved
level of violence. Mr King also had in his possession a machete which he used to
strike one of the victims in the face.
He said he had bought the weapon
approximately two weeks earlier but could not explain why he had it with him on
the night of the
While Mr King has said that he is not usually an angry person, he could
not offer an explanation as to why the situation had escalated
to such a level.
Mr King has also engaged in violent behaviour during his custodial term.
Attitude to victim
Mr King said he was 'remorseful' for what had happened because it should
not have reached the point of assaulting the victims. However,
he had little
recollection of the incident and does not appear to have any insight into how
his offending may have impacted the victims,
either physically or
psychologically, other than they might have had a ‘couple of
Behaviour in custody
During the current custodial period, Mr King has incurred six internal
misconduct charges from 5 January 2021 to 28 February 2022
described below.
Following sentencing, Mr King was classified as a C2 minimum security
inmate on 21 December 2020. However, a month later he was regressed
medium classification due to
acting in an aggressive and combative manner
towards staff on 5 January 2021
. Chemical munitions were deployed as he had
created a barrier at the door and was also damaging departmental property. Mr
King admitted
to having been under the influence of a gaol made "brew" at the
time. He was subject to a segregation order for this incident from
January 2021 and incurred three misconduct charges for intimidation, disobey
direction and destroy/damage property.
He retained the B classification at the next review hearing on 14 February
2022 due to poor interactions with staff,
two internal misconduct charges in
the past 12 months and involvement in three incidents where contraband was
located, two of which
involved buprenorphine strips being sent in the mail
which were addressed to Mr King.
Mr King spent a further period in segregation from 1 to 14 March 2022
due to being instrumental in a group assault on another inmate
who sustained
facial and head injuries,
however police charges were not requested.
He incurred a misconduct charge of 'assaults' and was given seven days off buy
ups. During
discussions with Community Corrections regarding this incident,
Mr King did not appear to take any responsibility for his involvement,
describing it as a "misunderstanding with another inmate”.
Offence related programs
Mr King was assessed as eligible• but unsuitable for the Young Adult
Offenders Program, due to the regression in his classification
in January 2021.
He was then deemed eligible for EQUIPS Foundation and Aggression.
Mr King initially commenced the EQUIPS Foundation program on 6 April 2021,
however he was• removed from the group on 11 May
2021 for non-attendance.
He was re-allocated to the program in August 2021 which he completed on 20
October 2021. He engaged in the
group appropriately and was reported to have had
a high level 1 of understanding of the program's content.
Mr King completed EQUIPS Aggression on 8 December 2021, having attended
all sessions. During the group, he demonstrated a good understanding
program content and was an active contributor to the group. However,
demonstrated a willingness to change his aggressive behaviour during the
program, his subsequent involvement in the group
assault on another inmate on 28
February 2022 is an indication that he is yet to apply the skills and strategies
learnt during the
program to actual life situations and therefore he will need
to apply more effort and a firm commitment into changing his behaviour
In April 2021, Mr King self-referred to the VTP Business course·,
however he was withdrawn from the course in May 2021 as he
had failed to attend
any sessions.
Mr King has had various periods of employment during his incarceration
with mixed reports regarding his performance. During 2021,
he was warned
multiple times for playing cards during work hours. He is currently employed in
the Textiles Unit at Lithgow Correctional
Centre; enquiries made on 29 March
2022 revealed a similar pattern of behaviour. It appears that
he has a poor
work ethic.
Pre-release leave
Mr King is not eligible for pre-release leave due to his
classification.
Accommodation
Subject to Mr King's immigration status, he has been approved to reside
with his mother at: [x NSW].
A Risk Mitigation Plan assessment was undertaken by Blacktown Community
Corrections who have deemed that his risks can be managed
Supervision level
Mr King has been
assessed at a medium-low risk of reoffending
according to the Level of Service Inventory - Revised (LSI-R).
For the first 6 weeks following release to parole, Community Corrections
supervises all new parolees at the new parolee supervision
level. At this level,
parolees must have weekly contact with their Community Corrections Officer,
including a home visit in the first
After the first 6 weeks, Community Corrections will supervise Mr King at
the Tier 3/medium-low supervision level of the Service Delivery
Standards. He
will be required to have contact with a Community Corrections Officer every 4
weeks, including a home visit every 12
If the Community Corrections Officer identifies any concerns, the officer
may revise the risk assessment and supervision level.
Overall assessment
Mr King is a young offender who was 18 years old at the time of the
current offences which involved acts of serious violence committed
company of his co-offenders on several victims. Mr King was known to be
associating with a gang, known as e ‘Greater
West’, although he
denied being a member of this gang.
Mr King has demonstrated
very limited insight into his offending
behaviour and is yet to demonstrate that he is committed to positive behaviour
He has completed the EQUIPS Foundation and Aggression programs with
positive reports about his participation. However, he has involved
acts of violence and defiance since he has been in custody. More recently,
following ‘completion of the aggression
program he was involved in a group
assault on another inmate late February 2022.
Mr King's appeal against the cancellation of his visa is yet to be
determined. However, should he not be subject to immigration detention,
release plans, including suitable accommodation, have been formulated in
conjunction with Blacktown Community Corrections, to
mitigate his risks.
Although Mr King has shown very limited insight into his adverse behaviour both
in the community and custody,
it is considered an extended period of time on
supervision will enable him to engage in the recommended intervention strategies
assist him to develop the skills to lead a pro-social lifestyle.
Recommendation
Community Corrections recommends that a parole order is made for Mr King,
with the addition of the following conditions:
Condition 28
- not to contact, communicate or associate with the co-offenders
Condition 32
- immigration
Mr King's anti-social and aggressive behaviour in the custodial setting
remains of concern. Further to this his limited insight into
his adverse
behaviour both in the community and custody is also of
to the Applicant’s partner [O.O], their relationship began in about
April/May 2022,
though they had
known each other for some years before
According to her sister
[V.O] the relationship began “
when he was released from prison at the
end of 2022
is not consistent with the Applicant’s claims that he has been in a
committed relationship
” with O.O since
In the same document, he
claims that the relationship started on 14 May
He was not released from
immigration detention until 2 November
The Applicant told the
Tribunal that his relationship with O.O. “
” when he was
Applicant told the Tribunal that he first met Child A by video in 2022. He only
met him in person after he was released from detention
in November 2022.
18 June 2022, the Applicant refused to cooperate with prison staff. He was
handcuffed.
relation to this incident, he said that he had been promised that he would be
permitted a visit from his partner but the staff
had changed the arrangements
without telling him. He was upset about this.
20 June 2022, the Applicant became eligible for
He was released from
prison and taken into immigration
was detained in Villawood for a couple of months, then he was moved to Yongah
8 July 2022 the Applicant was involved in an assault on another
16 October 2022, the Applicant prepared a statement giving his account of the
assault. He states:
Response on immigration incident
report of 10.10.2022
1. Thank you for the opportunity to comment on your letter of 11 October
2. I have had time to study the incident report at the Mackenzie compound
on Friday 8 July 2022. I have good recollection of what
transpired on that
3. I understand how the incident may have portrayed me as an aggressive
person, considering the charges that led to my conviction.
In retrospect, my
behaviour towards my fellow detainee is unjustified and I’ve tendered my
deepest apologies to the victim
as soon as he returned from the
4. I witnessed an altercation between the detainee victim and my roommate.
My roommate could be old enough to be my father and due
to his age, I decided to
protect him against the victim who is way younger than him.
5. As a child, I was bullied a lot physically and emotionally and because
of all that trauma, I grew up to resent bullies and dislike
seeing someone being
bullied. I now understand that this is a very serious concern and bad approach
to my problems, and I have contacted
a health professional for help. I need
6. You’ll probably ask why I didn’t see a health professional
adulthood. Well,
growing up, professional help was already hard to get at home and I was under a
misconception that keeping it bottled
up would be better for me and everyone
especially since I needed to step up and help my mother with everything she was
with. But instead of bottling it up it came
7. out in a burst of anger, which I immediately regretted and realised I
need to find a therapeutic way to cope with these feelings.
8. First, I thought training was a good way to vent any negative energy.
Then I turned to my
who is usually
always there, and we talked frequently, and she helps with putting negative
feelings and thoughts at ease, although
I was ashamed before I realised that I
needed to seek professional assistance to help me further, as I have now
embarked on.
9. I reacted the way I did when I saw the altercation with the victim and
my roommate because of the age of my roommate, but still,
I shouldn’t have
let myself get to that extent to react in that way I did.
10. I’ve done the aggression program in jail where I learnt a lot
and usually identify my anger levels so I can defuse it before
it gets out of
hand but I am young and a work in progress and things like that can’t be
dropped over night but I’m willing
to do the hard work so I will one day
soon hopefully be able to help someone else who struggled the way I did.
11. I have contacted Dr C.Y. of PsychOrium Forensic and Clinical
Psychology and her team of forensic psychologists and counsellors.
I am thrilled
by the positive google reviews of Dr C.Y and I look forward to undergoing her
treatment plan and therapy methods.
I anticipate that Dr C.Y’s treatment
will facilitate a behavioural change, improved ability to commence and maintain
relationships, effective coping mechanism, improved decision-making
process, an improved version of myself, among other benefits.
. I contacted Dr C.Y to treat me due to my growing dissatisfied sense
of awareness in a particular aspect of my life and I am truly
determined to
change that
18 October 2022, the Applicant’s representative submitted a statement from
Ms O.O. which states:
My name is O.O, I am Gabriel King's
We’ve only been together for 6
known each other since childhood.
Since knowing Gabriel I know he has
been brought up with strong core beliefs, he always puts his family and loved
ones first, especially
before himself. His deep beliefs and connection with his
religion have also helped grow and strengthen mine and my son's spiritual
connection with our religion. We frequently pray together every night before we
go to sleep.
Many people were rooting for Gabriel, we all knew he would make it, and I
was very surprised when I found out that he had ended up
incarcerated, it just
wasn’t the Gabriel I knew and grew up with. I don’t know the exact
facts and reasoning behind the
altercations he was involved in but I can only
testify to the person I knew through school and the amazing man he has grown to
disciplined, respectful, selfless and goal-oriented.
Gabriel plays an
important role in mine and my son's life, he has taken on the father figure role
not only for my son but as well
as with his own family, looking after his
siblings in the house, and making sure his mum is doing good
. His maturity
level is greater than people twice his age.
Not only has he made a significant impact in my life
but it has also
been very beneficial for my son, Gabriel has helped him come back out of that
shell he crawled in after my previous
negative relationship.
Gabriel has never stopped making the effort to secure all my insecurities,
he reassures me with all my doubts. I went from thinking
I would never trust a
man again or get into another relationship until Gabriel came along, even though
he was incarcerated, he made
me feel like the most important person in the
world, he was battling his stresses but put everything aside to help me through
heartache and never stopped helping me do better and be better. Gabriel
slipped in and stepped up and without any complaints, he
showed nothing but
unconditional love and respect for both my son and myself.
Gabriel and I have had extensive discussions about our future, planning
on getting married and expanding the family that we’ve
always talked about
having. The way I’ve seen Gabriel around his family and mine, as well as
my son I know undoubtedly that
he would be the most reliable husband and father
We’ve not only been talking about growing our family but also how we
are going to grow with each other financially, discussing
business plans,
thinking ahead of what the next step is after he gets released and working
towards bettering both of our lives, together.
I pray from the deepest depths of my heart that you take what I've said
into consideration, because not only is him getting deported
going to hurt him,
but it’s also going to break his family & close ones' hearts and most
importantly my son who has grown
so attached to him and talks about him and to
him every day, waiting for the day he gets
note that according to this statement, the Applicant came to be a
father figure
” for Child A and a “
prospective husband. He did this over a 6-month period
during which he was in prison or detention.
Applicant told the Tribunal that O.O. and Child A live in house with O.O’
sisters, her mother and her grandmother. Child A’s biological father has
him on most weekends.
did not give evidence, so it was not possible to test her claims. Given her
living arrangements and Child A’s ongoing contact
with his father, I have
very little confidence in her claims regarding the Applicant’s crucial
role in Child A’s life.
2 November 2022, after considering the Applicant’s representations for
revocation, the Delegate decided to revoke the first
cancellation.
advising the Applicant included a warning which
Warning: if you engage in further criminal or
other serious conduct, this may again result in your visa being cancelled on
and it also states:
The Delegate of the Minister has issued Mr KING with a clear
warning that any such offending in future will be dealt with very seriously,
with the real possibility of being removed from Australia permanently. The
Australian Government and the Australian community consider
offences such as
armed with intent commit indictable offence and assault occasioning actual
bodily harm in company of others to be
very serious violent crimes and have very
little tolerance for repeat offending. I acknowledge that this is Mr
second time in custody
, so hopefully it will be his last
– that is up to him. He should continue to engage in rehabilitation
services in order to
reduce his risk of reoffending. If he offends again in
future, he cannot expect to receive the same degree of
the same day, the Applicant signed an acknowledgement indicating that he
understood the consequences if he engaged in further criminal
or other serious
conduct in these terms:
I, Gabriel Agyenim KING
acknowledge that I have received the Notice of decision to revoke visa
cancellation under
Migration Act 1958
I understand that if
I engage in further criminal or other serious conduct, this may again result in
any visa I hold being cancelled
on character grounds
, and in this case my
past conduct and previous relevant information held by the Department can also
be reconsidered.
response to the Delegate’s decision above, the Applicant stated on 18
April 2024:
... To correct the following, ... ‘Mr
King’s second time in custody’ is incorrect. My first time in
custody was
the combined Police Pursuit and Violent Assault.
I have taken the clear and direct warning as a matter of importance. I
have not re-offended or committed any violent offences that
, which I plead guilty too. And as I have clearly outlined,
have moved away from the youthful peer pressure associated with my 2019
The current conviction for attempting to sell and supply a prohibitive
drug for the first time was foolish and irresponsible. I will
complete my
sentence for the WA Crimes on 27 July 2024, whereby I will return to Sydney NSW
to complete 8 months imprisonment for
the 2019 NSW
the passage above, the Applicant implies that he took the Respondent’s
warning given on 2 November 2022, to have been confined
to violent crime. The
Applicant expressly however acknowledged, that if he engaged “
further criminal or other serious conduct, this may again result in any visa I
hold being cancelled on character
note that the Applicant moved from associating with a gang in Sydney at the time
of his August 2019 offending, shortly after his
November 2022, to “
dealing in drugs for
in W.A. as a
part of an “
established criminal
the time still on parole. This also occurred after receiving an explicit warning
from the Respondent about the possible
consequences of
re-offending.
Applicant’s account of how this came to happen lacked credibility. He said
that he could not recall the name of the man
who arranged this, even though he
had known him for years from playing rugby with him as a teenager. He conceded
that he knew from
the start that the proposal was illegal.
November 2022 to 10 March 2023, the Applicant said that he spent several days
per week living with O.O. and her extended family.
He denied that this was a
breach of his parole conditions. These were not before the Tribunal. It would be
unusual for parole conditions
not to specify a single address, for obvious
reasons. This was his mother’s house. He said that his parole officer said
was fine to go between addresses
10 March 2023, while still on parole, the Applicant boarded a flight from Sydney
to Perth using a false identity. This was done
to avoid being detected for
breaching parole in NSW.
trip to Perth, was planned for an illegal purpose.
Applicant told the Tribunal that he tried several times to contact his parole
officer to get permission to travel to WA, but he
never replied, so he just went
trip was carefully arranged. It is recounted by police in these terms:
11:35am on Friday 10 March 2023
accused attended terminal 2 at Sydney Airport in order to board a Jetstar flight
JQ986 bound for Perth Airport. The booking reference
for this flight was
The accused boarded the flight utilising a electronic boarding pass under
the name of [redacted information] and provided an address
of [redacted
information] in [redacted information]. The flight was scheduled to arrive at
Perth Airport at about 1:30pm.
The accused booked a return trip on Jetstar flight JQ987 from Perth to
Sydney scheduled to
depart on Tuesday 28 March 2023 at about 2:45pm
booking reference number for this flight was [x].
The return flight was booked separately to the first flight however
utilised the name of and provided an address of [information redacted]
[information redacted].
9:00am on Tuesday 28 March 2023
, the accused was the
passenger in a white Mitsubishi 380 bearing registration [x] travelling on
Beaufort Street near Newcastle Street
The vehicle was stopped by Police and the accused was spoken to.
The accused was asked by Police to provide his full name and date of birth
to which he replied his name was [redacted information]
and provided a date of
birth of [x] 2001.
During a search of the vehicle Police located a [x] Bankcard in the name
of the accused in a Gucci satchel band belonging to the accused.
accused was spoken to in regards to the bankcard
he stated he had provided a
false name to Police as he was on parole in New South Wales and as part of his
parole conditions he was
not authorised to leave the state of New South
A search of the mobile telephone located in the accused possession was
interrogated by Police with officers located the electronic
booking records for
both Jetstar flights contained within the device.
The accused was conveyed to Curtin House where he participated in an
electronic record of interview making full admissions to booking
two separate
Jetstar flights under a false name in order to be able to fly undetected to
Perth from Sydney and
without permission, the Applicant was apprehended
by WA police in possession of
methamphetamine and cash.
booked to return to Sydney on a flight at 2:45PM, on that same day. He was taken
into custody. The amended statement of material
facts file in the WA District
Court states:
1. At about 9:00am on Tuesday, 28 March
2023, the offender was the passenger in a white Mitsubishi 380 bearing
registration [x] travelling
on Beaufort Street near Newcastle Street in
2. The vehicle was stopped by Police and the offender was spoken
3. Police asked the offender to provide his full name and date of birth to
which he replied his name was [K.L] and provided a date
of birth of [x] 2001,
this name was identified by Police as being false.
4. Prior to the Misuse of Drugs Act search of the vehicle, the offender
declared he had "10 grams of Ice" in his bag.
5. The Police searched the vehicle and found a black Nike duffle bag
belonging to the offender.
6. Inside one of the zip lock pockets, Police found a medium sized clip
seal sandwich bag containing 15.2 grams of Methylamphetamine.
7. As the search continued, Police found in a separate compartment a large
white envelope containing $20,050.00 cash. The cash is
suspected to be derived
through the sale of prohibited drugs,
8. Digital scales and clip seal sandwich bags used for the sale and supply
of methylamphetamine were also found in the offender's
9. The offender's mobile phone was interrogated by Police where they
identified the offender as a member of an established criminal
network utilising
an encrypted chat platform known as [x]. The network used the platform to
co-ordinate drug distribution throughout
New South Wales and Western Australia.
The offender's handle was [x], and the message content relates to conveying
Methylamphetamine
into Western Australia and collecting cash payments before
returning to New South Wales.
10. The drugs were sent to the Chemistry Centre of Western Australia for
analysis returning a weight of 15.2 grams and purity of
Applicant told the Tribunal that he agreed with those facts.
29 March 2023, the Applicant was remanded in custody for the drug
Applicant’s sentence in NSW for the offences committed in August 2019 was
to expire on 20 November
note that O.O. lives in NSW and so the only time that she could have spent with
the Applicant in the community was between 2 November
2022 when he was released
from detention, and 10 March 2023, when he travelled to Perth. He told the
Tribunal that she and Child
A did visit him once in WA, during his
imprisonment.
note that WA prison records from April 2023 to February 2024, record regular
electronic contact between O.O. and the
18 January 2024, the Applicant was convicted of:
methylamphetamine with intent to sell/supply
Proceeds of Major Offence
in the District Court of
Western Australia. He was sentenced to 16 months and 8 months (con-current)
imprisonment respectively.
sentencing remarks of Lonsdale DCJ state:
LONSDALE DCJ:
Yes. So, Mr King, I’m going to sentence you to a term of immediate
imprisonment today, but that will come as
no surprise to you.
sentencing you for one count of possession of methylamphetamine with intent to
sell or supply; the maximum penalty for which
is 25 years' imprisonment and/or a
fine not exceeding $100,000. And also one count of receiving or dealing with
money that was the
proceeds of an offence and the maximum penalty for that is 20
years' imprisonment.
Now, the facts were read by the State prosecutor. I will briefly
summarise those facts as best I can. On 28 March 2023 you were
a passenger in a
car travelling on Beaufort Street near Newcastle Street in Perth.
stopped the vehicle and asked you to provide your details. You gave them a
false name and date of birth. Police then executed
a search warrant. You
declared prior to the police executing the search warrant that you had 10 grams
of ice in your bag. That
was something of an under-estimation because police
located 15.2 grams of methylamphetamine in a medium sized clipseal sandwich bag
and also $20,050 in cash. And police found other indicia of sale and supply,
such as digital scales and clipseal sandwich bags.
Police interrogated your mobile phone and identified that you were a
member of an established criminal network utilising an encrypted
chat forum to
. So the drugs weighed 15.2 grams and had a purity of 82
Now, you pleaded guilty at your fifth appearance in the Magistrates Court
and the State accepts that this was a plea of guilty at
earliest reasonable
opportunity. I am going to discount your sentence by the maximum discount
amount of 25 per cent for
your early plea of guilty
I note also that
you didn’t cooperate with the police and provided them with a false name,
so you’re not being punished
for that today, but you’re not entitled
to any further reduction for cooperation with police.
your offending was in all of the circumstances very serious
It involved a significant quantity of methylamphetamine, albeit that there are
bigger quantities of methylamphetamine that this
court has to deal with on a
regular basis, but it was 15-odd grams, it had a high purity around 82 per cent,
which suggests that
it was close to the source. Because of the cash it is plain
that you were dealing in drugs for profit, and indeed, you admit that.
offending is made more serious by the fact that you were on parole from New
South Wales
Now, I heard your explanation for why you offended. It is said that you
were struggling mentally and financially because you were
unable to work. I
don’t have any medical records before me to suggest that you had an injury
which rendered you incapable
for work. And quite frankly none of this is a
mitigating circumstance.
I’ve been told that you couldn’t access benefits because
you’re a New Zealand citizen. And I’m not sure whether
that's right quite frankly, Mr King, given the relationship between New Zealand
and Australia. I don’t really know.
I’m a bit sceptical, I must
say, that you weren’t able to access some kind of benefits being a New
Zealand citizen.
But perhaps that had something to do with your uncertain
immigration status. And I’ve been told by Mr Barber that you spent
certain amount of time in detention challenging your deportation, so perhaps
it’s got something to do with that. I don’t
know. But in any event
it’s hardly an excuse to resort to dealing in drugs.
Now, you have pleaded guilty at the earliest opportunity, as I’ve
said, so you get the 25 per cent discount for that. You are
relatively young. You are 23 years of age now and I think you were 22 at the
time. I beg your pardon, are you 23 or
LONSDALE DCJ: You’re still 22, yes. So you still have the benefit
of youth, despite the fact that you already have a very
significant criminal
history. In New South Wales you have a history of violent offending and on one
occasion you received a sentence
of imprisonment of three years. So that
indicates to the court, Mr King, that you’re somebody who has chosen an
anti-social
lifestyle. And until you start to make better choices, Mr King, you
will simply be in and out of prison, and I don’t know
why you would want
to spend the rest of your life in that way.
I accept that there is some uncertainty with your future because you will
be extradited back to New South Wales, no doubt to serve
out the parole term
which was imposed by the courts there, although I’m not sure how that
works in that jurisdiction, but it
seems likely that you’re going to have
to do some more time over there.
Now, you were born in New Zealand. You are the middle child of three
children to your parents' union. You moved to Australia in
2004, when you were
three years of age. You report having a good childhood, but I note that your
parents separated when you were
six, and you haven't had any contact with your
father really. You didn't have any contact with him between him leaving until
were 18, so one suspects that you lacked positive role models.
You have minimised, I think, to some extent the - your use of
substances. You've denied use of methylamphetamine, but that seems
to me to be
inconsistent with the fact that you were found with a very significant quantity
of it, but you do admit using other drugs,
such as cocaine and MDMA
Now, I'm sentencing you, Mr King, for an offence which involves you
selling drugs essentially - or offences which involve you selling
drugs. And in
that respect it doesn't really focus on the issue of your own drug use, but
plainly if you're somebody who uses drugs,
you're choosing to associate with
other people who either use or sell drugs, and that's something that you need to
address if you're
serious about your rehabilitation in the future.
I consider that it is appropriate that those two sentences be served
concurrently with each other, so the total sentence will be one
of 16 months.
Now, you have been in custody since 28 March 2023, and I'll backdate the
sentences to commence on that
30 January 2024, the Applicant’s visa was cancelled on the basis that he
was convicted of “
possession of methylamphetamine with intent to sell
” for which he was sentenced to 16 months of imprisonment
second visa cancellation
the same day, the Applicant made representations requesting revocation of the
second visa cancellation.
13 February 2024, a W.A Parole Review report recommended against
The Applicant said that
he was not aware at the time, that he had to request parole, so he
26 July 2024, the Delegated decided that the second visa cancellation decision
should not be revoked.
2 August 2024, the Applicant applied for review of the Delegate’s decision
at the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(Tribunal).
Applicant stated the reasons in his application for review, as
I have strong family ties to Australia, I have
completed all my schooling in Australia. I came from New Zealand when I was 3
old, I have no family nor friends in New Zealand, by send me back my
future will be condemned to nothing but hardship.
I have my partner [O.O] and
step son [Child A] in Australia who I am deeply invested in and by having a
negative result in my decision
will deeply impact them mentally and emotionally.
Even with my recent incarceration had made my partner [O.O] fall into depression
and my step son becoming very withdrawn socially and I fear the catastrophic
impact on her and my sons mental health will become
deeply damaged with a
negative visa result.
And also my mother [M.K] is struggling with depression
of me being incarcerated and the stress of looking after my older brother who
currently in the mental hospital and also with a negative result on my visa will
deeply affect her mentally and she awaiting me
to come home so I can help her
financially and physically since she is also having physical issues. My little
sister [S.K] is now
having heart problems as well and needs her big brother to
be there for her.
is instructive to compare these submissions with those made after the first visa
cancellation.
Applicant says that he has no family or friends in New
His immediate family
– father G.K, mother M.K, older brother G.J.K and youngest sister S.K are
currently residing in Australia.
He has no contact with his father.
Applicant claims that his family relies on him financially and
emotionally.
He says that this
is because his older brother who suffers from schizophrenia and bi-polar
requires 24-hour care and he is
‘in-and-out’
of institutional
care. Consequently, this has become a burden on his
Applicant has a very complex, and, in the past, even abusive relationship with
his brother.
It was revealed
during the hearing that his older brother (G.J.K), who is a citizen of New
Zealand, may also be facing deportation.
If this were to occur, and the
Applicant were to be returned, he would have a brother there. When asked about
this prospect, he said
that it would make his life in New Zealand harder,
because he would have to look after G.J.K. By inference, the same may apply to
his attitude to looking after his brother in Australia. Therefore, his claims
seem to be embellished at
least, if not untrue.
Applicant gave vague evidence about G.J.K having mental health issues. He
thought that he had schizophrenia and bi-polar disorder.
He said that he had
been hospitalised for mental health problems on several occasions since 2017. He
said that G.J.K. has assaulted
his mother and sister. G.J.K. has even tried to
burn down their house, with them asleep in it. He has been convicted of criminal
offences, but the Applicant was very vague about what offences and when. The
fact of a criminal conviction, if true, suggests that
G.J.K was not mentally
impaired at the time of the offending. There is no independent evidence
confirming any diagnosis.
the Tribunal’s request, the Respondent made a search to see if there were
any records regarding the current status of G.J.K.
The Respondent provided the
Tribunal with a copy of a decision of DP Cowdroy AO. KC. made on 2 August 2022.
This decision affirmed
an earlier visa cancellation. This decision makes no
mention of G.J.K suffering from schizophrenia or bi-polar disorder. It refers
instead to gender dysphoria, anxiety, depression, substance abuse and a
first episode
to the Applicant, G.J.K remains in detention. If he has no visa, he will not be
in the community.
Applicant’s mother
O.O’s mother
O.O’s sister
and a high school
friend [M.R]
produced letters of support for the Applicant, which I have considered.
Applicant’s mother and sister live together in rented accommodation in
Sydney. They are both employed and not dependant
on benefits, according to the
Applicant further submitted a letter of support from his sister –
another friend –
and a statement from
with respect to the
Applicant’s relationship to her son, Child A, which I have also
considered.
noted above, there is no independent evidence before the Tribunal to corroborate
these specific claims. It is, however, apparent
that G.J.K has had some ongoing
mental health issues.
also note that since the Applicant’s incarceration in August 2019, he has
made little if any direct contribution to his family.
He says that he was never
paid for his drug dealing in WA.
stated that the Applicant and Child A have formed a relationship where Child A
loves the Applicant as his own
The Applicant also
claims that Child A sees him as his
My name is O.O. Gabriel and I have been together
going on 2 years now, although we have been good friends since we were 14 years
Gabriel is a charismatic young man, he is caring and cheerful who always
puts the needs of others before his own.
I have a son of my own who loves
Gabriel like his own father, they have formed such a healthy bond in the time we
have been together.
He has shown nothing but love and support to my son, as
every father should. They did absolutely everything together, those two were
inseparable. Gabriel has helped me through some of the hardest moments of my
life, he's given me hope and strength. In him I found
a best friend.
Gabriel has dreams and goals to better his life and the situation he is in
right now. We have dreams and goals we want to accomplish
together and have been
planning marriage and more kids, and we weal to expand the little family we
already have. He is a smart talented
man that was exposed to the wrong side of
the world at such, a young age, I had never experienced, anything like this
before so it
was all very new to me but I knew straight away that the most
important thing I could give him was support, he needed guidance and
someone to tell him that this is not the life God has planned for him. He has
such a great support team here, my family
- mother and sisters, who adore him,
as well as his family - mother and sister, whom I am very close with. He has
many good friends
that he considers family that only want the best for him, to
I am very confident and will never lase hope in Gabriel, he has a purpose
and he knows that spending his young adult years incarcerated
is not U. I
believe with the right support not only from friends and family but also his
parole officers, whether It be help adjusting
to life back in the community,
programs to help him stay out of prison etc, Gabriel will get back on his feet
and thrive in doing
what is right not only for himself but for his family as
well as the family we want to create. I hope you have as much faith in him
Applicant claims:
I am a 24hour/7day a week ‘father
figure’ to my stepson, [Child A]. He sees me as his Dad. Both [O.O] and I
are equally
committed to the safety and wellbeing of our son, [Child A].
As previously mentioned, both [O.O] and [Child A] are suffering acute
mental health conditions with the uncertainty of the mandatory
cancellation of
me living in Australia with both of them as a family unit. [Child A’s]
emotional state is already precarious
and my deportation to NZ would be
devastating. The New Direction 99 (replacing Direction 90) emphasizes the
of my personal ties to Australia.
The devastating impact on my family is why the New Direction 99 was put in
place of Direction
the reasons set out above, I give little weight to these claims. Child A has
weekly contact with his biological father.
Applicant claims that O.O has suffered from depression since his incarceration
and is under medical care.
further claims that both O.O and Child A have acute mental health
conditions.
note that there is no corroborative evidence in any of the materials in support
of the Applicant’s claims regarding the mental
health of his mother, O.O
and Child A.
I give all of
these claims little weight.
is no evidence of substance and alcohol abuse, although the Applicant has
indicated that he was leading “
a positive lifestyle (drug free) in
prison to prepare to return home to Sydney,
It is noted
that the Applicant had denied using methylamphetamine but admitted to using
other drugs such as cocaine and
His claimed abstinence
has not really been tested in the community since his arrest in 2019. The
evidence suggests that he has been
using alcohol, and perhaps illicit drugs, in
prison/detention.
Applicant states that he does not have any diagnosed medical or psychological
conditions.
Applicant states that he has not been able to engage with any
meaningful courses
incarcerated.
Nevertheless he
has applied for ‘
any courses available
’ to him in preparing
to return to the community.
It is unclear of what programs he has participated and successfully completed
(if at all) in WA.
told the Tribunal that he did see a psychologist on 2 occasions, but he did not
feel comfortable discussing his feelings with that
person. He decided instead to
go to Church... get closer to God....talk to God...
also said that he studies the Bible with O.O.
Applicant further states that, while in prison (WA), he attended at some African
counselling meetings where he experienced some
His engagement with
programmes in NSW is set out above.
Applicant says that he plans to get married to O.O upon his release from
has no concrete plans for rehabilitation, treatment, employment or accommodation
if he were to be returned to the community. I
have little confidence in any of
his aspirational assurances and the untested statements provided by O.O.
the Applicant were to have his visa returned, he would be released back into the
community he would not be under parole supervision.
He told the Tribunal that he
would reside with O.O. in her family house.
copy of the Applicant’s record of convictions is annexed hereto and marked
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
Does the Applicant Pass the Character Test?
Applicant was sentenced by Lonsdale DCJ of the District Court of Western
Australia to a term of imprisonment of 16
Tribunal finds that the Applicant has a “
substantial criminal
” and, therefore, he does not pass the character test. This is
not disputed by the Applicant. The Tribunal must consider whether
is another reason why the original decision should be revoked”.
Is there another reason why the original decision should be
revoked under section 501CA(4)?
considering whether to the original decision should be revoked, the Tribunal is
bound by s 499(2A) to comply with any directions
made under the Act. In this
Direction No 110 – Visa refusal and cancellation under section
501 and revocation of a mandatory cancellation of a visa under
section 501CA
(“the Direction”) has
application.
the purposes of deciding whether to refuse or cancel a non-citizen’s visa
or whether or not to revoke the mandatory cancellation
of a non-citizen’s
visa, paragraph 5.2 of the Direction contains several principles that must
inform a decision maker’s
application of the considerations identified in
Part 2 where relevant to the decision.
principles that are found in paragraph 5.2 of the Direction may be briefly
stated as follows:
(1) Australia has a sovereign right to determine whether non-citizens who are of
character concern are allowed to enter and/or remain
in Australia. Being able to
come to or remain in Australia is a privilege Australia confers on non-citizens
in the expectation that
they are, and have been, law-abiding, will respect
important institutions, such as Australia’s law enforcement framework, and
will not cause or threaten harm to individuals or the Australian community.
The safety of the Australian Community is the highest priority of the
Australian Government
(3) Non-citizens who engage or have engaged in criminal or other serious
conduct should expect to be denied the privilege of coming
to, or to forfeit the
privilege of staying in, Australia.
(4) The Australian community expects that the Australian Government can and
should refuse entry to non-citizens, or cancel their
visas, if they engaged in
conduct, in Australia or elsewhere, that raises serious character concerns. This
expectation of the Australian
community applies regardless of whether the
non-citizen poses a measurable risk of causing physical harm to the Australian
(5) Australia has a low tolerance of any criminal or other serious conduct by
visa applicants or those holding a limited stay visa,
or by other non- citizens
who have been participating in, and contributing to, the Australian community
only for a short period of
(6) With respect to decisions to refuse, cancel, and revoke cancellation of a
visa, Australia may afford a higher level of tolerance
of criminal or other
serious conduct by non-citizens who have lived in the Australian community for
most of their life, or from a
very young age.
(7) Decision-makers must take into account the primary and other considerations
relevant to the individual case. In some circumstances,
the nature of the
noncitizen’s conduct, or the harm that would be caused if the conduct were
to be repeated, may be so serious
that even strong countervailing considerations
may be insufficient to justify not cancelling or refusing the visa, or revoking
mandatory cancellation.
(8) The inherent nature of certain conduct such as family violence is so serious
that even strong countervailing considerations may
be insufficient to justify
not cancelling or refusing the visa, or revoking a mandatory cancellation, even
if the information available
at the time of consideration suggests that the
non-citizen does not pose a measurable risk of causing physical harm to the
6 of the Direction provides that:
Informed by the principles in paragraph 5.2, a decision maker must take into
account the considerations identified in sections 8
and 9, where relevant to the
7(2) of the Direction requires that protection of the Australian community
(Primary Consideration 8.1), is generally to
be given greater weight than other
primary considerations. Otherwise, primary considerations should generally be
given greater weight
than the other considerations.
8 of the Direction sets out five Primary Considerations that the Tribunal must
take into account and they are:
(1) protection of the Australian community from criminal or other serious
(2) whether the conduct engaged in constituted family violence;
(3) the strength, nature and duration of ties to Australia:
(4) the best interests of minor children in Australia; and
(5) expectations of the Australian community.
9 of the Direction sets out three Other Considerations which must be taken into
account. These considerations are:
a) legal consequence of the decision;
b) extent of impediments if removed;
c) impact on Australian business interests
note the importance of the Other Considerations being “
considerations, as opposed to “
” considerations. As
noted by Colvin J in
Suleiman v Minister for
Immigration and Border
“...Direction 65 [now Direction 110] makes clear that an evaluation
is required in each case as to the weight to be given to
considerations' (including non‑refoulement obligations). It requires both
primary and other considerations to be
given 'appropriate weight'.
Direction 65 does provide that, generally, primary considerations should be
given greater weight. They
are primary in the sense that absent some factor that
takes the case out of that which pertains 'generally' they are to be given
greater weight. However, Direction 65 does not require that the other
considerations be treated as secondary in all cases. Nor does
it provide that
primary considerations are 'normally' given greater weight. Rather,
Direction 65 concerns the appropriate weight
to be given to both 'primary'
and 'other considerations'. In effect, it requires an inquiry as to whether one
or more of the other
considerations should be treated as being a primary
consideration or the consideration to be afforded greatest weight in the
circumstances of the case because it is outside the circumstances
that generally apply.”
Primary Consideration 1 – Protection of The Australian
considering this Primary Consideration 1, paragraph 8.1 of the Direction
requires decision-makers to keep in mind
the safety of the Australian
community is the highest priority of the Australian Government
end, the Government is committed to protecting the Australian community from
harm as a result of criminal activity or other
serious conduct by non-citizens.
Decision-makers should have particular regard to the principle that entering or
remaining in Australia is a privilege that this country confers on
non-citizens in the expectation that they are, and have been, law
abiding, that
they will respect important institutions and that they will not cause or
threaten harm to individuals or the Australian
determining the weight applicable to Primary Consideration 1, paragraph 8.1(2)
of the Direction requires decision-makers to give
consideration to:
a) The nature and seriousness of the non-citizen’s conduct to date; and
b) The risk to the Australian community should the non-citizen commit further
offences or engage in other serious conduct.
The Nature and Seriousness of the Applicant’s Conduct
assessing the nature and seriousness of a non-citizen’s criminal offending
or other conduct to date, paragraph 8.1.1(1)
of the Direction specifies that
decision-makers must have regard to a number of factors. I will now turn to
addressing these considerations.
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction provides that without limiting
the range of conduct that may be considered very serious, violent
and/or sexual
crimes; crimes of a violent and/or sexual nature against women or children
(regardless of the sentence imposed); or
acts of family violence (regardless of
whether there is a conviction for an offence or a sentence imposed) are viewed
very seriously
by the Australian Government and the Australian community.
Applicant’s criminal record is set out in detail above.
has been associated with violent crime perpetrated by a youth gang. He has also
been involved in serious drug crime, as part of
common feature here is participation in serious criminal activity as a part of,
or in association with, a group committing criminal
do not agree with the Applicant’s assertion that he does “
have an extensive criminal
contrary, for a young man of 23 years of age, he has committed very serious
crimes and spent much of his adult life in prison,
or detention.
Applicant’s violent offending is set out in detail above. This is very
serious. A very disturbing aspect to the Applicant’s
offending is that it
was also filmed by another gang member, using his
This suggests that
some pride was taken by the group in their collective criminal conduct, and the
humiliation of their victims.
It is also consistent with being allocated
” for violent conduct within gang culture. The
Applicant was filmed “
” wearing what appeared to be
the victim’s stolen watch. He uploaded a picture of himself wearing the
victim’s gold
The Applicant also used a weapon, namely a machete, during the
He admitted to
carrying it “
for protection
Applicant has been involved in violent incidents in prison/ detention.
Applicant’s drug offending is also set out in detail above. This is also
very serious. It was clearly premeditated. The
Applicant was very vague about
the details of this offending. He sought to pass himself off to the Tribunal as
just being a courier.
The sentencing Judge thought otherwise. I agree.
evidence suggests that the Applicant made a conscious, deliberate decision to
engage in this offending. He says that he
“stupidly went to Perth, WA
to illegally attempt to rectify my poor financial situation at the
His decision
to go to Perth and be involved in drug trafficking, came as a result of a
suggestion from one of his
He refused to
provide more detail about this “
” when asked directly
in cross-examination. He claimed not to know his name, even though he had known
him for years and played
rugby with him. The elaborate efforts that the
Applicant took to conceal his identity when traveling to Perth underscore the
of his planning and dishonesty. He was deliberately seeking to avoid
detection for breaching parole. He knew exactly what he was
gravity of his drug related offending is even greater, because it occurred when
he was on parole and after the warning following
the first visa cancellation.
Applicant totally ignored the explicit warning from the Respondent when the
first visa cancellation was revoked. He did so almost
immediately after his
release from immigration detention.
scourge of illicit drugs, including methamphetamine, has devastating
consequences for our community. The suppliers of these drugs
are destroying the
lives of addicts and their families. They collectively impose significant
burdens on taxpayers and the many victims
of abuse, suffered at the hands of
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction provides that
without limiting
the range of conduct that may be considered serious
, the types of crimes or
conduct described below are considered by the Australian Government and the
Australian community to be serious:
(i) causing a person to enter into or being party to a forced marriage (other
than being a victim), regardless of whether there is
a conviction for an offence
or a sentence imposed;
(ii) crimes committed against vulnerable members of the community (such as the
elderly and the disabled), or government representatives
or officials due to the
position they hold, or in the performance of their duties;
(iii) any conduct that forms the basis for a finding that a non-citizen does not
pass an aspect of the character test that is dependent
decision-maker’s opinion (for example, section 501(6)(c));
(iv) where the non-citizen is in Australia, a crime committed while the
non-citizen was in immigration detention, during an escape
from immigration
detention, or after the non-citizen escaped from immigration detention, but
before the non-citizen was taken into
immigration detention again, , or an
offence against section 197A of the Act, which prohibits escape from immigration
Applicant obviously does not pass the character test.
offending is very serious.
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction requires a decision-maker (with
the exception of the crimes or conduct mentioned in sub-paragraphs
(a)(iii) or (b)(i) of paragraph 8.1.1(1)) to have regard to the sentence(s)
imposed by the Courts for a crime or crimes
of a non-citizen/applicant. The
imposition of a custodial term is regarded as the last resort in any reasonably
and correctly applied
sentencing process. Custodial terms are viewed as a
reflection of the objective seriousness of an applicant’s offending.
Applicant has been sentenced to 2 periods of imprisonment, both being in excess
of 12 months.
gravity of his offending is set out in the sentencing remarks (above) and is
demonstrated by the length of his head sentences.
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction requires a decision-maker to have
regard to the impact of the offending on any victims offending
or other conduct
and their family, where information in this regard is available and the
non-citizen whose visa is being considered
for refusal or cancellation, or who
has sought revocation of the mandatory cancellation of their visa, has been
afforded procedural
is no evidence of this.
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction requires a decision-maker to have
regard to the frequency of a non-citizen’s offending
and whether there is
any trend of increasing seriousness.
Applicant has been a consistent and serious offender during his time as an
fact that the Applicant reoffended while on parole and immediately after an
explicit warning from the Respondent, shows an increasingly
serious trend in his
offending and a total contempt for our laws.
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction requires a decision-maker to have
regard to the cumulative effect of an Applicant’s
repeated offending.
Applicant’s violent offending has been extremely serious. The direct
impact on the victims of his violent criminal conduct,
was very serious. He used
a weapon. He was at very least associated with a youth gang. He displayed
evidence of his crime on social
media. Violent street crime also generally
undermines public confidence in the safety of our community.
community has been damaged to some degree, by the consequences of his drug
offending, through its impact on addicts, their families
and those coming into
Applicant has been a significant burden on taxpayers through his extensive
interactions with the criminal justice system.
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction requires a decision-maker to have
regard to whether a non-citizen has provided false or misleading
information to
the Department, including by not disclosing prior criminal offending.
is no evidence of this.
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction requires a decision-maker to have
regard to whether the non-citizen has re-offended since being
formally warned
migration status (noting that the
absence of a warning should not be considered
to be in the non-citizen’s favour).
previously noted, the Applicant was formally warned by the Respondent when the
first visa cancellation was revoked on 2 November
2022. Just a few months later,
on 28 March 2023, whilst still on parole, he was apprehended committing serious
drug offences. I note
that, he used a false identity to travel to Perth on 10
March 2024 to allow him to re-offend.
Applicant totally disregarded the Respondent’s warning. Indeed, according
to his statement,
deliberately set out to make money, by illegal means.
Sub-paragraph
of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction requires a decision-maker to have
regard, where the offence or conduct was committed in another
country, to
whether that offence or conduct is classified as an offence in Australia.
is no evidence of this.
do not consider factors (d), (g) and (i) of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction
apply to the Applicant’s offending or circumstances.
The rest of the
relevant sub-paragraphs of paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction, in their
totality, weigh very heavily against revocation
of the cancellation of the
Applicant’s visa.
The Risk to the Australian Community Should the Applicant
Commit Further Offences or Engage in Other Serious Conduct
8.1.2(1) provides that in considering the need to protect Australian community
(including individuals, groups or institutions)
from harm, decision-makers
should have regard to the Government’s view that the Australian
community’s tolerance for
any risk of future harm becomes lower as the
seriousness of the potential harm increases. Some conduct and the harm that
caused, if it were to be repeated, is so serious that any risk that it
may be repeated may be unacceptable.
8.1.2(2) provides that in assessing the risk that may be posted by the
non-citizen to the Australian community, decision-makers
must have regard to,
cumulatively:
a) the nature of the harm to individuals or the Australian community should the
non-citizen engage in further criminal or other serious
b) the likelihood of the non-citizen engaging in further criminal or other
serious conduct, taking into account:
(i) information and evidence on the risk of the non-citizen re-offending; and
(ii) evidence of rehabilitation achieved by the time of the decision, giving
weight to time spent in the community since their most
recent offence;
consideration is being given to whether to refuse to grant a visa to the
non-citizen - whether the risk of harm may be affected
by the duration and
purpose of the non-citizen’s intended stay, the type of visa being applied
for, and whether there are strong
or compassionate reasons for granting a short
Nature of harm should the Applicant engage in further criminal
or other serious conduct
the nature of the harm to individuals or the Australian community that may occur
if the Applicant were to engage in further
criminal or other serious conduct, is
informed by the nature of his offending to date, including any escalation in his
This assessment also notes that the Direction provides that the
Australian community’s tolerance for harm becomes lower as
the seriousness
of the potential harm increases. Some conduct and the harm that would be caused,
is so serious that any risk that
it may be repeated may be unacceptable
(Paragraph 8.1.2(1)).
nature of the harm that may be done if the Applicant were to reoffend, is
extremely serious.
risk that the Applicant’s violent offending or drug offending may be
repeated, is unacceptable.
Likelihood of engaging in further criminal or other serious
is no independent expert evidence before the Tribunal to assist in the
assessment of risk.
note that parole was not recommended by the WA Department of Justice in a report
dated13 February 2024.
Applicant’s explanation of his conduct provides no
My third and final offence was Intent to Sell and
Supply a Prohibitive Drug and related offences in Perth, Western Australia which
I immediately plead guilty too. As I have outlined in my application to revoke
the decision to cancel my visa,
I was not coping with my financial
responsibilities and stupidly went to Perth, WA to illegally attempt to rectify
my poor financial
situation at the time.
I have obviously learnt with a
great deal of support, that my poor decisions have hurt not only me, but the
ones I love. (please
see my application to revoke my visa cancellation)
I have taken the clear and direct warning as a matter of importance. I
have not re-offended or committed any violent offences that
the one specified,
which I plead guilty too. And as I have clearly outlined, have moved away from
the youthful peer pressure associated
with my 2019 offences.
The current conviction for attempting to sell and supply a prohibitive
drug for the first time was foolish and irresponsible. I will
complete my
sentence for the WA Crimes on 27 July 2024, whereby I will return to Sydney NSW
to complete 8 months imprisonment for
the 2019 NSW
assessments made by corrections in NSW suggest a disturbing lack of
Applicant’s claim that his relationship with O.O and Child A is a
circumstances
lacks credibility. He claims that the relationship started as far back as 2020,
and certainly well prior to the drug offending. O.O.
places the start of the
relationship in April/May 2022. He was in detention at the time. Again, this is
prior to his trip to Perth,
for the deliberate purpose of engaging in drug
trafficking.
relationship has not performed a protective function.
accept that the Applicant has had ongoing electronic contact with O.O. over
recent years.
has also continued to be in contact with one of his co-offenders in the August
2019 offences (R.J.T). He considers him to be non-biological
”. R.J.T’s father is a close friend of the
Applicant’s mother.
Applicant is close to his mother and at least his younger sister (S.K) , but
this connection has also not served a protective
function during his
Applicant ignored an explicit warning from the Respondent when the first visa
cancellation was revoked.
has committed a serious, premeditated drug offence when on parole for crimes of
Applicant accepts that he has not engaged in any “
” to assist in his
rehabilitation.
hearing, he told the Tribunal that he has not engaged with any psychologists,
namely Dr C.Y and counsellors in which he promised
he would if released from
instead he chose
talk to God
note that, during his proceedings on 20 November 2020, in relation to the 2019
offences, where Judge Harris referred to the Applicant’s
representations
that he may require assistance or treatment to prevent him from
becoming as angry as he did during the
Applicant submits to the Tribunal that when he was incarcerated in 2019, he:
participated in foundation courses which covered drugs,
alcohol problems and anger management. Then after that course I participated
another anger management course which went further into depth about how to
control anger and how to identify different stages
of anger, how to stop it from
increasing and also how to leave certain situations that I feel could escalate
into something more
serious. I believe those courses really helped me contain
and dispose of my anger tendencies. I know I can’t change anything
done in the past but I have worked on myself to ensure I prevent anything like
that from happening again.
Which leads me to my last and most recent offenses, laundering proceeds of
a major offense, possession of methamphetamine with intent
to sell/supply, false
ID information and giving false personal details to police in March of 2023 when
I was 22 years old. I was
sentenced to 16 months imprisonment and a $200 fine. I
had just been released from immigration in November 2022 Upon my release,
started working as a scaffolder and started my certificate III in fitness at
tafe in January 2023. I was on the right track working,
attending church, and
spending time with my family.
I didn’t realize how difficult it would
be to reintegrate back into normal life out of prison
, It was my first time
having freedom as an adult, a lot had changed since the last time I was out in
society in 2019. I saw people
my age that were way ahead in life than I was and
it discouraged me, it was overwhelming and I just felt as though I was at a
still. I didn’t cope with my emotions very well and although I had
people all around me supporting me, I still felt like I
was doing it alone.
After being in jail for so long I didn’t want to come out and continue
putting my problems on to my loved
While I was going through all of
this a friend reached out to me with an opportunity and me not being in the
right mindset senselessly
accepted. Thinking it might help me to get on top of
things instead it led me to being incarcerated in Perth
. It’s easy to
think “if you accepted an opportunity like this so quickly last time you
were struggling, what’s
stopping you from accepting again this
time”. Honestly speaking, I was not in the right headspace when I got
released last
time, I didn’t know how to cope with my emotions and
problems I now realize that it is okay to ask for help, it’s okay
I’ve got my family. I have removed myself from
certain friend groups that
do not benefit my life, I don’t need friends that tempt me into doing
things that will ruin my
Applicant has failed to demonstrate that he has derived any benefits from
course/s. In fact, within a short period after his release
from prison and
immigration detention, the Applicant continued to engage in further,
premeditated criminal activities in another
state. This was apparently because
a friend reached out to me with an
opportunity
explanation for reoffending is that he did not know how difficult it was to
re-integrate into the community. I note that he had
the support of his family
and O.O (and her family) at that time of his release. These connections were
apparently insufficient to
prevent him deliberately taking up “
opportunity
” to deal in methamphetamine.
Applicant continues to say:
I now realize that it is okay
to ask for help, it’s okay to need help, I’m not in this on my own I
have my partner and
her family, I’ve got my family. I have removed myself
from certain friend groups that do not benefit my life, I don’t
friends that tempt me into doing things that will ruin my life.
I know at the moment all you can take is my word to make your decision, so
I want to say I understand all the wrong decisions I’ve
made and not only
how they have affected me but also a lot of other people around me, surrounding
myself with the wrong people and
not being able to handle mental and emotional
stress properly. I thought that since my family life at home wasn’t the
the friends I made would make up for what I was missing at home.
were troublemakers and did bad things but since they showed me love I very
quickly joined in on the mischief without realizing
it was a sword
being incarcerated in Perth I attended the African counselling meetings in [x]
Prison. These meetings helped me realize that
I always had a second option, I
can always do better and strive to be better, even though it will be slow
getting back on my feet
and making up for lost time, if I set goals and take it
step by step it will be worth all the hard work in the end because I get
with my family.
I’m not a danger to the community or a criminal mastermind,
I’m a young man who made bad life decisions at a young age.
Even though it
ended me in jail, I’m glad I went to jail when I did because it helped me
rehabilitate, straighten out my mind
and get my life goals and priorities in
order. Now I know what and how to look after myself and cope physically,
mentally and emotionally
but also I know how to look after my family the correct
law abiding
Applicant’s statements indicate that he was drawn to
trouble-makers’
which eventually led him into re-offending,
instead of seeking professional help, or turning to his family/ partner when he
was struggling
with his own mental and emotional stress. The Applicant’s
criminal record suggests that he is easily led by any criminal elements
an interest in him.
M.D (O.O’s mother) also suggests in her letter that “
the lack of
mental health support contributed to him
re-offending.
previously noted, he has rejected such help, preferring instead to
talk to God
Applicant wants the Tribunal to take his word that he has understood the impact
of his wrongful decisions. I note that he apparently
did not understand this, as
recently as November 2022, when his visa was restored.
says that he is not a danger to the community and that spending time in prison
in any treatment or
meaningful programs. I do not accept his assurances, given his history.
Applicant justifies his continued offending as being due to his financial
struggles. These are likely to reoccur from time to
time in the future. These
are a common feature of many people’s lives. Resorting to crime is not an
acceptable remedy. We have
only his word, that he will not again resort to crime
to solve his financial problems.
Applicant has not demonstrated any significant history of legitimate employment.
Based on his history, the probability of him
gaining and maintaining legitimate
employment if he were to return to the Australian community, is limited.
Applicant stated that he should have helped his loved ones through
work. The Applicant had the opportunity in January 2023 when he was working as a
to do exactly
that. He failed to take that opportunity and all the then available support to
improve his circumstances. Instead,
he deliberately chose a path of easy money
in drug crime. His mother, sister and O.O are all apparently gainfully employed
and financially
independent from him.
Tribunal does not have the power to impose parole-like conditions, or to grant a
conditional visa. If the Applicant has his visa
restored, he will be in the
community, unsupervised.
my judgement, based on his conduct, his noted lack of insight, and his total
disregard for both his conditions of parole and the
explicit warning from the
Respondent after the revocation of the first visa cancellation, the Applicant
presents at least a medium,
if not a high risk, of reoffending.
Conclusion: Primary Consideration 1
consideration number one weighs very heavily against revocation of the
Applicant’s visa cancellation.
Primary Consideration 2: Family Violence
is no evidence of family violence.
Conclusion: Primary Consideration 2
consideration is neutral.
Primary Consideration 3: Ties to Australia
Paragraph 8.3 of the Direction provides:
(1) Decision-makers must consider any impact of the decision on the
non-citizen’s immediate family members in Australia, where
those family
members are Australian citizens, Australian permanent residents, or people who
have a right to remain in Australia indefinitely.
(2) Where consideration is being given to whether to cancel a
non-citizen’s visa or whether to revoke the mandatory cancellation
their visa, the decision-maker must also consider the strength, nature and
duration of any other ties that the non-citizen has
to the Australian community.
In doing so, decision-makers must have regard to:
a) how long the non-citizen has resided in Australia, including whether the
non-citizen arrived as a young child, noting that:
weight should be given where the non-citizen began offending soon after arriving
in Australia; and
weight should be given to time the non-citizen has spent contributing positively
to the Australian community
b) the strength, duration and nature of
any family or social links with Australian citizens, Australian permanent
residents and/or
people who have an indefinite right to remain in Australia.
Applicant has lived most of his life in Australia. He came here as a young boy,
not quite 3 years of age. He attended school here.
He has spent virtually all of
his formative years here.
Applicant has worked for a short
but not as long as he
has spent in prison.
Applicant says that he has been involved in community
organisations
but there is
limited independent evidence of this.
Applicant describes the impact of his removal upon his family in these
The impact of me being permanently removed from
Australia to NZ would have a devastating impact on my family: mother [M.K] (56
brother [G.J.K] (26 years); and sister [S.K] (18 years). My mother [M.K]
relies on me both financially and emotionally. My time incarcerated
very difficult, but with the real hope on me coming home to take up my important
role in the family. The mandatory cancellation
of my visa and permanent removal
to NZ would be catastrophic impact on her mental health and wellbeing. My
younger sister [S.K] has
carried the burden looking after my mum and my brother
[G.J.K] who is ‘in-and-out’ of institutionalized care. [G.J.K]
diagnosed with schizophrenia and bi-polar. He requires 24hr care. [S.K] is in
the same circumstance as my mum. The hope of me
coming home to take up the
burden of looking after [G.J.K] I am the one to ensure everybody goes
I have family/financial responsibility that I was not coping with. Rather
than get help (legitimately). I was introduced to people
who lead me to commit
the crime of Intent to Sell and Supply a Prohibitive Substance in Western
Australia, and associated money laundering
(proceeds of crime - $20,000). I
plead guilty and am serving my custodial sentence. I am not a career criminal
(drug dealer) nor
an opportunities. In poor judgement I committed the said
offences. I have utilized my time in prison to understand there are better
to help my loved ones with legitimate work and being a responsible son, brother,
partner and father to my family who need me.
Due to extra-ordinary circumstances at [x] Prison, [x] WA, (COVID
lockdowns, prison riots and fires, low staffing levels and ongoing
Action), I have not been able to engage in any meaningful courses to help me
improve my given circumstances. Given this,
I have applied for any courses
available to me, and have lived a positive lifestyle (drug free) in prison to
prepare to return home
to Sydney, NSW (family, partner and son).
I had my visa cancelled in 2022 (I was 19 yrs of age). I successfully
appealed my mandatory visa cancellation. I have subsequently
had my visa
cancelled this year (2024). I am currently 22 years of age.
The stupidity of youth and ill-considered decision making has to date had
a disasterous[sic] effect. I have sought out good people
who are older and wiser
than me, who have put me in the ‘right path’ to seeing my family and
loved ones as my principal
importance.
note that he has been of little practical or financial assistance to his family
since August 2019, due to his imprisonment, detention
and relocation to WA.
noted above, his brother is currently in immigration detention. His mother and
his sister have jobs. I also note that none of the
abovementioned connections to
his family deterred the Applicant from traveling to Perth to deliberately engage
in the methamphetamine
Applicant also submits that:
I came to Australia in 2004
when I was only 3 years old, I have attended preschool here, I attended primary
school here and I also
attended high school here. In all my schooling I have
never been suspended nor expelled ever. I was a good student in top classes
always paid attention and loved school. I attended primary school at
[institution 1] primary school and [institution 2] primary school,
I then moved
onto [institution 3] high school for 1 year before I got a scholarship to attend
[institution 4] high school for rugby.
While I was playing rugby for my school
team, I also played in a club teams outside of school and was also in numerous
development
and representative teams as well. I dropped out of school in the
start of year 11 because my mother just lost her job and was struggling
a new job and bills were piling up and she feared we might become homeless
again. So, without her knowledge I dropped out
of school found a job and started
working as labour for a waterproofing company, while I was attending Tafe and
keeping up with my
commitment to to my rugby representative team and club team.
My mother was incredibly grateful for me doing that but also felt sad
guilty. I told her not to worry that she does not have to take the pressure of
everything on her own anymore, that I am older
now and can take the stress off
her so she could rest a bit. I am remarkably close with my family because they
are my only immediate
blood family in Australia and all we had growing up was
each other. Me being Incarcerated was hard enough on us being separated but
saying I will not be able to see them again because I’ll be in another
country will be the most painful feeling in my life
that I don’t know if I
could or ever will recover from. I got a beautiful partner and stepson who are
my world we talk to each
other every day without a miss we are so close my
family has accepted them as ours and my partners family has accepted me as
I have the strongest supportive circle I’ve ever had in my
life; everyone whole heartedly just wants to see me do well and
be on the right
path. They support me emotionally, physically, mentally, and spiritually there
isn’t any problem I have now
that I can’t just speak to them, and
they will give me advice. If I had a negative result on my visa cancellation, I
have absolutely no one back in New Zealand. No family no friends no
support circle, how am I supposed to reintegrate into society
with no one there
to help me in a country I haven’t been in since I was 3 years old. My
future and my hope of starting a better
life will be completely crushed and
doomed before it even
accept that the Applicant has close family connections in Australia, at least
with his mother and sister.
relationship with his brother is much more troubled. His brother does not
currently have a visa and is in immigration detention.
The Applicant was
protected from G.J.K by an AVO for some years. The Applicant was negative about
the prospect of connecting with
his brother if they were both deported.
has no relationship with his father.
Applicant describes the impact of his removal upon his partner, O.O and Child A
in these terms:
I met O.O in 2015 and we became a
committed couple in 2020 with her son [Child A]. We will be married upon my
release from prison
which at the earliest will be October 2024 (this
O.O has been suffering depression since my incarceration and under medical
care. A permanent severance of our relationship would be
devastating impact on
O.O and particular, [Child A] who is suffering acute anxiety, and is currently
withdrawn. My permanent severance
of our relationship would be
devastating.
note that the Applicant has been in custody, prison and immigration since August
2019 , except for the period when he was in the
Sydney community between 2
November 2022 – 10 March 2023, and between 10 March 2023 and 28 March
2023, when he was in Perth,
involved in the drug trade.
Applicant’s connection to O.O. and Child A, was not enough to prevent him
taking up an “
” to travel to WA to deal in drugs.
accept that there is an ongoing connection to O.O. and to a much lesser extent,
through her, to Child A. This is borne out by prison
communications
do not however, accept the accuracy of the Applicant’s statements about
his importance to O.O and especially to Child A. They
both live in a house
containing several generations of their family. Child A is in weekly contact
with his biological father.
aside electronic communications, which could continue from New Zealand, the
Applicant’s claims regarding a relationship
that existed from April /May
2022 when he was in detention, and in person from 2 November 2022 to 10 March
2023, when he went to
WA, are exaggerated and unreliable.
Notwithstanding
the Applicants unreliable claims about his connection to O.O. and especially to
Child A, I accept that he has very
strong ties to the Australian community,
especially his mother and sister.
accept that if the Applicant were returned to New Zealand, his immediate family,
O.O. and to a much lesser extent Child A would
be distressed. His other
connections may be distressed to a lesser degree.
accept that he would find the transition very difficult.
Conclusion: Primary Consideration 3
consideration weighs in favour of revocation of the cancellation of the
Applicant’s visa.
Primary Consideration 4: The best interests of minor children
in Australia
8.4(1) of the Direction requires a decision-maker to make a determination about
whether cancellation or refusal under section
501, or non-revocation under
section 501CA is in the best interests of a child affected by the decision.
Paragraphs 8.4(2) and 8.4(3)
respectively contain further considerations. The
former provides that for their interests to be considered, the relevant child
children) must be under 18 years of age at the time when a decision about
whether or not to refuse or cancel the visa or not to revoke
the mandatory
cancellation decision is being made. The latter provides that if there are two
or more relevant children, the best
interests of each child should be given
individual consideration to the extent that their interests may differ.
8.4(4) of the Direction sets out a number of factors to take into consideration
with respect to the best interests of minor
children in Australia. Those
include, relevantly:
a) the nature and duration of the relationship between the child and the
non-citizen. Less weight should generally be given where
the relationship is
non-parental, and/or there is no existing relationship and/or there have been
long periods of absence, or limited
meaningful contact (including whether an
existing Court order restricts contact);
b) the extent to which the non-citizen is likely to play a positive parental
role in the future, taking into account the length of
time until the child turns
18, and including any Court orders relating to parental access and care
arrangements;
c) the impact of the non-citizen’s prior conduct, and any likely future
conduct, and whether that conduct has, or will have
a negative impact on the
d) the likely effect that any separation from the non-citizen would have on the
child, taking into account the child’s or non-citizen’s
maintain contact in other ways;
e) whether there are other persons who already fulfil a parental role in
relation to the child;
f) any known views of the child (with those views being given due weight in
accordance with the age and maturity of the child);
g) evidence that the child has been, or is at risk of being, subject to, or
exposed to, family violence perpetrated by the non-citizen,
or has otherwise
been abused or neglected by the non-citizen in any way, whether physically,
sexually or mentally;
h) evidence that the child has suffered or experienced any physical or emotional
trauma arising from the non-citizen’s conduct.
is only one relevant child, being Child A.
the Applicant made further submissions in relation to Child A, which
In the revocation denial they said they
acknowledged that my stepson and I have formed a close bond relationship but
then say just
because I’ve been incarcerated for a while and that
he’s in my partner Olivia’s primary care so it wouldn’t
put him at a disadvantage if I was removed. I whole heartedly disagree my
stepson [Child A] and I are extremely close anyone
who’s close to us can
see that. He doesn’t only see me as his father figure but as his best
friend, we talk all the time
on the phone and since he’s learnt to
FaceTime off his iPad, he will FaceTime me randomly and whenever he misses me so
stay on the phone and talk for ages about anything and everything. My
partner told me how he became extremely sad and withdrawn when
incarcerated often asking my partner to pray with him for me to come home and to
spray my cologne on him before he goes to
school so he can smell like me or
putting my earrings on his teddies to remind him of me. I know it will be in the
best interest
for him if my visa cancellation was overturned. So, [Child A] and
I could do everything we planned to do together, I don’t
think either of
us could take permanently being separated from each other the outcome would be
catastrophic on our mental and emotional
Applicant provided a written statement from O.O, which
[Child A] and Gabriel met in 2022,
[Child A] was 2 years old at the time. They got along straight away. Gabriel
stepped up and welcomed a child that wasn’t biologically
his with open
arms. A step dad is so much more than just another parent, he made a choice to
love when he didn’t have to and
he has shown [Child A] nothing but love
since day one.
[Child A] needed that male/father figure in the house and that’s
exactly what Gabriel is. They would play basketball, soccer,
watch movies, go
shopping, all the activities a boy would want to do with their dad they did it
for hours on end. He is an outstanding
dad and ever since they met they have
been inseparable.
He looks up to Gabriel, he relies on him for emotional support and
guidance. They have formed such a healthy bond and it’s so
lovely to see
how much [Child A] has come out of his shell after forming a great loving and
caring relationship together, they love
spending time with each other, they get
along so great. [Child A] thinks very highly of Gabriel and he has been looking
to spending more time with him once he gets released. They are
constantly talking on the phone making plans about what they are going
together when they are reunited.
[Child A] has found this time without Gabriel quite difficult, not only
does [Child A] look at him as a bonus parent but also a
friend, so him being
gone for these past months has taken a toll on [Child A], he’s still
quite young and it’s just
the uncertainty of if/when Gabriel is coming
back home again. Although [Child A] doesn’t always understand
what’s going
on Gabriel has always reassured him and their relationship
has stayed as strong as it’s been since the beginning.
Gabriel has always remained positive throughout this situation in his
life, which has been really good for [Child A]. I’m confident
in saying I
trust him to guide my son through all stages of
Applicant first met Child A in person in November 2022.
A lives with several generations of his family in a group home. He has regular
Applicant is not, has not been and is unlikely ever to be, Child A’s
primary carer, unless O.O. totally changes her living
arrangements. This is not
proposed. The Applicant proposes to move in with them.
Applicant left for Perth on 10 March 2023. The claim that he has become a
critical part of Child A’s life over the course
of a few months between 2
November 2022 and 10 March 2023, is inherently improbable. At most the
relationship began in April/May
2022, when he was still in prison and detention.
I accept that it has continued electronically since.
A has the regular, ongoing support of his biological father.
previously discussed, I do not accept the extravagant claims made by the
Applicant and in O.O’s statements, about his connection
to Child A. The
Applicant first met Child A in November 2022 according to O.O. In practical
terms, that means he saw him for a few
days per week, (but not weekends),
between 2 November 2022 when he was released from immigration detention and 10
March 2023, when
he went to Perth to “
take up the
opportunity
”, to traffic in methamphetamines.
accept that the Applicant has some ongoing connection to Child A. This is
essentially incidental to his connection with O.O. This
has mainly been
maintained electronically. This connection, such as it is, could continue from
is nothing to prevent O.O. and Child A visiting the Applicant in New Zealand, or
indeed relocating, should they choose to do
so. I note that the Applicant has
discussed this with O.O. and she has said that it is not in their interests to
leave Australia.
accept that if the Applicant were to be returned to the community and
he did not reoffend, he may be of some modest support and benefit to Child
he were to reoffend, his influence on Child A may be damaging.
my view that he is quite likely to reoffend, I give this connection little
Conclusion: Primary Consideration 4
regard to all of the above, and assuming in his favour that the Applicant did
not reoffend, primary consideration 4 weighs
at best slightly in favour of
revocation of the Applicant’s visa cancellation.
Primary Consideration 5 – The Expectations of The
Australian Community
The relevant paragraphs in the Direction
making the assessment for weight to be allocated to Primary Consideration 5,
paragraph 8.5(1) of the Direction provides that t
he Australian community
expects non-citizens to obey Australian laws while in Australia
non-citizen has engaged in serious conduct in breach of this expectation, or
where there is an unacceptable risk that they
may do so, the Australian
community, as a norm, expects the Government to not allow such a non-citizen to
enter or remain in Australia.
I should consider whether the Applicant has
breached, or whether there is an unacceptable risk that he may breach, this
expectation
by engaging in serious conduct.
8.5(2) of the Direction directs that a visa cancellation or refusal, or
non-revocation of the mandatory cancellation of
a visa, may be appropriate
simply because the nature of the character concerns or offences are such that
the Australian community
would expect that the person should not be granted or
continue to hold a visa. In particular, the Australian community expects that
the Australian Government can and should refuse entry to non-citizens, or cancel
their visas, if they raise serious character concerns
through conduct, in
Australia or elsewhere, of the following kind:
(a) acts of family violence; or
(b) causing a person to enter into, or being party to (other than being a victim
of), a forced marriage;
(c) commission of serious crimes against women, children or other vulnerable
members of the community such as the elderly or disabled;
in this context,
‘serious crimes’ include crimes of a violent or sexual nature, as
well as other serious crimes against
the elderly or other vulnerable persons in
the form of fraud, extortion, financial abuse/material exploitation or
(d) commission of crimes against government representatives or officials due to
the position they hold, or in the performance of
their duties; or
(e) involvement or reasonably suspected involvement in human trafficking or
people smuggling, or in crimes that are of serious international
including, but not limited to, war crimes, crimes against humanity and slavery;
(f) worker exploitation.
8.5(3) of the Direction provides that the above
expectations of the
Australian community apply regardless of whether the non-citizen poses a
measurable risk of causing physical harm
to the Australian community.
8.5(4) of the Direction provides guidance on how the expectations of the
Australian community are to be determined. This
paragraph states:
This consideration is about the expectations of the Australian community as a
whole, and in this respect, decision-makers should
proceed on the basis of the
Government’s views as articulated above, without independently assessing
the community’s
expectations in the particular case.
8.5(4) is consistent with the decision of the Full Court of the Federal Court in
FYBR v Minister for Home Affairs
[2019] FCAFC
185 which affirmed the approach established in previous authorities that it is
not for the Tribunal to determine for
itself the expectations of the Australian
community by reference to an Applicant’s circumstances or evidence about
those expectations.
The Tribunal is to be guided by the Government’s views
as to the expectations of the Australian community, which are to be
found in the
8.5 contains a statement of the Government’s views as to the expectations
of the Australian community, which operates
to ascribe to the whole of the
Australian community an expectation aligning with that of the executive
government which the decision
maker must have regard to.
Analysis – Allocation of Weight to Primary
Consideration 5
Accordingly,
in assessing the weight attributable to Primary Consideration 5, it is necessary
to have regard to the following matters:
Applicant’s very serious criminal record as set out in Annexure B and
discussed above, and
Applicant’s demonstrated contempt for his parole conditions and the
Respondent’s explicit warning in November 2022,
other matters discussed above
Applicant states that he understands the expectations of the Australian
community within the framework of Direction 110:
I understand how the direction indicates that the Australian community
expects non-citizens to obey Australia’s law while residing
in Australia
and I fully respect that. However, none of my offending behaviours were learnt
from another country and brought to Australia
to cause mischief or the community
harm. Everything I’ve learnt, the why I behaviour, the way I take on
problematic decisions
were all obtained growing up in Australia no where else. I
don’t go looking for trouble, but I admit that I’ve just been
situation and being juvenile in thought made the wrong decisions. Just because
I’m a noncitizen doesn’t mean I’m
more prone to violence or
criminal behaviour I’m still human and all humans make mistakes regardless
their race. I understand
my offending and I understand where I went wrong in my
decision making and have worked within my self and with advice from loved
to better my self to not make foolish decisions again. I have been in the under
16 Australian rugby team for [x], but my non
citizenship didn’t mean
anything then, but now that I’ve made
a couple mistakes
non citizenship matters. Everyone makes mistakes maybe not as bad as mine
sometimes even worst then mine, but Australia
is country of new beginnings and
opportunity, so I plead to you to give me another opportunity to rectify my
mistakes and embark
on a new beginning to replenish myself in the law's eyes but
also my mothers'
Applicant has committed crimes of violence, he has behaved poorly in
prison/detention, he has ignored the fact that he has been
given a second chance
by having his visa restored after the first visa cancellation, he deliberately
breached parole and he has deliberately
engaged in serious drug
Conclusion: Primary Consideration 5
consideration 5 weighs very heavily against revocation of the cancellation of
the Applicant’s visa.
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
is necessary to look at the Other Considerations listed at paragraph 9 of the
(a) legal consequence of the decision:
is not a relevant consideration in this case.
Other Consideration is neutral.
(b) Extent of Impediments if Removed
9.2 of the Direction directs a decision-maker to take into account the extent of
any impediments that the non-citizen may
face if removed from Australia to their
(in the context
of what is generally available to other citizens of that
country), taking into account:
(a) the non-citizen’s age and health;
(b) whether there are any substantial language or cultural barriers; and
(c) any social, medical and/or economic support available to that non-citizen in
that country.
Applicant is a young man in apparently good health.
accept that he would find reintegration into the New Zealand community very
difficult. I accept that he may experience mental health
issues as a
does have the option to go to Ghana to be with his extended family there, though
he told the Tribunal that he is not inclined to
are no substantial language or cultural barriers separating Australia and New
Zealand. That said, the Applicant’s family’s
cultural heritage, is
West African.
Applicant has however, spent all his formative years in Australia. He has no
family in New Zealand. He has no social networks
there. He would undoubtedly
experience hardship in adjusting to a new environment, finding accommodation and
finding employment.
He would not have the immediate support of his various
Australian connections. He would, however, be able to maintain connection
them electronically, as he has mainly done since his imprisonment in 2019.
may be that his brother could join him there, though he would see this as a
detriment, rather than a benefit.
Applicant would be entitled to the same social, medical and/or economic support
as any other citizen of New Zealand. These supports
are generally comparable to
those available in Australia.
consideration (b) weighs in favour of revocation.
(c) Impact on Australian business interests
is no evidence of this.
Other Consideration (c) is neutral.
is necessary to weigh up all of the primary and other considerations.
Consideration 1 weighs very heavily against revocation.
Consideration 2 is neutral.
Consideration 3 weighs in favour of revocation.
Consideration 4 weighs slightly in favour of revocation.
Consideration 5 weighs very heavily against revocation.
Consideration (a) is neutral.
Consideration (b) weighs in favour of revocation.
Consideration (c) is neutral.
note that paragraph 7(2) of the Direction requires that protection of the
Australian community is generally to be given greater
weight than other Primary
Considerations, and that Primary Considerations should generally be given
greater weight than the Other
Considerations.
Applicant has engaged in very serious criminal conduct. This has involved crimes
of violence and drug related crime. He has reoffended
while on parole. He has
ignored an explicit warning from the Respondent, committing very serious
offences, less than 5 months later.
gravity of his offending is such that the community would have little, if any
tolerance of risking further offending of this nature.
my view, there is at least a moderate, if not a high risk of the Applicant
reoffending. Imprisonment, previous visa cancellation,
detention, parole and
explicit warnings from the Respondent have not deterred him from reoffending. I
have no confidence that his
social supports offer any significant protective
has no concrete plans for rehabilitation, accommodation or employment upon
has expressed a desire to marry O.O. He says that this relationship will now
motivate him not to reoffend. It was not protective
as recently as March 2023. I
give these claims little weight.
of these factors weigh very heavily against revocation.
the other hand, the Applicant does have strong ties to Australia. His immediate
family are here. He spent his formative years here.
O.O is here, and so is Child
A (to the extent that that connection exists).
A may benefit slightly from the Applicant’s continued presence in
Australia, though not to the extent that he claims.
In the likely event of him
reoffending, he would be of no benefit to Child A, and indeed may become a
negative role model.
accept that the Applicant would find returning to New Zealand difficult and
reestablishing himself there would take time. That is
not however his only
weighing up all of the considerations, the protection of the Australian
community weighs very heavily against revocation, as
do the expectations of the
Australian community.
factors in favour of revocation, are collectively insufficient, compared with
the considerations heavily weighing against it.
is a case where the Direction requiring the highest priority to be given to
protection of the Australian community, is critical.
The Applicant presents an
ongoing, and unacceptable risk to our community.
my view, the proper application of the Direction does not favour the Tribunal to
revoking the cancellation of the Applicant’s
find that there is not “another reason” pursuant to s
501CA(4)(b)(ii) to revoke the original decision.
decision under review is affirmed.
I certify that the preceding two hundred and ninety-three (293)
paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for the decision herein
Member Hon J Rau SC.
..............................[sgnd].....................................
Dated: 11 October 2024
Date of hearing:
for the Applicant:
Self-represented
Advocate for the Respondent:
Elle Tattersall
(Minter Ellison)
ANNEXURE A – LIST OF EXHIBITS
Statement Of Facts, Issues And Contentions
G-Documents
Bundle of Documents
1. Applicant’s submissions 1 (Direction 110) (3 pages)
2. Applicant’s submissions 2 (3 pages)
3. Letter of Support from Ms S. King (Applicant’s Sister)
4. Letter of Support from Mr S. A (Applicant’s Friend)
5. Statement of Ms O. O (Applicant’s partner) (undated)
6. Screen shot 1
7. Screen shot 2
8. Certificate of participation for Prison Yoga Project
Tender Bundle
ANNEXURE B – APPLICANT’S OFFENDING HISTORY
Court Result
Perth Magistrates Court (WA)
Give False Personal Details To Police
Perth Magistrates Court (WA)
False ID information
Imprisonment: 1 Months Concurrent From 23.01.2024
Perth District Court of Western Australia (WA)
Possess Methylamphetamine With Intent to Sell/Supply
Imprisonment: 16 Months Concurrent From 28.03.2023
Perth District Court of Western Australia (WA)
Laundering Proceeds of Major Offence
Imprisonment: 8 Months Concurrent From 28.03.2023
Parramatta District Court (NSW)
Armed w/i commit indictable offence – T1
Imprisonment (Aggregate) : 4 Years And 3 Months Commencing
21.08.2019 Concluding 20.11.2023
Non-Parole Period : 2 Years And 10 Months Commencing
21.08.2019 Concluding 20.06.2022
Parramatta District Court (NSW)
Assault occasioning abh in company of other(s)-T2
Parramatta District Court (NSW)
Assault occasioning abh in company of other(s)-T2
Parramatta District Court (NSW)
Receive property-theft = serious indictable offence
Mt Druitt Local Court (NSW)
Police Pursuit - Not Stop - Drive Recklessly - 1st
Imprisonment : 8 Months Commencing 17/08/2019 Concluding
16/04/2020 Non-Parole Period : 3 Months Commencing 17/08/2019 Concluding
16/11/2019 Disqualification - Driver : 3 Years Commencing 09/10/2019
Exhibit 2, G-Documents, G4:
Decision by delegate, 23; G5: Statement of reasons for decision, 24-36.
Ibid Attachment R: Notice of
visa cancellation (dated 30.01.2024), 182-8.
Ibid Attachment A: National
Criminal History Check, 38.
Ibid Attachment F: Personal
Circumstances Form, 89.
Exhibit 4, Respondent’s
Tender Bundle, 246.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment G: Letter from the Applicant to the Department (dated 18.04.2024),
Ibid Attachment N: Visit
History, 120-70.
Ibid Attachment Q: Movement
record, 181.
Ibid Attachment F, 91;
Attachment G, 108.
Ibid Attachment Q: Movement
record, 181.
Ibid Attachment Q: Movement
record, 181.
Ibid Attachment F, 88.
Exhibit 3.1,
Applicant’s Bundle of Documents: Applicant’s Submissions 1
(Direction 110), 1.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 125.
Ibid 122-3.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment F: Personal Circumstances Form, 99.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 51-4.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 237 at [9].
Financial pressure.
Exhibit 3.2,
Applicant’s Submissions 2, 1.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment D: Sentencing remarks of the District Court of New South Wales
(20.11.2020), 47.
Exhibit 3.2,
Applicant’s Submissions 2, 1.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment D, 55.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment D, 84; Exhibit 4, Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 108.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 55.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 61-3.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment A, 39.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 68.
Exhibit 4, Respondent Tender
Bundle, 37-41.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 46.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment D, 84.
Ibid Attachment A, 38-9.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment D, 47-85. See also Exhibit 4, Respondent’s Tender Bundle,
Ibid Attachment O: Notice of
visa cancellation (dated 03.12.2020), 171-7.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 69.
Ibid 198-207.
Ibid 212-230.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 229.
This is inconsistent with
the police account of events.
He did know (see police
Prison records suggest that
she may have supplied him with drugs secreted in photographs.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 235-241.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 246-7.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 74.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 248-50.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 83-9.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 277.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment H,110-11.
Ibid Attachment K,115.
Ibid Attachment F, 92
Exhibit 3.2,
Applicant’s Submissions 2, 1.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 76.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 34, 55, 82, 162.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment D, 84.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 264-5.
On 1 February 2022 (while in
prison) he stated in his personal circumstances form that he was single - by Oct
2022 he had a girlfriend
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 269-70.
ie. since April/ May 2022.
He was in prison at the time.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 277.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment P: Notification of decision to revoke visa cancellation, 178-9.
Ibid Attachment G,
Ibid Attachment P, 180.
Ibid Attachment B, 41.
Finding of Lonsdale DCJ.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment P, 178-80.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 2.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 138-9.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment B, 41.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 12-3.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 8.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 29.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment N: Government of Western Australia - Visit History, 120-170.
Ibid Attachment A, 38.
Ibid Attachment B, 40-4.
Ibid Attachment R,
Ibid Attachment E, 86-7;
Attachment F, 88-103; Attachment G, 104-109.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 174-5.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment G4, 23; Attachment G5, 24-36.
Ibid Attachment G2:
Application for review of decision, 4-12.
Ibid Attachment F, 101.
Ibid Attachment F, 97.
Ibid Attachment F, 97-8.
Ibid Attachment F, 97-8.
See above with AVO
King and Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment I: Letter of M.K (dated 03.03.2024), 112-3.
Ibid Attachment H: Letter
of O.U (dated 11.02.2024), 110-11.
Ibid Attachment J: Letter
of M.D (dated 20.03.2024), 114.
Ibid Attachment K: Letter
of V.U (dated 11.03.2024), 115-6.
Ibid Attachment L: Letter
of M.R (dated 17.04.2024), 117.
Exhibit 3.3,
Applicant’s Bundle of Documents: Applicant’s Sister –
S.K’s letter of Support (undated).
Exhibit 3.4:
Applicant’s friend – Mr S.A’s letter of support (undated).
Exhibit 3.5: Ms
O.O’s statement (undated).
Ibid Attachment H,
Ibid Attachment F,
Ibid Attachment H, 110
Ibid Attachment F,
Ibid Attachment F,
Ibid Attachment F,
See also Attachment H,
110-11; Attachment I, 112-13; Attachment J, 114; Attachment K, 115-16.
Ibid Attachment F,
Ibid Attachment B,
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment F, 100.
Ibid Attachment F,
Exhibit 3.1,
Applicant’s Submissions 1 (Direction 110), 1.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment F, 92.
Ibid Attachment A,
On 21 June 2024, the
former applicable direction,
Direction No. 99 – Visa refusal and
cancellation under s501 and revocation of a mandatory cancellation of a visa
under s501CA
, was revoked and was replaced by Direction 110.
See sentencing
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment G: Letter from the Applicant to the Department (18.04.2024), 105.
Ibid Attachment D,
Ibid Attachment G,
Exhibit 3.2,
Applicant’s Submissions 2, 2.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment G, 106.
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 174-5.
Ibid Attachment G,
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 83-9.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment G, 105.
Ibid Attachment F,
Respondent’s Tender Bundle, 269-70.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment D, 80.
Exhibit 3.2,
Applicant’s Submissions 2, 1-2.
Exhibit 3.2,
Applicant’s Submissions 2, 2.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment J, 114.
Ibid Attachment F,
Ibid Attachment F, 99;
Exhibit 3.2, Applicant’s Submissions 2, 1.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment F, 99.
Exhibit 3.1,
Applicant’s Submissions 1 (Direction 110), 1-2.
Exhibit 2, G-Documents,
Attachment F, 92, 94.
Exhibit 3.1,
Applicant’s Submissions 1 (Direction 110), 2.
Exhibit 3.5, Statement of
Ms O. O (Applicant’s partner) (undated).
Uelese v Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] FCA 348
Afu v Minister for
[2018] FCA 1311
YNQY v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2017] FCA 1466
FYBR v Minister for Home Affairs
[2019] FCA 500.
Exhibit3.1,
Applicant’s Submissions 1 (Direction 110), 3.
RTF format (2.76 MB)
Signed PDF/A format