National Seniors Australia Ltd [2025] ATMO 202 (26 September 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Trade mark application
numbers 2427002 and 2427003 (both in classes 35, 36, 39 and 41) –
National Seniors Australia
(fancy) and
NATIONAL SENIORS
- in the name
of National Seniors Australia Ltd.
Nicole Worth
REPRESENTATION:
Shauna Ross (counsel), instructed by Talbot Sayer law
2025 ATMO 202
Trade Marks Act 1995
proceedings: Registrar to
accept or reject applications – ground for rejection raised under
both applications – trade marks to some extent but not sufficiently
inherently adapted to distinguish – evidence
of use and other
circumstances sufficient – trade mark applications accepted.
is a decision pursuant to
Trade Marks Act 1995
provides that the Registrar of Trade Marks must, after examination, accept an
application to register a trade mark unless satisfied
that, among other things,
there are grounds for rejecting it.
9 February 2024 (‘
Filing Date
’) National Seniors Australia
’) filed trade mark application numbers
2427002 and 2427003 to register the trade marks detailed
NATIONAL SENIORS
(Collectively ‘
Trade Marks
Application no. 2427002
Application no. 2427003
Goods and Services:
Collection of information relating to market research;
Commercial lobbying services; Employment consultancy; Market surveys; Surveys
(opinion polling); Management, administration, operation and supervision of
customer incentive programmes and schemes which offer
members rebates,
discounts, rewards or other benefits on goods and services of participating
companies; Management, administration,
operation and supervision of schemes or
customer reward schemes; Marketing and promotional services; Direct mail
advertising; compilation
and maintenance of direct mailing lists; Promotion of
leisure activities; Promotion of transportation, travel and airline services
the supply of benefits in connection with transportation and travel incentive
schemes; Market research and advisory services;
retailing relating to the sale
of gift memberships; Lobbying services for commercial purposes (promoting,
publicising or otherwise
representing the interests or concerns of others),
other than services in Class 45; Commercial advocacy (promoting, publicising or
otherwise representing the interests or concerns of others in the fields of aged
care, retirement income, pensions, pensioners housing
and healthcare), other
than services in Class 45; Information, advisory and consultancy services
related to the aforesaid (including
such services provided online); Business and
market research services, including the preparation of research reports,
relating to
ageing, productive ageing, lifestyle issues for seniors and
preventative health issues; Information, advisory and consultancy services
related to business and market research services, including the preparation of
research reports, relating to ageing, productive ageing,
lifestyle issues for
seniors and preventative health issues (including such services provided online)
discount card services; Management,
administration, operation and supervision of
sales and promotional incentive schemes
Financial consultancy, evaluation and management;
Financial information services; Financial investment advisory and consultancy;
Financial advisory and consultancy in relation to retirement investment and
payment; security, stocks and bonds brokerage; Advice
and advisory services
relating to insurance; Appraisals for insurance purposes; Arranging of
insurance; Financial administration
of insurance claims; Providing insurance
information, including online; Insurance services, including insurance
brokerage, insurance
consultancy and information; Research for insurance
purposes; Research services relating to banking; Research services relating to
finance; Research services relating to investment; Charitable fund raising;
Information, advisory and consultancy services related
to the aforesaid
(including such services provided online)
Arranging and conducting of tours; Booking of seats for
travel; Travel reservation; Provision of information on travel and tours;
Escorting of travellers; Information, advisory and consultancy services related
to the aforesaid (including such services provided
seminars, webinars, and
workshops for educational and training purposes
applications were examined as required by
and a ground for rejection under
was raised against both applications. The bases for the ground for
rejection were:
Your trade mark is NATIONAL SENIORS AUSTRALIA.
A SENIOR or senior citizen refers to an older or elderly person, usually
someone who [is] over 60 years old.
The trade mark indicates that the claimed services are for SENIORS, that are
provided NATIONALLY in AUSTRALIA.
Other traders should be able to use NATIONAL SENIORS AUSTRALIA, or something
so nearly resembling it, to describe goods or services
similar to yours in the
normal course of trade.
Your trade mark is NATIONAL SENIORS.
A SENIOR or senior citizen refers to an older or elderly person, usually
someone who [is] over 60 years old.
The trade mark indicates that the claimed services are for SENIORS, that are
provided NATIONALLY.
Other traders should be able to use NATIONAL SENIORS, or something so nearly
resembling it, to describe goods or services similar
to yours in the normal
course of trade.
the course of a further four examination reports, the Applicant made and
proposed amendments to its services and provided evidence
of use of its Trade
Marks. The examiner was satisfied that the amendments and evidence of use were
sufficient to overcome the ground
for rejection, except in relation to certain
services in classes 35, 36 and 41. In respect of those services the examiner
either that there was insufficient financial data provided, that
variations of the trade mark were used (as opposed to the specific
trade mark in
question), or that the use was not extensive enough.
the fifth examination report, the Applicant exercised its right to be
heard the matter, as a delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks, on 1 July 2025.
Shauna Ross of counsel, instructed by Jack Collings
of Talbot Sayer law firm,
represented the Applicant at the hearing and filed written submissions on its
purpose of these proceedings is not a review of the examiner’s decision.
Rather, this is a fresh consideration of the ground
for rejection.
The Legislation
of the Act relevantly provides:
41 Trade mark not
distinguishing applicant’s goods or services
(1) An application for the registration of a trade mark must be rejected if
the trade mark is not capable of distinguishing the applicant’s
services in respect of which the trade mark is sought to be registered (the
designated goods or services) from the goods
or services of other persons.
(2) A trade mark is taken not to be capable of distinguishing the designated
goods or services from the goods or services of other
persons only if either
subsection (3) or (4) applies to the trade mark.
(3) This subsection applies to a trade mark if:
(a) the trade mark is not to any extent inherently adapted to distinguish the
designated goods or services from the goods or services
of other persons;
(b) the applicant has not used the trade mark before the filing date in
respect of the application to such an extent that the trade
mark does in fact
distinguish the designated goods or services as being those of the
(4) This subsection applies to a trade mark if:
(a) the trade mark is, to some extent, but not sufficiently, inherently
adapted to distinguish the designated goods or services from
the goods or
services of other persons; and
(b) the trade mark does not and will not distinguish the designated goods or
services as being those of the applicant having regard
to the combined effect of
the following:
(i) the extent to which the trade mark is inherently adapted to distinguish
the goods or services from the goods or services of other
(ii) the use, or intended use, of the trade mark by the applicant;
(iii) any other circumstances.
Note 1: Trade marks that are not inherently adapted to distinguish goods or
services are mostly trade marks that consist wholly of
a sign that is ordinarily
used to indicate:
(a) the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, value, geographical
origin, or some other characteristic, of goods or services;
(b) the time of production of goods or of the rendering of services.
(5) For the purposes of this section, the use of a trade mark by a
predecessor in title of an applicant for the registration of the
trade mark is
taken to be a use of the trade mark by the applicant.
presumption of registrability is embodied in
which provides that the
Registrar must accept an application for registration unless satisfied that
there are grounds for rejecting
it (thereby placing the onus for proving the
ground upon the Registrar, rather than placing the onus to prove registrability
the Applicant). Accordingly, if I consider the Trade Marks have some
inherent adaptation to distinguish the designated services,
I am not entitled to
reject them unless satisfied that the combined effect of their inherent
adaptation to distinguish, any past
or intended use of them, and any other
circumstances, has not or will not render the Trade Marks distinctive or capable
of distinguishing.
If I consider the Trade Marks have no inherent adaptation to
distinguish, I am not entitled to reject them unless I am satisfied
that they do
not in fact distinguish the designated services, having regard to the extent to
which the Trade Marks were used, if
at all, before the Filing Date.
starting point for the assessment under
is a consideration of the inherent
adaptation of the Trade Marks to distinguish the designated services from those
of other traders.
This is to be tested
by reference to the
likelihood that other persons, trading in goods of the relevant kind and being
actuated by only proper motives
– in the exercise, that is to say, of the
common right of the public to make honest use of words forming part of the
heritage, for the sake of the signification which they ordinarily possess
– will think of the word and want to use it in connexion
with similar
goods in any manner which would infringe a registered trade mark granted in
respect of it.
test was cited with approval in
Cantarella Bros Pty Limited v Modena Trading
Pty Limited
In that case their
Honours describe a two-step process of consideration wherein first the ordinary
signification of a word is determined,
permitting a conclusion to be drawn as to
whether the word contains a ‘direct reference’ or ‘covert and
allusion’. Then the legitimate desire of other traders to use the
word is considered, wherein only a word comprising a ‘direct
reference’ can legitimately be desired for use by other traders –
not words that are allusive or
metaphorical.
start therefore by considering the ordinary signification, if any, of the Plain
Mark NATIONAL SENIORS. Putting aside the consideration
of whether the Fancy Mark
amounts to the Plain Mark with additions or alterations not substantially
affecting identity, it may safely
be said that the Fancy Mark is at least as
distinctive as the Plain Mark, if not more so. Should the Fancy Mark require
consideration, I will turn to it as appropriate.
bear in mind that it is the signification of the Plain Mark as a whole which is
relevant, however it remains necessary to consider
the ordinary signification of
the words individually in order to assess the signification of the
Additionally, any meaning
of the Plain Mark is to be assessed in the context of the designated services:
‘[T]he meaning of
all words is governed by their context and how words are
understood depends upon the universe of discourse. Here, the scope of the
the word is settled by the application for
registration...’
Macquarie Dictionary
provides the following definitions of
‘national’ and ‘senior’:
of, relating to, or maintained by a nation as an
organised whole or independent political unit:
national affairs
peculiar or common to the whole people of a country:
devoted to one’s own nation, its interests, etc.:
older or elder...
rank or standing, especially by virtue of longer service.
a person who is older than another.
One of higher rank or standing,
especially by virtue of longer service.
has a number of definitions, the most common meanings being those that pertain
to the whole of a nation. Similarly,
‘senior’ has varied meanings,
most commonly relating to older people. The words themselves do not naturally
form a composite
expression either grammatically or conceptually. There are no
people or things that are ‘national seniors’. Nor can the
said to describe the services.
Nonetheless,
it is not difficult to derive meaning from the expression. NATIONAL SENIORS is a
reference to older Australians across
the country, and in the context of the
services refers to the intended audience of those services. There is a continuum
of distinctiveness
for trade marks, reflected in the Act itself and observed in
several court decisions, notably
Moroccanoil Israel Ltd v Aldi Foods Pty
wherein the following
passage is cited:
Just as the distinction between descriptive and
fancy names is not a distinction of law so too it is wrong to see the
distinction
in black and white terms. The reality is that there is a continuum
with at the extremes purely descriptive names at the one end,
invented names at the other and in between names that contain ordinary English
words that are in some way or other at
least partly
descriptive.
consider that the Plain Mark lies between the two extremes. It does not directly
describe the specified services nor a character
or quality of them. At the same
time, it clearly refers to a segment of Australian society upon which the
Applicant’s services
are focussed. Given this signification, it is not
difficult to imagine that other traders who cater to the older population of
may likewise wish to use NATIONAL SENIORS as a reference to their
intended audience.
Accordingly,
in my estimation the Plain Mark falls within the category of trade marks that
are to some extent, but not sufficiently,
inherently adapted to distinguish the
designated services from the services of other persons, contemplated in
Although the state of the Register of Trade Marks is generally of limited
assistance, I observe that my conclusion is not inconsistent
registered trade marks such as NATIONAL ROADS & MOTORISTS ASSOCIATION;
NATIONAL HIRE; NATIONAL PHARMACIES; NATIONAL
BREAST CANCER FOUNDATION and
NATIONAL HOMELESS COLLECTIVE, all of which have been registered under the same
or equivalent provisions.
Fancy Mark is likewise to some extent, but not sufficiently, inherently adapted
to distinguish. The additional word AUSTRALIA
and the visual arrangement of the
words and geometric shapes in the mark add a further degree of distinctiveness,
but those features
are not so distinct that the resultant trade mark is, as a
whole, inherently adapted to distinguish.
Evidence of use and other circumstances
turn then to the combined effect of inherent adaptation to distinguish, any use
or intended use of the Plain Mark and Fancy Mark,
and any other
circumstances.
Applicant raises as a relevant other circumstance its previously held
registrations for the trade marks NATIONAL SENIORS in plain
text and BE HEARD
NATIONAL SENIORS AUSTRALIA in logo form (as shown in paragraph [25] below) in
relation to a broad range of goods
and services in classes 16, 35, 36, 39, 41,
43 and 44. Relevant details of these registrations are at Attachment A to this
NATIONAL SENIORS was registered from 3 April 2003 to 3 April 2023 and
the logo BE HEARD NATIONAL SENIORS AUSTRALIA was registered
from 7 November 2011
to 7 November 2021. During that time the Applicant had moved addresses but did
not inform its solicitors on
record, and so the renewal notices were sent to the
old address.
to the Applicant’s evidence of use, the following declarations were filed
in support of the applications:
Wayne Kendall,
Financial Controller of the Applicant, with exhibits WK-01 to WK-17, dated 17
June 2024 (
Wayne Kendall,
confidential declaration dated 17 June 2024 (
Confidential Kendall
Wayne Kendall,
with exhibits WK-18 to WK-31, dated 3 December 2024 (
Wayne Kendall,
confidential declaration dated 3 December 2024 (
Confidential Kendall
Wayne Kendall,
dated 19 February 2025 (
information in the above declarations is summarised as follows.
Applicant is a not-for-profit membership and advocacy organization and
registered charity. In an undated brochure it describes
National Seniors Australia is the country’s leading
independent voice of the over 50s, with more than 200,000 members. As the
nation’s largest not-for-profit organisation for the over 50s, we
represent the views of older Australians and their families
to all levels of
government. We make sure our members’ voices are heard on the issues that
count such as age discrimination,
mature age employment, superannuation, pension
increases, health care, aged care and the cost of living.
We also make sure our members’ voices are heard by businesses and
retail groups across Australia. Inside this book is a selection
of everyday
discounts to save you money. For a wider range of offers, please visit our
website which is packed full of the latest
savings, deals and chances to win
great prizes.
National Seniors Australia was established in 1976, initially under the name
National Seniors Association Limited and then from 2007
under National Seniors
Australia. From 2012 the Applicant began using various stylised trade marks
including those below. In 2018
the Applicant underwent a rebrand and commenced
using versions including the Fancy Mark.
at June 2024 the Applicant had approximately 243,000 members in every state and
territory in Australia (a 2014-2015 Federal Budget
Submission mentions
‘more than 200,000 individual fee-paying
). There are 71
community branches in each state and
Members receive
benefits and discounts in the form of content from the Applicant and discounts
arranged with over 2,000 businesses
around Australia. The Applicant’s
services are also available and promoted to non-members. Membership application
other documents regarding member benefits display the names
‘National Seniors Australia’, ‘National Seniors’,
website address ‘www.nationalseniors.com.au’, and the logos shown
They are declared to be
from 2012 to 2024, although several are undated. Those that indicate dates are
from around January 2014,
February and May 2017, and February 2019 (inferred
from due dates for various actions such as responding to a survey or becoming
or around 1998 the Applicant registered the domain name
‘www.nationalseniors.com.au’, its primary website. Wayback
extracts are exhibited,
dated between 1998 and 2024.
They demonstrate use of the name ‘National Seniors Association’ from
1998, and then at overlapping times the Plain Mark
from 2003, ‘National
Seniors Australia’ from 2013, the logo
from 2015 and the Fancy Mark from 2019.
Applicant states that there have been a number of different stylised versions of
its trade mark over the last 25 years but the
words NATIONAL SENIORS have been
the consistent dominant element of the trade mark and the Applicant’s
brand identity.
The Applicant
also states that it is always, and has always since 1976, been referred to as
NATIONAL SENIORS aurally, an allegedly
critical factor given the
Applicant’s reliance on marketing and publicity by way of appearances on
TV, radio, podcasts, and
other media (discussed further below).
at least 1998, the Applicant has undertaken research, prepared reports and
submissions, and undertaken advocacy and lobbying
activities on behalf of older
Australians in relation to issues including finance, insurance, aged care,
health and housing. It has
an agreement with the Australian Government
Department of Health to fund the Applicant’s provision of aged care policy
and promote aged care
The Applicant has also
run several campaigns to raise awareness of matters such as ‘Keep
Cash’ (2024), ‘Let the
Pensioners Work’ (post-COVID), franking
credits (2019), and shingles (2014), the last of which resulted in free
vaccinations
for seniors.
gave testimony twice to the Royal Commission into Aged Care and Safety, the
final report of which is declared to have made 51
mentions of National
It regularly makes
submissions into the formulation of Federal and State budgets and into other key
areas of government reform for
of the Applicant’s documentation relating to research, lobbying and
campaigns, and preparation of reports and submissions
is claimed to be branded
with the Trade Marks. The Applicant has produced more than 100 research reports
since 2008. Its research
reports and submissions are submitted to government
agencies and committees including the Productivity Commission, Senate Standing
Committees on Economics and the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights.
The reports and submissions are made publicly available
by government agencies,
departments (in particular the Department of Health with which the Applicant has
worked for over 10 years)
and the Applicant’s own website and social media
pages. Exhibits related to research and reports, advocacy and lobbying, and
various campaigns show use of various trade marks as
Trade Marks
National Seniors Australia
National Seniors
National Seniors Australia
nationalseniors.com.au
National Seniors
National Seniors Australia
National Seniors
nationalseniors.com.au
National Seniors Australia
National Seniors Australia
National Seniors Australia
National Seniors Australia
National Seniors
National Seniors Australia
National Seniors Australia
National Seniors Australia
National Seniors Australia
National Seniors
nationalseniors.com.au
National Seniors Australia
National Seniors
National Seniors Australia
National Seniors
National Seniors Australia
nationalseniors.com.au
National Seniors Australia
National Seniors Australia
National Seniors
National Seniors Australia
nationalseniors.com.au
Applicant has offered insurance services since at least 1998 and in 2004 was
appointed a registered Authorised Representative
of Allianz Australia Insurance
Limited, providing car, travel, health and life insurance pursuant to that
authorisation since that
date. A 2012 advertisement displays the Plain Mark and
the first logo below. A separate website for the Applicant’s insurance
services was registered in 2012 at
‘www.nationalseniorsinsurance.com.au’ and Wayback Machine extracts
from 2012 to 2023
demonstrate use of the second logo below as well as
‘National Seniors Insurance’, the Fancy Mark (from 2019) and the
Plain Mark (from
at least 1998 the Applicant has offered various financial services. In 2004 the
Applicant was authorised to provide financial
services, including arranging term
deposits with Auswide Bank Ltd. The Applicant also arranges access to general
and specific financial
advice from various financial services providers.
Brochures in evidence demonstrate use of the
trade mark, the Plain Mark (in 2019), the Fancy Mark
(from 2019) and the website address ‘nationalseniors.com.au’ in
respect of superannuation information, estate planning, credit cards, retirement
income information, downsizing costs, pensioner
concessions and general
financial advice relevant to older
Australians.
at least 1998 the Applicant has offered travel and tour services. In 2012 the
Applicant registered a separate domain name for
its travel services:
‘wwwnationalseniorstravel.com.au’. Wayback Machine extracts from
2012 to 2024 show that travel services
such as tours at various destinations,
cruises and train travel were advertised at that website. From 2014 the trade
is shown to have been displayed until 2019 when the Fancy Mark is
Applicant has arranged and conducted seminars, webinars, and workshops since at
least 2012. These have been for educational and
training purposes, for the
benefit of the Applicant’s members as well as the broader public.
Advertisements for such events
demonstrate use of ‘National Seniors Australia’,
‘nationalseniors.com.au’ and the logos below in 2015, 2016
as well as the Fancy Mark and the Plain Mark in 2018 and 2019 (as well as
several undated exhibits showing one or more
of the above trade
Applicant declares that its promotional strategy focusses heavily on unpaid
publicity and promotional activities, primarily through
interviews and
presentations by representatives of the Applicant, in particular its CEO. These
take the form of TV and radio interviews,
podcasts, newspapers and magazine
features. Since around 2017 the Applicant has engaged Isentia, a public
relations and media monitoring
company, to provide reports regarding the value
of its publicity and public relations efforts. It receives weekly Advertising
Rate (ASR) reports. ASR is an industry standard measure giving an estimate
of how much money a company would have to spend on advertising
to gain the same
level of media exposure received through unpaid promotional activities. The
Applicant adduces an example report
for the period 5 May 2024 to 5 June 2024,
which provides impressive figures for potential reach (audience numbers) and
ASR. Isentia
information for previous years (from mid 2021) likewise show
impressive figures for ASR and ‘Audience’ in respect of
expressions including ‘national seniors Australia’ and combinations
of ‘national seniors’ with other
The Applicant also refers
to interviews given by its CEO which have been viewed a significant number of
times on YouTube, one of
which was reposted by celebrity Russel Brand leading to
further views. In addition, several mentions are made of ‘National
Seniors’ in Hansard, of which six transcripts are in evidence although
they are dated after the filing
Applicant provides its numbers of followers on various social media platforms,
which although moderate are still commercially
significant. Various posts are
demonstrating use
primarily of the Fancy Mark as well as ‘National Seniors Australia’
in plain text.
marketing and promotional materials used by the Applicant are
‘Branch News’ newsletters from 2012 demonstrating use of the Plain
Mark and the
‘Connect’ digital publication from 2023 demonstrating use of the
Fancy Mark and ‘nationalseniors.com.au’;
and 2017 and 2018
competition advertisements demonstrating use of the Plain Mark, the
‘nationalseniors.com.au’. Other undated materials are included in
the exhibit but are not described here.
Confidential
sales figures are provided in Confidential Kendall 2 under the headings
‘financial services’ (2020/2021 to
2023/2024), ‘insurance
services’ (2019/2020 to 2023/2024), ‘travel services’
(2013/2014 to 20232024), ‘travel
insurance’ (2020/2021 to 2023/2024)
and ‘membership and member benefit services’ (2010/2011 to
2023/2024). Further
confidential sales figures in relation to insurance are
provided in Confidential Kendall 3 (2012 to 2019). The figures vary depending
the services involved, from impressive to moderate though still commercially
significant. The Applicant explains that it does
not make money in respect of
its research or advocacy services or organising exhibitions – as a
not-for-profit entity it uses
profit from other activities for its advocacy and
research services.
Confidential
marketing figures for the years 2010/2011 to 2022/2023 to are also provided in
Confidential Kendall 1, which are substantial.
Consideration of evidence
total the evidence demonstrates long-standing use, over an approximately 25 year
period, of trade marks incorporating the words
NATIONAL SENIORS (not including
undocumented use claimed from 1976). Other than the logo used for a period
between 2008 and 2011
(see the table in paragraph [31]), the trade marks used by
the Applicant have always contained as their dominant element the words
SENIORS. The other elements in the trade marks have been either non-distinctive
geometric shapes, words that describe the
services or ‘Australia’.
This is not to say that the trade mark variations are necessarily substantially
identical to
the plain words – their combination and specific visual
arrangement have a degree of significance – rather, the words
SENIORS are the most striking feature and have consistently been used as the
dominant element for a substantial period of
time. By virtue of this they are
likely to have attained a degree of acquired distinctiveness.
addition, there are uses of the Plain Mark. Firstly, there are a number of
instances of use in membership documentation and in
the reports, submissions and
campaign material as shown in paragraph [31]. Secondly, Wayback Machine extracts
for the website ‘www.nationalseniors.com.au’
are in evidence which
date back to 1998. Use of a domain name can constitute use of a trade
which I consider to be the
case here, the website being used to promote membership and member benefits,
travel and insurance services
(before separate websites were established for
these, also with addresses featuring ‘National Seniors’) and the
Applicant’s
lobbying and representation activities. The Plain Mark is also
shown to be featured on the captured web pages at various times beginning
2003. Thirdly, data from Isentia indicates substantial reach and ASR of
‘National Seniors’ in combination with various
words or names, with
73.4% of mentions occurring
Lastly, the Plain Mark
is used in marketing material relating to financial services, from 2019.
Fancy Mark has likewise had significant use, albeit for a shorter period of time
– since 2018. Despite its shorter period
of use, it has more clearly been
featured on the Applicant’s documentation, website and social media.
bear in mind also that the Applicant had a monopoly over the expression
‘National Seniors’ for twenty years, from 2003
to 2023, and a logo
featuring those words, from 2011 to 2021, in respect of a majority of the
services specified in the subject applications.
Other traders were accordingly
barred from using those words in respect of the same or similar services, and
the examiner’s
research does not reveal any other party using
‘National Seniors’ in the time between the lapsing of the previous
registration
and the subject applications. A monopoly was also held over the BE
HEARD NATIONAL SENIORS AUSTRALIA logo for ten years, from 2011
to 2021. This is
a further facet of evidence which supports the Trade Marks having acquired
distinctiveness.
consider that the long standing use and exposure of the Trade Marks also
demonstrates that the Trade Marks are capable of becoming
distinct in respect of
adjacent services for which specific use has not been demonstrated, such as
‘employment consultancy’
or ‘security, stocks and bonds
brokerage’. The older sector of the Australian market is likely to have
some familiarity
with National Seniors and/or National Seniors Australia either
in its capacity as a member organisation, as a provider of financial,
and travel services, or as a representative to government in respect of
financial, health and wellbeing matters. This familiarity
is likely to extend to
other related services offered under the Trade Marks. I could therefore not be
satisfied, in terms of the
language of
, that the Trade Marks do not
and will not distinguish the Applicant’s services having regard to the use
demonstrated in the
evidence and the circumstance of the Applicant’s
relatively recent monopoly granted by virtue of its previous
registrations.
consider that both of trade mark applications 2427002 and 2427003 may be
accepted for possible registration, and I have accepted
the Trade Marks with
each bearing the following endorsement:
Evidence and/or other
circumstances provided under
subsection 41(4)
acceptance will be advertised for opposition purposes in due course, and the
Applicant will receive notification should any opposition
to registration be
Nicole Worth
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and Hearings
Trade Marks and Designs
Attachment A
949378 National Seniors
National Seniors Association Limited
Filing date:
Renewal due:
Removed from register:
Goods and Services:
Paper and paper goods in this class; printed matter and
printed publications, including magazines, newsletters, brochures, leaflets,
posters, members cards and application forms; stationery; instructional and
teaching material in this class
Management, administration, operation and supervision of
programmes and schemes which offer members rebates, discounts, rewards or
benefits on goods and services of participating companies; management,
administration, operation and supervision of discount
card services; management,
administration, operation and supervision of sales and promotional incentive
schemes or customer reward
schemes; marketing and promotional services; market
research and advisory services; advertising and advertising agency services;
direct mail advertising; compilation and maintenance of direct mailing lists;
promotion of leisure activities; promotion of transportation,
travel and airline
services and the supply of benefits in connection with transportation and travel
incentive schemes; organisation
of exhibitions and shows for commercial or
advertising purposes
Financial consultancy, evaluation and management; financial
information; financing of purchases; investment advisory and consultancy;
insurance services, including insurance brokerage, insurance consultancy and
information; mutual funds; financial advisory and consultancy
in relation to
retirement investment and payment; security, stocks and bonds brokerage; stock
exchange brokerage; credit facilities;
credit and charge card services;
administration and processing services in respect of credit and account sales;
funeral saving plans;
charitable fund raising
Arranging and conducting of tours; booking of seats for
travel; travel reservation; provision of information on travel and tours;
escorting of travellers
Arranging and conducting of conferences, seminars and
workshops; booking of seats for shows; sport and holiday camp services;
organisation
of shows; organisation of sports or other competitions;
organisation of balls; organisation of exhibitions for cultural or educational
purposes; entertainer services; production of shows; entertainment information
relating to cultural, sports and recreational events;
presentation of live
performances; provision of sports facilities; provision of recreation
facilities; timing of sports events; health
club services; library services;
operating lotteries and raffles; cultural activities, including organization and
presentation of
awards, particularly for persons over 50 years of age,
organization of cultural events, including award presentation ceremonies;
provision of information relating to cultural activities and events,
particularly awards and award ceremonies
Providing of food and drink; restaurant, cafe, cafeteria,
snack-bar, canteen and catering services; accommodation or hotel
reservations
Nursing homes; retirement homes; healthcare; medical
assistance; nursing services
National Seniors Australia Limited
Filing date:
Renewal due:
Removed from register:
Goods and Services:
Paper and paper goods in this class; printed matter and
printed publications, including magazines, newsletters, brochures, leaflets,
posters, members cards and application forms; stationery; instructional and
teaching material in this class
Management, administration, operation and supervision of
programmes and schemes which offer members rebates, discounts, rewards or
benefits on goods and services of participating companies; management,
administration, operation and supervision of discount
card services; management,
administration, operation and supervision of sales and promotional incentive
schemes or customer reward
schemes; marketing and promotional services; market
research and advisory services; advertising and advertising agency services;
direct mail advertising; compilation and maintenance of direct mailing lists;
promotion of leisure activities; promotion of transportation,
travel and airline
services and the supply of benefits in connection with transportation and travel
incentive schemes; organisation
of exhibitions and shows for commercial or
advertising purposes; retailing services, including retailing relating to the
gift memberships; management and operation of a buying scheme, namely, a
scheme where members indicate they wish to purchase a product,
and retailers
submit a quotation for their best price for that product; lobbying (promoting,
publicising or otherwise representing
the interests or concerns of others);
information, advisory and consultancy services related to the aforesaid
(including such services
provided online)
Financial consultancy, evaluation and management; financial
information; financing of purchases; investment advisory and consultancy;
insurance services, including insurance brokerage, insurance consultancy and
information; mutual funds; financial advisory and consultancy
in relation to
retirement investment and payment; security, stocks and bonds brokerage; stock
exchange brokerage; credit facilities;
credit and charge card services;
administration and processing services in respect of credit and account sales;
funeral saving plans;
charitable fund raising; financial grant services,
including financial grants for research purposes; information, advisory and
consultancy
services related to the aforesaid (including such services provided
Arranging and conducting of tours; booking of seats for
travel; travel reservation; provision of information on travel and tours;
escorting of travellers; transport; packaging and storage of goods; information,
advisory and consultancy services related to the
aforesaid (including such
services provided online)
Arranging and conducting of conferences, seminars and
workshops; booking of seats for shows; sport and holiday camp services;
organisation
of shows; organisation of sports or other competitions;
organisation of balls; organisation of exhibitions for cultural or educational
purposes; entertainer services; production of shows; entertainment information
relating to cultural, sports and recreational events;
presentation of live
performances; provision of sports facilities; provision of recreation
facilities; timing of sports events; health
club services; library services;
operating lotteries and raffles; cultural activities, including organization and
presentation of
awards, particularly for persons over 50 years of age,
organization of cultural events, including award presentation ceremonies;
provision of information relating to cultural activities and events,
particularly awards and award ceremonies; entertainment services;
services; charitable services in the nature of educational services; electronic
publication of information on a wide range
of topics, including online and over
a global computer network; information, advisory and consultancy services
related to the aforesaid
(including such services provided online)
Research services; medical research services; research
services relating to ageing, productive ageing, lifestyle issues for seniors
preventative health issues; preparation of research reports relating to the
aforesaid; information, advisory and consultancy
services related to the
aforesaid (including such services provided online)
Providing of food and drink; restaurant, cafe, cafeteria,
snack-bar, canteen and catering services; accommodation or hotel reservations;
charitable services relating to the provision of food and drink and temporary
accommodation; wine club services; information, advisory
and consultancy
services related to the aforesaid (including such services provided online)
Nursing homes; retirement homes; healthcare; medical
assistance; nursing services; charitable services relating to the provision
medical or healthcare; information, advisory and consultancy services related to
the aforesaid (including such services provided
Any references to a section or
regulation is a reference to a section of the
Trade Marks Act 1995
’) or a regulation of the
Trade Marks Regulations
Regulations
’) respectively, unless otherwise
Clark Equipment Co v
Registrar of Trade Marks
[1964] HCA 55
, [5] (Kitto J).
[2014] HCA 48 (French
Hayne, Crennan, Keifel and Gageler JJ).
See for example
Bone and Joint Clinic Pty Ltd v Registrar of Trade Marks
[2024] FCA 53
Apple Inc. v Registrar of Trade Marks
[2014] FCA 1304
J), wherein the ordinary signification of the respective phrases
MELBOURNE BONE AND JOINT CLINIC and APP STORE were considered, taking
account the meaning of the individual words comprising the phrases.
Howard Auto-Cultivars
Limited v Webb Industries Proprietary Limited
[1946] HCA 15 (Dixon
[1946] HCA 15
(1946) 72 CLR 175
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 2 September 2025) ‘national’ (def 1-3).
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 2 September 2025) ‘senior’ (def 1-5).
[2017] FCA 823
, [638] (Katzmann
Equity Access Pty Ltd v
Westpac Banking Corp
[1989] FCA 506
, [71] (Hill J).
Kendall 1, exhibit
Kendall 1, exhibit
Kendall 2, [7].
Kendall 1, WK-02.
Being a digital archive of
web pages on the internet.
Kendall 1, exhibit
Kendall 2, [4].
The agreement is dated 2019,
with a variation made to it in 2022. Kendall 2, exhibit WK-22.
Kendall 2, [17].
Kendall 2, [19] and exhibit
Kendall 2, [20], exhibits
WK-27 to WK-31.
Kendall 1, exhibit WK-03 and
Kendall 1, exhibit
Kendall 1, exhibit
Kendall 1, exhibit
Kendall 2, exhibit
Kendall 2, exhibit
Kendall 1, exhibit
Kendall 1, exhibit
Sales figures have been
provided in each of Confidential Kendall 1, Confidential Kendall 2 and
Confidential Kendall 3. The sales
figures were combined in Confidential Kendall
1, then further separated into categories in Confidential Kendall 2.
Confidential Kendall
3 provides figures relating to insurance prior to 2019.
Goodman Fielder Pte Ltd v
Conga Foods Pty Ltd
[2020] FCA 1808
, [140] (Burley J), citing
S.A. Plastics Industry v Flexopack Australia Pty Ltd
[2016] FCA 235
(Beach J) and
Sports Warehouse, Inc. v Fry Consulting Pty Ltd
, [155] (Kenny J).
Kendall 1, exhibit
RTF format (13 MB)
Signed PDF/A format