K v Commonwealth Agency [2010] PrivCmrA 13 (24 December 2010)
Case Citation:
K v Commonwealth Agency
[2010] PrivCmrA 13
Subject Heading:
Improper disclosure of personal information
Information Privacy Principle 11 in Part III Division 2 of the
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner prior to 1
November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the powers of the Privacy
Commissioner under the
were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
The complainant was a client of an Australian Government agency. The
complainant alleged that the agency improperly disclosed their
information to their former partner.
The agency investigated the complaint and came to the view that it had
improperly disclosed the complainant’s personal information.
found it had not complied with the requirements of IPP 11. To resolve the
complaint, the agency:
made a written apology to the complainant for the improper disclosure of the
personal information
provided training to the employee involved in the disclosure
offered monetary compensation to the complainant for non-economic
The complainant was not satisfied with the steps the agency
took to resolve their complaint. In particular, the complainant considered
the amount of the compensation offered by the agency was inadequate.
IPP 11 prohibits agencies from disclosing personal information to anyone
other than the individual concerned, unless an exception
The Commissioner accepted the complaint and considered the information
provided, including the question of whether the compensation
offered was
Section 41(2)(a)
gives the Commissioner the discretion not
to investigate a complaint if the complainant has complained to the respondent
respondent has adequately dealt with the matter.
The Commissioner came to the view that the complainant had not provided
sufficient evidence to support their claim that the compensation
offered was
inadequate. Specifically, the complainant had not provided any evidence to
support their claims concerning non-economic
loss. As such, the Commissioner
found that the amount of compensation offered by the agency was satisfactory.
The Commissioner also found that the improper disclosure was a one-off
incident that did not raise systemic issues.
The Commissioner decided that the steps taken by the agency to resolve the
complaint had adequately dealt with the complaint. The
Commissioner advised the
complainant of this view.
The Commissioner gave the complainant the opportunity to provide further
evidence to substantiate their claim. However, the complainant
did not do so.
The Commissioner declined to investigate the complaint under
section 41(2)(a)
on the grounds that the agency had adequately dealt with the
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
RTF format (121 KB)
Signed PDF/A format