Department of Immigration and Border Protection: Own motion investigation report [2014] AICmrCN 5 (12 November 2014)
Department of Immigration and Border Protection: Own motion
investigation report
November 2014
Timothy Pilgrim, Australian Privacy Commissioner
21 February 2014, the Australian Information Commissioner opened an own motion
investigation into the Department of Immigration
and Border Protection (DIBP)
following a media report that a database containing the personal information of
approximately 10,000
asylum seekers was available on DIBP’s website. DIBP
confirmed this was the case.
The investigation, led by the Australian Privacy Commissioner (the
Commissioner), on behalf of the Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner (OAIC), focused on whether DIBP had reasonable security safeguards
in place to protect the asylum seekers’ information,
and whether DIBP had
disclosed the information in accordance with the
(Privacy Act).
After considering the facts of the case, submissions from DIBP, and the
relevant provisions of the
, the Commissioner came to the view that
DIBP had breached the
by failing to put in place reasonable security
safeguards to protect the personal information it held against loss,
unauthorised
access, use, modification or disclosure and against other misuse.
The Commissioner also found that DIBP had unlawfully disclosed
information.
19 February 2014, the OAIC received information that a database containing the
personal information of 'almost 10,000' asylum seekers
was available on
DIBP’s website (the data breach).
Each month, DIBP publishes a document titled
Immigration Detention and
Community Statistics Summary
on its website (www.immi.gov.au). The document
includes statistics about asylum seekers. For accessibility reasons, DIBP
the document in Adobe PDF and Microsoft Word versions.
On 10 February 2014, DIBP published the Microsoft Word version of the January
2013 issue of the
Immigration Detention and Community Statistics Summary
dated 31 January 2014 (the Detention report).
In preparing the Microsoft Word version of the Detention report for web
publication, DIBP embedded the Microsoft Excel spreadsheet
that had been used to
generate the statistics used in the Detention report. The spreadsheet included
the personal information of
approximately 9,250 asylum seekers (the listed
individuals) and was accessible through the Detention
DIBP was notified about the breach by the Guardian Australia at 9.15am on 19
February 2014. DIBP removed the Detention report from
its website by 10.00am on
that date. The Detention report was available on DIBP’s website for about
eight and a half days.
DIBP also identified that the Detention report was also available on The
Internet Archive (Archive.org)
11 February 2014. DIBP wrote to Archive.org on 24 February, seeking removal of
the report. Archive.org complied with this request
on 27 February. The Detention
report was available on Archive.org for about 16 days.
The categories of personal information compromised in the data breach
consisted of:
citizenship
of immigration detention
arrival details
why the individual was deemed to be
The Commissioner was
particularly concerned about this information being publically available due to
the vulnerability of the listed
individuals.
Relevant provisions of the
Until 11 March 2014,
agencies covered by the
were required to comply with 11 Information
. The IPPs were replaced by the Australian Privacy Principles (APPs) on 12
March 2014. DIBP was subject to the IPPs at the time of
the data breach
(February 2014).
The IPPs applied to the handling of ‘personal information’, which
defined as:
information or an opinion (including information or an
opinion forming part of a database), whether true or not, and whether recorded
in a material form or not, about an individual whose identity is apparent, or
can reasonably be ascertained, from the information
provisions relevant to this data breach are: IPP 4 (storage
and security of personal information) and IPP 11 (limits on the disclosure
personal information).
In particular:
an agency must ensure that records containing personal information are protected
by such security safeguards as are
reasonable in the circumstances against loss,
unauthorised access, use, modification or disclosure or other misuse.
an agency must not disclose personal information about an individual unless a
listed exception applies.
Security of personal information (IPP 4(a))
assess whether DIBP had reasonable security safeguards in place, in accordance
with IPP 4(a), the Commissioner considered information
from DIBP and the report
on the data breach by KPMG (the KPMG
safeguards in place prior to the data breach, and what security safeguards would
have been reasonable in the
circumstances to protect the personal information
held. This included considering DIBP’s particular circumstances, such
the sensitivity
of the personal information held
the risk to the
individuals concerned if the personal information is not secure
its information
handling practices
the ease with
which a security measure can be implemented.
The Commissioner also
had regard to the guidance set out in the OAIC’s
Guide to information
Where there is a known risk to data security, IPP 4 would generally have
required that reasonable steps be taken to mitigate that
The Commissioner found that the data breach was caused by the failure of a
number of Departmental policy documents to adequately mitigate
against the known
risk of embedded data. This included the failure of DIBP to make Departmental
staff aware of the risk of embedded
data. These failures led to the errors by
Departmental staff who created and cleared the Detention report.
Further, this data breach may also have been avoided if DIBP had processes in
place to de-identify data where particular areas of
the agency do not require
access to the full data set.
Publication policies
DIBP had a number of
policies in place to provide guidance to staff for each stage in the process of
creating, reviewing and publishing
the Detention report. A number of
instructions in these policy documents indicate that DIBP was aware of the risk
of personal information
being embedded in its publications.
Creating the Detention report
While creating the Detention report, Departmental
staff copied charts and tables directly from the Microsoft Excel spreadsheet,
in the underlying data being embedded in the Microsoft Word version of
the Detention report. This was contrary to the relevant Departmental
which stated that graphs should be copied and pasted as pictures into Microsoft
Word documents.
The Commissioner found that had staff correctly followed DIBP’s policy
when creating the Detention report, DIBP would likely
have avoided the data
However, the Commissioner also found that the relevant Department policy did
not provide sufficient information about why this instruction
to copy and paste
graphs as pictures was necessary, or sufficient instruction on how to carry it
out. If DIBP had explained the reason
for this direction, staff may have better
understood the risks of embedded data and why this instruction was
Similarly, the Commissioner found that had DIBP appropriately trained
Departmental staff involved in the creation of the Detention
understand the risks of embedded data and how those risks could arise, and in
how to copy and paste graphs as pictures,
the staff may have avoided making the
The Commissioner was of the view that, to assist the likelihood of complying
with an instruction, staff should understand why they
need to comply and how to
Reviewing the Detention report
Departmental policies specified that the Detention
report should be cleared by seven reviewers in hard copy. Quality assurance
focused on writing style, grammar, spelling and the accuracy of the data
in the Detention report. The policies did not require reviewers
or publishers to
check for data that had been inadvertently embedded, even though the
Commissioner was satisfied this risk was known
Further, the majority of reviewers and the publisher of the document were
unaware that it was possible to embed Microsoft Excel data
in a Microsoft Word
document. As a result, the digital copy of the Detention report was not checked
for this risk.
The Commissioner took the view that, in order for a policy to be effective in
mitigating a risk, that policy must not only identify
a risk but include
processes and procedures to mitigate that risk. DIBP’s policies reflected
that DIBP was aware of the risks
of embedded data, however the clearance
processes set out in the policies did not include steps to mitigate that risk.
Had the policies
included steps in the clearance process for checking that data
had not been embedded in the Detention report, the issue may have
been detected
prior to publication of the report.
Further, the likelihood of the issue being detected by the document reviewers
would have been increased if Departmental staff had
a better understanding of
the risks of embedded personal information, as well as knowledge about how and
where to look for such embedded
Publishing the Detention report
The relevant Departmental policies required
publishers to check that no personal information of staff or clients is included
document prior to publication, and to removed ‘hidden’ data
and personal information before uploading documents to the
web. However, the
examples of personal information that are provided in the policies primarily
refer to the personal information
of staff. The policies did not provide
information about how to identify and remove embedded objects.
Had DIBP’s policies included more detail on how to check for unobvious
sources of personal information, including embedded data,
this, together with
appropriate training, may have assisted Departmental staff to understand how to
detect the embedded data in the
Detention report prior to publication.
De-identification of information
Given the sensitivity of
the data in question and the number of people involved in compiling, clearance
and publication of the Detention
report, the Commissioner found that a
reasonable security safeguard in this situation would be to de-identify the
information at
an early stage in the process of compiling the Detention report.
Such a process would have removed the possibility of the identifying data
inadvertently being disclosed at a later stage, and would
have limited access to
the personal information only to those employees that required access to enable
DIBP to carry out the functions
and activities for which the information is
IPP 4(a) conclusion — whether DIBP had reasonable
security safeguards in place to protect the personal information it held
Commissioner found that DIBP had a number of procedures and policies in place at
the time of the breach for the compilation, clearance
and publication of its
The Commissioner found that aspects of DIBP’s policies implied that it
was aware of the risk of embedded personal information.
However, there was a
lack of detail in the policies. There was also a lack of understanding amongst
staff about how to undertake
the procedures outlined in the policies, and the
importance of following them correctly in order to safeguard the personal
information
held by DIBP.
The Commissioner concluded that these deficiencies in DIBP’s policies,
procedures and training failed to adequately mitigate
against the risk of a data
breach. In order for policies and procedures to constitute a reasonable security
safeguard, those policies
and processes must adequately address known risks.
Further, to satisfy the requirements of IPP 4(a), reasonable security
procedures must be implemented, and an agency must take steps
to ensure that
staff understand how to, and are practically able to, adhere to the procedures.
This includes ensuring that:
staff are able
to understand an agency’s policies and procedures
the policies
provide sufficient information to enable staff to follow them
training is
provided in relation to the policy.
Policies that are not
understood by staff are unlikely to be adhered to, and are therefore unlikely to
be a reasonable security safeguard.
Therefore, the Commissioner found that DIBP contravened IPP 4(a) by failing
to put in place reasonable security safeguards to protect
the personal
information it held against loss, unauthorised access, use, modification or
disclosure and against other misuse.
Disclosure of personal information (IPP 11)
part of the investigation, the Commissioner considered whether there had been a
breach of IPP 11. IPP 11 regulated the disclosure
of personal information and
states that an agency shall not disclose personal information to a person, body
or agency unless an exception
In general terms, an agency ‘discloses’
information when it makes the information accessible to others outside the
agency and releases the subsequent handling of
the personal information from its
effective control. The release may be an accidental release or an unauthorised
release by an employee.
The Commissioner found that DIBP ‘disclosed’ the compromised
information within the meaning of IPP 11, as it made the
personal information
accessible to the general public by publishing it on its website.
Exceptions to the prohibition on disclosure in IPP 11 included where:
the individual
concerned is reasonably likely to have been aware that information of that kind
is usually passed to that person, body
the individual
concerned has consented to the disclosure
the disclosure
is required or authorised by law.
The Commissioner did not receive
any information to suggest that any of the exceptions in IPP 11 applied to the
data breach incident.
DIBP acknowledged that the personal information embedded
in the Detention report should not have been publically available.
Accordingly, the Commissioner found that the publication of the personal
information of the listed individuals was an unauthorised
disclosure and
therefore a breach of IPP 11.
Rectification
Commissioner considered the information that DIBP provided about the steps that
it took to respond to and contain the data breach,
and to mitigate against
future data breaches of this nature.
DIBP advised that, once it became aware of the data breach, it took the
following steps to contain the data breach:
Removed the
Detention report from its website. The report was available on DIBP’s
website for about eight and a half days.
Undertook a
through public search engines, and checked DIBP’s
website to ensure that
all source information containing personal information was removed.
Conducted a
detailed examination of information obtained through DIBP’s website about
the number of times the Detention report
was accessed and the location of the IP
addresses that attempted to retrieve the
assurances from the journalists that had discovered the data breach that the
information had not been, and would not be,
disseminated further.
Archive.org to seek the removal of the Detention report. The report was
available on Archive.org for about 16 days.
In addition to taking
steps to contain the data breach, DIBP took the following steps to respond to
the data breach:
external consultant (KPMG) to undertake a review of the data breach, including
to identify departmental vulnerabilities,
policies or management practices that
contributed to the data breach, and provide recommendations to prevent
recurrence.
Undertook an
internal risk assessment to assess the risk of harm to the listed
individuals.
Commenced a
process of notifying the listed individuals.
DIBP advised that it
has taken a number of steps to mitigate against future data breaches of this
nature, including the following:
Removed personal
information from the underlying datasets prior to the immigration detention and
community statistics reports being
prepared. It also intended to implement the
approach of analysing and reporting on ‘sanitised’ datasets that
have personal
information automatically removed.
Reviewed all
processes relating to the creation, review and publication of online content.
DIBP notes that it intends to regularly
update these processes. These materials
will be available to all staff on DIBP’s intranet.
face-to-face staff training and an awareness campaign, to highlight the changes
. Privacy e-learning training material is also being
developed. It also intended to develop a new security training program and
its existing mandatory security e-learning package, both focusing on
issues such as the handling of private or sensitive data and
Conducted a
research and evaluation forum for staff involved in research activities to cover
specific privacy issues around client
data handling.
The Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection has announced that from 1 July 2015, the
functions of DIBP and the Australian Customs
and Border Protection Service will
be integrated into a new department. DIBP advised that this process will include
changes to its
information management practices, which will be ‘managed as
a discrete function separate to the ICT implementation function’.
further advised that ‘this organisational design feature’ will
‘create an internal checking mechanism
to ensure that information and ICT
practices occur in a way that is consistent with departmental and ICT policies
and will... enhance
the department’s performance with respect to meeting
its privacy obligations’.
Recommendations
Commissioner was satisfied that the measures that DIBP took in response to the
data breach, and the steps that it intends to take,
will assist DIBP to:
significantly
strengthen its privacy framework
identify other
establish a
obligations under
and the APPs.
The Commissioner noted
that it is essential that DIBP put in place measures to ensure that its revised
policies are supported with
staff training in the new procedures, IT security,
The Commissioner also recommended that DIBP continue to monitor internal
compliance with these new processes to ensure that they are
being followed
consistently over time.
The Commissioner requested that DIBP engage a suitably qualified independent
auditor to certify that DIBP has implemented the planned
remediation steps,
including an ongoing program of updates to staff training, and provide to the
OAIC the certification and a copy
of the independent auditor’s report by
13 February 2015.
In response to the Commissioner’s recommendations, DIBP advised it has
done the following:
Progressed its
work to enhance its information and communications technology and generic
connections between the two.
high-level working group to provide formal governance for online publishing and
updated its online publishing material, with
particular emphasis on checking for
embedded or hidden data.
Engaged KPMG for
a second management initiated review of DIBP’s policies, procedures and
culture regarding the handling and
management of sensitive data, both electronic
and hardcopy.
DIBP also advised that it is currently:
strengthen its policies and the understanding of staff about physical, IT and
communications security and the appropriate
handling of personal
information.
Reviewing its
need for proactive notification of all
breaches, particularly those with
significant implications for the individuals involved.
DIBP further
advised that it intends to engage an independent auditor to certify to the OAIC
that DIBP has taken the remediation steps
recommended by the Commissioner and in
the KPMG report.
Commissioner found that:
DIBP breached
IPP 4 by failing to put in place reasonable security safeguards to protect the
personal information that it held against
loss, unauthorised access, use,
modification or disclosure and against other misuse, and
the publication
of the personal information of the listed individuals was an unauthorised
disclosure, in contravention of IPP 11.
This data breach
demonstrates the difficulties of effectively containing a breach where
information has been published online, and
highlights the importance of taking
steps to minimise the risk of data breaches occurring, rather than relying on
steps to attempt
to contain them after they have occurred.
The Commissioner found that DIBP took some steps to contain the data breach
and put in place processes to assess and respond to the
data breach. However,
there are areas where the execution of these processes could have been improved.
The Commissioner expressed concern about the length of time it took DIBP to
detect the cached copy of the Detention report on Archive.org
and effect its
The personal information involved in this data breach was disclosed in the
context of DIBP voluntarily publishing statistical information
on its website.
Public sector information is a national
and the Commissioner
encourages agencies to proactively make public sector information publicly
available. However, this data breach
demonstrates the importance of agencies
implementing appropriate information handling practices to facilitate open
access to public
sector information while also protecting the personal
information that they hold.
The Commissioner noted that the OAIC has received a large number of
individual complaints about this incident. This investigation
focused on the
systems failures that led to the breaches of the
and the measures to
be taken to prevent future breaches rather than the impact on individuals
affected by the breach, as this will
be dealt with as part of the complaints
process. The Commissioner’s finding in this own motion investigation that
DIBP breached
IPP 4 and IPP 11 will be taken into account when investigating
individual complaints.
Based on DIBP’s remediation activities, DIBP’s ongoing
implementation of recommendations made by KPMG, and its intention
to engage an
auditor confirm its remediation steps, the Commissioner decided to close the
investigation.
Acronyms and abbreviations
Commissioner
— Australian Privacy Commissioner
DIBP - The Department of Immigration and Border Protection
IPPs — Information Privacy Principles (contained in
(Cth), prior to 12 March 2014)
OAIC — Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
Information Privacy Principle 4 and Information Privacy Principle 11.
Media Release by the Hon. Scott
Morrison MP,
Unacceptable breach of privacy
, 19 February 2014
<www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm211907.htm>.
The Internet Archive (
http://archive.org
) is a non-profit organisation
that was founded to build an ‘Internet library’ by archiving and
preserving materials published
on the internet; this is done in part by
automated processes, which search for and capture new publications.
Department of Immigration and
Border Protection,
Management initiated review: Privacy breach – Data
management, Abridged report
, 20 May 2014, Department of Immigration and
Border Protection website, viewed 10 September 2014,
<www.immi.gov.au/pub-res/Documents/reviews/kpmg-data-breach-abridged-report.pdf>.
Guide to information
, April 2013, OAIC website
<www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-resources/privacy-guides/guide-to-information-security>.
I note that the KPMG report
concluded that ‘with very limited exceptions, the [Department] will not be
able to track or recover
the data’, as DIBP would be unable to use the IP
addresses to identify who accessed the document, and, ‘once the data
downloaded, it could then be emailed to anyone or posted anywhere’.
Freedom of Information
, Comlaw website
<www.comlaw.gov.au/Series/C2004A02562>.
RTF format (223 KB)
Signed PDF/A format