Joslyne & Carrel [2025] FedCFamC1A 193 (31 October 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1) APPELLATE
Joslyne & Carrel
[2025] FedCFamC1A
Appeal from:
Joslyne & Carrel
[2025] FedCFamC1F 154
Appeal number(s):
NAA 160 of 2025
File number(s):
BRC 10297 of 2021
Judgment of:
MCCLELLAND DCJ,
HOGAN AND JARRETT
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
FAMILY LAW –
PARENTING – APPEAL
– Where the appellant appealed final parenting orders which changed the
primary residence of the child
from the appellant to the respondent –
Where the appellant asserted the primary judge failed to afford her procedural
and that the trial judgment had been infected by apprehended bias
– Where the appellant asserted the primary judge acted upon
principle in relation to family violence – Where the appellant asserted
the primary judge made errors of fact and failed
to take into account a number
of material matters – Where no ground of appeal enjoyed merit
– Appeal dismissed –
Costs ordered in favour of the
respondent.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Amendment Act 2023
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) r 12.17
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 2012
Cases cited:
Australian Coal and Shale Employees'
Federation v Commonwealth
(1953) 94 CLR 621
[1953] HCA 25
Beach Petroleum NL v Johnson (No 2)
(1995) 57 FCR 119
Bielen & Kozma
(2022) FLC 94-123
[2022] FedCFamC1A 221
Boulton & Boulton
[2024] FedCFamC1A 132
(2024) FLC 94-202
FedCFamC1A 132
Cadwallader v Bajco Pty Ltd
[2002] NSWCA 328
Concrete Pty Ltd v Parramatta Design & Developments Pty Ltd
(2006) 229 CLR 577
[2006] HCA 55
Conway v The Queen
2002) 209 CLR 203
[2002] HCA 2
Cross & Beaumont
(2008) 39 Fam LR 389
[2008] FamCAFC 68
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
(2000) 205 CLR 337
Fitzgerald v Fish
[2005] FamCA 158
(2005) 33 Fam LR 123
[2005] FamCA
FJ & PN Curran Pty Ltd v Almond Investors Land Pty Ltd
Graham & Squibb
[2019] FamCAFC 33
(2019) FLC 93-892[2019]
Gronow v Gronow
(1979) 144 CLR 513
[1979] HCA 63
Joslyne & Carrel
[2024] FedCFamC1F 25
Joslyne & Carrel
[2024] FedCFamC1F
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
Johnson v Johnson
(2000) 201 CLR 488
[2000] HCA 48
Leventis & Leventis (No 7)
[2024] FedCFamC1F 143
(2019) 266 CLR 129
[2019] HCA 28
Masson v Parsons
(2019) 266 CLR 554
[2019] HCA 21
Medlon & Medlon (No 6) (Indemnity Costs)
(2015) FLC 93-664
[2015] FamCAFC 157
Medlow & Medlow (No 2)
[2016] FamCAFC 63
State of New South Wales v JR
[2024] NSWCA 308
Penfold v Penfold
(1980) 144 CLR 311
[1980] HCA 4
(1990) 19 NSWLR 677
Robinson Helicopter Co Inc v McDermott
(2016) 331 ALR
[2016] HCA 22
Royal Guardian Mortgage Management Pty Ltd v Nguyen
(2016) 332 ALR
[2016] NSWCA 88
Simmons & Simmons
[2023] FedCFamC1A 44
(2023) FLC 94-137
[2023] FedCFamC1A
Whisprun Pty Ltd formerly Northeast Exports Pty Ltd v Dixon
200 ALR 447
[2003] HCA 48
Willmore & Menendez
[2022] FedCFamC1A 73
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
The Appellant:
Litigant in Person
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Freedom Law
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Mr Linklater-Steele
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Gary Rolfe Solicitos
BRC 10297 of 2021
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
DIVISION 1 APPELLATE JURISDICTION
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
MCCLELLAND DCJ
, HOGAN AND JARRETT
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appeal is dismissed.
appellant is to pay costs of the respondent in the fixed sum of $21,657.46
within 90 days.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
McCLELLAND DCJ
INTRODUCTION
appeal concerns parenting orders, made by a judge of the Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 1) on 13 March
2025, which transferred the
primary residence of a child, then aged six, from the mother to the father. The
orders were made on the
basis of findings by the primary judge, that the mother
had engaged in a sustained pattern of manipulative behaviour intended to
adversely impact the child's relationship with the father.
trial, the primary judge found the mother to be an unreliable witness whose
conduct, including the making of unfounded allegations
and repeated police
complaints, combined with her obstruction of court-ordered contact, was
calculated to frustrate the child's relationship
with the father. In contrast,
the father was found to be a credible witness who had taken meaningful steps to
address past issues
and foster a safe and nurturing environment for the
appeal, brought by the mother, challenges the orders on multiple grounds,
including apprehended bias and the denial of procedural
fairness, and contends
that the primary judge erred by failing to apply correct legal principles and by
making multiple errors of
appellant, however, has failed to satisfy the Full Court of the Federal Circuit
and Family Court of Australia (Division 1) (“The
Full Court”) as to
the existence of any appealable error and, as such, the appeal is dismissed with
BACKGROUND AND TIMELINE OF MAJOR EVENTS
the judgment of the primary judge dated 13 March 2025, in which the reasons for
the orders subject to appeal were set out (“the
judgement”), the
primary judge recorded the following events as relevant to the determination of
the parties’ respective
application for parenting orders pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”):
(1) In 1979, the father was born.
(2) In 1977, the mother was born.
(3) In late 2014, the parties commenced cohabitation.
(4) In 2018, the child of the relationship was born. It is also noted that, at
the commencement of the trial, the child lived with
the mother and the
mother’s two daughters of a previous relationship.
(5) In June 2021, the parties separated on a final basis.
(6) In August 2021, the mother commenced family law proceedings by filing an
Application for Final Orders in relation to parenting
(7) In late 2021, the first parenting orders were made by consent; providing for
the father to spend supervised time with the child
at a contact centre on a
fortnightly basis.
(8) From late 2021 until mid-2022, the mother delayed signing the contact
service agreement and, as a result, the child did not spend
time with the father
during this period.
(9) In July 2022, the child resumed contact with the father under the
supervision of a contact centre.
(10) In August 2022, the mother issued a complaint about the supervision
arrangements, leading to the contact centre withdrawing
their offer of service.
(11) In August 2022, the mother filed an Amended Application in a Proceeding
seeking to suspend the father's time with the child.
(12) In October 2022, orders were made for the re-commencement of supervised
time between the father and the child at an alternate
(13) In October 2022, the first Single Expert Report of Ms AA was released.
(14) In June 2023, the mother filed an Amended Initiating Application seeking to
reduce the father's time with the child and for
orders to be made permitting her
to relocate within Australia.
(15) In August 2023, the second Single Expert Report of Ms AA was released.
(16) In August 2023, the Final Hearing commenced but was ultimately adjourned
until November 2023 due to the father filing an Amended
Response to Final
(17) In August 2023, interim orders were made for the father to spend supervised
time with the child in the presence of the paternal
grandfather.
(18) In November 2023, the Final Hearing was postponed again due to the mother's
hospitalisation.
(19) In January 2024, the mother filed an Application in Proceeding seeking a
psycho-sexual assessment of the father and for the
suspension of the
father’s time with the child.
(20) In February 2024, the third Single Expert Report of Ms AA was released.
(21) In March 2024, the Final Hearing resumed. The mother amended her position
to allow supervised time between the child and father
in the presence of the
paternal grandfather.
(22) In March 2024, the mother further amended her position, abandoning the
requirement for the supervision of time between the father
and child. Interim
orders were made accordingly, and the proceedings were adjourned for a further
period of six months to enable
the Court to assess the mother's preparedness to
support a relationship between the child and the father.
(23) In November 2024, the mother filed an Application in a Proceeding seeking
the issue of subpoena and seeking to discharge an
injunction prohibiting contact
between the child and the mother’s former partner. The Application was
(24) In November 2024, the mother filed a further Amended Application for Final
Orders seeking the reintroduction of supervision
of time between the father and
(25) In November 2024, the father then filed a Further Amended Response to the
Final Orders.
(26) In December 2024, the father's solicitors sought the mother's consent for
the father to attend a school event of the child.
The mother did not respond to
the request and made a police complaint the following day in relation to an
alleged breach of the Apprehended
Domestic Violence Order from months earlier.
(27) In January 2025, the Final Hearing concluded, and judgment was reserved.
SUMMARY OF THE REASONS FOR JUDGMENT OF THE PRIMARY
considering this matter, it is important to appreciate that, as the proceedings
commenced prior to 6 May 2024, the primary judge
was required to apply the
statutory framework of Part VII of the
Family Law Act 1975
(“the Act”) as it existed at the time. That is, prior to the
amendments of the
Family Law Amendment Act 2023
(Cth) taking effect.
Relevantly,
an important object of the repealed
of the Act was s 60B(1)(a) which,
as noted by their Honours Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane, Nettle, and Gordon JJ
Masson v Parsons
[2019] HCA 21
(2019) 266 CLR 554
, provided for children to
have "the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in
their lives, to the maximum
extent consistent with the best interests of the
child” and, in so providing, confirmed the extent to which that object
guide the Court’s application of the best interest considerations
set out in s 60CC of the Act.
this case, as noted by the primary judge at [183], the primary considerations
set out in s 60CC(2) required him to consider:
(a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of
the child's parents and
(b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to abuse, neglect or family
the primary judge also considered the additional considerations set out in
s60CC(3) at [195]- [224], he placed particular weight
on the primary
considerations. In so doing, his Honour concluded that there were no operative
risk factors impacting the child's
safety in the care of the father.
Furthermore, his Honour found that, if the alternative care arrangements applied
and the child
remained in the primary care of the mother, the mother would
continue to engage in a demonstrated pattern of conduct which, his Honour
was intended to undermine the child's relationship with his father.
so concluding, the primary judge found the mother to be an “unconvincing
and unreliable witness” at [48] and placed
no weight on her evidence
unless corroborated by objective sources. In so finding, his Honour noted that
the mother provided no explanation
for abandoning her allegations of risk,
including an allegation that the father had engaged in 'grooming' the child for
sexual exploitation.
Ultimately, the mother's allegations were rejected and
found to be “opportunistic and manipulative” by the primary judge
Comparatively,
the father was found to be a more reliable witness who had made appropriate
concessions and admissions. Accordingly,
where the parties' evidence conflicted,
the primary judge preferred the father's evidence at [54].
that respect, the Court was satisfied that the father had perpetrated acts of
family violence on those occasions admitted by him,
but not to the extent
alleged by the mother given her lack of credibility.
primary judge further noted that the risk of family violence had been assessed
in the three single expert reports of Ms AA, dated
21 October 2022, 8 August
2023 and 23 February 2024 (Exhibit 70), which specifically addressed the
father's admitted family violence,
alcohol misuse and mental health issues. The
primary judge accepted the family report writer's opinion, as set out in her
third report,
that the father no longer posed a risk of harm to the child (p. 8
primary judge found that the mother had repeatedly attempted to frustrate the
child's relationship with the father. This included:
(1) Refusing to sign contact centre agreements;
(2) Making unfounded complaints to police and child welfare services;
(3) Unnecessarily involving a security guard at changeover; and
(4) Filing numerous unmeritorious applications to suspend time between the
father and the child or to require that such time be supervised.
Additionally,
the primary judge found that the mother failed to facilitate the father's
communication with the child's school and
attempted to exclude the father from
decision-making at [202].
primary judge found that these actions, together with baseless allegations of
abuse, were intended to undermine the child's relationship
with the father.
primary judge also had regard to the recommendations of the family report writer
at [87] who, in their final report, recommended
that the child remain in the
mother's care only if she supported a relationship with the father, otherwise,
as a "last resort", a
transfer of care was necessary (Single Expert Report dated
23 February 2024, p.100).
Appropriately,
the primary judge noted the family report writer's opinion as to significance of
orders effecting a change of residence
for a child and the potential distress
this would cause the child at [205]. Having regard to that opinion, the primary
the exceptional, but entirely understandable and appropriate course,
of adjourning the proceedings for six months to enable the mother
upon her conduct in the context of the weight of evidence and the
recommendations of the family report writer. The primary
judge referred to his
reasons for doing so as set out in
Joslyne & Carrel
[2024] FedCFamC1F 134:
15 During the course of her cross-examination, the Single Expert expressed some
considerable misgivings surrounding the mother's
unexplained change of position,
and whether the mother was bona fide and genuine in now seeking to promote a
significant and substantial
time arrangement between the child and the father.
Nevertheless, the Single Expert remained of the view that a change of residence
at this stage was not supported, albeit she contended that it was marginal and
finely balanced.
raised with the Single Expert whether the Court should make interim orders and
bring the matter back in approximately six months'
time and determine then what
final arrangements should be made for the child. That proposal had, as an
attraction, the ability to
really test the genuineness of the mother's proposal
and to determine whether she was really committed to maintaining a relationship
between the child and the father. The Single Expert was somewhat ambivalent
of the child but
recognised that it would provide at least some evidence of the mother's
willingness to facilitate a meaningful relationship,
consistent with the orders
that the Single Expert then promoted.
the interim orders were made, the proceedings were adjourned part heard to
recommence in November 2024. Instead of reflecting
upon her conduct, the mother
was found to have effectively ‘doubled-down’ on her allegations
against the father and took
additional steps to frustrate the child spending
time with the father. Her conduct, in that respect is detailed at [160] –
[174] of the judgment.
with that history, the primary judge determined that a change in primary care
was necessary to prevent further frustration of
the child's relationship with
the father.
Court ordered that the mother spend time with the child on alternate weekends
and for half of the school holidays; during which
time the child would spend
time with their two half-siblings born during a relationship the mother had with
a previous partner.
regard to the potential distress which a change in primary residency would cause
the child, the primary judge declined to impose
a moratorium on the child
spending time with the mother during their transition into the father's primary
were also made for the child to spend time with the mother on special occasions
but orders for the child to spend time with
each parent on birthdays was found
to be impracticable due to travelling distance between the two households at
way of summary, the final orders provided for:
The child to
live with the father starting from the first Friday after the making of the
orders; that is, from 14 March 2025.
The child to
spend time with the mother, as agreed in writing, or failing agreement:
Each alternate
weekend from Friday 5:00 pm to Sunday 5:00 pm, and until 5:00 pm
Monday if it is a long weekend; and
Half of all
Queensland school holidays.
On Father's Day,
the child spends the full weekend with the father, with make-up time for the
mother the following weekend.
On Mother's Day,
the child spends the full weekend with the mother, with make-up time for the
father the following weekend.
At Easter and
Christmas, time is to be arranged on an alternating arrangement basis on
even/odd years.
The child is to
have video calls with the mother on Tuesdays and Thursdays from
6:00 pm to 6:30 pm, facilitated by
the father.
arrangements apply during school holidays with the non-residential
The father is
granted sole parental responsibility for all major long-term decisions
concerning the child, subject to the father:
Informing the
mother via AppClose of any decision to be made;
Considering her
views if provided within five days; and
Notifying her of
the final decision within five days.
THE GROUNDS OF APPEAL
her Amended Notice of Appeal filed on 4 July 2025, the mother relied on the
following grounds of appeal:
(1) The learned trial judge acted upon a wrong principle.
(a) The Learned trial Justice did not consider
Law Act 1975
in consideration and assessment of Family Violence and Risk at
paragraphs 55-169.
(2) The learned trial judge erred on the facts as follows.
(a) At Paragraph 202 of the Judgment by His Honour of 13 March 2025, His Honour
fell into error where it was stated that the mother
has persistently failed to
communicate with the father about major long term decisions about the child
where there were no long term
(b) The learned trial Justice erred on the facts at paragraph 222 of Judgement
in the reference to admissions where there was a copy
of a Police Protection
Notice evidencing the fathers admissions annexed to the trial Affidavit of the
Applicant mother filed 16 July
2023 at pages 75 and 76.
(3) The learned trial judge failed to take into account material considerations
listed as follows;
(a) In the Judgement of 13 March 2025 and assessment of Family Violence and Risk
at paragraphs 55 through 169, 217 His Honour did
not consider
Sections 4A
Family Law Act 1975
(b) At paragraph 217 of the Judgement of 13 March 2025 his Honour in making the
I am satisfied that this request was done with the hope that police
might investigate one of her baseless allegations with the aim
to frustrate and
thwart a relationship between the child and the father
" failed to take into
consideration previous Protection Orders made in Town PP, NSW, finding of Child
Protection Queensland (mid-2022)
that the child had been exposed to emotional
harm by the Respondent and the Respondent pleading guilty to breach of a
Order early 2022.
learned trial Justice and the Family report writer at paragraph 206 in assessing
impact of separation from siblings or the
mother as primary carer failed to take
into consideration the finding of existing emotional harm finding by Child
Protective Services,
Queensland.
(4) The learned trial judge's decision was plainly unreasonable or unjust;
(a) The learned trial Justice failed to take into consideration the Affidavit
filed by the Applicant 13 November 2024 (annexing previously
served material)
that had been filed and served on the parties and their representatives prior to
29 January 2025 though not brought
to the attention of the court by
representatives during trial dates preventing the Applicant from being able to
present their case.
(b) The learned trial Justice failed to take into consideration issues were
raised as to the existence of evidence in the Affidavit
of the Applicant filed
1,13 November 2024 at paragraphs 15,16,17 and 20 November 2024 concerning errors
of fact in the third Family
Report at paragraph 46 and second Family Report at
paragraph 51.
(c) It is submitted that the learned trial Justice failed to take into
consideration the fact that Psychologist for the Respondent,
Ms M, was not cross
examined as to the material relied upon by the father to verify credibility,
test evidence relied upon or investigate
the Respondents insight regarding
Family Violence and considerations of Family Violence pursuant to the
(d) The learned Justice failed to take into consideration that evidence to
correct errors in the record and Family Reports were filed/served
and a further
Application in a Proceeding (filed1 November 2024) was filed to bring the issue
of errors in evidence to the attention
of the court.
(e) The error in the record at paragraph 46 of the third Family Report by Ms AA
remains in error.
(f) The error in the record at paragraph 51 of the second Family Report by Ms AA
filed 10 August 2022 remains in error.
(6) There were circumstances leading to perception of apprehended bias and
procedural fairness
(a) The learned Justice failed to take into consideration that evidence (in the
form of Affidavit material filed 13 November 2024
exhibiting clear test results,
professional reports regarding relapse prevention and anger management course
completion for Witness
Mr C), was filed/served to address errors on the record
and the need or basis for restraint.
(b) The learned Justice in their considerations of systems abuse failed or did
not take into consideration the father opposing an
Application in a proceeding
filed 30 October 2023 based on the Applicant being diagnosed with serious
illness and requiring urgent
abdominal surgery to preserve life and more
specifically an illness requiring urgent surgery and the impact on the child of
becoming terminally ill if surgery was not received at paragraphs
231, 29 of Judgement delivered 13 March 2025.
(c) The learned trial Justice did not consider
(Cth) or Systems abuse in relation to the withholding of consent
by the father to jointly seek adjourning proceedings to afford the
having an urgent medical operation/procedure necessary to prevent serious
illness, to preserve and prolong life.
(As per the original)
is to be noted that there is no Ground 5.
PRINCIPLES RELATING TO
APPELLATE INTERVENTION
is a strong presumption as to the correctness of the primary judgment with the
appellant carrying the onus of establishing material
Australian Coal
and Shale Employees' Federation v Commonwealth
[1953] HCA 25
(1953) 94 CLR 621
Boulton & Boulton
[2024] FedCFamC1A 132
(2024) FLC 94-202
weight given to evidence in the exercise of a judicial discretion under the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) ("the
") is a matter that is quintessentially
for the primary judge. The fact that an Appellate Court might have arrived at a
outcome, by virtue of affording different weight to various matters,
does not justify the reversal of the decision of the primary
[1979] HCA 63
(1979) 144 CLR 513
a finding of fact will not be disturbed unless those findings are demonstrated
to be "wrong by 'incontrovertible facts
or uncontested testimony', or 'glaringly
improbable' or 'contrary to compelling inferences":
Robinson Helicopter Co
Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 331 ALR 550
[2019] HCA 28
In that context, it is not the role of an Appellate Court to conduct a
second trial with a view to reconsidering the evidence and
submissions made at
first instance:
Cadwallader v Bajco Pty Ltd
[2002] NSWCA 328
Heydon JA (Santow JA and Gzell J concurring).
making orders pursuant to
, the primary judge exercised the
broad discretion reposed in the Court. Accordingly, the primary judge's
conclusions attract the
standard of appellate review articulated in
(1936) 55 CLR 499
("House v The King") which requires the
identification of an error of principle or a material error of fact, the
consideration of
irrelevant material or the failure to consider relevant
material, or, if no specific error can be identified, demonstration that
decision is “unreasonable or plainly unjust” (
House v The
CONSIDERATION
Full Court’s consideration of the grounds of appeal was complicated by the
appellant mother relying on an Amended Notice
of Appeal filed on 4 July 2025 and
a Summary of Argument filed on that day but which referred to the mother's
original grounds of
appeal filed on 2 May 2025.
Nevertheless,
in circumstances where the mother is self-represented, the Court endeavoured to
correlate the arguments set out in her
Summary of Argument, with the amended
grounds of appeal.
Ground 6 - Alleged Apprehended Bias and Absence of Procedural
of appeal in relation to bias and procedural fairness challenge the integrity of
the administration of justice and, accordingly,
must be dealt with first, before
other discrete grounds of appeal are considered:
Concrete Pty Ltd v
Parramatta Design & Developments Pty Ltd
[2006] HCA 55
(2006) 229 CLR 577
Royal Guardian Mortgage Management Pty Ltd v Nguyen
ALR 128 at [9]-[10].
the Court shall turn first to Ground 6 which contends the reasons of the trial
judge are vitiated by both apprehended bias
and the absence of procedural
Apprehended Bias
will deal firstly with the contentions that the decision is vitiated by
apprehended bias.
relevant test in considering the question of apprehended bias was recently
described by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in
State of New South Wales
[2024] NSWCA 308
- [254] as follows:
The test for apprehended bias is the "double might" test of whether a
fair-minded lay observer might reasonably consider that the
judicial officer
might not carry out his or her judicial functions with an impartial and
unprejudiced mind to the resolution of the
issues arising on the motion:
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
(2000) 205 CLR 337
[2000] HCA 63
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v Nicholls (
2011) 244 CLR 427;
[2011] HCA 48
. This test is objective. It does not require an assessment
of the state of mind of the judge, as is necessary on an inquiry about
Michael Wilson
The application of this test requires, first, the identification of what it is
said might lead the decision-maker to decide a question
other than on the merits
of that question and, second, an articulation of the logical connection between
the matter identified and
the apprehended or feared deviation from the course of
deciding the question other than on its merits:
at [32]-[33]. Only then can the reasonableness of the asserted
apprehension of bias be assessed. This is sometimes referred to as
Isbester v Knox City Council
(2015) 255 CLR
[2015] HCA 20
(Gageler J);
Charisteas v Charisteas
273 CLR 289
[2021] HCA 29
]; CNY17 v Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection and Another
(2019) 268 CLR 76
[2019] HCA 50
(Kiefel CJ and Gageler J).
appellant's amended grounds of appeal do not allege conduct that would satisfy
the first aspect of the test referred to in
Ebner v Official Trustee in
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337.
That is, the appellant has not identified the
issue or issues in respect to which a fair-minded lay observer might consider
the primary
judge might not carry out his or her judicial function with an
impartial and unprejudiced mind.
Accordingly,
in so far as the Amended Notice of Appeal contends apprehended bias on the part
of the primary judge, this ground of
appeal is without merit.
Procedural Fairness Challenge
respect of the alleged denial of procedural fairness, the appellant mother
asserts, at p.8 –9 of her Summary of Argument,
The learned trial Justice failed to take into consideration the Affidavit filed
by the Applicant 13 November 2024 (annexing previously
served material) that had
been filed and served on the parties and their representatives prior to 29
January 2025 though not brought
to the attention of the court by representatives
during trial dates preventing the Applicant from being able to present their
It is submitted that the material was filed to correct errors of fact
contained within the Family Reports more specifically being
paragraph 51 of the
Second Family Report (Paragraph 51 of the Appeal Book, Item 36) and paragraph 46
of the third Family Report (Item
38 Settled Appeal Index, page 931 of the Appeal
Book) that are incorrect statements.
his Summary of Argument, the respondent father contends that, at paragraphs
Procedural fairness requires each party to be given an adequate opportunity to
be heard, and to present their cases. Procedural fairness
is only concerned with
the fairness of the hearing, and not the fairness of the outcome.
Procedural fairness does not involve a fixed body of rules to be applied in a
formulaic manner. It's role is to avoid practical injustice.
An absence to afford procedural fairness must be material before it invites
appellate intervention. A breach is only material if
it operates to deny a party
an opportunity to be properly heard (to give evidence or to make arguments) and
thereby deprived that
party of the possibility of a different and more
favourable outcome. It is submitted that this is distinctly not the case in this
[footnotes omitted]
Independent Children's Lawyer noted at paragraphs [35] and [38] of their Summary
of Argument that the mother raised broad complaints
regarding a lack of
procedural fairness but that such complaints were without substance. This is
because, in so far as the mother
contends the primary judge failed to consider
an affidavit filed by her on 13 November 2024, the Independent Children’s
submits that the affidavit was not part of the evidence.
is, with respect, substance in the submission of the Independent
Children’s Lawyer. On 29 January 2025, the matter resumed
for further
hearing. The mother had filed several affidavits in November 2024, including one
dated 13 November 2024. In respect to
that affidavit, Counsel for the mother, Mr
Duplock, sought leave, at the outset of the hearing, to rely on three affidavits
in November 2024, including the 13 November affidavit.
Honour required the mother to nominate a single affidavit to rely upon, in
accordance with trial directions made in respect to
the proceedings. When
Counsel for the mother initially elected to rely on the affidavit of 13 November
2024, the primary judge questioned
Counsel as to the relevance of that
affidavit, given that the mother's final position, at hearing, was to seek
unsupervised time
for the father, and not to press for supervision or risk-based
orders (Transcript, 29 January 2025 p. 5 line 4).
the course of that discussion, the primary judge observed that, in the
above-mentioned circumstances, much of the content of
the 13 November 2024
affidavit—particularly the material asserting risk or supporting the
making of orders for supervision—was
rendered irrelevant.
Ultimately,
Counsel for the mother conceded that most of the 13 November 2024 affidavit was
not relevant and did not press reliance
on that affidavit for the purposes of
the Final Hearing (Transcript, 29 January 2025 p.5 line 40).
Accordingly,
this ground of appeal, in so far as it contends there was a denial of procedural
fairness, is also without merit.
determined the grounds of appeal in respect of alleged apprehended bias and the
absence of procedural fairness, I will now
consider the balance of grounds of
appeal contained in the Amended Notice of Appeal filed on 4 July 2025.
GROUND 1 - THE LEARNED TRIAL JUDGE ACTED UPON A WRONG
PRINCIPLE IN THAT THE LEARNED TRIAL JUSTICE DID NOT CONSIDER SECTION 4, 4A
FAMILY LAW ACT 1975
IN CONSIDERATION AND ASSESSMENT OF FAMILY VIOLENCE
AND RISK AT PARAGRAPHS 55-169.
is the case that the primary judge did not explicitly refer to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the
”) in their reasons
for judgment. Those sections define "family violence" for the purpose of the
and provide examples as to what constitutes family violence and exposure to
family violence. However, a failure to specifically refer
to a legislative
provision does not, in and of itself, demonstrate appealable error:
[2022] FedCFamC1A 73
and the cases cited therein.
This is in circumstances where the judgment demonstrates that the principles
embedded in those sections
were considered by the primary judge.
that respect, the primary judge made specific findings that the father had
engaged in acts of family violence including the following:
Being angry and
frustrated with the mother;
Calling the
mother derogatory terms and names;
Urinating at the
end of the bed when intoxicated;
Locking up the
house after the mother had left, although she had a key to return;
Driving off in
anger during an incident in Victoria but contacting the mother the next morning
and apologizing;
Getting angry
when intoxicated and punching a door in anger;
Unintentionally
walking in on the mother's daughter in the shower;
Arguments in
front of the children about money and throwing the remote control on the ground;
Placing the
mother in a bear hug from behind.
primary judge noted that those allegations, which were candidly admitted by the
father, constituted family violence at [68].
primary judge also considered but ultimately rejected at [58] and [68], the
mother's broader allegations that the father engaged
in a pattern of physical,
emotional, psychological, and financial abuse. This included allegations that
the father engaged in:
violence, such as holding a weapon to her throat, butting her chest, punching a
door, and threatening to kill her;
Self-harming
Verbal abuse,
involving derogatory name-calling, accusations of prostitution, and disparaging
remarks made in the presence of the
misuse, including excessive alcohol consumption while on prescription
painkillers and engaging in compulsive gambling;
behaviour, such as throwing her belongings onto the lawn, smashing household
items, and yelling at her children;
The provision of
alcohol to an 11-year-old and inappropriate conduct towards her son while he was
showering; and
Coercive control
and surveillance, including monitoring the appellant's activities
post-separation, breaching domestic violence orders,
and engaging in stalking
to concerns about her credibility, the primary judge was not persuaded by the
mother's evidence unless it was corroborated by
an objectively sourced document
or established through the father's admissions [48].
preferring the evidence of the father where it conflicted with that of the
mother, the primary judge noted that the mother's allegations
were inconsistent
and seemed to be aimed at limiting the father's contact with the child or
avoiding a change in primary care at
[49]. This included her claim that the
father was "grooming" the child for sexual abuse which was seen as a desperate
and manipulative
attempt to distort an innocuous event [49]. The primary judge
also noted that the mother had no evidence to explain the abandonment
assertions as to the risk of harm posed by the father at [49].
that factual analysis, it was reasonably open for the primary judge to prefer
the evidence of the father where it conflicted
with that of the mother.
finding that the father had perpetrated acts of family violence, the primary
judge found that the father had taken steps to
address his past conduct. The
primary judge agreed with the opinion of the single expert that the father had
made significant efforts
to reduce his alcohol consumption and had demonstrated,
through independent testing, that he had no problematic use of alcohol over
sustained period since April 2022 at [77]. It was also noted that the father had
engaged with support services to improve his parenting
capacity and had shown a
keen and genuine desire to develop a positive relationship with his child at
judge accepted the conclusions of the family report writer, who had assessed
that the father made substantial and sustained changes
to position himself as a
safe and responsible parent. The report writer noted that the father's previous
alcohol and prescription
medication misuse, as well as mental health concerns,
were no longer current factors. The primary judge also found that the father's
efforts to address his vulnerabilities and improve his parenting insight and
capacity were both credible and supported by the evidence
a result, the primary judge was satisfied that the father “does not pose a
risk of harm to the child let alone an unacceptable
risk of the type variously
contended by the mother” [83].
was no error in the approach of the primary judge, who gave detailed
consideration to the issue of family violence and made
findings that were each
reasonably open to him on the evidence, in assessing family violence and
Accordingly,
there is not merit to this ground of appeal.
Ground (2) - The learned trial judge erred on the
2, which is comprised of two sub grounds, contends that the primary judge erred
on the facts.
Sub ground 2a
will firstly consider sub ground (a) which is as follows:
At Paragraph 202 of the Judgment by His Honour of 13 March 2025, His Honour fell
into error where it was stated that the mother has
persistently failed to
communicate with the father about major long term decisions about the child
where there were no long term
Relevantly,
at [202] the primary judge stated:
I am satisfied that the mother has persistently failed to communicate with the
father about major long-term decisions in relation
to the child and would
continue to do so the most recent example being Exhibit 44 as referred to above.
I accept that the father
has consistently sought to spend more time with the
child and that the mother has persistently sought to restrict it.
to that which is asserted in this sub-ground of appeal, there was specific
evidence that justified the relevant finding by
his Honour. Indeed, [202]
immediately follows an extract of the evidence given by the family report writer
during the trial as set
MS WARDLE: Would you characterise the way the mother has exercised
decision-making to date as that excluding the other party?
MS AA: I am not aware of any times when Ms Joslyne has consulted with the
father. So yes I believe that she has excluded over those
key decisions.
(Transcript, 4 March 2024, p. 192 lines 40 – 45)
opinion, and the finding of the primary judge, was reasonably open on the
evidence. For example, records produced by the child’s
school, referenced
in the judgment at [170] and tendered as Exhibit 44 at trial, evidenced the
mother's attempts to limit the father's
involvement in their child's life.
Specifically, the records included a communication from the mother to the
child's school requesting
that the school provide the father with only academic
information about the child. It was reasonably open to the primary judge to
that this was a deliberate attempt by the mother to deny the father information
his ability to participate in
his child’s education.
Additionally,
the primary judge found that the mother has taken steps to limit the father's
the mother attempting to frustrate the
father's relationship with the child by making baseless complaints to
authorities and not
facilitating the father's time with the child as ordered by
the court (at [160] - [169]).
Sub ground 2(b)
(b) of this ground of appeal is as follows:
The learned trial Justice erred on the facts at paragraph 222 of Judgement in
the reference to admissions where there was a copy
of a Police Protection Notice
evidencing the fathers admissions annexed to the trial Item 27 Appeal Book,
Affidavit of the Applicant
mother dated 15 July 2023 at pages 500 and 501.
[as per the original]
[222], the primary judge stated that he drew "no inference" from a Domestic
Violence Order in circumstances where "it was made
on a without admissions
Relevantly,
pages 500 - 501 of the Appeal Book, which reproduce the annexures at p 75
– 76 of the mother’s trial affidavit
filed 15 July 2023, contain a
copy of an Application for a Police Protection Notice dated 12 May 2021 which
names the father as the
respondent and the mother and child as protected persons
alongside the mother’s two children of a previous relationship. The
relevant event referred to in that application alleges that, during an argument
on 12 May 2025:
... the respondent has approached the aggrieved and placed her in a bear hug
from behind. She has dropped her phone and he has thrown
this outside. Again the
children were home and witness to this occurring. The respondent has then told
the aggrieved that it was
over and he would "get her and hunt her down."
cross examination by Counsel for the mother, the father stated that he admitted
to police that he "bear hugged" the mother causing
her to drop her phone but
denied admitting to police that he told the mother he "would get her and hunt
her down" and, furthermore,
denied making the comment to the mother (Transcript,
4 March 2024 at p 155). In circumstances where the primary judge found the
to be a witness of truth, it was reasonably open for the primary judge to
accept that evidence.
on the admissions of the father, the primary judge found that the father had
placed the mother in a bear hug from behind at
[13] and [65]. The primary judge
did not, however, accept those allegations of the mother which were not admitted
by the father.
As earlier noted, this was the result of adverse credibility
findings in respect to the mother and the denials by the father to which
Authorities
recognise that the advantage enjoyed by a trial judge in determining factual
questions extends, not only findings of fact,
but to inferences drawn or not
drawn from those findings:
FJ & PN Curran Pty Ltd v Almond Investors Land
[2019] VSCA 236
. No error has been established in the
primary judge refraining from drawing any inference from the father consenting
to the Application
to the Protection Order in circumstances where that consent
by the father was on a without admissions basis.
Accordingly,
this sub ground of appeal is also without merit.
GROUND 3 - THE LEARNED TRIAL JUDGE FAILED TO TAKE INTO ACCOUNT
MATERIAL CONSIDERATIONS
this ground of appeal is also pleaded in sub-grounds, each sub ground will be
separately considered.
Sub-ground 3(a)
In the Judgement of 13 March 2025 and assessment of
Family Violence and Risk at paragraphs 55 through 169, 217 His Honour did not
Sections 4A
Family Law Act 1975
sub ground of appeal raises the same issues as those raised in Ground 1. For
similar reasons to those earlier provided in respect
to Ground 1, this
sub-ground of appeal also fails.
Sub-ground 3(b)
At paragraph 217 of the Judgement of 13 March 2025 his
Honour in making the comment "I am satisfied that this request was done with
hope that police might investigate one of her baseless allegations with the aim
to frustrate and thwart a relationship between
the child and the father" failed
to take into consideration previous Protection Orders made in Town PP, NSW,
finding of Child Protection
Queensland (mid-2022) that the child had been
exposed to emotional harm by the Respondent and the Respondent pleading guilty
of a Protection Order early 2022.
relevant finding of the primary judge at [217] was made following a reference by
the primary judge, in the immediately preceding
paragraph, to an application
made by the mother for following order:
That leave be granted for the Applicant to provide Family law documents, Orders
and correspondence be released to the Queensland
Police Service and lawyers for
the purposes of investigating criminal breaches of the Domestic Violence Order
commencing proceedings
in State Courts.
reasons of the primary judge make it clear that his Honour’s conclusion,
as to the mother making baseless complaints against
the father, was based on
extensive evidence including:
complaints by the mother to police and child protection services, including:
breach of a Domestic Violence Order due to the father parking near her at a
McDonald's restaurant (Exhibit 14), which police
determined to be a chance
encounter and that such an allegation was unfounded;
Complaining
which police investigated and declined to
Queensland Child Safety immediately after orders were made for the father to
spend time with the child as supervised by
the paternal grandfather (Exhibit
23), without disclosing that such time was court-ordered; and
complaint about a photograph and candy canes months after the event, coinciding
with the father's request to attend a school
event (Exhibit 47), and in respect
of which police found that no offence had occurred.
to the above, multiple applications filed by the mother were found to have
lacked merit and were designed to delay proceedings
or disrupt the father's time
with the child, including:
An application
for a forensic psycho-sexual assessment of the father, which dismissed in
Joslyne & Carrel
[2024] FedCFamC1F 25
An application
to discharge the family report writer and reduce the father's time (30 October
2023) which was dismissed;
An application
to proceed on an undefended basis (1 November 2024), which was dismissed;
Initiating Application (13 November 2024) (Exhibit 43), which was earlier
referred to, seeking leave to release family
law documents to police, despite no
evidence being presented to indicate the police had requested such
information.
the context of that evidence, the primary judge accepted the opinion of the
family report writer that the best predictor of future
behaviour is past
behaviour at [228]. Therefore, having regard to the relevant evidence and the
opinion of the family report writer,
the primary judge concluded that there is a
significant risk that the mother will continue to make baseless complaints and
to frustrate the child's relationship with the father if she remained
the child's primary carer at [229].
conclusion, that the mother would likely continue to undermine the child's
relationship with the father should the child remain
in her primary care, was
soundly based on the evidence to which his Honour referred. This is particularly
so in circumstances where
aspects of that conduct continued even after the
primary judge, in March 2024, adjourned the proceedings for a period of six
to provide the mother an opportunity to reflect upon the weight of
evidence presented during the hearing; including the opinions
expressed by the
family report writer. The conduct of the mother which continued even after the
adjournment included the following:
psycho-sexual assessment of the father based on an incident where his genitals
were accidentally exposed while the child
sat on his lap—an allegation
which the Court found to be baseless, opportunistic and designed to delay
proceedings and undermine
the father's time with the child;
application to reintroduce supervision of the father's time in November 2024,
despite having previously abandoned the need
for supervision in March 2024;
Attempting to
have the Final Hearing proceed on an undefended basis for reasons which the
Court described as a “mystery”
and entirely unmeritorious at
evidence, together with those findings in respect of the mother’s conduct
in the period prior to March 2024, justified
the findings of the primary judge
that the mother's conduct was consistently obstructive, manipulative, and aimed
at frustrating
the child's relationship with the father and, furthermore, would
likely continue in the future.
the joint judgment of Bell, Gageler, Nettle and Edelman JJ in
[2019] HCA 28
(2019) 266 CLR 129
, their Honours stated that the advantage enjoyed by a
trial judge, afforded by their opportunity to gain "impressions about the
credibility
and reliability of witnesses", extends to "findings of secondary
facts which are based on a combination of these impressions and
other inferences
from primary facts." In this case, I are satisfied that the primary judge
enjoyed that same advantage and that his
findings were reasonably open on the
Accordingly,
this sub ground of appeal is without merit.
Sub ground 3(c)
The learned trial Justice and the Family report writer
at paragraph 206 in assessing impact of separation from siblings or the mother
as primary carer failed to take into consideration the finding of existing
emotional harm finding by Child Protective Services, Queensland.
ground of appeal is misconceived. At [206] of his reasons for judgment, the
primary judge expressed concern in respect to the
potential loss of the
relationship between the child and his father and not the potential impact of
orders for change of residence;
although this was elsewhere considered.
Relevantly, [206] is as follows:
That said I have little doubt given the mother's attitude to date that she will
attempt to frustrate his relationship with his father
and that a loss of that
relationship will be intensely felt by the child and have long-term
consequences.
finding, as to the potential impact of the loss of the child's relationship with
the father, in no way diminished the primary
judge’s acute awareness of
the potential impact which orders for a change of primary residence would have
upon the child. In
these circumstances, the primary judge’s focus on that
potential impact was entirely appropriate. In
Simmons & Simmons
[2023] FedCFamC1A 44
(2023) FLC 94-137
the Full Court recognised that orders changing a
child's place of residence from that of their primary caregiver has the
to cause significant emotional distress to the impacted child. In
Bielen & Kozma
[2022] FedCFamC1A 221
(2022) FLC 94-123
the Full Court stated that,
in contemplating such an order, the Court should therefore reflect upon "the
immediate, medium and long-term
impact of proposed orders upon the child's
physical, emotional and psychological safety, security and well-being."
this case, the primary judge gave careful consideration to that potential impact
upon the child of orders for a change of residence
and specifically noted that
this change would be distressing for the child and that he would likely
“suffer a sense of emotional
loss” at [205]. The primary judge was
also concerned that, in making such an order, the child would also have a lesser
relationship
with his half-siblings at [205].
as against that negative impact upon the child, the judge also found that the
mother had consistently attempted to frustrate
the child's relationship with the
father, and that a loss of the relationship with the father would be intensely
felt by the child
and have long-term consequences at [206]. Ultimately, the
primary judge concluded that the only way the child could have any form
relationship with both parents, was where the child resided primarily with the
father, despite the distress caused by the change
respect to this sub-ground of appeal, the mother contends, at p. 8 of her
Summary of Argument, that the primary judge failed to
have regard to the
findings of Child Protection and/or any referrals made in relation to family
violence. In doing so, she makes
specific reference to pages 116 – 119 of
the mother’s trial affidavit filed 15 July 2023.
pages contain a copy of a report from "QQ Organisation" and a one-page exit
summary from the service (“the QQ Organisation
documents”). The
report notes that the child received early childhood intervention support from
QQ Organisation under the National
Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) between
September 2022 and April 2023. The report and discharge letter summarise several
behavioural
and emotional regulation challenges faced by the child and make
recommendations as to how such challenges might be addressed in the
is the case that the QQ Organisation documents are not referenced in the
judgment. It is, however, unnecessary for a trial judge
to "mention every fact
or argument relied on by the losing party as relevant to an issue"
Pty Ltd formerly Northeast Exports Pty Ltd v Dixon
[2003] HCA 48
(2003) 200 ALR 447
not expressly referencing the QQ Organisation documents, it is clear that the
primary judge was aware of the potential impact
of the parties’ conduct on
the child's emotional wellbeing and future development and that such matters
were considered when
determining what orders were in the child's best interests.
that respect the primary judge referred to and accepted the assessment of the
family report writer that:
The mother's
efforts to interfere with the child's relationship with his father were
detrimental to the child's emotional development
The lack of a
healthy relationship with both parents was likely to adversely impact the
child's long-term ability to develop a healthy
self-identity [73];
The mother's
actions, such as making baseless complaints and attempting to frustrate the
child's relationship with the father, were
harmful to the child's emotional
well-being [80]; and
The mother has
denied the child “the right to complete identity formation" and that her
behaviour could lead to the child feeling
isolated and rejected [87] and
the context of the primary judge's consideration of the impact of the parental
conflict and the mother's role in that conflict,
it cannot be said that the
failure of the primary judge to refer to the QQ Organisation documents was
material to the outcome of
the proceedings (
Conway v The Queen
Accordingly,
this sub-ground of appeal is without merit.
GROUND 4 - THE LEARNED TRIAL JUDGE’S DECISION WAS PLAINLY
UNREASONABLE OR UNJUST
framed as a reasonableness challenge, this sub-ground of appeal, in substance,
appears to contend that the primary judge failed
to consider material facts;
namely, those set out in the 7 sub-grounds of appeal. It is therefore necessary
to consider each of those
sub-grounds separately.
Sub ground 4(a)
a) The learned trial Justice failed to take into
consideration the Affidavit filed by the Applicant 13 November 2024 (annexing
served material) that had been filed and served on the parties and
their representatives prior to 29 January 2025 though not brought
attention of the court by representatives during trial dates preventing the
Applicant from being able to present their case.
reasons earlier set out at paragraphs 42—45 herein, noting that the
mother's affidavit of 13 November 2024 was not relied
upon in the proceedings,
there is no merit in this ground of appeal.
Sub ground 4(b)
b) The learned trial Justice failed to take into
consideration issues were raised as to the existence of evidence in the
of the Applicant filed 1,13 November 2024 at paragraphs 15,16,17 and
20 November 2024 concerning errors of fact in the third Family
paragraph 46 and second Family Report at paragraph 51.
documents relied upon by the mother at the first instance proceedings are
referred to at [16] of the reasons and are set below:
Application filed 26 June 2023;
Affidavit of
mother sworn 15 July 2023;
Affidavit of
mother sworn 16 February 2024;
Statement filed 14 July 2023;
Notice of child
abuse, family violence or risk filed 5 August 2021; and
Outline of Case
paragraph reflects the advice provided to the Court by Counsel for the mother in
the first instance proceedings (Transcript,
1 March 2024, p 166). Furthermore,
the above-listed documents were set out in the mother's case outline document
filed in the proceedings
at first instance and confirmed by her Counsel as the
documents upon which she relied during the hearing. The mother is bound by
way in which her case was conducted and the forensic decisions of her Counsel
(1990) 19 NSWLR 677
at 683 – 684).
Accordingly,
this sub-ground of appeal is without merit.
Sub ground 4(c)
is submitted that the learned trial Justice failed to take into consideration
the fact that Psychologist for the Respondent [Ms
M] was not cross examined as
to the material relied upon by the father to verify credibility, test evidence
relied upon or investigate
the Respondents insight regarding Family Violence and
considerations of Family Violence pursuant to the
Family Law Act 1975
for the mother did not seek to cross examine the psychologist for the
respondent, Ms M.
is specifically confirmed at p. 5 of the Transcript dated 1 March 2024. Further,
at p. 12 of that transcript, Counsel for the
mother confirmed that she required
Ms AA, the family report writer, for cross examination but made no such request
in respect to
earlier noted, a party is bound by the forensic decisions made by their counsel
during the proceedings.
Accordingly,
this sub-ground of appeal is without merit.
Sub ground 4(d)
d) The learned Justice failed to take into
consideration that evidence to correct errors in the record and Family Reports
were filed/served
and a further Application in a Proceeding (filed 1 November
2024) was filed to bring the issue of errors in evidence to the attention
respect to this sub-ground of appeal, the mother argues that error has occurred
as a result of the primary judge failing to consider
affidavit material filed on
13 November 2024 which annexed previously served material intended to correct
factual errors in the second
and third family reports (specifically, paragraph
51 of the second report and paragraph 46 of the third report).
have earlier set out the evidence relied upon by the mother in the proceedings
at first instance. She did not seek to rely upon
an affidavit filed on 13
November 2024 nor did she seek to rely upon material filed in support of an
Application in a Proceeding
filed on 1 November 2024.
Accordingly,
that evidence was not before the Court and, as such, there was no error on the
part of the primary judge in failing to
have regard to it.
Additionally,
I note that Counsel for the mother had the opportunity, during cross
examination, to put such material to the family
report writer as considered
necessary to correct any error contained in any of the reports of the family
report writer. That did
in respect to this sub-ground of appeal, it is not explained, by the mother, how
any perceived error in the reports of the
family report writer, were material to
the outcome of the proceedings.
Accordingly,
this sub-ground of appeal fails.
Sub ground 4(e)
e) The error in the record at paragraph 46 of the third
Family Report by Ms AA remains in error.
paragraph 46 of her third family report, Ms AA stated:
There is a current five-year Protection Order listing the father as the
respondent and the mother as the aggrieved with the child
and his older half
siblings as named children. This expires July 2026. There have been no formal
breaches of this Order.
relevant evidence in respect to the father's non-compliance with a protection
order was before the Court and is clarified by the
mother during her
cross-examination; the relevant exchange is set out below (Transcript, 21 August
2023, p. 11):
MS EVISTON: It’s still one of the risks that you continue to raise about
my client being a risk to the child in terms of domestic
MS JOSLYNE: Yes.
MS EVISTON: And you raise that on the basis of breaches of the domestic violence
MS JOSLYNE: I raise it on - based on a number of factors.
MS EVISTON: Ma'am, you raise it on the basis of breaches of domestic violence
MS JOSLYNE: That would be one of them.
MS EVISTON: And how many breaches has my client been charged with?
MS JOSLYNE: My understanding is he has been charged - sorry, charged and
convicted with one.
MS EVISTON: He has been charged and convicted with one in [early] 2022; you
would accept that?
MS JOSLYNE: Yes.
MS EVISTON: And he received no conviction recorded and a fine?
MS JOSLYNE: Yes. I believe there's a certificate of recognisance.
MS EVISTON: Sorry, yes. Correct. I withdraw my question. He did receive a good
behaviour bond in that regard. So you will accept
MS JOSLYNE: Yes.
MS EVISTON: And he didn't breach the good behaviour bond, did he?
MS JOSLYNE: Not to my knowledge, no.
MS EVISTON: And that was the last breach that he was charged with?
HIS HONOUR: Well, that's the only breach.
MS EVISTON: It's the only breach that he has been charged with. And that was
back in [early] 2022.
Thereafter,
the transcript records the mother attempting to explain why she advised the
family report writer of more recent occasions
where the respondent father had
breached a protection order. A fair characterisation of the evidence provided by
the mother is that
she believed there had been further breaches but that such
breaches were not confirmed by any evidence produced by the mother during
so far as the mother asserts error in paragraph 106 of the third family report,
she provided evidence to correct the record and
it rose no higher than the
father being convicted of breaching such an order in early 2022.
earlier noted, the primary judge acknowledged that a Protection Order was made
against the father on a "without admissions" basis
and, accordingly, the primary
judge gave no weight to its evidentiary value other than to the extent that the
father admitted certain
conduct referred to in the application for the
protection order.
primary judge did not accept the mother's evidence that the father had breached
the Protection Order on multiple occasions and
found the mother's numerous
complaints to that effect were baseless and aimed at frustrating the father's
relationship with the child
rather than protecting against genuine risk.
these reasons, in so far as there is error at paragraph 46 of the third Family
report, it is not an error that is material to
the outcome of the
Sub ground 4(f).
f) The error in the record at paragraph 51 of the
second Family Report by [Ms AA] filed 10 August 2022 remains in error.
AA’s only report of 2022 is dated 21 October 2022 not 10 August 2022. It
is assumed that this sub ground of appeal is intended
to refer to that report.
At paragraph 51 of that report Ms AA states:
The couple moved into live together formally late 2014 as Ms Joslyne accepted a
new position on the [City RR], the father then proposing
to her over the
Christmas period of the same year, 'I thought it .Vas sudden, but said yes
anyway ... it's only an engagement'.
mother has failed to identify how any error contained in that paragraph had a
material impact on the outcome of the proceedings.
I am wrong and the intention of the mother is to refer to paragraph 51 of the
second report of Ms AA dated 8 August 2023, then
the relevant paragraph is as
[Mr C] 44 years [...] advised he met the mother in August 2021, moving to live
together in November of 2022. He described their relationship
great, fresh. It’s different...clean. We talk. We’ve never
has conflicts. We have a lot in common’.
regard to that paragraph, it remains the case that the mother has failed to
specify the nature of the error or how any such
error was material to the
outcome of the case.
Accordingly,
this sub ground of appeal is without merit.
DISPOSITION
there is no merit in any of the appellant’s grounds of appeal, the appeal
must be dismissed.
respondent father sought an order for costs in the event of the appeal being
dismissed. That was opposed by the mother.
issue of costs in respect to proceedings under the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) ("the
") is to be determined in accordance with
That section relevantly provides that, ordinarily, each party will bear their
own costs in family law proceedings. However, the
Court may depart from this
position if it considers that the circumstances of the case justify the awarding
of costs in favour of
a party or parties. Those circumstances are set out in
and include the following:
(a) the financial circumstances of each party to the proceedings;
(b) whether any party to the proceedings is receiving assistance by way of legal
aid in respect of the proceedings and, if so, the
terms of the grant of the
assistance to that party;
(c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings
including, without limiting paragraphs (a) and (b),
the conduct of the parties
in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to
answer questions, admissions
of facts, production of documents and similar
matters, and in relation to their duty of disclosure under
subsections 71B(1)
(d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the
proceedings to comply with previous orders of the
(e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the
proceedings;
(f) whether a party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other
party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings
and the terms of any such
(g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.
Penfold v Penfold
(1980) 144 CLR 311
at 315, when considering the
equivalent section of the
, the Court held that beyond the "essential
preliminary" consideration of those matters set out above, there is no
"additional or
special onus" on the applicant, for the Court to make an order
considering whether it is appropriate and just to make an order for costs in
favour of a party, it is unnecessary for the Court
to be satisfied in respect to
each and every factor set out in
Fitzgerald v Fish
[2005] FamCA 158
(2005) 33 Fam
). Nor does any factor set out in that section have priority
over another (
Medlon & Medlon (No 6) (Indemnity Costs)
[2015] FamCAFC 157
opposing an order for costs, the mother referred to facing difficult financial
circumstances, primarily in respect to the litigation
in which she has been
involved with the father. I note, however, that, pursuant to property adjustment
orders made on 13 March 2025,
the mother will be entitled to receive a lump sum
amount of money. In any event, in
Cross & Beaumont
[2008] FamCAFC 68
(2008) 39 Fam LR
, the Full Court held that financial incapacity to pay a costs
order is not a barrier to the making of such an order where the conduct
party may warrant a costs order being made.
considering the question of costs, I note that an appellant who has been wholly
unsuccessful in their appeal will ordinarily be
required to pay the respondent's
Medlow & Medlow (No 2)
[2016] FamCAFC 63
satisfied that this course is appropriate in this matter, particularly where all
grounds of appeal have been found to be without
question then becomes whether the Court should award costs in a fixed sum as
sought by the respondent.
Rule 12.17(1)(a)
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) permits the Court to order
costs in a specific amount. The power to do so is to "avoid the expense, delay
and aggravation involved
in protracted litigation arising out of taxation"
Graham & Squibb
[2019] FamCAFC 33
(2019) FLC 93-892
Beach Petroleum
NL v Johnson (No 2)
(1995) 57 FCR 119
am satisfied that the costs sought by the respondent have been assessed at the
relevant scale at $21,657.46 and that such costs
are logical, fair and
reasonable.
acknowledge that there may be some time required for the property settlement
orders to be implemented and, on that basis, we will
require the appellant
mother to pay costs of the respondent in the fixed sum of $21,657.46 within 90
DISPOSITION
all of these reasons, the appeal is dismissed and the appellant mother is
required to pay costs of the respondent in the fixed
sum of $21,657.46 within 90
HOGAN & JARRETT JJ:
appellant, Ms Joslyne, appeals parenting orders made by a judge of the Federal
Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division
1) on 13 March 2025 in respect
of the parties’ only child. By those orders, the child lives primarily
with the respondent,
Mr Carrel. The child is to spend alternate weekend time,
generally from 5.00 pm on a Friday to 5.00 pm on a Sunday, or to 5.00 pm
in the event that it is a long weekend; and half of his school holidays with the
appellant. The respondent has the obligation
of an order for sole parental
responsibility for the child.
have the advantage of reading, in draft, the reasons of the Deputy Chief
Justice. We agree with the orders that his Honour proposes
for the disposition
of this appeal. These are our reasons for so doing.
her Amended Notice of Appeal filed on 4 July 2025, the appellant advances five
grounds of appeal. The grounds allege an error of
principle, errors of fact, a
failure to take into account certain material considerations as well as
assertions of apprehended bias
and a lack of procedural fairness. None of the
grounds have merit.
There was no appearance of bias or want of procedural
6 (which seems to be erroneously numbered because the Amended Notice of Appeal
only contains five grounds of appeal) has two
parts. The first asserts that the
trial judgment is infected by apprehended bias and the second that the primary
judge failed to
afford the appellant procedural fairness. These grounds are
difficult to follow and are not the subject of any submissions from the
appellant in her Summary of Argument filed on 4 July 2025.
establish a claim of apprehended bias, the appellant must show that a
fair-minded lay observer might reasonably apprehend that
the judge might not
bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the resolution of the question the
judge is required to decide (see
Johnson v Johnson
[2000] HCA 48
(2000) 201 CLR 488
). In order to succeed, the appellant must first identify what it is said
might lead the judge to decide a case other than on its
legal and factual merit
and then articulate the logical connection between that matter and the
apprehension that the judge will not
decide the case on its merits (
Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
in her Amended Notice of Appeal, her summary of argument nor her oral argument
does the appellant identify either of those
matters. In the absence of a clear
articulation of either, there is no basis for her to assert that the primary
judge’s decision
is impugned by reason of apprehended bias.
appellant asserts that a lack of procedural fairness arose in three ways. The
first relies upon the proposition that the primary
judge was somehow in error in
not taking into account an affidavit deposed by the appellant and filed on 13
November 2024.
his Honour was not in error. Judges make their decisions based upon the evidence
before them. In proceedings under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), evidence is
primarily given by affidavit. To become part of the body of evidence before the
court, an affidavit must be read
by the party seeking to rely upon it, its
contents otherwise adopted by the deponent as his or her evidence in the case,
or the affidavit
or relevant parts thereof tendered by an opposing party as
statements against interest or to prove a prior inconsistent statement.
affidavit at issue here falls into none of those categories. In the
circumstances explained by the Deputy Chief Justice, the
affidavit in question
was not before the court and did not form part of the body of evidence before
the primary judge. That being
so, his Honour was right to pay it no
second and third aspects of this part of Ground 6 point to the
respondent’s opposition to an Application in a Proceeding
filed by the
appellant on 30 October 2023 for an adjournment of the trial because she had
been diagnosed with a serious illness and,
she says, required urgent surgery.
It is difficult to understand the point of this ground in light of these
(a) The trial of the proceedings was to recommence on 22 November 2023 following
an adjournment of the proceedings by the primary
judge on 22 August 2023.
(b) The appellant filed an Application in a Proceeding on 30 October 2023 in
which she sought to adjourn the hearing of all future
court dates by three
months because her health was poor.
(c) In the same application she also sought further interim parenting orders
designed to limit the child’s time with the respondent,
for the time to be
supervised by a person other than the then appointed supervisor and that an
alternate Family Report writer be
appointed. She also sought some other orders.
(d) Insofar as the Application in a Proceeding sought an adjournment of future
hearing dates, it was heard and determined by the
primary judge on 1 November
2023. His Honour vacated the proposed resumption of the trial on 22 November
2023 to a date to be fixed
following the filing of some further evidence about
the appellant’s health and the arrangements for the child.
(e) The balance of the Application in a Proceeding was adjourned to be heard and
determined by another judge. Resumption of the part
heard trial was listed for 1
March 2024.
(f) When the matter recommenced before the primary judge on 1 March 2024, no
application was made by the appellant for the proceedings
to be further
adjourned for any reason.
Notwithstanding
that the adjournment sought by the appellant in her Application in a Proceeding
was granted, she argues that the primary
judge failed to take into account, in
his consideration of “systems abuse”, that the respondent opposed
the adjournment
application. Further she asserts that the primary judge did not
Family Law Act 1975
or Systems abuse in
relation to the withholding of consent by the father to jointly seek adjourning
proceedings”.
of these matters were raised by the appellant in the course of her
counsel’s submissions at the conclusion of the trial
before the primary
judge. Nothing was made of the fact that the respondent opposed the
appellant’s adjournment application
and, there is no evidence that any
particular prejudice flowed to her, or to the child for that matter, by reason
of the respondent’s
stance in relation to the adjournment
application.
ground of appeal has no merit.
A discretionary judgment
to the difficulty that ordinarily confronts an appeal against a discretionary
judgment, the first four grounds of appeal advanced
by the appellant seek to
engage the relevant principles identified in
House v The King
at 504–505. In particular, she argues that:
(a) the primary judge has acted upon a wrong
principle (Ground 1);
(b) the primary judge has made errors of fact (Ground 2);
(c) the primary judge has failed to take into account certain material
considerations (Ground 3); and
(d) upon the facts of the case, the primary judge’s orders are
unreasonable or plainly unjust (Ground 4).
The primary judge did not act upon a wrong principle
appellant does not particularise Ground 1 in her Amended Notice of Appeal other
than to assert, and repeat in her summary of argument,
that the primary judge
did not consider
as set out in her summary of argument), 4A or
as set out in her summary of argument) of the
considered the issues of family violence and risk that she had raised in the
is the general interpretation section of the
. It defines
many terms within the
, but for present purposes the definitions of
family violence
are relevant. That part of
dealing with
family violence
directs attention to
which, in turn,
provides a definition of
family violence
It provides
numerous examples of what will be within that definition in
is correct to say that the primary judge did not refer in terms to
However, it was unnecessary for him to do so. The definitions direct
attention to the behaviour of the party alleged to have perpetrated
family violence
and in most circumstances, to the effect of that
behaviour on others the subject of it. The evidence informs findings about that
behaviour such that, depending upon the allegations found proved by the court,
the court might reach a factual conclusion as to the
existence of the claimed
family violence
. But to do so does not require specific
reference or recitation in reasons for judgment of the text of each of those
sections. Rather,
what is necessary, within the context of the issues framed by
the parties for the court’s determination, is an application
provisions of the legislation to the facts found by the judge.
primary judge’s reasons demonstrate, with respect, an engagement with the
issues raised by the appellant and the evidence
she adduced to make good her
case on those issues. His Honour resolved the contentious issues of fact between
the parties to the
extent they needed resolution having regard to the issues as
they were finally formulated at the conclusion of the trial.
is clear from his Honour’s reasons that he understood the case that both
parties wished to make insofar as both asserted,
for different reasons, that the
child was at risk of harm in the care of the other by reason of the
other’s conduct. In particular,
the primary judge catalogued the
appellant’s allegations concerning the respondent’s conduct, said to
family violence
at [29]–[31], [44] and [58]–[60] of
his reasons. On this appeal, the appellant did not suggest that the primary
did not understand her case as it was put to him.
respondent conceded some of the appellant’s allegations concerning family
violence. The primary judge recorded these concessions
at [33] and [65] of his reasons. He made a finding
that the respondent perpetrated
family violence
on the occasions conceded
by him at [68]. The appellant does not cavil with this finding, notwithstanding
that the primary judge
did not refer to either
in terms when
the primary judge rejected the appellant’s evidence about the episodes of
conduct relied upon by her to establish
a case based upon
family violence
of the child by the respondent at [66]–[69] of his
her summary of argument, the appellant refers to
Leventis & Leventis (No
[2024] FedCFamC1F 143
–[91]. Her reliance on those passages
is, however, misplaced. The first recites orthodox statements concerning
statutory interpretation.
The second records the trial judge’s findings in
that case that one party had not proved the elements of the definition of
family violence
. Although those paragraphs represent an unremarkable
application of the facts as found by the court in that case to the applicable
law, they are of no assistance in resolving this appeal.
assuming that it was some failure of principle on the part of the primary judge
not to refer in terms to
, the argument is nonetheless
of no utility because in final submissions the orders proposed by the appellant
did not suppose that
the child was at any risk of harm by reason of exposure to
family violence or abuse from the respondent.
appellant has not demonstrated the primary judge acted upon a wrong
The primary judge did not make any errors of fact
her Amended Notice of Appeal, the appellant particularises two factual errors
made by the primary judge.
she submits that the primary judge erred when he stated at [202] of his reasons
that she had persistently failed to communicate
with the respondent about major
long-term decisions about child, “where there were no long-term decisions
[to be taken]”.
this argument cannot succeed. There was evidence to support the primary
judge’s finding. The appellant’s evidence
was that there was no
communication between she and the respondent at all. She said in
cross-examination that she had not communicated
with the respondent about
schools for the child (Consolidated Transcript 21 August 2023, p.14 lines
18-30). Further, the evidence
was that the appellant had failed to communicate
with the respondent about the child’s attendance upon a therapist and
paediatrician
(Consolidated Transcript 21 August 2023, p.14 lines 30–45
and 1 March 2024 p.29 line 30 to p.31 line 20) and that she had sought
the information provided by others to the respondent about the child (Exhibit
44). The finding made by the primary judge
was open on the evidence.
the appellant submits that the primary judge “erred on the facts at
paragraph 222 of Judgement in the reference to admissions
where there was a copy
of a Police Protection Notice evidencing the father’s admissions annexed
to the trial Affidavit of the
Applicant mother filed 16 July 2023 at pages 75
submission is misplaced. A little context about this is necessary. Following the
issue of a Police Protection Notice issued pursuant
Domestic and
Family Violence Protection Act 2012
(Qld) in May 2021 and a temporary
protection order, a subsequent final protection order was issued for a period of
five years in
mid- 2021 by a Magistrates Court of Queensland (referred to in
the primary judge’s reasons as “the DVO”).
[222] of his reasons the primary judge says:
I draw no inference from the DVO in circumstances where it was made on a without
admissions basis.
was not a finding of fact, let alone an error of fact. It was the primary judge
recording that he declined to draw an inference,
presumably a negative
inference, against the respondent from the fact of the existence of a protection
order alone. Nothing more
and nothing less.
insofar as the appellant, by this ground, submits that the primary judge did not
take into account the facts upon which the
relevant protection order was made,
the submission cannot be accepted. The Police Protection Notice issued in May
2021 was in evidence
before the primary judge.
of the notice sets out
the grounds for a protection order and it purports to record a number of events
upon which the notice is based
and the respondent’s acceptance of most of
those events when they were put to him by the police. The respondent was
cross-examined
conceded them. Those events were the basis of the concessions referred
primary judge at [33] and [65] and which led, in part, to the findings made by
the primary judge at [68] of his reasons.
To the extent that the respondent did
not accept that he made certain admissions to police, as recorded in the notice,
the primary
judge accepted his denials.
appellant does not demonstrate that the primary judge has made any factual
The primary judge took into account all material
are three matters particularised in Ground 3 of the appellant’s Amended
Notice of Appeal, said to be material to the primary
judge’s decision,
that the appellant submits his Honour did not take into account.
to the first, the appellant repeats and relies upon the submissions she made in
respect of Ground 1 of her Amended Notice of Appeal.
She argues that the primary
judge’s failure to specifically refer to
failure by him to take into account a material consideration. For the reasons
set out above, we reject that argument.
second matter, said to be a failure to take into account a material
consideration, arises in the following context. At [215] the
primary judge
expressed the finding that the appellant had “consistently over the course
of the litigation contacted the police
and other authorities on numerous
occasions with I am satisfied the aim of attempting to persuade them to
investigate the father
with the aim of disrupting if not ending the child and
parent relationship and in almost every instance they were baseless
allegations”.
At [216] his Honour expressed the view that the appellant
had persisted in that endeavour throughout the litigation and, to that
sought an order in her Amended Initiating Application filed on 13 November 2024
that she have leave to provide the documents
in the case, the orders and
correspondence to the Queensland Police Service and lawyers for the purposes of
“investigating
criminal breaches of the Domestic Violence Order commencing
proceeding in State Courts”.
at [217] the primary judge says:
Beyond her assertion, there is not a scintilla of evidence that the police have
requested this information. As a [professional in
her own business], she would
know that the police could at any time contact the court to access court files.
I am satisfied this
request was done with the hope that the police might investigate one of her
baseless allegations with the aim
to frustrate and ‘thwart’ a
relationship between the child and the father.
There is a significant risk
that she will in the future continue to make baseless complaints.
(Emphasis added)
appellant argues that in reaching the conclusion set out in the emphasised
portion of [217] above, the primary judge has failed
to take into
consideration:
(a) previous “Protection Orders” made in another state;
(b) the finding of “Child Protection Queensland” to the effect that
the child had been exposed to emotional harm by the
respondent; and
(c) the respondent pleading guilty to breach of a Protection Order.
the extent that the appellant argues that the primary judge should not have made
a finding set out in the emboldened portion of
[217] above, her argument cannot
be accepted. To succeed on an argument that the trial judge has made an error of
fact (for that
is what she must argue to attack that finding) she must
demonstrate that there was no evidence upon which the primary judge could
that finding. As the reasons of the Deputy Chief Justice demonstrate, there was
ample evidence however, upon which the primary
judge could reach that
conclusion.
to the extent that the appellant argues that the primary judge gave no
consideration to the matters we have set out above,
even if one was to accept
that was so, the primary judge’s failure to take those matters into
account could not be considered
material in circumstances where the appellant
abandoned her claim that the respondent represented a risk of harm, unacceptable
otherwise, to the child.
third particular relied upon by the appellant to support Ground 3 is an asserted
failure by the primary judge to take into consideration
a finding of existing
emotional harm made by “Child Protective Services, Queensland” when
“assessing impact of
separation from siblings or the mother as primary
carer”. The appellant argues that the primary judge did not
the involvement and finding of Child Protection and/or any
referrals made in relation to Family Violence”. She refers to documents
annexed to her affidavit filed on 15 July 2023. Those documents do not make out
her assertion but consist of records from an organisation
upon which the child
had attended under a NDIS plan.
Nonetheless,
the material that the appellant argues ought to have been
“referenced” (by which we assume she means accepted)
by the primary
judge was but part of the evidence before the primary judge. The primary judge
set out clearly in his reasons for
judgment why he rejected the
appellant’s evidence about important events, including her claims about
family violence. He carefully
considered the potential effects upon the child of
the orders proposed by the respondent in light of that evidence. The
appellant’s
submissions do not establish that the primary judge failed to
take into account matters that were material to the outcome of the
application.
The primary judge’s orders are not unreasonable or
plainly unjust
appellant asserts in the Amended Notice of Appeal that the primary judge’s
orders are reasonable or plainly unjust because
he failed to take into
consideration:
(a) the affidavit filed by the appellant on 13 November 2024;
(b) that issues were raised as to the existence of evidence in the affidavit of
the appellant filed 1 November 2024, 13 November
2024 at paragraphs 15, 16, 17
and 20 November 2024 concerning errors of fact in the third Family Report at
paragraph 46 and the second
Family Report at paragraph 51;
(c) the fact that the psychologist for the respondent “was not cross
examined as to the material relied upon by the father
to verify credibility,
test evidence relied upon or investigate the Respondents insight regarding
Family Violence and considerations
of Family Violence pursuant to the
Cmwlth”; and
(d) that evidence to correct errors in the record and Family Reports were
filed/served and a further Application in a Proceeding
(filed 1 November 2024)
was filed to bring the issue of errors in evidence to the attention of the
she points to two errors, the first “in the record” at paragraph 51
of the second family report and the second
in paragraph 46 of the third family
report, both of which were in evidence before the primary judge. She does not
identify the errors
that she says needs to be corrected.
written submissions do not advance these assertions in any material way. Rather
than advancing her argument that the primary judge’s
unreasonable or plainly unjust, these grounds as articulated in the Amended
Notice of Appeal and in her Summary of Argument
advance a grab-bag of grounds
asserting a failure to consider material matters, errors of fact and perhaps a
want of procedural fairness.
Whatever the case, the grounds cannot succeed for
these reasons:
(a) the affidavits deposed by the appellant and filed on 1 November 2024 and 13
November 2024 were the subject of discussion before
the primary judge at the
resumption of the trial on 29 January 2025. Neither were relied upon by the
(b) counsel for the appellant told the primary judge that the respondent’s
psychologist was not required for cross-examination.
In those circumstances she
cannot now make complaint about that course;
(c) the appellant cannot be heard to complain that the primary judge did not
consider that she had filed evidence to correct what
she alleges were factual
errors in the trial evidence when her counsel did not press the reception of
that evidence;
(d) the assertion that there is error “in the record” at paragraph
51 of the second family report is not made out. The
second family report, dated
8 August 2023 says:
51. Mr C 44 years, advised he met the mother in August 2021, moving to live
together in November of 2022. He described their relationship
as 'great, fresh.
It's different ... clean. We talk. We've never had conflicts. We have a lot in
Even if there is some factual error in the above passage, it is not readily
apparent why any error is material to the primary judge’s
decision; and
(e) the assertion that there is error in paragraph 46 of the third family report
is also not made out on the appellant’s argument.
The third family report,
dated 23 February 2024, is styled as an update of the report dated 8 August
2023. In that paragraph, the
report writer recites the protection order between
the parties and that “There have been no formal breaches of this
It is accepted that this statement was an error. But the appellant
corrected it in the course of her cross-examination, which established
respondent had been the subject of one breach proceeding that resulted in a
sanction being imposed upon him. However, there
is nothing to suggest that the
primary judge was not alive to this evidence or that the misstatement of the
position in the updated
family report was in any way material to the orders that
the primary judge made.
DISPOSITION AND COSTS
appeal must be dismissed.
agree with the orders proposed by the Deputy Chief Justice with respect to costs
and the reasons for those orders.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
seventy-seven (177) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
Judgment of
Deputy Chief Justice McClelland and Honourable Justices Hogan and
Dated: 31 October
RTF format (770 KB)
Signed PDF/A format