Trescott & Trescott [2025] FedCFamC2F 1111 (14 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Trescott & Trescott
[2025] FedCFamC2F
File number(s):
SYC 9156 of 2023
Judgment of:
JUDGE SHOEBRIDGE
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– CHILDREN – Final
parenting orders –Whether the child should travel overseas to spend time
with the father –
Logistics of the child travelling overseas – Best
interests of the child – Risk – Family violence – Father
convicted of assaulting the mother – Coercive and controlling behaviour
– Father’s relationship with other daughter
broken down
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
Blinko & Blinko
[2015] FamCAFC 146
Fitzwater & Fitzwater
(2019) 60 Fam LR 212
[2019] FamCAFC
Hardie & Capris
[2010] FamCA 1046
Isles & Nelissen
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
Mazorski & Albright
[2007] FamCA 520
Napier & Hepburn
[2006] FamCA 1316
Olivier & Olivier
[2020] FamCA 639
Pickford & Pickford
70 Fam LR 85
FedCFamC1A 249
(2000) 25 Fam LR 712
[2000] FamCA 43
Sweet & Sweet
[2022] FedCFamC2F 676
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submissions:
Date of hearing:
24 – 26 February 2025
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr T. Hodgson
Solicitor for the Applicant:
O’Sullivan Legal
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr T. Jackson
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Gad & Co Lawyers
SYC 9156 of 2023
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
MR TRESCOTT
MS TRESCOTT
JUDGE SHOEBRIDGE
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1 to 14 of the Orders made by consent on 14 March 2018 are hereby discharged.
Decision Making
mother has sole responsibility for all major long term decisions in respect of
the children X, born in 2010, and Y, born in 2012,
provided that before any such
decision is made:
(a) the mother or her nominee is to contact the father in writing and provide
her views about any such issue; and
(b) the father is to respond to the mother or her nominee (whoever made contact
communication setting out, if
he so chooses, his views in relation to the issue; and
(c) the mother and father are to make a genuine effort to come to a joint
decision about any such issue; and
(d) if no agreement is reached between the parties, then within 14 days, the
mother is at liberty to make the final decision and
advise the father in writing
of her decision about the issue.
Therapy for the Father
father is to enrol in, and complete, a Men’s Changing Behaviour
father is to advise the mother when he enrols in that course.
father is to provide to the mother documentary evidence that he has successfully
completed that course.
father is at liberty to produce a copy of these Orders and the accompanying
Reasons for Judgment to any therapist that he engages
with, whether that be in
relation to the Men’s Changing Behaviour course or otherwise.
mother is at liberty to produce a copy of these Orders and the accompanying
Reasons for Judgment to any therapist that she engages
with, and to any person
that is engaged to provide therapy to either child.
Arrangements for X and Y
and Y are to live with the mother.
is to spend time with or communicate with the father in accordance with her
otherwise agreed in writing, Y is to spend time with the father in Australia as
(a) until such time as the father produces to the mother documentary evidence
that he has successfully completed a Men’s Changing
Behaviour course:
(i) on any weekend that the father is in Australia, for a period of up to four
hours, at a supervised contact centre, or otherwise
supervised by such person as
the parties agree to in writing; and
(b) upon the father producing to the mother documentary evidence that he has
successfully completed a Men’s Changing Behaviour
(i) for a period of 2 weeks during the school holidays at the end of term 2 in
each year; and
(ii) for a period of 21 days during the school holidays at the end of term 4
each year from 10 January to 31 January; and
(iii) on any other occasion when the father is in Australia, from after school
on Friday until the commencement of school on Monday
provided that:
such period is only to take place if the father remains in Australia for that
weekend; and
father is to collect Y from school on Friday afternoon. If Y is not at school
on that day for any reason, then changeover is
to take place at 3.00pm at the
Suburb B Supermarket; and
father is to deliver Y to school on Monday morning. If Y is not at school on
that day for any reason, then changeover is to take
place at 9.00am at the
Suburb B Supermarket; and
any occasion that the father intends to spend time with either child in
accordance with these Orders, he is to provide the mother
with no less than 60
days notice of his intention to do so. For the sake of clarity:
(a) that notice is not to be communicated through either child; and
(b) that notice is to be provided in relation to school holiday time and weekend
Overseas travel
child is to travel overseas with the father unless that is agreed to in writing
by the mother.
the purpose of any international travel by Y:
(a) no later than 90 days prior to the intended travel, the party proposing the
travel shall provide written notice to the other
party of the intended travel
(b) no later than 60 days prior to the intended travel, the party proposing the
travel shall provide a full itinerary of the proposed
travel, inclusive of
departure and return dates, places of travel, and proposed flights and
accommodation, and furnish the other
party with copies of return airline
tickets, travel insurance policies, confirmed addresses of accommodation and a
upon which the party proposing travel and the child may be
(c) the party proposing travel shall be responsible for the payment (or either
of them) flights, accommodation, and other expenses
during the travel; and
(d) the mother is to hold the passport of both children.
Family Therapy
the father providing to the mother documentary evidence that he has successfully
completed a Men’s Changing Behaviour program,
and only in the event that X
expresses a wish to do so, the parties are to do all acts and things and sign
all documents necessary
to engage Dr C (or such other family therapist as agreed
between the parties) for the purposes of family therapy taking place between
and the father on the following terms:
(a) the father is to bear the full costs of the family therapy; and
(b) whilst X remains willing to attend family therapy and the family therapist
recommends that the family therapy continue, the parties
are to use their best
endeavours to ensure that X attends all scheduled appointments and follows all
recommendations of the family
father is to ensure that Y attend any extra-curricular activities that she is
enrolled into, or any school related events that
occur outside of school hours,
when she is in the father's care.
mother is to do all such acts and things and sign all authorities necessary to
authorise each of the children's schools to provide
to the father documents and
information in writing relevant to both children, including but not limited
(a) the children's school reports; and
(b) notice of school photographs; and
(c) circulars sent to parents; and
(d) notices of school excursions; and
(e) any other activities in which the children are participants.
parties are to do all things necessary and provide all such authorities
necessary to any medical practitioner, specialist, orthodontist
and/or any other
health professional as may be necessary to enable the other party to obtain
particulars in relation to the children's
father is hereby restrained from consuming alcohol in excess of the prescribed
legal driving limit or taking any illicit substances
within 24 hours of the time
when both or either of the children shall commence to spend with him or when
both or either of the children
are spending time with him. It is noted that the
father’s consent to this Order is on a without admissions basis.
parties are hereby restrained from denigrating the other party to the children
or in the presence of the children.
the event that either party refuses or neglects to do all acts and things and
sign any document necessary to give effect to these
Orders then pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) a Registrar of this Court is hereby
appointed to execute all documents in the name of either party and do all acts
necessary to give validity and operation to the said
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
proceedings are primarily about the parenting arrangements for Y, who was born
in 2012, and is 12 years old at the time of this
Judgment. I will refer to her
as "Y" in these Reasons.
Applicant in this matter is Y's father, Mr Trescott. The Respondent is Y's
mother, Ms Trescott.
has a sister, X, who is 15 years old. Final Parenting Orders were made in
relation to both X and Y on 14 March 2018.
relationship with her father is poor. The parties agree that she should only
see him if she wishes to, and that there should
be family therapy to address the
father/daughter relationship, but only if X wishes to participate in that.
father lives in Town D, Country E. He would like for Y to travel to Country E
or the USA to spend time with him. The mother
opposes that. Though there are
other issues, that is the key tension in this matter.
father and mother agree that circumstances have changed sufficiently since the
existing parenting orders were made to justify
setting them aside and making new
parenting orders (see Notation C of the Orders made on 20 May 2024). I am
satisfied that it is
appropriate to reconsider the final orders pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”) and
would have found that there was sufficient change under
s 65DAAA(2)
AGREED ORDERS
parties have handed up a Joint Minute setting out:
(a) the Orders that are agreed; and
(b) the Orders that are not agreed; and
(c) where there is disagreement, the Orders contended for by each party.
That document was received into evidence and is Exhibit C2.
agreed Orders are summarised as follows:
(a) Orders 1 to 14 of the Orders made on 14 March 2018 be discharged; and
(b) the mother is to have the sole responsibility for making all major long term
decisions for X and Y; and
(c) X is to live with the mother and spend time with the father in accordance
with her wishes; and
(d) there are a number of logistical orders that are agreed, if Y is to travel
overseas to spend time with the father; and
(e) there is to be family therapy involving X and the father, if X wishes to
participate in that; and
(f) the father is to take Y to her extracurricular activities when she is
spending time with him in Australia; and
(g) where changeovers take place in Australia, at times when the father is not
collecting Y from school or dropping her to school,
that changeover is to take
place at Suburb B Supermarket; and
(h) the mother is to authorise both girls’ schools to provide to the
father school reports, photo slips, etc; and
(i) the father submits to an injunction in relation to his consumption of
alcohol around the times when Y spends time with him.
He does so without
admissions for the need to; and
(j) Orders regarding communication about medical practitioners treating the
children and the like.
ISSUES IN DISPUTE
issues that remain in dispute are:
(a) whether or not Y should be able to spend time with the father overseas;
(b) if Y does spend time with the father overseas, there are issues relating to
the length of notice that the father has to give
to the mother prior to each of
those occasions commencing, the amount of the security bond that the father
should have to put up,
and various other logistical issues; and
(c) the time periods that Y can spend time with the father in Australia; and
(d) whether or not the father should be ordered to undertake a Men’s
Behavioural Change Course; and
(e) whether or not the time that Y spends with the father should be supervised
until such time as the father completes a Men’s
Behavioural Change Course;
(f) if Y spends time with the father that concludes on Monday mornings, whether
the father delivers Y to school, or to the mother
at Suburb B Supermarket at
parties were represented by a solicitor and counsel at trial.
father relies upon the following documents:
(a) Amended Application for Final Orders filed on 18 June 2024; and
(b) Affidavit of the father filed on 21 February 2025; and
(c) the Family Report from the prior proceedings dated 28 August 2016; and
(d) the updated Family Report from the prior proceedings dated 8 January 2018.
mother relies upon the following documents:
(a) Amended Response to Final Orders filed on 14 January 2025; and
(b) Affidavit of the mother filed on 17 January 2025.
parties relied upon Case Outlines, which were Exhibit F1 and Exhibit M1
respectively.
was Single Expert evidence in the form of a Family Report prepared by Ms F
(“Ms F”) dated 10 September 2024. Ms
F is a social worker and is a
Regulation 7
Family Consultant. Her Report was received into evidence as
Exhibit C1.
addition to the above, the father tendered the following documents:
(a) a copy of SMS text messages between himself and X (“Exhibit
(b) an extract from NSW police records (“Exhibit F3”); and
(c) Advice of Court Results in relation to Local Court at Suburb G
(“Exhibit F4”); and
(d) Child Impact Report dated 2 May 2024 (“Exhibit F5”).
parents were both cross-examined. The Report Writer, Ms F, was also
cross-examined.
trial was heard over three days, commencing on 24 February 2025. Whilst I have
not referred to every aspect of the evidence,
I have taken it all into account
and considered it.
were a number of factual matters in dispute that I have had to determine.
Section 140
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) sets out that the standard of
proof in these proceedings is to a balance of probabilities and in what follows,
statements of
fact constitute findings of fact.
parties commenced living together in 2006 and were married in 2007.
was born in 2010.
early 2011, the father was convicted for common assault of the mother. He was
sentenced to a supervision order, was required to
undertake counselling, and an
ADVO was put in place for 12 months.
was born in 2012.
parties separated on 20 December 2013.
early 2014, the father was convicted for assault occasioning actual bodily harm
of the mother. He was fined and sentenced to a
good behaviour bond. Another
ADVO was put in place.
mid-2014, the father was found to have breached the ADVO then in place to
protect the mother, and guilty of using a carriage service
to menace, harass and
offend the mother. On that occasion he was fined $500.
late 2014, the father was convicted for possession or attempt to possess
anabolic steroids. He received a fine of $400.
mid-2016, the father was found guilty of aggravated robbery and common assault.
The victim on that occasion was an employee of
the mother. He was placed on a
good behaviour bond.
14 March 2018, final parenting orders were made by consent. They are summarised
as follows:
(a) the mother has sole parenting responsibility for both children; and
(b) both children live with the mother; and
(c) the children spend time with the father for five nights per fortnight and
half school holidays; and
(d) there was provision for both of the parents to travel overseas with the
children, subject to conditions.
seems to be agreed that both children spent time with the father in accordance
with the 2018 Orders until July 2020.
March 2020, the father let the mother know that his then partner may have
contracted Covid. The mother withheld the children accordingly.
later advised that his partner did not have Covid, and insisted upon the
children coming into his care. The mother did
not agree and the father called
the police, alleging that the mother had "kidnapped" the children. The children
resumed seeing the
father on 8 April 2020.
June and July 2020, X expressed opposition to seeing her father. She left
school early on 23 July 2020 and went to the mother's
time with the father per the Orders. The father attended at the mother's
address. There is disagreement
it is not in dispute that the police attended and that the father again
that the mother had "kidnapped" X.
saw a therapist between June 2020 and February 2021. That therapy appears to
have been a consequence of the difficulties in her
relationship with the
22 November 2020, for the first time since the Covid pandemic caused lockdowns,
the mother was able to attend at her work at H
Company. The mother was unable
to secure a babysitter. The two girls did not want to sit in the café at
her work, for fear
of catching Covid. They stayed in the mother's car. She
says that the car was unlocked, and that they came into the building to
toilet. They had their iPads, snacks and pillows. The father became aware of
that arrangement and called the police, who
attended and interviewed the mother
in front of the children. She says that the children were crying and asked if
she was going
did not see the father between October 2021 and January 2022.
November 2021, the father tested positive to a roadside alcohol test. He
refused to submit to a drug test and fled the scene.
He was eventually arrested
at his unit after physical altercations with police. He was found guilty in
early 2024 of not driving
the correct way in a roundabout, refusing or failing
to submit to an oral fluid test and resisting an officer in the execution of
duty. He received a fine of $1,050.
were then a series of events relating primarily to X that I will deal with later
in these reasons. In February 2023, X stopped
seeing her father.
March 2023, the father advised the mother that he was planning to relocate to
Country E. His own father was ill and was to receive
treatment in Country E.
He moved in late 2023.
mother was not meaningfully challenged on any of the above historical events and
I accept that the events have occurred as described
RELEVANT LEGAL PRINCIPLES
Parenting Generally
principles governing the determination of competing parenting applications are
of the Act.
essence, when making a parenting order, the Court must consider what is in the
best interests of the child pursuant to s 60CA,
but, as succinctly put by Murphy
Hardie & Capris
[2010] FamCA 1046
“Best interests” is not the application of a theoretical construct
but, rather, the practical application of a number
of considerations relevant to
the individual needs, desires, health and aspirations of the particular child or
children of this particular
parenting relationship.
Act specifies six matters which must be considered in determining what is in the
child’s best interests at s 60CC(2). The
matters to be considered
(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(a), the court must consider the following
(a) what arrangements would promote the safety (including safety from being
subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, abuse,
neglect, or other harm) of:
(i) the child;
(ii) each person who has care of the child (whether or not a person has parental
responsibility for the child);
(b) any views expressed by the child;
(c) the developmental, psychological, emotional and cultural needs of the
(d) the capacity of each person who has or is proposed to have parental
responsibility for the child to provide for the child’s
developmental,
psychological, emotional and cultural needs;
(e) the benefit to the child of being able to have a relationship with the
child’s parents, and other people who are significant
to the child, where
it is safe to do so;
(f) anything else that is relevant to the particular circumstances of the child.
contemplating these matters, s 60CC(2A) of the Act requires the Court to
(a) any history of family violence, abuse or neglect involving the child or a
person caring for the child (whether or not the person
had parental
responsibility for the child); and
(b) any family violence order that applies or has applied to the child or a
member of the child's family.
The Wishes of the Child
weight to be given to any views expressed by a child is as the Court considers
appropriate in the circumstances. As held in
[2000] FamCA 43
(2000) 25 Fam LR
...There are many factors that may go to the weight that should be given to the
wishes of children and these will vary from case
to case and it is undesirable
and indeed impossible to catalogue or confine them in the manner
...What is required is that they be given appropriate and careful consideration
and not simply treated as a factor in the determination
of the child's best
interests without giving them further
significance...
Family Violence
the recent decision of
Pickford & Pickford
[2024] FedCFamC1A 249
(2024) 70 Fam LR 85
”), Aldridge and Carew JJ considered what violence
is, in the context of the Act.
commenced by reference to the definition of violence in s 4AB of the Act.
Sub-section
4AB(1) of the Act defines family violence to include violent, threatening or
other behaviour that coerces or controls
a member of the family, or causes that
member to be fearful.
reproduce the contents of s 4AB(2) below for convenience:
(2) Examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are
not limited to):
(a) an assault; or
(b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour; or
(c) stalking; or
(d) repeated derogatory taunts; or
(e) intentionally damaging or destroying property; or
(f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal; or
(g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she
would otherwise have had; or
(h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable
living expenses of the family member, or his or her
child, at a time when the
family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial
support; or
(i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or
her family, friends or culture; or
(j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family
member’s family, of his or her liberty.
Coercive and Controlling Conduct
Full Court decision of
also offers considerable guidance in
relation to the issue of coercive and controlling conduct.
[14]–[22] of that decision, McClelland DCJ explores the notion of whether
or not it is necessary to prove intention on the
part of the person who is
alleged to have acted in a coercive and controlling manner. His Honour
concludes that it is not necessary,
and explains why it is the conduct, and the
consequences of the conduct, that inform the decision making process under Part
Honour also concludes that it is not satisfactory to find that coercive and
controlling conduct has taken place merely because
it is the perception of one
party that it has.
relevant, that perception is not, of itself, determinative.
and Carew JJ also dealt with the issue of intention at [44]–[51], and also
conclude that when it comes to allegations
of coercive or controlling conduct,
it is not necessary to prove that it was intended that the conduct would be
coercive or controlling.
Whilst intention may be relevant, the focus of the
fact-finding process is on the behaviour and the impact of the behaviour. Once
such behaviour has been identified, it is then a question of what weight is to
be given to it and any impact on the orders under
consideration.
and Williams JJ held that the mother’s perception of the father’s
conduct were irrelevant to the issue of family
violence if his conduct could not
objectively be considered to be coercive or
controlling.
Honours observed at [109] that the definition of family violence in s 4AB(1)
means that “violent, threatening or other
behaviour” amounts to
family violence in only one of two ways:
(a) the behaviour coerces or controls; or
(b) the behaviour causes the family member to be fearful.
Honours confirmed that the alleged perpetrator’s intention to exert
influence over and to dominate the alleged victim
may very well be decisive, but
is not an essential ingredient of a finding of family violence taking the form
of coercion or control.
in the context of making the other family member fearful, the intention of the
perpetrator to cause fear may very well
be present, but it does not necessarily
have to be.
DCJ said in
at [31] about coercive and controlling
Fundamentally, determining whether behaviour constitutes coercive or controlling
conduct requires deeper evaluation than simply a
party’s experience or
perception — as relevant as that may be. In that context, I commend and
respectfully adopt the
following analysis provided by Gill J in
[2020] FamCA 639
where his Honour observed at [51]–[52]:
It should be accepted that the definition of family violence goes well beyond
physical assaults to encompass behaviours that, absent
context may appear
innocuous, but in context may be examples of coercion or control. However, the
mere assertion that the conduct
has the quality of being coercive or controlling
does not make it so. It is necessary that the evidence, particularly where the
is ambiguous and may bear an innocuous explanation, be sufficient to
allow a characterisation of coercion or control.
By way of example, a pattern of disagreements and criticism can form controlling
or coercive behaviour. Whether they do or not must
be derived from consideration
of their form, intensity, context and the impact upon a person. The mere fact of
disagreement or criticism
does not automatically equate to family violence.
the decision of McClelland DCJ in
Sweet & Sweet
[2022] FedCFamC2F 676
”), his Honour neatly summarised the issues in
unacceptable risk. In summary, his Honour indicated at [55]:
It is now well established that “unacceptable risk” does not arise
solely in respect of allegations of physical or sexual
“test” of “unacceptable risk” also requires assessments
of risk of future physical and emotional
[1998] FamCA 25
...an unacceptable risk can include any or all matters that compromise the
safety, welfare and well-being of a child, and is examined
in light of an
accumulation of factors proved: see
Director-General, Department of Family
and Community Services (NSW) v Colt Children
[2013] NSWChC 5 at
[146]–[148].
Isles & Nelissen
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
, the Full Court discussed the
assessment that the Court must make when considering whether or not there is an
unacceptable risk.
The Full Court clearly stated that the assessment of risk is
an entirely separate task to making findings of fact. The Court must
findings of fact based on the balance of probabilities. A risk assessment is a
predictive exercise. The risk may be a possibility,
probability, or a
the Court identifies the existence of an unacceptable risk, it is then necessary
for the Court to assess whether that risk is able
to be sufficiently managed or
ameliorated.
Napier & Hepburn
[2006] FamCA 1316
, the Full Court emphasised that it
is not for the Court to find a solution which eradicates the chance of serious
harm. Rather,
the Court must balance the harm that will follow if the risk is
not minimised or removed as against a normal, healthy parent-child
relationship
not being permitted to flourish.
Fitzwater & Fitzwater
[2019] FamCAFC 251
(2019) 60 Fam LR 212
, Austin J said
[138] The assessment of risk is a predictive exercise and while it is, naturally
enough, liable to be influenced by factual findings
contemplation of risk entails the foresight of
harm. It is an
oddity to expect that the mere
possibility
of future harm can or should
be proven as a
probability
, as has been implied before. Risks of harm
must be heeded even if they are improbable eventualities.
[139] Speaking of the risk of some future occurrence is just another way of
expressing the chance of it happening. The concept of
chance lies along a
continuum, encompassing all outcomes which lie in the range between highly
probable and remotely possible, assuming
the polar extremes of certainty are
ignored. In the current context, the higher the chance of the children’s
sexual abuse,
the greater the risk of their physical or psychological harm. At
some point on the continuum the risk of such harm becomes so potent
it cannot be
tolerated: it is unacceptable.
challenge in this case, is to weigh the relationship that these children could
have with their father against the risk that that
relationship presents.
is clearly necessary to identify the existence of risk, and to then assess
whether that risk "is able to be sufficiently managed
ameliorated".
Meaningful Relationship
concept of "a meaningful relationship" has been discussed in many authorities,
most significantly the decision of Brown J in
Mazorski & Albright
[2007] FamCA 520.
Those authorities establish that "a meaningful
relationship" is a qualitative concept. The relationship is not measured simply
by the amount of time the child is spending with each parent, but the quality of
the relationship that exists between the child and
said that, it is much more difficult for a young child to maintain a meaningful
relationship if they are unable to spend time
with both parents on a regular
basis. Electronic interaction via Skype or Facetime is better than no
communication, but it is no
replacement for personal interaction, physical
affection and for a child being able to communicate freely with his
CONSIDERATION OF THE ISSUES
Travel to Country E
mother’s reasons for opposing Y travelling to Country E can be summarised
as follows:
(a) she has concerns about the logistics of the proposed travel in the context
of the father’s lack of transparency around
finances; and
(b) she says that there are risks to Y’s physical and mental health
associated with spending time with the father, and worries
capacity to assist Y if her health suffers whilst she is overseas; and
(c) she worries about the physical safety of Y associated with the travel
itself; and
(d) she has concerns about any impact that such travel might have on the
relationship between Y and X.
relation to logistics, the concerns raised by the mother are that:
(a) the father is in arrears of child support; and
(b) he has been in arrears of child support consistently since his move to
Country E; and
(c) the father’s proposals regarding travel involve flights that would
cost tens of thousands of dollars per year; and
(d) the father has not been as transparent as he could have been about his
finances; and
(e) he has not adequately explained how he would pay for the travel that he
contends for.
father was born in the USA. He is 53 years old. He describes his occupation in
his affidavit as "self-employed transport worker"
(Father’s affidavit
filed 21 February 2025, paragraph 2).
nature of his employment was explored in cross-examination. He says that he is
in fact a director of an Australian based company
that is in the business of
"[transport]".
is no evidence in his affidavit in relation to the father's business or the
income that he derives from that business. I note
that the mother's concern
February 2025.
his affidavit filed 21 February 2025 at paragraph 63, the father says that he
paid $5,000 in order to address a potential Departure
Prohibition Order. He
says that he had correspondence at that time that said that his arrears were
cross-examination the father was asked about child support. He conceded
(a) he is presently in arrears of child support in an amount of approximately
$3,000; and
(b) he is consistently in arrears of child support. He later gave a different
response and said that he was only consistently in
arrears in the last few
(c) as at September 2024, his arrears were closer to $6,000; and
(d) he has previously been the subject of threats of Departure Prohibition
Orders in relation to child support arrears; and
(e) he pays child support "when he has the means"; and
(f) his income is variable, and there are times when he has no income.
said that he was in arrears in relation to child support because it "has been in
dispute". There is no evidence in relation to
that "dispute". He did say, in
response to a question asked of him, that he does not wish to pay child support
for X as she does
not want to see him.
relation to child support the father described himself as “diligent and
behind”. I reject the description by the father
of himself as
“diligent” when it comes to paying child support.
father was asked questions about the costs of the flights that he is contending
for. He advances no evidence in chief about that.
(a) the flights that he has in mind for Y would include a flight to City J, USA,
and then a further flight to Town D, Country E;
(b) the flights between Sydney and City J are about $4,000 return; and
(c) the cost of flights between Town D, Country E and City J, USA vary
"depending upon the season". He spent $1,000 one way the
last time he took that
flight; and
(d) in total, on average, the costs of flights is about $4,000 to $5,000 return;
(e) if the father flies to Australia to collect Y, and then flies with her when
she returns, the overall cost of flights alone is
therefore about $12,000 to
$15,000; and
(f) he wants to do that two times per year, so costs of flights alone are in the
order of $24,000 to $30,000.
father was asked questions about his business. He gave oral evidence
(a) he is paid about $52,000 per annum from the business after tax; and
(b) he is not sure of the current state of the company's finances. He said it
is a private company and he does not even know what
the company earned last
(c) he engages an accountant to handle the financial records of the company;
(d) he has made no effort to put evidence in relation to his company’s
finances before the Court.
father accepted that his current child support assessment is approximately
$11,800 per year. He accepted that medical costs are
higher in the USA and in
Country E than in Australia. The father said in cross-examination that if he
were to see Y in Australia,
accommodation and meals would cost more than the
cost of the travel that he contends for. There is no evidence to support that
and I do not accept it.
relation to the father's choice to live in Country E, he says that his father is
very ill, with a number of ailments including
a terminal illness. His father
had treatment in City K, Country E, but now lives in L State, USA.
father says that because he lives in Country E, the arrangements provided for in
the 2018 Orders are unworkable. He expressly
refers to the school term and
school holiday arrangements, and also to the orders relating to overseas travel
set out in Order 13
of those Orders. Whilst it is obvious why the father says
that the school term time is unworkable, it is less clear why the school
arrangements, or the overseas travel arrangements are said to be unworkable. In
any event, the fact that the Orders are
unworkable at all in relation to Y is
because the father has chosen to live in Town D, Country E.
gives scant evidence of the living circumstances in Town D, Country E. He said
in response to a question that he is "living rough".
His father lives in the
USA and the father says that he chooses to continue to live in Town D, Country E
because it is more affordable
than living in the USA (Father’s affidavit
filed 21 February 2025, paragraph 49). I find this aspect of the father's
somewhat confusing. He says that he regrets that he now lives in a
different country to his girls, however, the situation with his
father's health
has left him with "no choice" other than to continue to do so. Yet, he chooses
to live in a different country to
his father.
cross-examination he said that he spends two to three weeks in L State, USA,
"sometimes months". He conceded that he spends more
time living in Country E,
and that is by choice. He disputes that he could simply relocate back to
Australia. He simply relies
upon the unsubstantiated assertion that it is
cheaper for him to live in Country E. He offers no other explanation for his
belief that he could not relocate to Australia.
conceded that he made the decision to live in Country E knowing that that
decision would have an impact upon the ability of his
daughters to spend time
evidence offered by the father does not allow me to make a finding about how
much it costs for him to travel to the USA, where
he stays when he travels, or
how long he stays there when he goes.
says that he gives ongoing financial support to his father (Father’s
affidavit filed 21 February 2025, paragraph 54(b)(i)),
though he accepts that he
has been consistently in arrears of child support.
father was challenged in relation to his ability to pay for the flights that he
is contending for in these proceedings. He, at
one point, says that he pays for
flights "with points". There is no evidence at all about that.
was suggested to the father that he has not demonstrated how he could afford the
flights that he wants Y to undertake, and his
response was "I think I just did".
I do not accept that he has done so.
am not persuaded that the father has the financial means to pay for the flights
that he wants Y to undertake. I am not able to
make a finding about the
suitability of the flight arrangements proposed by the father, or the
accommodation arrangements for Y if
she were to travel due to the absence of any
evidence in relation to those matters.
am troubled by the father's attitude towards child support. He seems to let
arrears grow and then pays them when he visits Australia
to avoid a Departure
Prohibition Order. That pattern of behaviour has the obvious effect of
depriving the mother of funds to meet
the expenses of the children as and when
that need arises. He said that he does not want to pay child support in
relation to X because
she does not want to see him. He then said that his
attitude was based upon "the events that led to her not wanting to see him".
The only logical interpretation of that statement is that he blames the mother
for X not wanting to see him and he thinks that an
appropriate punishment for
that is to deprive her of child support in relation to X. In subsequent
questions, the father gave slightly
different evidence, suggesting that he
thought that the assessment had increased after the time when X stopped seeing
found the father's oral evidence in relation to child support, and finances
generally for that matter, to be unsatisfactory. On
balance, I find that it is
more likely than not that the husband does blame the mother for X not wanting to
see him, and that he
justifies not paying child support, as assessed and when
assessed, for that reason. If I am wrong about that, then his attitude
child support shows an abject disregard for the financial support of his
children and he pays only when he has to in order
to be allowed to leave the
Physical Safety
relation to physical safety, the mother's concerns were expressed in a context
where the father was, up until the hearing of the
trial, seeking for overseas
travel to take place while Y is only 12 years old.
her Case Outline, the mother refers to safety warnings about Country E on the
Australian Government Smart Traveller website, though
that was not explored in
cross-examination.
father has modified his position and now seeks that overseas travel start when Y
turns 15 years old.
father points out that Country E is a signatory to the Hague Convention.
his affidavit, the father says that both girls have travelled overseas on a
number of occasions (Father’s affidavit filed
21 February 2025, paragraph
44). On each of those occasions the children were accompanied by either one or
both of the parents.
I observed above, there is no evidence about the means of travel. In his Case
Outline, filed on the day before the trial was due
to commence, the orders
sought by the father were to the effect that he would fly to Australia and
accompany Y on flights up until
the commencement of term 1 in 2026. After that,
he contended for her to fly as an unaccompanied minor.
a case where it is the father's contention that Y should fly to the USA, and
then on to Country E to spend time with him, the obligation
was on him to
put before the Court satisfactory evidence in relation to the flights that he
proposes that she catches, and his proposed
arrangements for those flights. He
has failed to do so. By the way in which he has run his own case, the father
has deprived the
Court of the ability to determine that the flight arrangements
he contends for are in fact safe for Y.
The Risks Posed by the Father
relation to the risks to Y's mental and physical health if she spends time with
the father overseas, the mother says that:
(a) the father's conduct towards both the mother and X should be regarded as
abusive; and
(b) any remorse that the father expresses about that conduct is not genuine;
(c) there are already signs that his conduct towards Y is abusive and also
manipulative; and
(d) Y is vulnerable emotionally; and
(e) the father could not be trusted to protect Y emotionally; and
(f) it is not possible to give Y the support that she will need if she is
overseas with the father and he abuses her.
the Family Report, the Single Expert Ms F:
(a) reports the father as being "able to talk about the experiences of his
children from his perspective only, and he was either
unable or unwilling to
consider how X and Y may have experienced both his behaviour and the extended
court proceedings from their
perspective" (Family Report dated 10 September
2024, paragraph 11); and
(b) noted that the father tended to blame the "legal system" for the damage to
his relationship with his daughters. He apparently
bases the blame on his
perception that the mother has never been held accountable for breaching orders
(Family Report dated 10 September
2024, paragraph 12); and
(c) records the father as stating that he would never return to Australia to
live, even if that meant he could see his daughters
more often (Family Report
dated 10 September 2024, paragraph 12); and
(d) reports upon her own review of the NSW Police records at paragraph 17 of the
Family Report. The observations are consistent
with what the mother has said
what is set out in the
chronology above; and
(e) at paragraph 19, reports on her observations of the Child Impact Report, and
relevantly:
(i) X's own report to the author of that report that she had been the victim of
emotional and verbal abuse by the father; and
(ii) the father's denial that he been abusive of X, his adherence to his belief
that he has done no more than punish her appropriately,
his criticism of the
Court for taking his rights away by not forcing X to see him, and his blaming X
for the ongoing damaged relationship
for failing to pick up the phone.
(f) reports on the mother accepting that Y did not like it when she spoke
negatively of the father, and that she was now mindful
of not doing that and
that she was engaged in therapy (Family Report dated 10 September 2024,
paragraph 29); and
(g) reports on the father blaming the mother for interrupting his relationship
with X, and attempting to do the same with Y by not
agreeing to her travel
overseas to see him. She also reports on the father rejecting the suggestion
that Y might feel abandoned
or rejected by his decision to move to Town D,
Country E (Family Report dated 10 September 2024, paragraph 31); and
(h) records the father as feeling that if the Court did not permit Y to travel
to see him, that would put the expectation on him
to travel to Australia to see
his daughter which, in his opinion, was unfair (Family Report dated 10 September
2024, paragraph 32);
(i) when reporting on her interview with X, says this at paragraphs 40 and
asked [X] to think of and describe three wishes she would have. [X] stated that
her wishes would be to have “unlimited amounts
of money so that we (her
mother, sister and [X]) would never have to worry about finances”,
“have a stable family and
life” which [X] described as having
“two parents who like each other and treat [X] well” and her third
for her to be “a kid longer” as [X] stated that she felt
“older than her friends” because of what she went
asked [X] what she wanted to tell the Court or what she wanted them to know
that she wanted the court
to know that she was “not making any compromises” and she was not
going to “see, talk
or communicate at all” with her father. [X]
described that she did not “feel safe” when she had to see or talk
to her father, and this would make her feel anxious. [X] stated that she felt as
though she “had to keep coming to court”
and she felt as though she
“can’t move on”. [X] described that she worried about her
sister’s safety especially
when her sister spent time with her father. [X]
stated that her sister “doesn’t remember what happened” and
[X] believed that she would not be able to recognise when her father
may become aggressive.
(j) the interview with Y reveals what is, on the surface, a much more positive
relationship between father and child. Y is aware
that X is angry at the
father. She clearly loves and admires her father. She expressly stated that
she would like to travel to
the USA to see her grandpa. She also expressly
stated that she would like her parents to stop fighting about her going to
E (Family Report dated 10 September 2024, paragraphs 42-47); and
(k) after considering all of the information presented to her, the Single Expert
said (Family Report dated 10 September 2024, paragraphs
Trescott] was granted parental responsibility and therefore is able to make all
major decisions for the children. [Mr Trescott]
was aware of this when he
decided to leave Australia and relocate overseas. It would appear that [Mr
Trescott] seeks to test the
boundaries put in place by the court, because of his
expectation that his choices should not have consequences such as him having
travel back to Australia to spend time with [Y]. [Ms Trescott] has expressed
reasonable concerns for [Y]’s safety due to
both [Y]’s young age and
[Mr Trescott] history of aggressive behaviour. Given that [Y] is able to make
her own decision about
travel when she turns 18 years of age, it is felt that it
is a relatively short amount of time that [Mr Trescott] will have to travel
Australia to be able to continue to have a relationship with [Y].
ongoing court proceedings would only serve to impact [Ms Trescott] and the
children in raising their anxiety and having them engage
in a process that they
have found emotionally taxing. It is important that the court system is not
continued to be used against the
mother and the children because the father is
making choices of which he does not want to be accountable for the
consequences.
(l) the Single Expert recommends that X's wish not to see her father be
respected, that Y not be permitted to travel to Country E
or the USA to see her
father, and instead that the father see Y at a supervised contact centre until
he can demonstrate that he has
engaged in a Men's Behaviour Change Program;
(m) in terms of ongoing therapeutic intervention, the Single Expert recommends
(i) X and Y continue to engage in therapy regarding their individual
relationships with their father and assisting them to process
the relationship;
(ii) the mother continue to engage in therapy to assist her to process the
impact of her relationship with the father and to assist
her to manage her
reactions to the behaviour of the father.
Single Expert was cross-examined. In relation to the father's criminal history,
it was pointed out that many of the criminal
matters pre-dated the 2018 Orders.
The Single Expert accepted that was the case, and that did not alter any of the
opinions that
she has expressed.
was suggested to the Single Expert by counsel for the father that she was saying
that the breakdown in the relationship between
X and the father was “all
his fault” because he moved to Country E. The Single Expert pointed out
that in addition to
the move to Country E, there was the issue of the
father’s controlling behaviour and his failure to get any therapy in
to that behaviour. She opined that his move to Country E was in fact a
continuation of his controlling behaviour.
Single Expert was taken to the courses that the father says that he has
undertaken. That also did not alter any of her expressed
opinions. She said
that she saw nothing that demonstrated that the father had learned anything from
any course that he has participated
in. She opined that therapy to properly
address the father’s issues could take years to have any effect. She
nevertheless
expressed the opinion that there was some benefit to the father in
undertaking the Men’s Behavioural Change Program again.
cross-examination by the mother’s counsel, the Single Expert noted that X
was relatively compliant when she was the same
age that Y is now. As X got a
little older and started testing boundaries, the fall out was catastrophic for
the relationship between
herself and her father. The Single Expert expressed a
concern that Y is presently totally compliant with her father, but is
approaching
the age when she, too, may start testing boundaries. She said that
the risk in this matter is associated with how the father responds
behaviour starts to happen.
fact that the father continues to blame the Court and others for the
difficulties in his relationship with X rather than reflecting
behaviour reinforced the Single Expert’s view that the emotional and
psychological risks presented by the father
warranted supervised time only for
Single Expert was resolute in her opinion that travel overseas was a high risk.
Not because of the travel itself, but because
of the high likelihood of the
father acting poorly, the consequences of that behaviour on Y, and the
difficulty in getting back quickly
if something happens.
was suggested to the Single Expert by counsel for the father that her opinion
should give way somewhat to the fact that there was
no evidence of physical
harm. The Single Expert rejected the suggestion that the risks that she
identified were limited to just
physical harm.
Single Expert’s evidence was compelling. It demonstrated a thorough
understanding of the factual matrix before the Court,
and offered a clear,
understandable expert opinion about the effects that the father’s
behaviour have had on the mother, on
his relationships with X and Y, and the
risk to Y that flows from all of the above. The challenge to her opinions, to
that it was premised on the notion that only physical violence or
threats of physical violence are damaging, was entirely misconceived.
anything, the cross examination of the Single Expert increased the weight that
can be placed upon her opinions.
evidence of the mother about the breakdown in the relationship between X and the
father is set out in her affidavit filed 17 January
2025 in paragraphs 24 to 83.
She says that:
(a) X expressed her reluctance to see her father on various occasions between
May 2020 and July 2020; and
(b) on 23 July 2020, X left school early and went to the mother’s house.
Pursuant to the Orders, she was to commence spending
time with him that day.
The mother says that she received a number of aggressive texts from the father
that afternoon. The texts
sent by the father that day included:
not for her to decide. Send her out. It’s my time with them. If
she’s sick, I will take her to a doctor.
Quit interfering [Ms
[X], get out of
this damn house and come with me. It is my time with you, not your
The police attended and the father accused the mother of kidnapping X. The
police spoke with the father, the mother and X. Y was
in the father’s car
and witnessed the above; and
(c) on 24 July 2020, the father sent a text message to X saying
“Incredibly disappointed in your actions and behaviour the
days” (Mother’s affidavit filed 17 January 2025, paragraph 37);
(d) on 25 July 2020, X sent the following texts to the father:
I feel unsafe
at your house and I don't want to be there.
I feel unsafe
because after the first night when u thought I was asleep, u said I'm gonna get
physical with her and I know who u
were talking about what u meant so I decided
I wasn't gonna be there anymore.
I know u said
that I'm not welcome at our home because [Y] told me.
Don't blame me
for what u said Your fault and I really don 't care.
I hate that u r
always telling me that I don't recognise what I do at all WRONG u r the one that
never recognises his own actions
Calling the
police on us, that's just ridiculously dumb it's the dumbest thing ever.
Hope u realise
now y I ran away.
(e) on 19 August 2020, the father sent a text asking X if she was going to come
with him that day. She replied with a text saying
that she did not know, and
thought she needed more time. She said that she felt hurt and scared. The
father responded with:
Then don’t come anymore [X]. I’m your dad and I love you very much
and I would like for you too, but I’m not gonna
allow you to lie and
manipulate your way through life. You started all this, now its your turn to
make things right by telling the
truth, saying your sorry and moving forward
(f) on Father’s Day 2020:
(i) X sent a text message to the father suggesting that she could spend the day
with him; and
(ii) the father replied by saying “I’m not going to drive all the
way to Suburb B and back on Father’s day when
you could already be
here” (Mother’s affidavit filed 17 January 2025, paragraph 51);
(iii) in a subsequent telephone conversation the father told X that he was not
interested in spending the day with her unless she
spent the whole weekend in
accordance with the Orders, that she was a spoilt brat and that things could not
always be done her way;
(iv) the mother says that she was present during the call and that X was upset
and crying afterwards.
(g) at around that time, X told her mother that she heard the father say that he
would “get physical” with her if she
did not start doing what he
wanted her to do (Mother’s affidavit filed 17 January 2025, paragraph
38(b)); and
(h) on 13 November 2020, X spent a few hours with the father and that went well;
(i) 22 November 2020 was the date on which the children waited in the car while
the mother worked. The father called the police;
(j) between December 2020 and April 2021, X and Y spent time with the father in
accordance with the 2018 Orders; and
(k) in April 2021, X again said on multiple occasions that she did not want to
go to her father’s house and again raised concerns
father’s anger; and
(l) on 23 April 2021, the girls’ school contacted the mother and alerted
her to both girls displaying distress. Y ended up
spending time with her father
that weekend, X did not. Y sent a text message to the mother saying that the
father was going to confiscate
her phone if he caught her texting the mother.
The father threatened to report the school principal to NSW Department of
(m) X did not spend time with the father again until 29 August 2021. From that
time onwards X would spend “the odd single
days” with the father but
not overnights. On occasions the father would refuse to pick her up, so the
mother drove her to
his house; and
(n) on 5 October 2021, X suggested spending a single overnight to the father.
His response was “No. That doesn’t work
for me [X]”
(Mother’s affidavit filed 17 January 2025, paragraph 74); and
(o) X did not spend time with the father between 5 October 2021 and 26 January
2022 because the father would not agree to daytime
visits; and
(p) X spent time with the father, his then partner and Y on Australia Day in
(q) X fractured both wrists in an accident at school in October 2022. The
mother deposes to sending a text to the father that day
advising him. The
father and X exchanged texts about that on 25 February 2023 as follows:
[X]: You didn’t care how your daughter was when she fractured both
wrists. Did you?
Father: I don’t even know what you are talking about. Has she broken
another court order is what your saying or you just
talking shit again?
[X]: Do you think I’m dumb? Or just gullible?
Father: DO NOT come back at me with your negative attitude
[X]: You love your daughter SO MUCH that you don’t care when she
fractured her wrists?
Father: If that actually happened your mother is in trouble AGAIN for not
letting me know. Thanks for your negative attitude [X],
makes everyone feel
(r) subsequent texts from the father on that same date include:
I have MUTED
your mothers messages for Years!
You HAVE NO
IDEA WHAT SHE HAS PUT ME THROUGH!
Go on living
your negative ass life. I will not contact you anymore.
I called you.
You’re a baby for not answering. Was gonna tell you directly how I felt,
you disrespectful little shit! You
have no idea what you are doing.
I interrupt this recount of the mother’s evidence to say that I am
relieved that the father did not have the opportunity to
tell X, aged just 13 at
the time, how he felt on that occasion.
(s) the father did initiate contact with X on 31 March 2023, inviting her to
meet him after school for a talk over an ice cream,
however, that caused her to
have a panic attack.
mother was cross-examined on these matters in only a very cursory way. I find
that the events described by the mother in her
affidavit occurred in more or
less the way that she described them.
have recounted these events in some detail because in my view they set out just
how X’s relationship with her father fell
apart. There can be no doubt
that X, aged 10 to 13, during the events set out above, tested boundaries on
occasion. It is the father’s
response to that behaviour that concerns me.
He was, in my view, authoritarian and bombastic. He was heavy handed, and
of X in the language that he chose to use when communicating with
her. He was the adult. He was the parent. His behaviour, in
my view, was
abusive and inappropriate.
sees a psychologist, Ms N (“Ms N”). In relation to that therapy the
father says that he received an email from Ms N
advising that she was treating X
(Father’s affidavit filed 21 February 2025, paragraph 32). The father
asked for a “report
relating to her prognosis” (Father’s
affidavit filed 21 February 2025, paragraph 32). He says that Ms N instead
the father to make an appointment to attend her practice
and to pay for the report that he asked for. The father says that he did
neither as he is “entitled to obtain particulars in relation to X’s
health pursuant to Order 8” (Father’s
affidavit filed 21 February
2025, paragraph 32).
in the very next paragraph the father says that he is anxious to repair his
relationship with X (Father’s affidavit filed
21 February 2025, paragraph
33). That is one of many examples in this case of the father adopting an
authoritarian approach even
when that approach creates negative outcomes for the
says that he is concerned about X’s mental health and would be concerned
if all steps were not taken to restore the relationship
between X and himself
(Father’s affidavit filed 21 February 2025, paragraph 34). He says that
he is deeply upset by the fact
that he is not in her life. Yet, he intends to
keep living in Country E. There is no evidence to suggest that he has ever
to her for the way that he has spoken to her and there was nothing in
his oral evidence to suggest that he has any genuine regrets
he has treated her. He conceded, eventually, in cross-examination that he
regretted his role in the breakdown
of his relationship with X. That is
inconsistent with the balance of his evidence on that topic and I do not accept
that his expression
of regret is genuine.
relation to Y, the mother says at paragraphs 84 to 138 of her affidavit filed 17
January 2025:
(a) on 21 September 2020, Y said that the father smacked her on the bottom and
said that she was being a brat; and
(b) in November 2020, it emerged that Y, then aged 8, had developed anxiety.
One way in which that was manifesting itself was sucking
her thumb, which was
starting to have an effect upon her jaw development; and
(c) to deal with the anxiety, Y started to see Ms N, the child psychologist that
X was seeing. The mother says that she notified
the father about the engagement
of a child psychologist but that as far as she is aware, the father has never
before; and
(d) on 26 November 2020, Y’s school counsellor contacted the mother and
advised her that Y had visited her, upset and crying,
and said “I feel
like it’s my responsibility to keep the family together, and happy. I
feel lonely at Dad’s because
X is not there to protect me and play with
me” (Mother’s affidavit filed 17 January 2025, paragraph 94); and
(e) Y’s sessions with Ms N ended in December 2020 because the father told
Y that she was not to talk to Ms N anymore; and
(f) after the incident in December 2020 when the children were left in the car
whilst the mother worked and the father called the
police, Y wrote her mother a
note that said “Dear Mum Im sorry that dad kept calling the police. Im
really sorry. Love [Y]”
(Mother’s affidavit filed 17 January 2025,
paragraph 96); and
(g) during April and May 2021, Y displayed signs of anxiety at school on
multiple occasions. She told her mother that she did not
know who she could
trust. She was upset that the principal told the father about her being upset
at school because she then got
in trouble with the father. On one occasion when
the father refused to let her bring the bike that she had at his house she broke
down and cried for hours; and
(h) on 16 August 2021, Y said to X “You are so wrong. Stop being so angry
at him for nothing. Dad wants you to apologise
to him. He is not angry at you
anymore.” Y was 8 and X was 11 at that time; and
(i) on 1 April 2022, the mother received a video call from Y at 9.30 pm and Y
said “Dad is dropping me off at 1.00pm tomorrow.
He said that he does not
want me to be here anymore because I have been naughty” (Mother’s
affidavit filed 17 January
2025, paragraph 107). In the background, the father
could be heard to say “[Y], you are being very rude. That’s why
don’t want you here anymore” (Mother’s affidavit filed 17
January 2025, paragraph 107); and
(j) on 21 July 2022, in response to ongoing anxiety displayed by Y, the mother
made another appointment for her to see Ms N. When
the father was advised, he
threatened Court action, so the appointment was cancelled; and
(k) in March 2023, Y’s teacher raised with the mother a concern that Y may
have ADHD; and
(l) in April 2023, Y told her mother that the father had taken her to get photos
for an American passport. The mother says that
the father had not raised that
topic with her; and
(m) in May 2023, Y told the mother that the father had said that he was going to
move to Country E. He apparently told Y that she
would like it there because
the people are nicer. Y said that he got angry when she said that she did not
want to go to Country
E but wanted to stay in Australia with her mother and X;
(n) on 3 October 2023, Y again reported to her mother that the father had
discussed moving, and if not moving at least travelling,
to Country E.
is not controversial that the father moved to Country E in around late
mother says that the father would contact Y weekly from Town D, Country E.
the father’s affidavit filed 21 February 2025 at paragraph 36, he advances
the notion that he has maintained contact with
Y despite some occasions when,
from his point of view, the mother has not made her available to him when he was
in Australia.
the time that Y would have ordinarily spent with the father ceased upon his move
to Town D, Country E. In March 2024,
Y said to the mother that the father was
returning to Australia for the Easter holidays. The father had not given any
such indication
to the mother, and she had made arrangements for her and the
children to celebrate X’s birthday together. The mother asked
sure that that was okay with the father.
father’s response was “Well. That doesn’t work for me.
I’m supposed to have you AND [X] on Saturday.
It’s my time too and
I have not seen you in a while”.
Regrettably,
the assistance of solicitors was necessary to negotiate some arrangements. It
is unfortunate that both parents used
Y as a means of communication with each
other. She was 11 years old at that time.
September 2024, the mother was advised by the father that he would be in
Australia and wishing to see Y over the holidays commencing
in September 2024.
The mother accommodated that wish.
rather than the father, subsequently told the mother that the father was not
coming to Australia for the January school holidays
in 2025. Then, on 11
January 2025, Y told the mother that the father’s plans had changed and
that he would be in Australia
between 22 January and 5 February, and that he
expected Y to spend the two weeks with him as per the Orders.
mother had already made other plans, including travel to Melbourne with both
girls and her own mother.
father’s response, and his attitude towards that entire incident is, in my
opinion, remarkable. He rejected the mother’s
proposal to see Y upon
their return from Melbourne. He discussed the matter with Y, causing her to
accuse her mother of keeping
her from her father. On 16 January 2025, he sent
an email to the mother that reads:
I sincerely hope you will not deny our children this time with their father and
make it more difficult than necessary. Put down
the knives and let our children
have a loving father without any further interference or breaches of the current
parenting orders
that have been in place since March 2018.
have used the word remarkable because there is no demonstration by the father
that he understands his own role in that particular
dispute. His response in
his affidavit is that the 2018 Orders do not oblige him to give notice when he
intends to spend time with
the girls in Sydney (Father’s affidavit filed
21 February 2025, paragraph 10(v)). He is only required to give notice when
intends to take the girls overseas. That response is offered notwithstanding
that for the best part of a year, at that point,
he had been living overseas,
not availing himself of the time arrangements that were provided for in the
Orders, not communicating
his intentions to the mother in any meaningful way,
and when he did, offering her very little time to accommodate his wishes.
then suggest in his email that it is the mother making matters difficult and
that she should “put the knives down”
is, in my opinion,
remarkable.
of the above evidence was challenged in any meaningful way and I accept that the
events described by the mother have occurred
as she has described them.
cross-examination of the mother, it was pointed out that until the Family Report
issued, the mother was contending for Y to
spend time with the father for two
blocks of time during school holidays. The mother’s position changed
after the Family Report
issued, adopting the recommendations contained within
the Family Report for supervised time only until the father undertook a
Behavioural Change Course. It was suggested to the mother that her
change in position was in some way opportunistic. I do not accept
criticism of the mother for allowing her attitudes towards parenting to be
informed by the opinion of an expert.
cross-examined, the mother said that her fear was that the father’s
treatment of X could be repeated in relation to Y.
She pointed out that Y had
three panic attacks in her last two weeks of school, requiring support from the
school counsellor and
herself. The mother expressed concern about how she could
manage a panic attack if Y had one whilst overseas with the father. That
concern is justified, in my view.
closing submissions, it was submitted on behalf of the father that reading the
Single Expert’s opinion must have seemed to
the mother like “winning
the lotto”. That submission was frankly offensive. It is a neat example
of the overall tone
of the father’s case in this matter.
father asks the Court to have regard to the fact that he undertook a Men’s
Behavioural Change Course in 2011. There is
no evidence to confirm that he
undertook that course, however, it seems clear enough that if the course was
undertaken it was as
a part of the father’s sentence for assaulting the
(a) the father’s various convictions for violence related offences after
the time when he says that he completed that course;
(b) the conduct of the father set out above including blaming others for the
consequences of his own conduct, being inappropriately
authoritarian with his
daughters, showing minimal to no courtesy to the mother of his children by
expecting her to jump when he gives
her very short notice of his wish to spend
time with the children;
it seems fair to say that the course has had little effect. That view is
consistent with the Report Writer’s evidence.
father sets out the efforts that he says that he has made to better himself as a
father at paragraph 65 of his affidavit filed
21 February 2025. Those efforts
(a) monthly sessions with a psychologist in 2018 after the final orders were
(b) completion of a Men’s Behaviour Change Program in 2011 or 2012; and
(c) completion of Understanding Anger course in 2015; and
(d) completion of Circle of Security course in 2017.
accepted in cross-examination that he has not sought out any therapy for himself
following the breakdown in his relationship with
father points out that the mother provided a copy of the Family Report to X
(Father’s affidavit filed 21 February, paragraph
10(aa)). That complaint
is justified. The mother should not have done that. The mother was
cross-examined on that. I am satisfied
that she understands why that was wrong,
and potentially damaging to X. The mother has engaged in therapy to assist her
way in which she processes her relationship with the father. I am
satisfied that the risk of any similar conduct from the mother
in the future is
father points out that the 2018 Orders post-dates his various criminal offences.
I note that it also post-dates all of the efforts
that he says that he has
undertaken to better himself as a father. He invites the Court to accept that
his various criminal offences
“do not reflect the man and father I am at
present to my children” (Father’s affidavit filed 21 February 2025,
paragraph 65). I find that those various offences are entirely consistent with
the father’s behaviour since the orders were
made in 2018. In the course
of what he believes to be justified discipline of X, he has engaged in a
behaviour that is emotionally
manipulative, disproportionately punitive,
emotionally damaging and coercive. He has acted in a manner towards the mother
high handed and demeaning, expecting her to be on standby to respond to
his late notice, or no notice, of his travel plans and then
criticising her
unreasonably when she is unable or unwilling to accommodate his wishes. He has
created in the mind of Y a mentality
that total compliance is the cost of
maintaining her father’s love.
father complains that the interviews for the Family Report did not involve an
observation of the children with him (Father’s
affidavit filed 21 February
2025, paragraph 12). That complaint was repeated in cross-examination of the
Single Expert and again
in submissions. The father leads no evidence that he
offered to come to Australia for the interview. He does say that he would
prepared to do so in the affidavit that he filed 4 days before the commencement
of the trial. The problem that the father perceives
with the interview process
is one of his own creation.
am satisfied that there are risks associated with Y spending time with the
father. Y has already experienced panic attacks and
anxiety which is at the
very least linked to the conduct of the father. She is only 12. I accept that
she is at an age where she
may start testing boundaries. The father conducted
himself very poorly in relation to X testing boundaries. I have little to no
confidence in his abilities to appropriately manage any behaviour from Y other
than her total compliance. I have no confidence that
he would seek out
assistance from the mother if Y experienced a panic attack or anxiety whilst in
am not satisfied that the father can manage the risks that I have identified
father reads in these proceedings the Family Report and Updated Family report
from the previous parenting proceedings. They are
dated 2016 and 2018
respectively. Anything that may be relevant within those Reports is overtaken
by the events that have occurred
since the 2018 Orders were made.
The Relationship Between X and Y
the mother’s affidavit filed 17 January 2025 at paragraph 76, she says
that the children have at times had difficulties as
between themselves. Whilst
that might not, of itself, seem extraordinary, she says that X’s worries
the father has caused some of those difficulties. She
says that Y is sometimes given cash and gifts. The father gets Christmas
birthday gifts for Y, but not for X.
mother deposes to hearing Y say to X that “Dad told me that you will only
get gifts and money if you spend time with him”
Sadly, that is
consistent with the father’s attitudes displayed throughout this
mother deposes to having heard Y call X a baby during an argument
(Mother’s affidavit filed 17 January 2025, paragraph 89).
behaviour of the father is tantamount to punishing X for not being totally
accept that the father has treated Y differently to X, and that at least to some
extent that was intended to punish X for her lack
of compliance.
accept that the different treatment of the girls by the father has at time
caused friction between them. That is at least in part
why it is necessary for
each of the girls, at ages 15 and 12, to engage with a psychologist in order to
assist them with their individual
relationships with the father.
Conclusions regarding the Travel to Country E
accept that the break down in the relationship between the father and X has
arisen out of X testing boundaries, and the father reacting
poorly to that.
find that the father’s treatment of X from July 2020 onwards was
bombastic, dictatorial, authoritarian, controlling and manipulative.
a child in a manner than any adult would have struggled with. It is hard to
imagine how much courage it would have taken
for that child to reach out to her
father in those circumstances in an effort to mend bridges. It is even harder
to comprehend how
it would have felt to that girl to be rejected by her father,
and to be subjected to not only abusive and puerile name calling, but
that, in effect, unless she was prepared to be completely compliant, he did not
want to spend any time with her at all.
father has demonstrated no preparedness at all to genuinely take ownership of
his own behaviour in relation to X, and I accept
the Single Expert’s
opinion that the father’s propensity to blame others for the consequences
of his own behaviour elevates
the risk that he will continue to act in the same
way in the future.
is at an age when she, too, may start to move away from total compliance and
start to test boundaries. The risk that the father
will react poorly to any
such behaviour is high. The father’s conduct when he reacts poorly in the
past has included physical
violence, and emotional and psychological abuse.
There has already been an occasion when he required her to leave his residence
early because she was rude to him.
benefits to Y of traveling to see her father overseas are outweighed, in my
opinion, by the risks associated with that travel.
I am not satisfied that it
is in her best interests for her to travel overseas to see her father.
orders sought by the father by the end of the trial were amended such that Y
would not travel until she turned 15. An extra few
years might possibly better
equip Y to deal with the father’s poor behaviour if she were to be
subjected to it. However, the
risks that I have found are largely informed by
the lack of any acceptance by the father for a need to change, and the
that flows from that, that he will not change. I would not subject
Y, even as a 15 year old, to that risk. I am mindful that the
relationship
between X and the father is still damaged, with no evidence that could give the
Court any confidence that the father
has the ability to repair it. I note that
than trying to litigate his way to the outcome that he wants, the father would
do better, in my view, to genuinely reflect
on what has transpired to arrive at
this point. He may come to the conclusion that his own behaviour and attitudes
need to change.
If he does, he may be able to demonstrate to the mother and to
his daughters at some point in the future that he has in fact changed.
Changeover Venue
issue was the subject of the least amount of scrutiny in cross-examination.
relation to where the children, for now Y only, are to transition into and out
of the father’s care, it seems to be agreed
that the father can collect Y
from school at the commencement of weekend time. However, when he is due to
return her on Monday mornings,
he would like to deliver her to school and the
mother would like to collect her from the father at Suburb B Supermarket at
seems to be agreed that any changeovers that otherwise do not coincide with the
start or end of a school day are to occur at Suburb
B Supermarket.
is no evidence that there is any elevated risk if the father returns Y to school
on a Monday morning. The number of times that
is likely to be happening in any
calendar year is low.
there are any orders that provide for time with the father to conclude on a
Monday morning, I will order that he do so by delivering
presentation of the father’s case was somewhat perplexing. He seemingly
has no insight whatsoever into the role that he
has played in damaging the lives
of the mother, Y and X.
did say in cross-examination that he regrets his role in the events that have
led to the breakdown in his relationship with X.
Though he said the words, I
regret to say that there was nothing in the way that that was said, considered
in light of the balance
of his evidence, that made that expression of regret
seem genuine. I am not persuaded that he does in truth regret any aspect of
own conduct.
chooses to live in Country E. That is a choice that he is entitled to make, but
like so many choices in life, there are consequences
that flow from such a
choice. The overall tone of the father’s case was to the effect that his
unilateral decision is something
that the mother and children must now work
around to satisfy his convenience.
reserves the right, it seems, to largely ignore his child support obligations
(up until he needs to leave the country) and be vague
at the same time proposing travel arrangements without adequately explaining how
he would pay for them.
most challenging aspect of his case, as presented, was in relation to his
attitude towards the children. He has been convicted
on multiple occasions for
being physically abusive towards the mother of his children. He acted towards X
in a way that was controlling
and threatening. He is dismissive of all of
is either blind to, or prepared to ignore, the impact that his overbearing,
controlling, and abusive behaviour has already had
on Y and to cherry pick
aspects of her communication and demeanour that he interprets to demonstrate a
healthy relationship with
submissions made on his behalf in relation to violence were embarrassing.
example, in relation to the instance where the father rejected X’s request
to spend time with him due to her lack of compliance
with his expectations,
counsel for the father submitted:
Look at it as it is. Don’t give a gloss... “Dad, I will come to
your place this weekend?”. “No. I don’t
want you to
come”. I mean, it’s as simple as that...Why not just take it on the
facts of what it is? It’s not,
“If you don’t come, I’m
going to kill you”.
Simply saying “No”, is not coercive and controlling behaviour. It
is not family violence. It’s simply saying,
“No. Don’t come
until you have a good think about things, and apologise for what you have
is one of multiple incidents where the father withdrew the opportunity to spend
time with him as a result of the children falling
short of his expectations.
Another example was when he sent Y home to the mother early because she was rude
to him. There were
many examples of similar behaviour by the father.
regard to what was said by Gill J in
Olivier & Olivier
[2020] FamCA
–[52], as endorsed by McClelland DCJ in
was, in my view, a pattern of conduct by the father that was intended to be, and
which was, controlling of both girls.
submissions made on the father’s behalf about coercive and controlling
conduct, and violence more generally, were inconsistent
with society’s
attitudes and the prevailing appellate level guidance, such as that set out
, in relation to what is recognised as violence, and how
that should be treated in parenting proceedings.
are matters of concern in relation to the mother also. She should not, for
example, have provided a copy of the Family Report
to X. She should not have
left the children alone in her car in November 2020 while she worked. She, like
the father, has at times
used Y as a means of communication between the parents.
There are ways in which both parents could have managed some of the events
they have described in their evidence in a more child focused way. There is no
dispute that the children will continue to live
with the mother, and that she
will have the responsibility for making decisions about them. I note that she
is engaged in therapy
to address the way in which she copes with the
relationship between herself and the father.
the above considerations, I have concluded that it will be in the best interests
of the children to make orders that require
the father to undertake a Men's
Changing Behaviour Course. If the father wants to engage in private therapy
that includes all of
the syllabus of the Men’s Changing Behaviour Course,
that is a matter for him. I will make orders that:
(a) allow the parties to provide a copy of these Orders and Reasons to any
therapist; and
(b) restrict Y's time with the father to supervised time until he completes the
Men's Changing Behaviour Course; and
(c) upon the father completing that course, for Y to spend blocks of time with
him on her school holidays. I note that the parties,
by the time of
submissions, seemed to be agreed on those holiday blocks, though of course the
father wanted Y to travel to Country
E for those periods; and
(d) once he has completed the course, I will also provide for Y to spend weekend
time with the father in Australia; and
(e) I will require the father to give the mother (as opposed to Y) a practical
and respectful amount of notice of his intention to
spend time with Y; and
(f) once the father has completed the Men's Changing Behaviour Course,
facilitate X engaging in therapy with her father, if she wishes
to do so; and
(g) there were a number of miscellaneous orders that were otherwise agreed
between the parties, and I will make those. Some of the
travel related orders
are not necessary as a consequence of the decisions that I have made above.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
seventy (170) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
Dated: 14 August 2025
[2000] FamCA 43
(2000) 25 Fam LR
at 724[54] (Nicholson CJ, Finn and Guest JJ) (“
Pickford and
[2024] FedCFamC1A 249
(2024) 70 Fam LR 85
at 94[32]–[33]
at 106[105].
at 107[111].
at 107[113].
Blinko & Blinko
[2015] FamCAFC 146
RTF format (766 KB)
Signed PDF/A format