Chrystie & Dellas [2021] FamCA 628 (27 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Chrystie & Dellas
[2021] FamCA 628
File number(s):
CAC 1320 of 2014
Judgment of:
ALTOBELLI J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– Review of a registrar’s decision to strike out subpoena –
Where subpoenaed party
objects to the subpoena – Discussion of public
interest immunity principles – Where subpoena found to lack relevance
– Application for review dismissed.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) rr 15.41, 18.08, 18.10
Cases cited:
Choat & Grendel
[2018] FamCA 579
Crawford & Sisinis and Anor
[2014] FamCA 912
(1999) 46 NSWLR 681
Smith & Duke
[2015] FamCA 990
(2015) 54 Fam LR 221
Tsocas & Rilak
[2018] FamCA 981
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
Heard on the papers
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Atw Family Law
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Boadicea Legal Services
The Subpoenaed Party:
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Phillip A Wilkins & Associates
CAC 1320 of 2014
MR CHRYSTIE
Subpoenaed party
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
ALTOBELLI J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The Application in a Case filed by the father on 23 April 2021 be
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Chrystie & Dellas
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
ALTOBELLI J:
INTRODUCTION
reasons for judgment explain the orders the Court has made in this matter.
2 The substantive proceedings relate to a child, X,
who is 11 years old. The proceedings relate to the parenting orders that are
his best interests.
3 On 5 March 2021 the Independent Children’s Lawyer caused a subpoena
to be issued to Mr B, a clinical psychologist who provides
treatment to X
(hereafter referred to as ‘the psychologist’).
4 On 19 March 2021 the psychologist caused to be filed a Notice of Objection.
The reasons stated were as follows:
I believe that producing my clinical case notes from
sessions with my client X, given the kind of things X has stated in sessions
are reflected in my notes, seriously risk putting X in future situations with
his father that are emotionally and psychologically
unsafe for him. In addition,
I believe that the material in my clinical case notes are of a nature such that
they could severely
adversely effect [sic] the ongoing relationship that X has
to his father and ought to be protected, both for X and his father’s
I also belief [sic] that the therapeutic relationship that I have managed to
build up with X over many years of working with him,
which has only recently got
to the point where X trusts me enough to engage fully with me and let me know
all that is going on for
him psychologically, could be threatened and derailed
if X were to discover that what he has painstakingly let me know in confidence
has been used for court purpose and exposed. I believe that X would no longer
feel able to access his therapy and make use of it
in the way that he needs to
in order to avail himself of necessary ongoing help and support.
My primary duty of care as a clinical psychologist is to my client, X, and I
believe that producing my clinical notes would amount
to me breaching this duty
5 On 31 March 2021 the matter came before Registrar Maitland. The orders
made by the learned Registrar indicate that, firstly, the
Independent
Children’s Lawyer no longer pressed the subpoena; and secondly the Court
asked the parties if they required reasons
for the decision to strike out the
subpoena and all the parties declined. The order further notes that the mother,
father, Independent
Children’s Lawyer, and the psychologist all appeared
on this occasion. The learned Registrar ordered, in effect, that the
to the psychologist be struck out.
6 On 23 April 2021 the father (the Respondent in the substantive proceedings
and the Applicant in the present application) filed an
application for review of
the learned Registrar’s order. The orders sought were as follows:
1. That pursuant to
Family Law Rules
the Orders of Registrar Maitland of 31 March 2021 be reviewed.
2. That the Notice of Objection filed by Mr B on 19 March 2021 be dismissed.
3. That Mr B produce the documents listed in Part E of the subpoena to Mr B
filed 5 March 2021 to the Family Court within 14 days
of the date of these
7 On 2 June 2021 I made the following orders in chambers:
1. By no later than 4pm on 9 June 2021, the subpoena
objector file and serve any submissions on which he seeks to rely, with respect
to the Application for Review of the decision of Registrar Maitland dated 31
March 2021, not exceeding 500 words in length.
2. Within 7 days thereafter, the Applicant file and serve any submissions on
which he seeks to rely, not exceeding 500 words in length.
3. Within 7 days thereafter, the Respondent file and serve any submissions on
which she seeks to rely, not exceeding 500 words in
4. Within 7 days thereafter, the Independent Children’s Lawyer file and
serve any submissions on which they seek to rely, not
exceeding 500 words in
5. Thereafter, judgment be reserved and the matter be determined on the
8 On 9 June 2021 the psychologist provided the following submissions by way
of an email bearing that date, marked as exhibit SP1:
1. My first objection is that the review is an
on the following grounds
The Independent Children’s
Lawyer has withdrawn the original subpoena for my documents and has not
re-instated any further subpoena
so there is no subpoena currently in place on
which this review can be based.
In addition, the original subpoena was far
too vague and wide ranging and as such in my view amounts to a fishing
expedition.
2. My second objection pertains to the original objection that I submitted
previously when I initially objected to the subpoena.
I have attached my
original objection to this email for your reference.
3. Thirdly, the only costs that I have been supplied with to fulfil the subpoena
are a cheque for $50 attached to the original subpoena
which I did not cash.
This will fall far short of the costs that it will entail for me to supply all
the documents requested in the
subpoena as they are voluminous and the costs
entailed would include my time as well as substantial compiling, printing ,
secretarial
and photocopying costs.
(Emphasis in the original)
9 On 16 June 2021 the solicitors for the father filed written submissions,
the substance of which will be referred to below, where
THE APPLICABLE LAW
10 This is an application for review and
accordingly, it is a hearing de novo.
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) (‘the Rules’)
sets out how a review of a Registrar’s decision should be conducted:
(1) A court must hear an application for review of an
order of a Judicial Registrar, Registrar or Deputy Registrar as an original
12 There is a helpful note that reads:
In an original hearing, the court rehears the whole
matter and does not simply review the decision of the original
13 Subrule 2 details what evidence may be received by the Court:
(2) The court may receive as
(a) any affidavit or exhibit tendered in the
first hearing;
(b) any further affidavit or exhibit;
(c) the transcript (if any) of the first hearing; or
(d) if a transcript is not available, an affidavit about the evidence that was
adduced at the first hearing, sworn by a person who
was present at the first
14 The relevant law in relation to subpoenas is helpfully summarised by
Berman J in
Smith & Duke
[2015] FamCA 990
(2015) 54 Fam LR 221:
SUBPOENA PROCESS
14. The principles for issuing a subpoena to a non-party
(1) that the requesting party is only able
to obtain a document or documents relevant to an issue in the proceedings;
(2) that the steps to be followed are conveniently set out in the remarks of
President Moffit in
National Employers Mutual General Association Limited v
Waind & Hill
[1978] 1 NSW LR 372
The first is obeying
the subpoena, by the witness bringing the documents to the court and handing
them to the judge. This step involves
the determination of any objections of
the witness to the subpoena or to the production of documents to the court
pursuant to the
subpoena. The second step is the decision of the judge
concerning the preliminary use of documents, which include whether or not
permission should be given to a party or parties to inspect the documents. The
third step is the admission into evidence of the
document in whole or in part;
or the use of it in the process of evidence being put before the court by
cross-examination or otherwise.
It is the third step which alone provides
material upon which ultimate decisions in the case rests. In these three steps
the stranger
and the parties have different rights, and the function of the
judge differs.
Hatton v Attorney General of the Commonwealth
of Australia
[2000] FamCA 892
(2000) FLC 93-038
the Full Court set out examples of where a
court may determine that it is proper to set aside a subpoena:-
If the subpoena
is for an improper purpose namely to obtain discovery against a third
Where it might
be oppressive to comply with the subpoena.
Where a party
embarks upon a “fishing expedition”.
subpoena should be set aside because it lacks relevance to the
proceedings.
THE SUBPOENA OBJECTION
15 The first ground of objection by the psychologist
appears to be a contention that the review is an abuse of process. The basis
this is the suggestion that the Independent Children’s Lawyer withdrew the
subpoena, and thus there was no basis on which
the review could be based. There
is no substance to this ground of objection. The application for review relates
to the order made
by the learned Registrar.
Section 37A(9)
(Cth) (‘the Act’) and
r 18.08(1) of the Rules
expressly provide that a party to the proceedings in which a Registrar has
exercised a delegated power may
apply for a review of the order made by the
Registrar. As the father is a party to the proceedings, he was well entitled to
the review application.
16 The third ground of objection to the review application appears to relate
to the conduct money of $50 attached to the original
subpoena. The psychologist
contends that this amount falls short of the actual costs involved for him to
supply the documents requested.
There is no substance to this ground of
objection. The cost has not been incurred.
17 The second ground of objection, and the only substantive ground, refers to
the reasons for objection contained in the psychologist’s
initial Notice
of Objection. In substance, the psychologist is contending that it is not in
the best interests of X that the notes
and records pertaining to his engagement
in a therapeutic context with the psychologist be made available to the parties,
his father. The psychologist also contends that the therapeutic
relationship that he has with X would be undermined, if not destroyed,
production of records which would seem to betray the confidentiality of their
therapeutic relationship.
18 As there is no separate ground or basis for the confidentiality of the
records of the treating psychologist, it is inferred that
the only possible
basis for the objection would be public interest immunity. In
, Berman J states:
PUBLIC INTEREST IMMUNITY
Cooper & Cooper
[2012] FMCAfam 789
(2012) 48 Fam LR 425
, the Court held
that whilst it would be ideal if all family counselling services could offer the
same protection, there is “no
basis, founded upon legislative
interpretation and absent a consideration of public policy
considerations...which would warrant such
position being arrived
Benson & Hughes
[1994] FamCA 30
(1994) FLC 92-483
Chisolm J found
There is a general public
interest in the proper administration of justice which is promoted by the
principle that “all relevant
evidence should be adduced to the court when
it makes its decision” (
Baker v Campbell
(1983) 153 CLR 52
per Gibbs CJ)
44. His Honour therefore held that public interest
immunity did exist in this instance but that it should be weighed against the
of the child. At page 81,045 his Honour considered how a court should
balance the paramountcy principle when considering cases in
which “there
is some clear and important other conflicting interest” and concludes
“the law requires the court
to take account of the child’s welfare
but balance it against the other interests or policy”.
45. Public interest immunity was also used to successfully uphold an objection
to a subpoena in
Goldy & Goldy (No 2)
[2011] FamCA 418
party sought to subpoena “the Kids Helpline”. Dawe J considered the
...should be very wary about
issuing subpoenas to an organisation which relies upon its confidentiality for
its very existence. The
benefit of the service provided by Kids Helpline to
children and young people who use that service is
significant.
46. Accordingly, her Honour upheld the objection on the
grounds of public interest immunity.
PSYCHOLOGISTS AND PUBLIC INTEREST IMMUNITY
Feinster & Feinster and Anor
[2006] FamCA 232
considered that:
Public interest immunity differs
from privilege as it operates for the benefit of the public interest in general
and does not protect
private relationships or
48. His Honour noted that while a preference had been
expressed to narrow a claim of public interest immunity to situations involving
a government function, it has “also been said that the categories giving
rise to public interest immunity are not closed and
they may be extended by
analogy with a known category of public interest exceptions”.
Jermyn & Garling
(2012) FMCAfam 814
the father issued a
subpoena to the mother’s psychologist in relation to her handwritten notes
from the treatment of the mother’s
experiences of childhood sexual abuse.
The mother and the psychologist objected on the grounds of relevance and public
The Court undertook an extensive review of the various authorities
both in Australia and overseas and held that to release the additional
information would be to “victimise her and inappropriately and in a
fashion that would be against the public interest”.
INTERESTS OF THE CHILD
Section 69ZN
sets out the principles for conducting child related
proceedings and the first principle is that the Court is to consider the needs
of the child concerned and the impact that the conduct of the proceedings may
have on the child.
51. It has not been argued however that the disclosure of the information is
likely to negatively impact upon the child other than
by the further
exacerbation of the proceedings and the potential loss of faith in a process
would seem important in all the circumstances
namely, the involvement of the
child in therapy.
19 A contrary view has been expressed by Watts J in
[2018] FamCA 579
where his Honour states:
10. However, in
Feinster & Feinster and Anor
[2006] FamCA 232
, I found that the ordinary psychiatric/patient relationship
does not attract a public interest immunity. That finding was applied
Aldridge J in
Wenlack & Cimorelli
[2013] FamCA 602.
11. The seminal decision of
[1999] NSWCCA 166
whether communications between a victim of sexual assault and a therapist could
be seen as a new category attracting public
interest immunity. Four of the five
judges found that it did not. Spigelman CJ said:
[92] In any event, this is not
an appropriate occasion on which to establish this new category of privilege.
First, it has not been
demonstrated that the privilege propounded has attained
the requisite level of community acceptance, as a special case entitling
treatment that differs from other confidential relationships. Secondly, the
evidentiary material presented to the Court is much too
limited to take such a
significant step.
[93] The recognition of a new category of privilege requires the formulation of
public policy by the courts, within the confines
of the proper role of the
courts. It is only appropriate for the courts to recognise a category of public
policy which is capable
of precise statement, and which reflects so widely held
an opinion, that the Court's reasoning can be described in terms of
'recognition'
rather than 'creation'.
[114] Affidavits in support of claims of public interest immunity have often
been criticised for their amorphous quality. General
conclusory assertions are
not acceptable. (See eg
Sankey v Whitlam
supra at 96 per Mason J).
[115] Before a new public policy is to be recognised, the supporting material
would need to be of a qualitatively different order
to that presented in the
case. At the least, the Court would expect a systematic review of expert
literature on the significance
of confidentiality in the counselling
relationship. The Court would also expect a review of an expert body of opinion
establishing
why sexual counselling services ought to be treated differently
from other counselling services. In the seminal case before the United
Supreme Court, both the American Psychiatric Association and the American
Psychological Association set out relevant studies
in their amici curiae briefs
filed with the Court. (See
Jaffee v Redmond
at 345 fn 9).
[116] The Court would need to be satisfied that the material presented to the
Court represented the full range of expert opinion
on the relevant matters and
that, where there were divergences in that expert opinion, the differences had
been properly tested.
The Court would also need to be satisfied that the
materials before the Court covered the full range of relevant matters, and was
not confined to the narrow specialisations immediately relevant, in order to
overcome the possibility of special pleading that sometimes
arises from a
mixture of self-interest and obliviousness to considerations external to the
specific field of expertise.
12. The common law governs pre-trial procedures unless
statute intervenes (see
Esso Australia Resources Ltd v Federal Commissioner
of Taxation
[1999] HCA 67
(1999) 201 CLR 49
). In New South Wales that part of
the decision in
to which I have referred has been reversed in
criminal proceedings for a sexual assault offence in respect of counselling
communication
relating to the alleged victim by what is now
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW). The current proceedings are conducted
under Commonwealth legislation on the civil standard. There is no comparable
provision that applies to pre-trial procedure in respect to
confidential communications.
Benson & Hughes
[1994] FamCA 30
(1994) FLC 92-483
, Chisholm J noted that since
the House of Lords’ decision in
D v National Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Children
[1977] UKHL 1
[1978] AC 171
, the common law recognised that the
confidentiality of information disclosing the identity of a person who reported
suspected child
abuse to a child protection organisation attracted public
interest immunity.
14. Another example of where a public interest immunity has been extended by
analogy was
Goldy & Goldy (No. 2)
[2011] FamCA 418
where Dawe J held
that “the Kids Helpline” attracted public interest immunity because
it was an organisation which relied
upon its confidentiality for its very
15. More recently, some judges have suggested that in parenting cases a
therapeutic counselling relationship might attract public
interest immunity if
the release of notes might victimise a parent or affect their parenting
capacity. Berman J in
Smith & Duke
[2015] FamCA 990
quotes Judge Harman in
Jermyn & Carling
(2012) FMCAfam 814
approval. The mother in this case relies on statements made by Cronin J in
Merrill & Burt
[2015] FamCA 159.
His Honour quotes what
Spigelman CJ said in
at [93] (set out above) and then Cronin J
goes on to say:
The general public interest in
confidence in therapeutic relationships may not be a recognised category, but
the specific interest
in protecting the best interests of children – in
this case, by maintaining the confidence of a therapeutic relationship which
improves the mother’s ability to parent the children – may be a
category capable of ‘recognition’.
16. Cronin J concludes at
....The Act (
a reference to
Family Law Act
) consistently places the child or children’s best
interests at the forefront of any decision regarding parenting such that
courts may well have recognised, to echo Spigelman J’s [sic] words (
reference to [93] in
), the reconciliation of these two
principles through which a confidential therapeutic relationship may be
protected. There is no
evidence here that these children are at risk such that
their best interests would be served by breaking the confidentiality of the
therapeutic relationship
17. I prefer the view expressed by Spigelman CJ in
as to the manner in which new categories of public immunity interest
may be recognised and accordingly, with respect, I am reticent
to adopt the new
category suggested by Cronin J, absent proper evidentiary material and
demonstration of a level of community acceptance
of this new category of public
interest immunity.
Whilst the published decision seems to attribute these words to
Spigelman CJ in
, that is an obvious formatting error.
(Emphasis in the original)
20 For the reasons given by Watts J, I prefer his
and Chief Justice Spigelman’s views. The extension of public interest
to the records of a treating psychologist is not a matter that should
be decided in the present context where the broader issues
referred to by
Spigelman CJ in
(1999) 46 NSWLR 681 have not been canvassed.
Nonetheless, this Court records its tentative view that it finds the concerns of
psychologist to be compelling. Consistent with cases such as
& Sisinis & Anors
[2014] FamCA 912
Tsocas & Rilak
[2018] FamCA 981
the needs of X are a relevant principle to guide the
conduct of the case. There are, of course, other relevant principles and issues.
21 In any event, this Court dismisses the application for review.
22 The Court accepts the father’s submission that the Affidavit filed
by the psychologist on 16 June 2021 annexing his two reports
dated 17 June 2019
and 18 January 2021 cannot possibly be viewed as the evidence of a person
treating the child for the purposes
of r 15.41(1)(a) of the Rules. The reports
indicate that the psychologist has gone well beyond merely giving evidence about
matters referred to in subparagraphs (i)-(iii) of r 15.41(1)(a). For
example, in both reports, the psychologist expresses opinions
ultimate issue in this case, i.e., the nature and extent of the father’s
time with X in a prospective sense.
23 Given that the evidence from the psychologist is inadmissible, what is the
ostensible purpose of the subpoena? In other words,
how is it relevant? When
the submissions made on behalf of the father are scrutinised, it seems that the
purpose is to demonstrate,
in effect, the lack of weight to be placed on the
evidence because the psychologist has become partisan in merely reinforcing to
the child the mother’s version of events. The father questions the
psychologist’s capacity to continue to provide therapeutic
assistance to
the child. The father also refers to the psychologist’s notes providing
evidence of what the child has told his
father, whilst at the same time
acknowledging that this evidence is available by way of a single joint expert
report already available
to the Court.
24 In the circumstances it is the father’s own submissions that
demonstrate to the Court that the material sought by way of
subpoena to the
psychologist is irrelevant. Even though the father has concerns about the
treatment being provided by the psychologist
to the child, there is no
application on foot in relation to this. The documents are irrelevant. The
subpoena should have been dismissed.
The learned Registrar made the correct
decision. Accordingly, the application for review is dismissed.
I certify that the preceding twenty-four (24)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 27 August 2021
RTF format (376 KB)
Signed PDF/A format