Joustra & Schuman [2025] FedCFamC2F 1478 (22 October 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Joustra & Schuman
[2025] FedCFamC2F
File number(s):
CRC 229 of 2022
Judgment of:
JUDGE SUTHERS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Parenting – second
tranche of parenting proceedings with final orders previously made in 2023
– s65DAAA satisfied
– where mother had alleged father posed an
unacceptable risk of harm and unilaterally suspended time – where mother
longer alleged unacceptable risk at trial – court considers
‘meaningful relationship’ and phraseology informing
s60CC(2)(e)
– court satisfied father did not perpetrate family violence or sexual
abuse upon child – court satisfied
mother poses an unacceptable risk of
harm to child’s emotional/ psychological safety – unacceptable risk
posed by mother
able to be ameliorated – child to live with father and
father to have sole parental responsibility– initial moratorium
child’s time with mother – progression of supervised to unsupervised
time with mother
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Amendment Act 2023
(Cth), sch 1, items 4 and 6
Family Law Amendment Bill 2023
(Cth) Explanatory Memorandum
United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child
done at New
York on 20 November 1989
Cases cited:
Blinko & Blinko
[2015] FamCAFC 146
Carlevaro & Carlevaro
[2024] FedCFamC2F 1736
Eastley & Eastley
[2022] FedCFamC1A 101
Isles & Nelissen
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
Jagatramka v Wollongong Coal Ltd
[2021] NSWCA 61
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Kuhl v Zurich Financial Services Australia Ltd
[2011] HCA 11
(2011) 243 CLR 361
Mazorski & Albright
[2007] FamCA 520
(2008) 37 Fam LR 518
McCall & Clark
[2009] FamCAFC 92
Napier & Hepburn
[2006] FamCA 1316
; (2006) 35 Fam LR 395
Pickford & Pickford
[2024] FedCFamC1A 249
Russell & Close
[1993] FamCA 62
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
4-6 August 2025
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Karen Rands Legal
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Schleiger Lawyers
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Mr Priestley
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Universal Law
CRC 229 of 2022
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
JUDGE SUTHERS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Final Orders made 17 February 2023
previous parenting orders are discharged.
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (‘the Act’), upon
the handing down of this judgment, MS SCHUMAN (‘the mother’)
to immediately vacate the courtroom and exit the Newcastle Registry of the Court
at 61 Bolton Street, Newcastle (‘
the registry
from returning to
the registry
and/or loitering within the
curtilage of
the registry
until after
born in 2019
(‘X’) has left
the registry
or until close of business
today (whichever is the earlier); and
from encouraging and/or requesting any person from remaining and/or returning to
the registry
until after X has left
the registry
until close of business today (whichever is the earlier).
of the Act, MR JOUSTRA (‘the father’) is prohibited from
leaving the courtroom
until the mother has vacated the courtroom and foyer of
the courtroom
and after this time, he is to make his way to Level 2 of
the registry
to collect X.
2 and 3 may be communicated by the parties to any support person(s) that may
have attended with the parents today.
responsibility
father shall have sole parental responsibility and decision-making for major
long-term issues about
born in 2019
‘Lives with’ arrangement
shall live with the father.
‘Spends time with’
moratorium arrangement
a period of about eight (8) weeks, X shall spend no time with the mother
the moratorium
facilitate Order 7, and pursuant to
of the Act, the mother is restrained,
and an injunction is granted prohibiting her from –
to contact or approach or communicate with X until otherwise permitted by these
to any action taken by X to contact or approach or communicate with her (or via
another person) until otherwise permitted
by these Orders,
any other person(s) from doing any act that is contrary to the injunctions made
against her as contained within these Orders
including causing those person(s)
passing messages to X or communicating with X on her behalf, and
upon X’s school or extra-curricular activities whilst ever X is in
attendance or expected to be in attendance.
the moratorium
, should the mother become aware of X taking any
action to contact, approach or communicate with her by any means (including via
person(s)), then the mother shall forthwith notify the father in writing
of the details.
‘Spends time with’
arrangement
Professional supervision
the conclusion of
the moratorium
and unless otherwise agreed in
writing between the parents, X shall spend professionally supervised time with
the mother on four
(4) occasions over a period of eight (8) weeks
Saturday 13 December 2025 until Saturday 31 January 2026
for two (2) hours
each alternate Saturday to be professionally supervised by a children’s
being B Contact Service at City D (in the first instance) until C Contact
Service at City D has capacity
to accept the family for supervision
the supervisor
’) PROVIDED THAT:
parent is permitted to provide a copy of these Orders to
parent will comply with all reasonable written directions and requests made by
the supervisor
including attendance at intake sessions and other
meetings and ensuring that X is available for supervision sessions (including
applicable) a change in time or location specified within these Orders,
times when supervised time shall occur are to be agreed upon in writing by the
parents and
the supervisor
, and failing agreement then at the sole
discretion of
the supervisor
parent shall be responsible for any intake fee or other meeting fee applicable
for session(s) between themselves and the supervisor,
parent shall be responsible for one-half of the costs of professional
supervision between X and the mother including as to any
orientation visit
conducted beforehand.
the conclusion of supervised time in accordance with Order 10, and unless
otherwise agreed in writing between the parents, X
shall spend time with the
’) as follows:
Term 1 2026 as exercised by X’s school from 9:00am Saturday to 5:00pm
Sunday each alternate weekend
commencing Saturday 14 February 2026
changeovers to be supervised by
the supervisor
the conclusion of Order 11.a., on each alternate weekend during school terms as
exercised by X’s school from 3:00pm (or
the conclusion of school) Friday
until 9:00am (or the commencement of school) Monday.
is suspended during
school holiday
‘School holiday time’
otherwise agreed in writing between the parents, commencing
from the Autumn
school holidays in 2026
, X shall spend time with the mother during any
school holiday period (
‘school holiday time
exercised by X’s school (‘
the first half in even numbered years, and
the second half in odd numbered years,
and to facilitate
the calculation of
school holiday
and the midway changeover, the
school holiday
commences at 3:00pm (or the conclusion of school on
the last day that X is required to attend), changeover on the middle day will
occur at 12:00 noon, and the
school holiday
concludes at 3:00pm on
the day before X is required to attend school at the start of the next school
holiday time
is suspended during
Miscellaneous – ‘spends time
with’ arrangement
resumption of
, the pattern of the alternate weekend
arrangement pursuant to Order 11.b. above will resume on the weekend that the
weekend would
have otherwise occurred, had
school holiday time
Special occasions with the parents
otherwise specified or agreed in writing between the parents, any ‘lives
with’ or ‘spends time with’
arrangements for X are suspended
so that X spends time with each of the parents on the following special
occasions (‘
Christmas Day
the father from 12:00noon on Christmas Eve to 5:00pm Boxing Day in odd numbered
years commencing in 2025,
the mother from 12:000 noon on Christmas Eve to 5:00pm Boxing Day in even
numbered years commencing in 2026,
X is not in a parent’s household on the morning of X’s birthday,
THEN with that parent from 3:00pm (or the conclusion
of school) on his birthday
to 9:00am (or the commencement of school) on the following
Mother’s Day
is not already spending time with the mother on Mother’s Day, THEN with
the mother from 5:00pm on the Saturday of the Mother’s
Day weekend until
9:00am (or the commencement of school) on the Monday immediately following
Mother’s Day,
Father’s Day
is not already living with the father on Father’s Day, THEN with the
father from 5:00pm on the Saturday of the Father’s
Day weekend until
9:00am (or the commencement of school) on the Monday immediately following
Father’s Day.
Changeovers
when supervised changeovers are no longer required, each parent shall do all
acts necessary to ensure that:
, changeovers occur at X’s school, and
special occasions
school holiday time
changeover does not occur at school pursuant to the Orders, the changeover
location shall be as agreed between the parents
in writing, failing which,
changeover shall occur at the City E Library carpark.
otherwise agreed in writing between the parents or at the written direction of
the children’s school/s (as may be applicable),
changeovers:
parent is permitted to appoint a nominee known to X (‘
’) to facilitate a face-to-face changeover PROVIDED THAT
the nominating parent shall give the other parent at least 24 hours’
written notice of their decision, and
nominating parent satisfies themselves beforehand that
the nominee
can adhere to the terms of their role, including to be:
towards the other
or the other parent (as the case may
of X’s emotions, and
to facilitate each parent’s compliance with Orders about the terms of
changeovers (such as being on time and having
transition).
Injunctions to keep X
Notwithstanding
in combination, Orders 11 and 17 permit X to spend unsupervised
with the mother with (from a point in time) changeovers to occur at
school; the mother is restrained, and an injunction shall issue
prohibiting her
from otherwise attending:
school to participate in or be present at any special events where X would be
expected to participate or be present; and
of X’s extra-curricular activities (including being visible to X before
and after dance lessons where she may not be his
teacher, but she is still
within the precincts of the building where lessons are
conducted).
from the date of these Orders and up to the day before any Easter Hat school
parade in 2026 or the commencement of Term 2 2026 (whichever
occurs sooner)
and to facilitate this Order - (1) the term
means the mother or X
supporting other persons who are participating - whether public-facing or
backstage as well as being in the
audience whether as a student or staff member
or school volunteer, and (2) the term
special events
anticipates, school
productions, end of school year ceremonies and commencement of school year
ceremonies.
the day of any Easter Hat parade in 2026 or the commencement of Term 2 2026
(whichever occurs sooner) the mother is permitted to attend:
school for special events that X is participating in and to which parents would
normally be invited, including school assemblies,
school carnivals,
parent-teacher interviews (although there is no expectation that X or the father
attends at the same session as
the mother) and any other school or
educational-related events, and
extra-curricular events or activities that X is participating in and to which
parents would normally attend.
parents are restrained, and an injunction shall issue prohibiting them
with X this proceeding including any allegations raised,
X to have access to any documents produced or arising from the proceedings,
negative, derogative or disparaging comments about the other parent or members
of the other parent’s family or members
of the other parent’s
household in the presence of X or permitting X to remain in earshot of any other
person doing so.
Ancillary matters to support X
parent shall provide to the other his or her emergency contact details including
their phone number, residential address and
email address, and shall keep other
informed of any change by written notice within seven (7) days of such
otherwise specified, the parents shall communicate with each other by email and
any reference in these Orders to
written notice
or an agreement
shall occur by email.
X suffer a serious illness or accident requiring urgent medical treatment and/or
hospitalisation (including presentation or
admission at an emergency department
and transportation to and from a hospital in an ambulance), THEN the parent in
whose care X
is in shall notify the other parent by telephone call as soon as
the exercise of sole parental responsibility, the father will keep the mother
informed in writing of all educational, medical and
allied health decisions made
by him about X.
Notwithstanding
the allocation of sole parental responsibility, each parent shall (at their sole
cost) be at liberty to receive copies
of all school reports, school notices,
school photographs and newsletters about X or from X’s school and this
Order shall be
sufficient authority for such purpose.
Notwithstanding
the allocation of sole parental responsibility, each parent shall (at their sole
cost) be at liberty to obtain any
information they may require from any of
X’s treating doctors or allied health professionals and this Order shall
be sufficient
authority for such purpose.
parent is responsible for ensuring that X attends any extra-curricular
activities that he is enrolled to participate in, and
which fall during times
when he is in their respective care.
father is authorised, and these Orders are sufficient authority for him to
provide a copy of these Orders to
the supervisor
, any of X’s
education providers (including any welfare or counselling officers),
extra-curricular providers and medical or
allied health professionals.
addition to Order 29, if the father deems it necessary, he may provide a copy of
the judgment to any of X’s treating medical
and allied health
professionals including counsellors and psychologists.
parent is authorised to provide a copy of these Orders to any
they are considering appointing.
FURTHER DIRECTS THAT:
Immediately
following the pronouncement of judgment, the Senior Court Child Expert is to
personally meet with X at Level 2 of
the registry
to explain to X
the effect and purpose of these Orders including that the father will be
removing X from
the registry
outstanding applications are dismissed.
an application for costs be filed, THEN pursuant to rr 5.02(2)(c) and 5.09 of
the Rules, the application will be listed for
hearing before Judge Suthers in
chambers with no appearances required.
THE COURT NOTES
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules
(Cth) applies.
was expert evidence that after the making of these Orders, X should be engaged
with psychological support and/or a play therapist
or a sand play therapist
holding a social science degree and having a background in child development and
family therapy who work
with separated parents. In the allocation of sole
parental responsibility, it is the Court’s expectation that the father
take all reasonable steps to afford the child that opportunity.
way of example only, an intended consequence of
the moratorium
the injunctive restraint against the mother at Order 19 is that the dance
lessons that X presently enjoy may need to be (at least)
temporarily suspended
by the father to ameliorate the high risk of X actively looking for his mother
at the risk of him becoming
emotionally dysregulated or interrupting the lesson
itself. Whether the father chooses to temporarily suspend or simply cancel
extra-curricular activities for X is at his sole
discretion.
of the reasons why the father has been permitted to publish these Orders to
specified third persons is so that those persons can
mitigate (as best they can)
any potential for X becoming distressed if, for whatever reason, the mother
takes steps which could be
seen as being in contravention of these Orders
including the injunctive restraint at Order 19.
father is at liberty to change X’s school enrolment from the commencement
of these Orders. Given the emotional trauma that
X will experience as a result
of the making of these Orders, the Court expects that any such transition is
handled empathetically
by the applicable educators and those caring for X.
allocating sole parental responsibility to the father, the Court reflected on
the evidence of the court child expert about the
potential benefits for X to
remain at F School as being somewhat of a “protective factor”
to bolster his exposure to
a change of residence from his mother to his father.
However, the mother’s evidence was that she continues to regularly work
an educator and the intention of these Orders is not for the mother’s
employment to be imperilled.
allocation of sole parental responsibility and the above notations are also
informed by the likely confusion X would feel if he
continued attending
but is not permitted (or cannot find) his mother when in the past
he could, versus the court child expert’s views about the
importance for
the child in maintaining connections with his classroom peers and familiarity
with the school environs. In other
words, a clean break, although initially
difficult, may ultimately be in the child’s best interests and any
decision about
education is best left for the father.
to s 114S of the Act, where these Orders permit a party to publish the Orders,
the judgment, or a court document to a third
person, this is not a communication
to the public.
34 was informed by the parties’ consent to any costs application being
determined in chambers in the absence of the
to ss 65DA (2) and 62B of the Act, particulars of the obligations that these
orders create, particulars of the consequences
that may follow contravention of
these orders, and details of assistance to comply with these orders are set out
in the attached
Fact Sheet, which forms part of these orders.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE SUTHERS
INTRODUCTION
is the second tranche of family law litigation for a boy who was only a toddler
when his parents first came to this Court for
could not quell the parental controversy, the zenith being the mother alleging
the father posed an
unacceptable sexual risk of harm to their son. The options
are a version of the status quo or a radical transition, and both carry
emotional trauma to the child. What is the right balance?
otherwise specified, legislative references are to the
Family Law Act
(Cth) (‘the Act’).
applicant is MR JOUSTRA (‘the father’). The respondent is MS
SCHUMAN, (‘the mother’). Ms Fletcher is
the Independent
Children’s Lawyer (‘the ICL’). A reference to ‘the
parties’ is a reference to all
three (3) persons as a collective. A
reference to ‘the parents’ is self-obviously a reference to the
mother and the
father as a collective.
subject child is X (‘X’ or ‘the child’) who was born in
2019 and is now six (6) years of age.
of respect for each person’s gender and social status, all persons will be
identified by their surnames unless they are
parties and where applicable, there
will be an avoidance of the use of gendered pronouns.
by the evidence and submissions, the following issues were significant in my
overall consideration of the matters identified
and other relevant
legislative provisions:
What are the
child’s current developmental, psychological, and emotional needs and what
will be the impacts upon him if these
needs are not properly managed?
What is the
nature of the child’s relationship with each of his parents and
significant others?
Has the father
perpetrated family violence against the mother?
Has the father
perpetrated family violence and/or sexual abuse upon the child
Is the physical,
emotional and/or psychological safety of the child at risk in the care of either
father’s parental capacity impaired?
What is the
level of effective and respectful communication between the parents about issues
involving the child?
What weight
should the court give to the views and/or expressions of the child?
What is the
impact upon the child from each party’s proposal and/or any other proposal
being considered by the Court?
an ICL is appointed, in my experience and at the end of trials, it is usual for
the ICL to make an application pursuant to
In this matter, the
ICL’s counsel submitted that such an application should wait until the
parenting judgment was published
and that, in any event, no application could be
sustained against the mother because she was currently in receipt of a grant of
Anecdotally,
this case management pathway can be inadvertently deleterious for the ICL
because I understand that it is not always
easy for them to secure additional
funding to bring a costs application post-judgment, but it was the ICL’s
contention so perhaps
she knows something I don’t about the internal
funding processes of Legal Aid NSW.
short compass I intend to make orders and notations with the following
(a) The father shall have sole parental responsibility for X,
(b) X shall live with the father,
(c) X shall be quarantined from any contact or communication with the mother for
the moratorium
’) immediately
following pronouncement of my Orders,
(d) Following
the moratorium
, X shall spend time with the mother
on a regularised and specified basis, commencing with supervision and then by
the start of the
2026 Autumn school holidays - without the need for supervision
of time or of changeovers,
(e) X will not have any communication with the parent he is not living with or
spending time with,
(f) Ancillary orders to facilitate X’s living circumstances and keep him
very broad terms –
(a) The father and the ICL both sought that X live with the father who should
have sole parental responsibility and that after a
two-month moratorium on
specified time with the mother
during school terms and school holidays
(initially supervised).
(b) The mother sought that X remain living with her and that she should have
sole parental responsibility with X to spend regularised
and specified time with
the father during school terms and school holidays.
pressed and indeed informed by their proposals, the parties submitted that
was satisfied because –
(a) a significant change in circumstances had occurred since the final parenting
orders were made on 17 February 2023 (‘
the 2023 Final
(b) I should be satisfied that, in all the circumstances (and taking into
account whether there has been a significant change of
circumstances since those
Orders were made), that it was in the best interests of X for those Orders to be
reconsidered.
OBSERVATIONS ABOUT THE PRESENTATION OF THE WITNESSES
the Act, one (1) of the principles for the conduct of child-related proceedings
is that the proceeding should, as far as possible,
be conducted in a manner that
will promote co-operative and child-focused parenting by the
For me, that means that,
unless necessary to inform findings of substance, I will be slow to make adverse
findings about how witnesses
present their evidence including as to their
credibility.
Kuhl v Zurich Financial Services Australia Ltd
[2011] HCA 11
(2011) 243 CLR 361
Kuhl v Zurich Financial
’) at [62], it was said:
Witnesses are supposed to answer questions put by counsel responsively: they are
supposed to give a full answer, but no more. It
is one thing to say that a
witness was not asked the right questions. It is another thing to say that a
witness did not answer the
questions that were asked. And it is an even more
serious thing to say that a witness was “reluctant” to answer. The
duty of a witness is to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth so far as the questions asked seek it. The duty
of a witness to answer
questions responsively involves not only a negative duty (not to volunteer
material for which the question
does not call), but also a positive duty (to
proffer all material within the witness’s knowledge for which the question
a very limited extent the father was non-responsive insofar as he volunteered
material for which the question did not call, although
overall I assessed the
father’s testimony to be generally responsive, making concessions against
interest where it was appropriate
father was sympathetic to the mother and her situation, notwithstanding some of
the actions she took against him and allegations
she made about him.
18 October 2022 and then again on 17 September 2024, court child expert MS G
’) produced s 62G child impact reports
the first CIR
gave insightful and impartial expert evidence which exposed the
factual foundations of her reasoning informed by her expertise.
Carlevaro & Carlevaro
[2024] FedCFamC2F 1736
’) I compared the court’s expectations
between a child impact report and a family
and those observations were
reinforced by what I heard from
. In summary,
made appropriate concessions that her evidence was necessarily
constrained by the remit of her engagement as a child impact report
rather than as a family report writer.
example, during cross-examination by the mother’s counsel,
was frank in saying –
My reports are – are limited. They are primarily meant for interim
proceedings. A change of residency is a significant issue,
and it would be
something I would be, I think, more comfortable speaking to had I had completed
a family report. I haven’t
seen [X] for a long time. He started school,
and I haven’t explored all of the concerns as thoroughly as a family
report would.
own candid views about the limitations to her
opinions, I accept her evidence.
14 May 2025, psychiatric single expert witness DR H (‘
’) produced a s 62G psychiatric assessment of both
gave professional evidence that was clearly impartial, informed by what they had
observed and largely, their evidence was accepted
without challenge. Where
there was challenge, I accept what
opined as having a
sound factual foundation with the reasoning properly made out from a position of
specialised knowledge.
the mother relied upon the affidavit of MRS SCHUMAN (‘the maternal
grandmother’) filed 10 July 2024. At the
beginning of the final day of
the trial, the mother’s counsel submitted that the mother no longer relied
upon that affidavit
nor sought to call the maternal grandmother has a
response, counsel for the ICL submitted that the ICL would not be taking any
point, nor asking for any inference to be drawn despite
for the father adopted the more conventional approach that aligned with the
principle espoused within
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
[1959] HCA 8
101 CLR 298
32 ALJR 395
to the effect (relevantly) that where there was an
unexplained failure by a party to call a witness, then in appropriate
circumstances,
this may lead to an inference that the uncalled evidence would
not have assisted the party. However, absent the appropriate circumstances,
am not bound to draw the adverse inference and where drawn, the principle cannot
be used to fill gaps in the evidence or to convert
conjecture into
mother’s testimony was of considerable concern and rather than make
unhelpful sweeping conclusions here, I will address
the more significant credit
issues as they arose during the course of my findings.
of facts as set out below should constitute findings of fact unless otherwise
What are the child’s current developmental,
psychological, and emotional needs and what will be the impacts upon him if
needs are not properly managed?
her trial affidavit, the mother described X as relying on her for
care and nurturing and when it comes to emotions and stability, [X] has always
sought me out.
described her son as having trouble separating from her which can mean that
rather than going to after-school care with
her parents (so that she can go to
work), X has instead gone with the mother to her
commenced kindergarten at F School in February 2025 and although his residential
address precluded him from being within the ‘school
mother says that the child was accepted via the school principal signing an out
of zone enrolment form.
mother’s evidence was to the effect that X was thriving within his current
educational environment, and a change of schools
would not offer him the same
opportunities.
stated that since X was a baby
he has come to work with me at school
The mother enthused
... [X] knows where everything is and has a routine there. A lot of the staff
have been involved in [X]’s growth and development
from when he was a
baby. [X] has structure and stability at his school. [X] also has lots of
friends at his current school and
many of them attended preschool ([K
Preschool]) with [X]. [X] (P)reschool is a transition school into [F] School.
[X] is also an
active leader of the kindergarten dance group which he enjoys
mother said that her son was becoming settled into the routines between his
parents’ homes although this has been
difficult for
Later on, the mother
deposed about these difficulties, including about X’s clingy behaviours
towards her arising from his complaints
for too long during the 2025 Autumn and Winter school holidays, and that
or “7 nights” was too long away from
father’s unchallenged evidence was that the child was acutely aware of his
mother’s dislike for the
The father said that
his son was affectionate and had a funny sense of humour but that he does
however like to “trick” people by telling them things that are
not necessarily true.
father described his son’s interests in toys and action heroes and
described him as being boisterous at times and that he
liked to keep
The father said that his
son is well behaved and generally compliant when directed to complete a task and
described a routine he
deploys with his son to ensure that his son goes to sleep
at night even if the child does not want to go to
father reflected on his son’s attendance at (and enjoyment of) dance
classes and that the child had a
close relationship
with both of
father readily acknowledged that a change of residence for X would be
significant but that his son was resilient and whilst he
would miss his mother,
the father considered that X would
settle into a new regime living with me
relatively well and look forward to spending time with [Ms
father described X as being
impressionable
and that the mother had at
times projected her anxiety onto their son. It seemed that this concern came
from the father’s observation
that when the child spends time with him
(away from the mother’s influence or presence) the child was
normally an anxious child and he is not anxious when he sees me and when he
spends time with me.
who may take the child, a fortnight of regularised activities for X during
school terms looks something like
Table 1 – X’s school term activities
8:55am to 2:55pm Kindergarten
8:55am to 2:55pm Kindergarten
8:55am to 2:55pm Kindergarten
8:55am to 2:55pm Kindergarten
8:55am to 2:55pm Kindergarten
3:30pm to 5:45pm –
Dance lessons at J Centre
3:30pm to 6:30pm –
Dance lessons at J Centre
Evenings – Sports (only when in father’s care)
5:30pm to 6:00pm – Swimming lessons
8:55am to 2:55pm Kindergarten
8:55am to 2:55pm Kindergarten
8:55am to 2:55pm Kindergarten
8:55am to 2:55pm Kindergarten
8:55am to 2:55pm Kindergarten
3:30pm to 5:45pm –
Dance lessons at J Centre
3:30pm to 6:30pm –
Dance lessons at J Centre
5:30pm to 6:00pm -Swimming lessons
The second CIR
suggested that since October 2023 the mother has
been taking X to play therapy and that at least at the time of interview in
2024, the child was attending weekly sessions: 2CIR- [9]. When that
occurs was not clear to me and this may be a limitation to the
above Table.
mother has part-time employment as an educator, which I reasonably infer she
considers provides a level of familiarity that is
of comfort to X. The mother
said that X also spends (and enjoys) time at the home of the maternal
grandparents each week
evidence was not corroborated by the maternal grandmother (nor it has to be
said, was it challenged by the father).
has had the benefit of observing X on two (2) occasions
during significant stages of his formative development, firstly in 2022 when
was three (3) years of age and then again in 2024 when he was five (5) years of
cross-examination,
was clear to say that a limitation to
any opinions she could proffer about the child; and for example, his capacity to
change, was that since her last observation, the child had commenced
formal education which necessarily would have caused him to
significant changes to his lived environment during school days which would have
exposed him to extended structured time
in a learning environment rather than
the more informal play settings of pre-school and at-home care offered by those
who love him.
that prism, in their latest report,
observed the child to
happy, energetic boy with limited focus during interview
reassurance from
on two separate occasions during interview
but on each of those occasions X did return to play and talk with
child was observed by
somewhat fanciful
prone to embellishment when responding to (for example) a question about what he
ate for breakfast which
appropriate
noted the opposing narratives of the parents about X’s alleged exposure to
the father’s perpetration of family
violence and/or child abuse or the
mother’s false allegations,
considered that the
mother’s decision to expose X to play therapy was a protective factor
which would
likely support [X] to overcome any adverse childhood experiences
and build resilience.
identified the adverse impacts for children (and
more particularly X) if they are exposed to family violence and child abuse, or
conversely false allegations of such events (because the child still considers
themselves to be victims, even if in reality they
In conclusion, in 2022
observed X to be moving out of babyhood and into the early
stages of childhood with his development considered to be
largely dependent
on his feelings of safety and happiness, stemming from the availability and
support of his parents.
expressed concern for X’s wellbeing due to the intensity of
the conflict between the parents and regardless of whether that
exposure is
direct or indirect, it can result in
increased risk of experiencing regular
and frequent stress.
2024, the previous warm relationship observed between father and son had
dissipated into the child expressing views that were not
age-appropriate,
negative and incongruent with what was understood to be his experiences in the
care of the father.
was so concerned by what she observed
that she made a mandatory report to the Department of Communities and Justice
’) and opined that the child could be at risk of
losing his relationship with a safe, loving and protective
expressed similar views about the impact upon X
through the loss of a ‘safe’ parent which it would seem were
by the child having not spent any time with the father for about seven
(7) months (as at the date of interviews in September
their interview with
, X was recorded as saying things like
his father had “put his willy on my leg” and being negative about
the father.
As part of their opinions about X’s developmental stage,
opined that the child would be expected to become more
independent, form friendships with preferred peers, follow rules and tell
stories including
‘fantasy’ or ‘made up’
described features of X’s expected stage of development (now
that he has started kindergarten) and that, based on at least
reports from the
child’s preschool, there was a risk of the child’s development and
wellbeing regressing.
their oral testimony,
opined that play therapy would
continue to be of utility for X and if a change of residence was ordered, (1)
that the child should
engage with a “
play therapist or a sand play
”, (2) that the preference would be for the therapist to have
social science degree
” and (3) that it would be preferable
they had a background in child development and family therapy and
worked with parents who had separated
the prism of a potential change in X’s primary residence and not having
been exposed to any material or observations
of or about X’s engagement
with kindergarten,
was clear to say that the continuation
of his enrolment at the current school would be of beneficial support to him
provided his
experience is
giving their evidence, it was unclear to me whether
aware that the mother also worked at the school. This is not a criticism but
reinforces some of the limitations previously expressed
themselves as to their opinions.
up the evidence, I am satisfied that X is at an important developmental stage
where he is simultaneously growing in independence
and wanting to form peer
relationships independent of his carers but yet remaining capable of telling
real and imagined stories,
as well as being heavily reliant upon his carers to
keep him safe (physically, emotionally and psychologically). Reducing his
to parental conflict within the school environs (where his peer group
will be predominant) should be a priority so that he has an
emotionally safe
space to simply enjoy being a child and a friend.
am also satisfied that irrespective of who is the perpetrator, X is a victim and
that his development is at significant risk of
harm because of his exposure to
acts of harm caused by one (1) or other of his parents. Without appropriate
amelioration of the
impacts of his exposure, I accept
opinions about the likely adverse impacts for X’s
future prospects (as described first in 2022 and then again in 2024 and as
explored at the trial in 2025).
What is the nature of the child’s relationship with each
of his parents and significant others?
summary of the child’s lived experience provides important context to this
was born in 2019.
April 2021 (months before separation), the parents acted on a doctor’s
referral and took X to see paediatrician, DR L.
During the paediatric
consultation, various behavioural issues were discussed and in
cross-examination, the father agreed that the
expert opinion was that X’s
behaviours were
within the realms of normal toddler behaviour
somewhat exaggerated
and that the child had
some separation anxiety
and difficulties regulating his emotions
October 2021, the parents separated.
Notwithstanding
that the child was born into an intact relationship where the parties shared the
same home, the mother said that she
was X’s primary carer, and the mother
considered it a relevant fact that X was breastfed by her for two and a half
The mother’s trial
affidavit did not disclose any direct observations by the mother about the
father’s positive parenting
attributes whilst the parents lived together
but she decided that it was still a relevant fact for me to know that
14. When [Mr Joustra] and I were together, I recall several occasions where [X]
had hurt himself by falling over or skinning his
knee when he was crawling or
learning to walk, he would seek me our (sic) over [X].
[Mr Joustra] was
generally secondary
to me when it came to these things with [X].
(my emphasis)
response to the father’s trial affidavit, the mother said that the child
was never left in the father’s sole care,
that she took over a year of
maternity leave so she could be with X and that
I was always around
When the mother was
challenged about this first assertion, she resiled from it and conceded that at
times the father did care for
the child on his own. In cross-examination and
despite not making this concession in her trial affidavit, the mother agreed
at separation the child had a “good relationship” with the
combination, the above evidence demonstrates the disingenuous approach of the
mother insofar as when she is not expecting a spontaneous
challenge (as was the
case when she prepared her affidavit and would be the case when she is with a
child as young as X), but when
she realises her views may not be helpful to her,
she can be mercurial.
separation, the child has lived primarily with the mother. The father described
X as enjoying his dance lessons and that the
child’s relationship with the
a holistic approach, there was no doubt that
found that X
had a close relationship with the mother but that the child was (in 2024) being
resist-refuse dynamics
within that
relationship.
recalling events around X being observed with the father in 2022 (and by way of
a demonstration of the incongruency between what
the mother says and then does
oral testimony was this –
MR KELLY: You prepared a report back in 2022 and you have that before you.
And I’m just looking at paragraph 10 of that
report and paragraph 13.
It’s the case, isn’t it, that when you saw [X] and the father back
in 2022, [X] had a good
relationship with his father? Can you describe that for
[MS G]: The relationship or what I observed that day?
MR KELLY: Of what you observed?
[MS G]: Yes, I do remember that day. [X] was with [Ms Shuman] and his maternal
grandmother, and it took some time for [X] to come
to leave his mum. [Ms
Shuman] was physically holding onto [X] but encouraging him to spend time with
Dad. But when he finally did
come into the hallway, he ran excitedly –
quite excitedly and yelled out “Daddy” to [Mr Joustra]. And their
together was very positive. [X] seemed very relaxed. He was quite
boisterous and vocal at that age. He played very well with –
Joustra] followed his child-led play. It was a very positive – a positive
observation, or an observation of positive
experiences between father and son on
MR KELLY: A moment ago you said that when [X] came with his mother, she was
physically holding him and encouraging him. What did
you mean by that?
[MS G]: Yes. So they were in – there was a large conference table, and
the two ladies were standing right at the end. And
[Ms Shuman] was holding [X],
like – so his little back was on her legs and had her hands on his
shoulders. But she was encouraging
him to go to his father. But the two
behaviours were slightly incongruent. She wasn’t actively, physically
encouraging him.
She was just reassuring him it was all right.
MR KELLY: ..... about holding his shoulders?
[MS G]: Yes, but not forcefully, but that physical comfort or reassurance that
parents – I don’t know. It seemed incongruent.
It seemed in
contrast with encouraging him, like getting down to his eye level and reassuring
him that it was all right to spend
time and that I would be there. There was
none of that, which we – which, you know, I often also see.
mother’s counsel cross-examined
resist-refuse dynamic
within the mother-son relationship and
evidence was somewhat ambivalent and qualified –
(a) by the family’s lived experience that notwithstanding previous
the 2023 Final Orders
, the child’s relationship with the
father had faltered with time stopping about a year afterwards, and then again
of the year and after
the interim orders
were made, and
(b) because while currently the latest stanza of consistent time suggested that
things may have turned around, “sometimes parents
do revert to behaviours
of concern” which is not necessarily informed by any duration of
supportive behaviours beforehand.
mother described X as having a warm and loving relationship with the extended
maternal family and this evidence was not challenged.
Similarly, the mother
gave unchallenged evidence about the child spending time with the maternal
grandparents four (4) or five (5)
times per week. The above evidence came from
paragraph 43 of the mother’s trial affidavit which made clear that the
(and X) derives a great deal of support from the maternal
grandparents.
mother went to some trouble to describe relationships that X has with maternal
uncles, aunties and other ‘family’
as well as arrangements she had
made for X to have playdates with his
both interviews with
, the mother’s negative views of
the father and the risks he posed to X were on full
and were incongruent (at
least in 2022) with how X behaved when he was observed with the father and in
the absence of the mother.
2024, X was not observed with the father and perhaps this was informed by both
the child’s expressions about his father and
the reality that although
the 2023 Final Orders
were made, X had not seen his father since
the mother unilaterally stopped time with the father in February of that year
citing various
risks posed by the father upon the child.
any direct evidence of how or why, the mother concluded that she wanted the
father and X to
have a strong, positive and meaningful relationship moving
I will return to findings of risk later, as to issues around the father-son
relationship, the mother’s written evidence
and testimony (informed by her
past behaviours when X has made disclosures) allow me to reasonably infer that
despite some limited
examples of
and the most recent
spate of fairly consistent time spent by the child with the father; the
mother’s above statement is completely
hollow and likely to collapse like
a pack of cards if the child makes a disclosure(s) that the mother considers to
be of substance.
the 2023 Final Orders
were made, the Act made reference to the
meaningful involvement
meaningful relationship
parenting framework informing decisions made pursuant to Part VII.
time, case law developed to fill the definitional gap within the Act, with the
starting point being the seminal opinion of Brown
[2007] FamCA 520
(2008) 37 Fam LR 518 (Brown
J) at [26] which
provided that –
26. ... “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful
relationship”, is synonymous with “significant”
turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of
consequence”. I proceed on the basis
that when considering the primary
considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful
relationship or a
meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant
and valuable to the child. It is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly
quantitive one. Quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of
considering the consequences of the application of
the presumption of equally
shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be,
where possible and in
their best interests, substantial and significant.
those sorts of terms have been
and instead informing
the exercise of discretion about a child’s best interests is a
consideration about –
the benefit to the child
of being able to have
a relationship
the child’s parents, and other people who are significant to the child,
where it is safe to do so.
(my emphasis)
has remained after the asserted simplification of Part VII is the retention of
United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child
New York on 20 November 1989 (‘
’) within the
Objects at s 60B.
due to the recency of amendments to the Act, there appears little (if any)
judicial attention on the impact upon the exercise
of discretion because of the
removal of ‘meaningful’ from the parenting legislative
Parliament made clear that its intention was to simplify
and that the
Court retained a wide discretion as to the application of the s 60CC
considerations, which to my mind does not translate
to a diminishment of the
case law informing the term “meaningful relationship”, just because
the term has been removed
from the Act.
the above observation, the
Family Law Amendment Bill 2023
Explanatory
Memorandum (2023)
the 2023 Explanatory
’) to the amending legislation provides some insights
into the Parliament’s intentions about how the new framework would
judicial discretion on children, their best interests and their relationships
with others. Some if not all of the relevant
paragraphs of
Explanatory Memorandum
are set out below –
26. Article 9(1) of the CRC recognises the right of a child not to be
separated from their parents against their will except where
it has been
determined to be in the child's in best interests. Article 9(1) recognises that
such a determination may be necessary
in cases involving neglect or abuse by a
parent, or where parents are living separately.
27. Article 9(3) outlines that children separated from one or both parents
right to maintain personal relations and contact with their parents,
except if it is contrary to their best interests.
The Bill expressly recognises and supports these rights
by providing
that, in determining what is in a child's best interests in parenting
proceedings, the court must consider:
• what arrangements promote the safety of the child and the child's
carers, including safety from family violence, abuse,
neglect or other harm (new
paragraph 60CC(2)(a)), and
the benefit of being able to maintain relationships with each
parent and other people who are significant to them, where it is safe
(new paragraph 60CC(2)(e)).
44. New paragraph 60CC(2)(e) provides that the court must consider the benefit
child of being able to have a relationship with the child's parents, and other
people who are
significant to the child, where it is safe to do so.
45. This consideration recognises the importance of parental relationships, and
relationships with other people who are significant
to the child (such as
grandparents or members of a broader kinship group) to a child's wellbeing.
Where appropriate and safe, parenting orders that ensure children benefit
from a close and nurturing relationship with their parents
46. No one particular arrangement will work for all children or all families,
whose needs are diverse and will change over time.
However, where safe and
appropriate, most children benefit from spending time with their parents not
only at the weekends and in
school holidays, but also during the school week,
and will also benefit from allowing each parent to be involved in the child's
routine and occasions and events that are of particular significance to
47. Paragraph 60CC(3)(e) recognises that while in the majority of cases the
courts will give consideration to the benefit to the
child of being able to
maintain an existing relationship with each parent and those significant to the
child, in some matters children
may not yet have had the opportunity to form a
relationship (such as where parents separate prior to the child's birth or when
child is very young). In these instances, the court should consider the
benefit to the child of being able to develop a relationship
with their parent
or other person of significance to the child.
(my emphasis)
parties made submissions about X’s “meaningful relationship”
with each of his parents as being a key consideration
because depending on what
Orders I made, I heard submissions that the character of those relationships may
be imperilled.
by the above circumstances, I am satisfied that the phraseology informing s
60CC(2)(e) at the very least suggests that if
Parliament did not intend for the
existing and longstanding case law on
meaningful relationship
, then where safe for a
child, relationship(s) with their parents and other significant persons would be
informed by the subject child
finding value in those relationships because those
relationship(s) appropriately and in a nuanced way embrace the child’s own
individual personality traits and developmental needs in a child-focussed and
loving manner that is capable of being found to be
close and nurturing
is because in the assessment of whether there is a benefit (or not), in the
maintenance or establishment of a relationship, the
Court must necessarily
assess the nature and quality of the relationship to the child, whether
described as meaningful, close or
as having a nurturing quality.
no such relationship exists or has been constrained, then
Explanatory Memorandum
suggests that nonetheless the Court should consider
the benefit to the child of being able to develop a relationship with their
or other person of significance to the
the prism of s 60CA, findings about s60CC(2)(e) would also be informed by
articles 8 and 9 of
, which, in summary,
acknowledge:
(a) The right of a child to preserve their identity including (relevantly)
family relations; and
(b) The right of a child to maintain personal relations and direct contact with
both parents on a regular basis except if it is contrary
to the child’s
best interests.
by all of the above circumstances, I am satisfied that at times, and despite the
mother’s minimisation of the father-son
relationship, X has had close and
nurturing relationships with both of his parents during and after his
parents’ separation
it has been about a year since
no direct evidence from
relationships look like now. For reasons that will be explored later, the best
I can make of it is
that X knows who his parents are, and that he feels
superficially safe in the care of the mother because (to be frank) that is
lived experience and is informed by a pervasive (but perhaps not
current) experience of a resist-refuse dynamic between them which
(at times) has
adversely impaired him feeling (or being able to feel) emotionally safe with the
is no doubt that the child has close and nurturing relationships with his
extended maternal family.
Has the father perpetrated family violence against the mother?
was common ground that the following police-related events occurred.
mid-2023 the father was the defendant to a provisional apprehended domestic
order issued by NSW Police and protecting the mother
provisional ADVO
’). Three (3) months later, the mother complained
to Police that the father had breached
the 2023 provisional ADVO
The Police decided not to press any charges. In October 2023 the mother
complained to the Police that the father had breached
the 2023 provisional
because of an issue with when X should have been returned by the
father to her. Once again, the Police decided not to press any
Seven (7) months after
the making of
the 2023 provisional ADVO
the mother made another
complaint and after detailing the child’s disclosure to the Police, the
mother was recorded as saying
that she was aware that the disclosure sounded
“far-fetched”.
Whether the mother thought that when the child first disclosed the information
to her, or only after she had started speaking to
the Police about it was not
clear. In any event, the Police decided not to press any charges but only after
the father had to suffer
the ignominy of being interviewed about a disclosure by
his young son and involving the father and a
mid-2024, the Police withdrew two (2) common assault charges against the father
(in which the mother was the alleged victim) as
provisional ADVO
the mother’s outline of case document, she contended that the father had
perpetrated family violence upon her. The father
was cross-examined about those
allegations, and the mother was cross-examined about the father’s
rejection of any such allegations.
up their written evidence, their presentation as witnesses and the tendered
material (particularly reports made by the mother
to the NSW Police Force),
there was insufficient evidence to make the finding sought by the mother.
summary this was because:
(a) In her original Notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 11
August 2022
, the mother did not
identify the family violence allegedly perpetrated by the father upon her as
including any ‘sexual’
experiences but more lately the mother
decided that was the case.
(b) During cross-examination, various allegations were put to the father (about
events during the relationship) and he denied them
all. In doing so his
presentation as a witness was of someone being honest and responsive to each
question and were consistent with
his written evidence.
(c) Exhibit ‘F13’ is a transcript of a Police body-worn video
recording of an event that post-dated separation in which
the mother gave
blanket denials in response to various questions posed by the Police Officer
threats of violence
, the father being
physical, strangle, weapon
, and there being
improper sexual
. When asked about this discourse, the mother either denied or
couldn’t remember the specifics.
(d) Given the consistency of the father’s testimony and the independent
business record made by a Police Officer, and the internal
inconsistencies
between what the mother said in cross-examination and her trial affidavit as
well as the inconsistencies between
her evidence and her statements as recorded
by Police; I am unable to make the findings sought by the mother as to family
perpetrated by the father during the relationship, and
(e) During cross-examination, at least one (1) post-separation event (in October
2021) was put to the parents about an argument in
a driveway about the
mother’s intention to remove a child car seat from a car driven by the
father. The mother gave no direct
evidence of the event in her trial affidavit.
Nonetheless, a tendered police record was put to the father (exhibit
and the father’s responses were largely consistent with
the tendered document, as was as his trial evidence.
(f) When the mother was cross-examined, it included references to the same
Police body-worn video recording mentioned earlier in
which she disclosed that
she had not suffered an injury, that she did not consider the father had an
intention to harm or assault
her and that she just did not like being touched by
him. The father’s testimony was broadly consistent with what was recorded
in that exhibit and exhibit ‘F13’. There was no persuasive evidence
that the mother was fearful as a result of the incident,
or that the behaviour
coerced or controlled her.
Has the father assaulted, perpetrated family violence and/or
sexual abuse upon the child?
reading the parties’ competing proposals (in which no one sought that X
spend supervised time with the father), the casual
observer might wonder why
this issue even arises?
quote Oscar Wilde “Scandal is gossip made tedious by morality”.
19 May 2023, the mother’s trial affidavit recorded the child coming back
from time spent with the father with a litany of
physical injuries or symptoms.
The father was not cross-examined about any of these allegations.
mother’s trial affidavit recorded that in July 2023 X disclosed to her
daddy headbutts me
” (followed by a physical
demonstration of what that looks like) and that “
daddy hurts me and it
makes me sad
father was not cross-examined about any of these allegations.
asked in cross-examination about whether the father sexually assaulted X, the
mother replied, “It is my understanding that
he did not”. When
asked when she came to that conclusion, the mother said that during the interim
hearing she understood “very
loud and clear” that the alleged
assaults did not occur.
The October 2023 allegation
14 October 2023, and after the father had commenced this current proceeding, the
mother said that X made a disclosure to her and
her parents
of a sexual
No direct evidence of
what the child allegedly said on that day was then proffered in her affidavit
and neither grandparent became
a witness at trial, with the mother deciding (on
the last day of the trial) not to rely upon her mother’s affidavit.
the mother was cross-examined about what she said at paragraph 23 of her trial
affidavit about events with her therapist
M from the N Centre (‘
mother’s therapist
’) three (3) days later.
mother’s therapist’s
record of that session was
reasons unclear to me, the two (2) adults decided it would be appropriate for X
to be questioned. What training the therapist
had to go down this complex
pathway is unclear to me because the potential trauma and tainting of evidence
should have been apparent
from when the mother texted her therapist expressing
concerns about her son being allegedly sexually abused/touched inappropriately
by the father.
any event, the verbatim account of some (if not all) of what X allegedly said
(as recited in the mother’s trial affidavit)
is not the same as what was
recorded by the counsellor. Exhibit ‘ICL-2’ appeared to confirm the
mother’s evidence
that whilst the mother was in the same room, questions
were asked of X, and sufficient disclosures occurred to warrant a mandatory
the obligations of mandatory reporters, I have given some weight to the
contemporaneous documented account of the disclosures
made in the presence of
the mother’s therapist
over what the mother contends for in
her affidavit.
Relevantly,
the disclosure recorded was this –
He stated he would only say yes to Dad touching him on the
“willy”. He stated he liked it when dad touched his
Asked why it was okay for dad, he stated because dad had a
mother’s trial evidence was much more expansive. She was not challenged
to me, save that given the
independent and contemporaneous notes of a mandatory report, that account also
informed my findings.
was interviewed by the Police and in summary he made no
disclosures.
At paragraph 25 of
her trial affidavit, the mother said that a follow-up visit to her home was made
by staff from
. Weeks later something similar happened at the
father’s home. Whether X was exposed to these home visits was not clear
me, but regardless X was still exposed to Police intervention.
would appear that at this stage the mother continued X’s therapeutic
relationship with the N Centre through play
continued to be spent between X and the father.
The February 2024 allegation
father said that in early February 2024, he and X went to a local indoor public
pool wearing newly purchased matching swimming
trunks with mesh
that visit, on 3 February 2024
the mother’s trial affidavit disclosed that –
17. According to these notes and to the best of my memory, [X] said,
daddy was really angry and kept hitting me
”. [X] then told
I wanted to cry but I didn’t
”. [X] then told me
” with [Mr Joustra]. [X] then told me [Mr
Joustra] said, “
this is our secret and I am (sic) [public servant] and
this is how I keep you safe
18. I then asked [X] “
did you sleep in your own bed like a big
” and [X] replied, “
I slept in Daddy’s bed and when
I woke up my willy, bum and tummy were sore and I don’t know
”. Then in the same breath, he said, “
daddy put his willy
19. After this conversation, [X] asked me if he could take a shower and when he
got into the shower [X] pulled out his penis to show
me a sore spot on it. I
could see redness around his penis. I also looked at his anus and it looked red
as well. [X] then told
daddy touched my willy
very concerned to hear this. I found a private area in my house, wrote down
notes about what [X] told me. I then
called the police assistance line to make
a report. [X]’s stomach appeared distended, and he was visibly upset.
21. When the ambulance arrived, [X] told the two Ambulance Officers as well as
my mother what [Mr Joustra] had allegedly done to
him. [X] also showed them
where [Mr Joustra] had allegedly touched him and said, “
angry if I don’t do what he says
”. As far as I am aware, [X]
was not subjected to a rape kit or blood tests.
‘F-21’ is a copy of the notes that the mother referred to above,
along with an extract from the NSW Ambulance
Medical Record of that day. It was
uncontroversial that X travelled by ambulance to City E Hospital and then onto O
Hospital where
he was the subject of questioning and some sort of examination by
medical staff.
mother gave oral evidence about something a police officer said during this time
which appeared to support her contention about
the veracity of X’s claims.
have placed little weight on this testimony as being supportive of her decision
to continue withholding X from the father for many
months, because there was no
business record to substantiate the conversation which was also incongruent with
other advice she received
later that same month or into March about it being
appropriate to resume father-son time.
13 February 2024, an exhibited consultation note recorded the mother seeking
therapeutic assistance.
consultation note records the mother’s frustration as to why a physical
examination had not occurred. The consultation
note goes on to record that the
day after the Police had spoken with the mother, a staff member from
advised that they had formed a view that the child was lying
and the allegations made by the mother, were made to protect herself.
consultation note reiterates the mother’s apparent concern as to the
failure by authorities to submit X to a sexual assault
investigation kit
(‘SAIK’) process or clinical examination.
March 2024, the father said that he was contacted by
informed that an allegation of sexual abuse had been made against
March 2024, P from
prepared notes described within a document
as a ‘field
assessment’.
aspects of the tendered material were put to the mother who agreed that during
her conversation with P she was told that
after two (2) investigations, no
sexual abuse of X had been exposed. When put to her, the mother agreed that
despite having been
told by P that
on the balance of probabilities
not been sexually abused, the mother said that she
still feels
not saying anything that is not true.
In cross-examination the mother said
X], what he said to me at the time.
pressed further, the mother told the Court that notwithstanding what the
authorities had told her in the weeks following X’s
second disclosure, she
continued to hold concerns that the father was sexually abusing X but then said
that she was not saying he
did it but that she
had a concern of harm, based
on what [X] had said
cross-examination this dialogue occurred between the father’s counsel and
the mother –
MR KELLY: So when they've given you these reassurances, you've said back to
them, "I believe that what [X] says is true, and he was
sexually abused by his
[MS SHUMAN]: I did not say I think he was sexually abused by his father. I
just acted upon what [X] said. It was the first time
that he had come .....
saying this. I didn't do all of this the first time I sent him back to his
(and despite
the 2023 Final
3 October 2024, and after a defended interim parenting hearing (‘
interim hearing
’), interlocutory parenting orders were made for X
to spend weekly supervised time with the father for four (4) weeks, followed
four (4) weeks of weekly day contact with supervised changeovers and then there
would be a return to the ‘spends time’
regime specified within
the 2023 Final Orders
the interim
mother’s testimony about the reason for the enduring unilateral moratorium
on time, months after being told of various authorities’
decisions was multi-faceted including –
(a) That she did not recall being told of the contextual statements made by X of
going to the beach with his father and wearing “silly
which may have given some context to
X’s statements and physical symptoms – despite the subpoenaed
material specifying
that she had been told,
(b) That the father had denied the allegations during
the interim
– and that even though he had been doing so since he first
became aware of them, it was different at
the interim hearing
because there was “information that has been said, and that’s coming
from adults then. It’s different than coming
from my child. It’s
coming from professionals.”
appeared to be common ground that X did not re-commence spending time with the
father until 15 November
mother was then taken to the effect of
the interim orders
after recounting again that she had been listening very closely to what
transpired during
the interim hearing
, she volunteered that
“I want him to have that meaningful time with his Dad”.
the second CIR
, the allegations of sexual abuse were canvassed,
but given the limited remit of such reports,
observed that if the Court found that the father had perpetrated sexual harm
upon X then it would be
to be in the child’s best
interests for X to have contact with the
that same report,
observed the mother’s narrative in
2024 to be incongruous saying that she found X’s resistance towards his
heartbreaking
” and yet asserting the father to be
a sexual predator. If the mother’s allegations and actions were about
the child and not for any other reason, then why would she even
contemplate such a circumstance? In my assessment, the mother was
disingenuous
then, and remained so when giving her oral testimony.
all the above reasons, I am satisfied that the father did not perpetrate family
violence or sexual abuse upon X.
Is the physical, emotional and/or psychological safety of the
child at risk in the care of either parent?
Notwithstanding
what the Court was told on 8 July 2025 at a trial management hearing before
, at trial a month later
neither the mother nor the ICL contended that the father posed an unacceptable
risk of harm and in any event,
there was no evidence to support such a
the father and the ICL contended that the mother posed an unacceptable risk of
psychological and emotional harm to X.
way of (it seems) a blanket defence of her actions, the mother made various
statements in her trial affidavit including –
77. I have only ever reacted to what [X] told me and showed me. For some time
before [X]’s disclosures [X] would complain
of a sore tummy, itchy bottom
and being scared of sleeping in the dark after returning home from [Mr
91. In relation to paragraph 44 [where the father expresses his worry about the
mother’s attempts to stop the father-son relationship
and that it will
continue after the proceeding is finalised] I disagree. I acted as a frightened
and concerned mother after [X]’s
second lot of disclosures. I have been
doing everything in my power to create a meaningful relationship between [X] and
[Mr Joustra].
I speak positively about [Mr Joustra] to [X]. [X] is becoming
settled into the routine between both homes. It has been difficult
though. I understand [Mr Joustra]’s fears, but I only want to move
forward positively for the benefit of [X].
finding of unacceptable risk need not be demonstrated according to the civil
standard of proof.
was followed in the decision of
Eastley & Eastley
[2022] FedCFamC1A 101
. The Court observed the finding of unacceptable
risk was open on the available evidence because the evidence demonstrated a
possibility’ of risk ‘which need not have been
demonstrated according to the civil standard of proof.’
the Court identifies the existence of an unacceptable risk, it is then necessary
for the Court to assess whether that risk can
be sufficiently managed or
ameliorated.
[2006] FamCA 1316
; (2006) 35 Fam LR 395, the Full Court emphasised
that it is not for the Court to find a solution which eradicates the chance of
harm. Rather, the Court must balance the harm that will follow if the
risk is not minimised or removed as against a normal healthy
parent-child
relationship not being permitted to flourish.
a finding of best interests is the need to promote the safety of children: s
children safe is important and is reflected within other provisions of the Act
including at ss 60CC, 60CG and 61CA.
am satisfied that the mother does pose an unacceptable risk of harm because
there is a material possibility that X’s emotional
and/or psychological
safety will be imperilled through her actions whether direct or indirect and
whether intended or not.
are some of the more significant findings that have informed this difficult
Failure to promote a close and nurturing father-son
relationship
Notwithstanding
that the mother has been aware:
(a) that the father was seeking X live with him since April 2024,
(b) of the untested views of
since late-2024, and
(c) that the so-called “eye of the Court” has been watching since
the father sought a re-consideration of
the 2023 Final Orders
the mother has been unwilling or unable to ensure that X spends uninterrupted
time with the father. This uncontroversial reality
has loomed very large for me
when assessing the adverse findings I am about to make.
by the mother’s presentation and their forensic interrogation of the
limited information before them,
opined that it was
unclear whether the mother understood and valued X’s right to have a
meaningful relationship with both parents
(where safe to do
the mother entered the witness box, she was acutely aware of what was at stake,
saying as much when at paragraph 82 of her trial
affidavit she rejected the
father’s asserted fear that X was being emotionally abused by her saying
I have never and will never emotionally abuse [X]. I have worked
with children for almost 20 years now. I have a current working
children’s check, first aid certificate, current police checks and I
participate in many child related and focused courses
and workshops through my
mother’s statement misses the point because the father’s assertion
is not about other children, it is about
their son...X
and by her conduct
and presentation as a witness, it is clear that no amount of certificates and
courses have or will be able to
permit the mother to put her emotional needs
second to the emotional and psychological needs of her son who should have the
of close and nurturing relationships with both of his parents.
assessed all of the evidence and the parties’ presentation as witnesses, I
find that the mother has a very limited capacity
to support a close and
nurturing relationship between X and the father.
finding is informed by the following circumstances.
A failure to give child-focussed evidence of the positive
aspects of the father-son relationship
mother’s affidavit evidence was at pains to identify the positive
relationships X has with her, her family and others.
mother gave very limited evidence about the positives offered by the father, and
I have had regard to that evidence
was only in cross-examination that the mother gave more expansive evidence of
some positive attributes about the father and, to
be frank, those statements
were inconsistent with her ongoing criticisms about his parenting, such as his
alleged failure to properly
manage X’s ear condition earlier this year and
to listen to their son when he said he wanted to go home to her.
A propensity to withhold the child or make unreasonable demands
in order for the child to spend time with the father
separation, lawyers were engaged by the parties, and the mother was
cross-examined about events that generated legal correspondence
between March
2022 and May 2022.
was common ground that in the months following separation, the mother demanded
that the child’s time with the father be spent
in public places rather
than where the father was staying. While initially rejecting that proposition,
concessions were grudgingly
given and at times only because she was taken to
legal correspondence from her lawyer.
inconsistent answers reflected poorly on her overall credit because it suggested
that she was trying to minimise how unreasonable
her demands were, given what
she knew of the father’s character and circumstances at the time.
behaviour then deteriorated to new lows.
The first unilateral suspension of time in 2022
was common ground that between February 2022 and May 2022 the mother
unilaterally suspended the informal time that X was spending
with the father.
correspondence reveals a litany of either unsubstantiated or overly critical
complaints coming (on instruction) from the mother’s
lawyer about the
level of care offered by the father towards their
or the risks (including
persons) the father was apparently exposing X to.
am satisfied that a significant genesis for the callous lack of child-focus in
the mother’s behaviour during these months
was informed by either jealousy
or paranoia about the father daring to be seen in public with a female. An
innocuous gymnasium session
with a female friend provoked what could only be
described as a text message rant from the mother which demanded to know the
name and then described her as a
fat ass “friiend”
and then asserted the person was his new girlfriend with the
rant continuing on from
The messages
display that while the father was trying to arrange to spend time with X, the
mother simply ignored the requests, intent
on haranguing the father.
months of wrangling, including allegations from the mother that the father was
taking illicit substances and supplying alcohol
to a minor and a proposal from
the mother for supervised time - an informal arrangement was struck which it
seems was informed by
the father’s production of a negative hair follicle
test and the father’s written intention to commence proceedings with
view to asking the Court to draw an inference about the mother’s alleged
incapacity to promote the father-son relationship.
months where X had not spent time with the father, following the first visit in
May 2022, the mother caused her lawyer to complain
that the father had failed to
comply with the terms of the informal agreement because X had returned home from
the visit stating
that he watched ‘Paw Patrol’ at the paternal
grandfather’s home (amongst other
allegations).
In reply, the
father’s lawyer’s letter gave an explanation which rejected the
mother’s contention, and which was
not the subject of challenge under
cross-examination.
mother said nothing in her trial affidavit that could be seen as demonstrating a
capacity (informed by hindsight) for insight
into the emotional damage caused by
her behaviours not only to her very young son but to the co-parenting
relationship itself.
Unsurprisingly,
the first round of family law litigation kicked off soon after and
2023 Final Orders
followed afterwards were another two (2) bursts of father-son time being
disrupted by the mother, but this time, the mother did
so despite Court
The second unilateral suspension of time – February
2024 to November 2024
circumstances about this time have been explored earlier.
after the mother experienced her asserted epiphany (my word)
interim hearing
in October 2024, time (as ordered) did not go
The disruption of time – November 2024 to February
the interim orders
prescribing four (4) weekly supervised Saturday
visits at times either agreed upon by the parties (at the convenience of the
professional
supervisor) or failing agreement as nominated by the ICL - only one
(1) supervised visit occurred on 10 November 2024 with that first
session being
very successful.
her trial affidavit
, the mother
chose not to talk about anything that could be seen as a positive for the
father-son relationship arising out of that
visit, but rather relayed a series
of conversations and actions involving X with her or the professional supervisor
that appeared
to be inserted to move the focus to the mother-son relationship or
take some of the gloss off what, from the supervision notes, was
occasion for X.
way of explanation for the failure to facilitate the next three (3) consecutive
weekly supervised sessions, the mother said in
her trial affidavit that
became quite busy as [X] had two Annual Dance concerts and a few extra
rehearsals.
testimony the mother also gave evidence about her work roster changing and her
failed attempts to have the maternal grandmother
assist to transport X. The
maternal grandmother did not give evidence.
was no persuasive evidence from the mother about her understanding or insight
into the disruption to either the father or X
from her prioritising other events
(including her work roster) ahead of court orders.
mother then gave an account of what happened at the next two (2) failed attempts
at supervised time on 24 November 2024 and 10
Her written evidence of
events on 24 November 2024 was consistent with the tendered contact record both
of which do not show the
mother saying or doing anything positive to support or
encourage X to see his father.
the third attempt, the mother said that she
encouraged [X] to go with [Mr
Joustra] by saying “go on, you’ll have fun”.
The tendered
mother complied with a request from
the professional supervisor for her to walk
with her son down the hallway to a two-way mirror where the child could look in
the father.
cross-examination about this event, the following discourse occurred between the
father’s counsel and the mother –
MR KELLY Yes. And that's the best you could do?
[MS SHUMAN]: I - I feel it's not my place to interfere at all. I encourage [X].
I - I don't want to interfere at all.
MR KELLY: What didn't you want to interfere in?
[MS SHUMAN]: I encourage [X] to see his Dad.
MR KELLY: No. I asked - my question was, what didn't you want to interfere
[MS SHUMAN]: Like any of the situations. I felt it wasn't my place.
MR KELLY: You're not recorded as - - -?
[MS SHUMAN]:.... that's between [Mr Joustra] and [X]. I don't want to interfere
in there. Like, I don't - I don't want to do anything
wrong or interfere with
that. I want it to work out. I just - I encourage [X]. I don't really
understand, like, kind of what you're
asking me, sorry.
the failed visit, the mother then decided to include in her affidavit a
conversation she had with her son which included a litany
of complaints about
the child’s experience of sharing a bed with the father and an allegation
that when the father sleeps with
him there are no undies or shirts worn and ends
with the sentence
“You don’t do bad things to me Mum but my dad
way of context, Orders 5 to 7 of
the interim orders
provided that
5. That during the time the child is with either parent, that parent shall:
a. respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the child about the
personal life of the other parent;
b. speak of the other parent respectfully
c. not denigrate or insult the other parent in the presence or hearing of the
child and use their best endeavours to ensure that
others do not denigrate or
insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the child.
6. The parties must inform the Independent Children’s Lawyer and other
party within 24 hours of any further disclosures of
risk of harm of [X]
(including sexual harm, physical and psychological harm) with specificity as to
what was said by [X] or third
parties, and any action taken.
7. The mother is hereby restrained from talking to the child or in the
child’s presence about any alleged abuse by the father,
or permitting the
child to remain in the presence of any person talking about any alleged abuse by
the father.
by paragraph 56 of the mother’s trial affidavit, there was no evidence of
the mother’s compliance (or otherwise)
with the above Orders that would
permit me to make any adverse findings.
summary of the cross-examination of the mother as to her response to X’s
alleged statements on 10 December 2024 was that she
did not say anything
(because of
the interim orders
) and gave him cuddles. The mother
denied that giving her son cuddles would be seen as a form of encouragement (or
reward) by the
child which had the potential to lead to more disclosures because
in her mind it was meant to comfort him.
I accept that the mother was operating under a difficult set of circumstances
(because of the language of
the interim orders
) her unwillingness
to accept an alternate interpretation of her reaction (notwithstanding her
comment about not wanting to say anything
because of the restraint) and her past
pattern of not saying anything when the child said negative things about his dad
give me much comfort that she has the capacity to reality-check
anything her son says to her in the future, particularly when those
paint the father in a poor light.
the time of this conversation, the child had not spent time at the
father’s home for about 10 months and the relevance of
the child’s
complaints at the time they were made and then repeated for a trial, completely
escaped me. If the point was to
somehow bolster what happened a short time
later, it failed, and instead only reinforced the mother’s willingness to
(and accept) whatever her young son says as being truthful and based
entirely on reality (notwithstanding that she had – by
that time, and when
she filed her trial affidavit,
expert opinions
am also conscious of the fact that both before and after X’s statement,
the child has had the benefit of ongoing play therapy
but there was no evidence
subject of any helpful
therapeutic interventions.
fourth (and failed) attempt at supervised time occurred on 19 December 2024 and
the mother gave written evidence of that occasion
which was consistent with the
to accept a present
next four (4) court-ordered events involved supervised changeovers as opposed to
supervised time, starting with 21 December 2024.
The mother’s trial
affidavit contained her written evidence of this
cross-examination the mother was taken to the contact record and agreed that
upon being informed that the paternal aunt was also
attending to support the
changeover, she
teared up. It’s – you know, it’s an
emotional situation. It’s nothing based at his sister; it’s just
hard time. I didn’t have any concerns. I said that.
The mother said
that when this occurred X could not see her.
evidence is incongruous with someone who has had an epiphany that the child is
no longer at risk and instead spoke volumes to
me about the mother’s
incapacity to regulate her own emotions which had the real risk (if not actual)
prospect of exposing
X to her distress and causing him emotional pain.
Essentially
the mother gave evidence about how difficult it was to engage with the
supervision process, and yet it was her behaviours
(and allegations) that had
meant that the more relaxed “in community” time previously available
to the family via
the 2023 Final Orders
, had caused the imposition
of this arrangement upon the family...and
not just her
mother was taken through the contact record and agreed that the child
volunteered that he didn’t want to see his dad because
” to him and that at one stage the child crawled
under a chair. The mother agreed with various negative things that the child
stated but then couldn’t recall what was recorded as occurring next, which
was (in summary) that the mother tried to prompt
the child to
nice lady what you told the lady in [City Q] at the child impact report, and
what you said about Daddy doing to your leg
(my emphasis)
the session had ended without the child seeing his father, the mother agreed
that she and X had left the building and were in
the car park when the child had
wanted to return to tell the professional supervisor something else. None of
this was in her trial
was common ground that at that time, X then made a disclosure to the
professional supervisor about the father putting his willy
on the child’s
leg but instead of saying in her affidavit that this disclosure occurred after
she had left the building with
the child (and then returned from the carpark),
her evidence was that
to [Ms R], “my dad puts his
willy on my leg”...
(my emphasis).
Implausibly,
the mother denied that she had coached the child to return to the professional
supervisor to explain what he asserted
had occurred with the father. I say
implausible because:
(a) While the mother could remember various other recorded details of what
happened that day, she could not recall having prompted
the child to talk about
what the father had done to the child’s leg (which I accept did happen
because the information was
recorded by an independent professional supervisor
with no skin in the game [so to speak]),
(b) “Out of the blue” the child had decided to return to a place
where minutes earlier he had been so distressed that
he had crawled under a
chair, to share information about the father’s willy on his leg, and
(c) The mother had failed to convey in her affidavit the true context of what
happened immediately before the specific disclosure
had been made, that is, that
the child and her had left the building and were not observed during that time
and before the child
returned to make the disclosure.
am satisfied that the mother’s oral and written evidence about the events
of 21 December 2024 were at times deliberately opaque
so as to minimise or avoid
any criticism being sheeted home to her. I am satisfied that (whether
intentional or otherwise) the mother
did coach/remind the child of his earlier
disclosure and that this caused the child to return and tell the professional
from the pressure of the court room and after reservation of the trial, the
unchallenged evidence of
damage wrought upon a person who is not a victim, but thinks they
resonated with me.
next attempt at a supervised changeover on 4 January 2025 also
father then filed an Application in a Proceeding on 7 January 2025 seeking that
X live with the father.
father’s unchallenged evidence was that the mother’s then lawyer
accessed the electronic copies of the documents
on-line and then ceased to
The father then deposed to
Legal Aid City S reaching out to his solicitor on 10 January 2025 to advise that
they were now instructed
on behalf of the
visits were subsequently arranged for X and the father in late January into
mid-February before the regime of time within
the 2023 Final
afterwards.
have been other hiccups this
, but no particularly
compelling criticism was made against the mother.
what the mother said at paragraph 91 of her trial affidavit, she decided it was
still relevant to include information about
(a) What the child disclosed to her happened to him while in his father’s
care in February 2025 such as the internet being
turned off, not being allowed
to watch television and being
(b) The child suffering an ear infection because of alleged water-based
activities between father and son two (2) days
(c) The father being at fault for the child’s ongoing ear infections,
fluid on- and bleeding from his ear drums because they
all happened after
returning from the father’s care and seemingly informed by X disclosing
that his father does not
block his ears when near
(d) The father refusing to return X to her care after the child had been crying
on the phone to her,
(e) The father using all
my uniforms, shoes, bags, lunchboxes and drink
when he should have his
the point was to demonstrate to the Court that despite all of these events,
father-son time kept going, then for reasons that will
follow, it did little to
dampen down my rising concerns.
and given her relief (or lack thereof insofar as reflective of her alleged
concerns about the father’s parenting capacity),
I am satisfied that the
mother continues to amplify and accept what her son says and does not seek to
reality-test it at all.
also note that although the mother’s trial affidavit speaks of (to a
limited extent) her failure to comply with her court-ordered
obligations, there
is no reflection or remorse and while I heard in cross-examination that offers
for make-up time were made at certain
points, none of that time every
eventuated. Into the breach, it is reasonable for me to infer that the mother
had no insight into
her misconduct and the possibility that her actions might be
seen as anything but justified.
A failure to comply with Orders of the Court about the
exercise of equal shared parental responsibility
the 2023 Final Orders
provided for the parents to have equal
shared parental responsibility.
is uncontroversial that the mother was legally represented at the time and there
was no evidence to suggest that she was not aware
of her obligations regarding
parental responsibility.
Notwithstanding
those Orders, the mother unilaterally changed X’s pre-school provider from
V Pre-school (the director of which
the mother discovered was the mother of the
father’s then girlfriend) to K Pre-school and in full knowledge that the
did not agree to the child being moved.
Pleasingly,
things appear to have improved with both parents attending the child’s
first day at kindergarten and recent
The impact of the resist-refuse dynamic
was uncontroversial that at present, X is spending regular time with the father
in accordance with
the interim orders
. Informed by this fact,
was asked about whether the child’s exposure to the
resist-refuse dynamic has been “dispelled”?
response was “currently yes, yes.”
The mother’s obsessive compulsive
by one (1) of
recommendations
, psychiatric
single expert DR H (‘
’) produced a psychiatric
report about both
opined that the mother did not have a major mental illness,
including bipolar affective
then identified that the mother –
...described some situational anxiety in the context of the current
proceedings, and does report suffering significant anxiety after
disclosures by
the child that led her believe the child had been sexually abused by the father,
but denies that this is an ongoing
In terms of her personality, she did describe some minor obsessive compulsive
personality traits, but denied
perfectionistic.
then reflected that although the mother appeared not to hold any
further concerns about the father presenting a sexual risk, she
...did express some concerns around the child tolerating being away from her
for extended periods of time. She also appeared concerned
that the father was
not managing the child’s chronic ear condition appropriately. She also
had some unformed concerns around
the father’s ongoing use of excessive
amounts of alcohol given her experience of the father during the
relationship.
cross-examination of
it was put to them
that rather than the mother engaging in “post-separation systems
abuse” could it be the case that the
mother was being hypervigilant in
saying that these traits could have been a contributing factor about her
mother’s concerns identified by
amplified by her trial affidavit (as explored earlier). There was no evidence
of the mother’s traits being addressed in
any effective therapeutic
addition to the more serious allegations made by the mother against the father,
there was also a spurious allegation that in early
January 2024, the father had
driven into the car park of the City E Library while using his mobile phone and
with X in the car.
Apparently, the maternal grandmother was also there and saw
the incident. The father denied the allegation. The mother called the
the maternal grandmother declined the opportunity to also be interviewed by the
Police and ultimately the mother did not
rely on her mother’s affidavit
for the trial.
both parties’ evidence including their presentation in the witness box, I
accept the father’s evidence as being
more plausible. That said, this was
another unwarranted allegation made by the mother against the father which
caused distress to
all and involved the mother yet again calling the
was also a concerning pattern of behaviours by the mother against third persons,
including –
(a) In February 2023, causing a solicitor to seek personal information about a
former partner of the father which ultimately led
to that person contacting
Police and Police recording as part that contact,
Should anything further
arise this would demonstrate a pattern and potential escallation
a point where the elements of a stalking offence would be
(b) In December 2023 and January 2024, making two (2) complaints to the Legal
Services Commissioner about the father’s lawyer
which were not
substantiated,
(c) In June 2024, and after the last time the mother was told that the
investigations of sexual abuse against the father had been
closed, telling the
child’s then early childhood teacher that the father had “badly
hurt” X requiring the child
to be taken away in an
(d) at various times, contacting Police about problems with changeovers
including on one (1) occasion calling triple zero.
will return to whether the risks posed by the mother can be ameliorated.
there were contentions of the mother perpetrating family violence upon the
father and the child, given the findings I am
enquiries of that nature are superfluous.
Is the father’s parental capacity impaired?
was no evidence to support this finding.
found that the father remained child-focussed and spoke of the
importance of X having two (2) loving
it may be that the father has not been as vigilant as the mother when it comes
to the management of X’s ears, his evidence
(in written and oral form),
left me with no doubt that he will follow the medical advice he receives.
for his attunement to his son’s needs, on every front he has tried his
best to quarantine the child from the parental dispute
and clearly recognised
the distress that the child would feel if he was removed from the mother’s
primary care.
he is untested as primary carer, I am confident that the father has the skill
set to manage the child’s very real grief
at being separated from his
mother as well as any changes to his educational and extra-curricular
activities.
Importantly,
and something I cannot say with any confidence about the mother, the father will
support X having a close and nurturing
relationship with his mum.
What is the level of effective and respectful communication
between the parents about issues involving the child?
in very recent times, the capacity for the parents to communicate in a
respectful and fulsome way about their son has improved.
the overwhelming experience has been one of mistrust, accusations and unfair and
unfounded criticism directed by the mother against
the father.
is perhaps this history that has informed (at least in part) why no one sought
for the existing equal shared parental responsibility
to be confirmed and
rather, that parental responsibility be afforded to whomever the child lived
with (with the mother including
provision for the father to give her
What weight should the court give to the views and/or
expressions of the child?
child is six (6) years of age and highly vulnerable – relying on his
carers to provide him with the physical, emotional
and psychological supports he
needs as he develops his own capacities on those fronts.
am satisfied that X has very limited cognitive capacity to properly assess the
effect of his expressions.
I am satisfied that during
the first CIR
, the child’s
expressions reflected his close relationships with both of his parents.
for his reported expressions during
the second CIR
, I am satisfied
(a) His unwillingness to be observed with the father reflected a child under
immense pressure to behave in a way that was consistent
with the messaging his
mother had overtly or inadvertently exposed him to, and which effectively was
that she believed that the father
posed a risk and so should X,
(b) His complaints about his father found genesis in a fictional story that had
taken on a self-fulfilling prophesy because he had
then been traumatised by his
experience of what happened after he said it,
(c) The mother constrained what verbal reaction she gave to X (remembering that
X’s interview with the CCE occurred before
the interim
were made) with no effective reality-testing and instead she
resorted to physical acts capable of being interpreted as not only comfort
of encouragement, without any evidence of the child’s exposure to
effective play therapy or other therapeutic interventions
aimed at trying to
support the father-son relationship.
What is the impact upon the child from each party’s
proposal and/or any other proposal being considered by the Court?
father and the ICL proposed that X live with the father and ultimately spend
regularised time with the mother during school terms
and school holidays. A
two-month moratorium was proposed to allow the child to settle into his new
reality. It seemed likely that
X would be moved to a new school, and the
continuation of the child’s existing dance class activities remained
unlikely (at
least in the short term and because of
the moratorium
broad terms, the mother’s proposal was to keep the status quo but allocate
parental responsibility to her with provision
for the father to provide feedback
before she made any decision. As part of her proposal, the mother wanted X to
be able to communicate
with each parent while in the care of the other.
broad terms ‘the lives-with/spends-time with’ proposal was explored
was clear to say that
there were distinct limitations to any opinions they could give because they had
not completed a family report
and had not seen the child for about a year.
view was that if the Court was satisfied that the mother
posed an unacceptable risk of emotional and psychological harm to X then
child should live with the father.
the second CIR,
explored and explained the impacts of psychological and
emotional harm, and these were further explored during their cross-examination.
The mother’s counsel explored with
the likelihood of
the child feeling abandoned by his mother and resentful of the father if a
change of residence occurred.
Conversely,
if the child remained living with the mother (as she proposed), the impacts for
X (should the father-son relationship
be disrupted again) were also explored;
being careful to give her opinion through the prism
of the child experiencing trauma (whether because of him being a victim of
harm or being disconnected from the father).
addition to an overt disruption of the father-son relationship via a suspension
of time spent, I am also concerned about the mother’s
other behaviours
which convey to X that the mother does not like the father and he is not safe
for X. Examples of this include her
failing to reality-check negative things
the child says, physically engaging with the child in a manner which could be
interpreted
by him as going beyond the offering of comfort and not speaking up
more robustly to send the child positive messages about his father
important role the father plays in X’s life.
the main, I accept
opinions, which essentially
meant that no matter which proposal I adopt, X will be emotionally harmed in the
short-term, with the
potential for psychological harm in the short to medium
term depending on whether his familial relationships with both his parents
supported or not.
relation to the mother’s proposal about inter-household communication (so
to speak), I have concerns that this will only
invite the child into making
possibly fantastical and/or emotive statements to the mother at a distance which
could trigger her personality
traits and underlying anxiety and mistrust of the
father, leading to more parental conflict, more calls to the Police and (worst
case) a return to litigation for the third round.
is because, as has happened in the past, the mother does not consistently engage
“reality-testing”
and/or appropriately responding to such complaints and in that regard, I am
reminded of her criticism from earlier this year that
the father was not
listening to X and allowing the child to come home to her rather than trusting
that the father could manage whatever
was troubling their son.
that prism, when the mother tells me in cross-examination that if there were
further disclosures of concern she would reach
out to the father first, I place
very limited weight on that evidence - firstly because of her ongoing
personality traits, secondly
because of the disingenuous way that the mother
presented as a witness and finally because I find that her statements of change
not reflective of a genuine epiphany; but rather as a mirage coming late and
in the context of court intervention (just like at
the interim
which sounded like another difficult court event) which once out
of Court will dissipate and the mother will likely revert to her
past patterns
of behaviour rather than follow through (as she did when confronted with the
framework of supervision).
contended for by the parties, I am satisfied that s 65DAAA was satisfied because
the evidence enabled me to find that there has
been a significant change in
circumstances since
the 2023 Final Orders
were made and in all the
circumstances it is in X’s best interests for the Court to reconsider
those Orders.
X, he has experienced various disruptions to the time he would otherwise have
spent with a safe parent, his father. Instead,
he has been subjected to
interviews and examinations with people in authority and has been left
traumatised to the point where he
is apparently triggered when seeing certain
marked vehicles like ambulances. In addition to that trauma, he has been fed a
narrative that he is a victim at the hands of his father, when the reality
is that his psychological and emotional safety has been
imperilled by the one
person he has always trusted, his mother. If I leave things as they are there
will be no change because the
mother has had the chance to do so and there was
no professional independent evidence that either addresses the risks she poses
disavows X from the false narrative he has been fed.
Notwithstanding
that by and large, X has been spending regularised time with the father for most
of this year, I am unconvinced that
the mother has the capacity to support the
child having a close and nurturing relationship with the father into the future.
consequences for the child were explored with
evidence before me only amplified
expert opinions
that further disruption of such an important relationship will cause significant
emotional and psychological harm
am satisfied that the mother’s past conduct and her current presentation
satisfy me that she does not value the father-son
relationship and there is a
material possibility that in the future she will overtly or covertly and
intentionally or unintentionally
act in ways to disrupt that relationship.
suggested that the mother’s incongruent
views (and aberrant behaviours) may have been informed by the loss and grief of
parents’ failed relationship; I now have the benefit of seeing the
mother give evidence and the opinions of
is a recurrent pattern of disrupted time and other aberrant behaviours towards
the father which allows me to reasonably infer
that the mother’s
personality traits continue to inform how she behaves and reacts to her own
anxieties, her child’s
presentation and his statements. I have already
reflected on her most recent spate of criticisms this year.
it is correct to reflect that since February 2025, by and large father-son time
has continued, there was no evidence of reality-testing
on the part of the
mother and that the only reason for the current situation is that the mother
knew about the impending trial and
was doing all she could to put her best foot
the trial is over and now another set of final orders will be made with the eye
of the Court turned away from this family once
more. The last time that
happened, compliance by the mother with
the 2023 Final Orders
lasted just over a year.
lack of any effective treatment of the mother’s personality traits and her
past behaviours both with (and without) the eyes
of the Court watching, have
caused me to reasonably infer that there is a material possibility that in the
future she will react
as a “frightened and concerned mother” (to use
her words) and take unilateral steps to emolliate her anxieties in an
uninhibited and self-focused way, ignorant of the consequences for her son.
This will include a continuation of her not being capable
of speaking up to her
son and reality-testing whatever negative things he may say about his father
which will only reinforce his
knowledge that this mother does not like his
father placing him under ongoing pressure to act consistently when he is with
the mother.
This means that a reduction in that time with the mother will
relieve the pressure to perform (so to speak).
up the competing harms posed by each party’s proposals, I am satisfied
that the lesser harm will flow from moving X
out of the mother’s household
and into the father’s. To help the child settle,
will apply.
making this decision I am satisfied that there will be no risk of a disruption
to the father-son relationship because while the
child will be confused and
possibly resentful of the father (although I will come back to a way to manage
those feelings),
the moratorium
is only for a short while and then
slowly the child will be exposed to his mother and the mother-son relationship
will be able to
flourish in a much safer way than at present. That process will
start with supervision and is informed by the availability of professional
supervisors as described within exhibit ‘D’.
try and curb some of the mixed emotions the child will feel when informed of my
decision, the family has been ordered to travel
to City U so that X can sit with
a senior court child expert and have that person explain these Orders to him.
The father will also
have the opportunity to possibly receive some professional
advice about how to manage the child’s initial presentation. The
will not be permitted to stay in the registry, and she will be prohibited from
encouraging anyone else from doing so on her
behalf so that the child is not
exposed to the distress that I understand the mother will feel.
combination of my decision and how it is relayed to the child will result in a
distraught and upset little boy but not a child
who should be angry at his dad.
Those types of negative feelings should be re-directed elsewhere and initially I
expect that will
be towards the judge who had to make this very difficult
decision. That is a message that, if deemed appropriate, should be conveyed
X by the senior court child expert.
am also going to permit the father to publish these Orders to various service
providers. He will also be permitted, at his sole
discretion, to provide a copy
of the judgment to the child’s treating medical and allied health
professionals.
child will be highly distressed when informed of what is going to happen to him
and he will suffer emotional harm in the short-term
the moratorium
will mean he has no contact with the mother either at school or after
school. The most dramatic expression of the impact of
is that X may have to change schools during Term 4 this year.
However, whatever happens, the father has the parental capacity to
emotionally
and psychologically support the child as he grieves as well as the insight to
gather around him treating medical, allied
health and educational professionals
to support X through what will be a challenging therapeutic and educational
be clear to the parents, I am satisfied that X will miss out on seeing his mum
on the last day of school this year and may not
participate in any end-of-year
eisteddfods/ concerts/ performances where he would expect his mother to be
difficult decisions will be left with the father because –
(a) on the one hand, last year, the mother couldn’t change her work roster
to accommodate supervised time, but she may be more
amenable to that happening
now if it means her son doesn’t miss out; but
(b) on the other hand, even if the mother is not there, the child may build up
an expectation that she is going to be there (because
she always was) and then
feel abandoned again by her and possibly resentful at the father when that fails
to materialise.
other words (taking the words of
a little out of context),
whatever decision the father makes about his son’s schooling and
applicable extra-curricular activities
the moratorium
is likely that during that two-month period, X will
lose the opportunity for
positive childhood experiences, including feelings of joy, happiness, and giving
and receiving love
in the short- to medium-term those feelings will return for X because he will
have two (2) parents in his life who, because of
the Orders I intend to make
will have the risks posed by the mother sufficiently ameliorated so that the
child can have close and
nurturing relationships with both of them and thus
avoid the pervasive and damaging harms identified by
such relationships are lost or disrupted.
Consequently,
various ancillary orders have been made to support X’s new circumstances
including the ability for the parents
to select a nominee to facilitate
changeovers and thus spare the child the risk of exposure to parental
have also included prescriptive orders about when the mother can and cannot be
present or participate in school or extra-curricular
activities involving X.
This is notwithstanding that X may already being spending prescribed time with
appreciate that this may have employment consequences for the mother, and it is
one (1) of the reasons why the father is going to
be permitted to provide a copy
of the Orders to the affected third parties.
purpose of the restraints is to ensure that sufficient time has passed between
the making of these Orders and when X may have
incidental contact (not
prescribed time) with the mother. The injunctive restraint imposed on the
mother will allow X a chance to
process the big changes in his life and gain
some strategies to regulate the big emotions he will feel in front of his peers
for example, he may see his mother again at say, next year’s Easter
Hat parade. X deserves the opportunity to continue to
develop his independence
and peer-supports and him being distressed by his family situation, at for
example, the end of year assembly
this year, will not be emotionally safe for
him. If his mother is not there, then it just gives him a better chance to come
with his new reality without the pressure of having to demonstrate his
grief to her in front of his peers.
same concerns inform why the injunctive restraint has been extended to his
extra-curricular activities this year and into Term
1 next year.
and irrespective of whether the mother’s work schedule can or cannot be
altered in the short-term to accommodate
these arrangements, the father shall
retain the sole discretion about what school and extra-curricular activities X
is exposed to.
was no persuasive evidence to justify the making of orders as sought by the
mother for overseas travel and I decline to do so.
way of procedural orders and noting that this was a consent position, any costs
applications will be determined in chambers.
otherwise dismiss all the outstanding applications.
the reasons outlined above, I am satisfied that the orders, directions and
notations I am about to make are in the best interests
of X and are otherwise
proper and in the interests of justice.
I certify that the preceding two hundred and
fifty-six (256) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment
Dated: 22 October 2025
114UC(2)(a).
Section 102NE
The child impact report
dated 3 August 2022 was marked exhibit ‘A’ and for convenience will
be referred by the acronym
‘1CIR’ with paragraphs enclosed in square
parenthesis. The child impact report dated 17 September 2024 was marked exhibit
‘B’ and for convenience will be referred by the acronym
‘2CIR’ with paragraphs enclosed in square
parenthesis.
v Wollongong Coal Ltd
[2021] NSWCA 61
Kuhl v Zurich
Financial Services Australia Ltd
[2011] HCA 11
(2011) 243 CLR 361
Affidavit of MS SCHUMAN
filed 17.07.2025 at paragraph 13. For convenience, future references to this
document shall use the acronym
‘MSS’ and paragraphs shall be
enclosed within square
parenthesis.
MSS- [108] &
Affidavit of MR
JOUSTRA filed 08.07.2025 at paragraph 47. For convenience, future references to
this document shall use the acronym
‘MRJ’ and paragraphs shall be
enclosed within square
parenthesis.
MRJ- [50] &
MRJ- [51] &
MRJ- [53] &
MSS- [123] & [124]
and MRJ- [57].
Which commenced in
October 2023 – see in combination 1CIR- [33] & 2CIR-
See for example 1CIR-
[32]-[33] & [36].
2CIR- [19] &
2CIR- [41] to
2CIR- [18], [44] to
At MRSS- [87] &
[88], the mother gives unchallenged evidence about the positive experiences the
child has had at
For example,
1CIR- [41] and 2CIR- [32].
MRSS- [78].
See for example,
2CIR- [33].
See for example
the repeal and replacement of ss 60B and 60CC via
Family Law Amendment Act
(Cth), sch 1, items 4 and
60CC(2)(e).
See for example
Mazorski & Albright
[2007] FamCA 520
(2008) 37 Fam LR 518 (Brown
J) at [26];
McCall & Clark
[2009] FamCAFC 92
at (Bryant CJ, Faulks
DCJ, Boland J).
Paragraph 47
the 2023 Explanatory
Notwithstanding the expansive approach adopted within
[2024] FedCFamC1A
No one raised an
issue with the inconsistencies between the father’s and mother’s
evidence as to the timing of these
Being an apparent
reference to the swimming trunks described
See Notation E(i) made
8 July 2025.
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
’), at [6],[7],[46] to [51] and
[2015] FamCAFC 146
, referring to
Russell & Close
[1993] FamCA 62.
See for example, MRSS-
photos taken of the child and statements made by the
[49] to [50].
MRSS- [53] to
This behaviour was
consistent with what the mother said she did when X said things about his father
that were not positive: 2CIR-
MRSS- [58] to
PML- [130] to
See for example,
MRSS- [105] to [109].
MRSS- [113] to
MRSS- [116] to
See for example,
MRSS- [72].
31 of the affidavit of DR H filed 15.05.2025. For convenience, future
references to this document shall use the acronym
‘SXW’ and pages
shall be identified by
See for example
therapeutic counselling notes from
the mother’s therapist
which include an entry on 16.07.2024 of the mother recounting that X withdraws
when he sees ambulance vehicles and police cars and
that about every fortnight
the child has behavioural issues including meltdowns and in recent times,
kicking his friend T.
2CIR- [40] to [44].
acknowledge that notwithstanding the child’s disclosure to
mother’s therapist
, time continued to be spent between father and
son, but whether the father was fully appraised of the allegation (which she
not have taken as seriously) is not necessarily so clear to me; which only
makes it harder for me to accept that from this point
on, the mother will do
RTF format (943 KB)
Signed PDF/A format