URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1960/42.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:26:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clark v Ryan [1960] HCA 42; (1960) 103 CLR 486 (5 July 1960)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
CLARK v. RYAN
[1960] HCA 42
; (1960) 103 CLR 486
High Court of Australia
Dixon C.J.(1), McTiernan(2), Fullagar(3), Menzies(4) and Windeyer(5) JJ.
Evidence - Expert witness - Qualifications - Opinion evidence - Principles
governing admissibility - Evidence wrongly admitted -
Sydney, 1960, April 1;
Brisbane, 1960, July 5. 5:7:1960
APPEAL from the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
The following written judgments were delivered:-
DIXON C.J. The questions upon which this appeal depends are the
collision on the highway between two motor vehicles, and, if the
evidence be
inadmissible, the consequences upon the validity of the verdict of erroneously
admitting it. (at p489)
2. The accident upon the highway occurred on 8th September, 1955. It was in
broad daylight but on a drizzly day at a place called
Piles Creek some miles
south of Gosford on the Pacific Highway. Ryan, who is the
plaintiff-respondent, was driving a panel-van northwards.
defendant-appellant, was driving a semi-trailer southwards. It was an
articulated vehicle about six tons in weight unladen
and forty-five feet in
length. The prime-mover ran on two wheels at the front and two double wheels
at the back and the trailer on
two double wheels at the back. As the two
vehicles approached the respective speeds as estimated in the evidence were
thirty to thirty-five
miles per hour for the semi-trailer and thirty miles per
hour for the panel-van. At a bend in the road involving a left-hand swing
the semi-trailer and a right-hand movement for the panel-van, as they were
nearing one another the semi-trailer "jack-knifed";
that is to say, instead of
following the prime-mover round the bend in an apparent curve, it and the
prime-mover took the form of
a half-open clasp knife, the right-hand corner of
the tray of the semi-trailer coming across the centre of the road well upon
wrong side of the road. Ryan in his panel-van in an attempt to avoid it
ran off the bitumen into the channelling on his left; but
the right-hand side
of his van hit the right-hand corner of the semi-trailer and he was seriously
injured. The plaintiff's case was
that having regard to the nature of the
defendant's vehicle, the wet roadway and the approach of the plaintiff's van,
the defendant
attempted to turn round the bend at an excessive speed. The
defendant's case was that there had been a film of dust on the road surface
that place which became in consequence very slippery, once it was wet with the
rain, causing him to go into a skid and that his
speed was not excessive. The
jury found for the plaintiff and the Supreme Court dismissed an application
for a new trial by the defendant.
From the order dismissing his application
the defendant now appeals as of right to this Court. (at p490)
3. In the course of his charge to the jury Maguire J. before whom the action
was tried, referred to the evidence given by a Mr.
Foster Joy who was called
on behalf of the plaintiff as an expert witness. His Honour said in effect
that according to that evidence,
if the jury accepted it, such a vehicle as
the defendant's has particular characteristics one of which is that in taking
has a tendency to swing out: in other words there is a time lag
between the alteration in the direction of the prime-mover and of
the trailer.
If that was so the jury might take the view that the exercise of reasonable
care required a different handling perhaps
for such a vehicle, a greater
degree of care than would be called for in driving an ordinary motor vehicle.
The appeal to this Court
is based upon the contention that the evidence of Mr.
Foster Joy was inadmissible. His evidence was in fact more extensive than the
passage referred to by his Honour and it was tendered upon the footing that he
was a qualified expert and that the opinions he expressed
formed part of the
subject of his special knowledge. It is not easy to define the subject of his
special knowledge. He said that
he was a consulting engineer formerly
practising in the city but now at Manly, and he had had fifty years experience
of engineering
problems in Australia; over a great number of years he had been
engaged in investigating road accidents for insurance companies and
in assessing losses. His investigations covered accidents in which
semi-trailers had been involved. He had no engineering
diploma or certificate
but from 1907 to 1912 he served an apprenticeship with an engineering company
and at night studied applied
mechanics, drawing, physics and mathematics at a
technical college. He described his subsequent employment in various kinds of
related to engineering. The evidence which after objection the witness
was permitted to give was not directed to any precise matter
of engineering or
special knowledge which might have been the subject opinion evidence if Mr.
Foster Joy had been qualified as an
expert to give such evidence. It dealt
with the movements and tendencies of a semi-trailer in an articulated vehicle.
The learned
judge had ruled that the witness could not state his opinion on
the causes of the collision between the two vehicles but under cover
as an expert what might cause vehicles to behave in different ways according
to circumstances (a thing his Honour ruled
that he might do) the witness did
in substance and effect put before the jury his opinion in detail of the
causes of the accident
and how it was brought about. If it had been desired to
prove how in fact semi-trailers of the kind driven by the defendant Clark
in practice behave, perhaps a witness or witnesses experienced in their actual
use might have given admissible evidence, not of
opinion, but of the fact. But
Mr. Foster Joy did not possess that experience. If it had been desired to give
technical evidence of
the physics involved and of any relevant opinions
deduced therefrom, possibly that might have been done by a qualified witness
one may doubt how intelligible to the jury the evidence would have
been and what useful purpose it would have served. But it certainly
appear that Mr. Foster Joy was qualified to give such testimony and in fact he
did not essay to do so. What in truth occurred
was to use the witness to argue
the plaintiff's case and present it more vividly and cogently before the jury.
4. The rule of evidence relating to the admissibility of expert testimony as
it affects the case cannot be put better than it was
by J. W. Smith in the
notes to Carter v. Boehm, 1 Smith L.C., 7th ed. (1876) p. 577. "On the one
hand" that author wrote, "it appears
to be admitted that the opinion of
witnesses possessing peculiar skill is admissible whenever the subject-matter
of inquiry is such
that inexperienced persons are unlikely to prove capable of
forming a correct judgment upon it without such assistance, in other
when it so far partakes of the nature of a science as to require a course of
previous habit, or study, in order to the attainment
of a knowledge of it."
Then after the citation of authority the author proceeds: "While on the other
hand, it does not seem to be
contended that the opinions of witnesses can be
received when the inquiry is into a subject-matter the nature of which is not
as to require any peculiar habits or study in order to qualify a man to
understand it." Adopted by Harding A.C.J. in Reg. v. Camm
(1883) 1 QLJ 136 .
5. In R. v. Parker
[1912] VicLawRp 32
; (1912) VLR 152 , one of the cases establishing the
evidentiary use of finger prints to prove identity, Cussen
said that expert witnesses may give in evidence statements based on
their own experience or study but that they
cannot be permitted
to attempt to
point out to the jury matters which the jury could determine for themselves or
to formulate their
empirical knowledge
as a universal law. To this should be
added the observation made by Vaughan Williams J. during the argument of
v. Silverlock
(1894) 2 QB 766 , viz. "No one should be allowed to give
evidence as an expert unless his profession or course
of study gives him
opportunity of judging than other people." (1894) 2 QB, at p 769 The words
"profession or course of study"
have of course a
wide meaning and application;
see per Lord Russell C.J. (1894) 2 QB at p 771 . The evidence of Mr. Foster
Joy included
offended against these principles. Some of it was
evidence of opinion that lay outside any qualifications that upon any
benevolent he could be supposed to possess. Some of it was an attempt
to guide the jury upon matters which it was within
the ordinary
capacity of
jurors to determine for themselves. Perhaps particular pieces of evidence may
be picked out concerning the
of the kind of semi-trailer the
defendant Clark drove but Mr. Foster Joy was not qualified by practical
experience to give
of their behaviour in fact. In short no small part
of his evidence was outside the range of opinion evidence by experts
more still Mr. Foster Joy was not a qualified expert. The objection to its
admissibility should have been sustained. (at
6. This conclusion, of course, means that prima facie the defendant is
entitled to a new trial. But a very serious question arises
as to whether
countervailing considerations exist sufficient to outweigh the prima facie
right. After all, the matters about which
Mr. Foster Joy spoke were things
upon which the jury could judge for themselves unencumbered by his assistance.
His evidence really
amounted to putting from the witness box the inferences
upon which the plaintiff's case rested. A further consideration is that the
plaintiff's case is in any case strong and moreover it is now a very long time
since the happening of the accident. These considerations
are by no means
without weight, but on the other side it must be remembered that on the
defendant's part the reception of the evidence
was strongly objected to, while
on the plaintiff's part it was strongly pressed. The purpose was to influence
the jury to accept
the inferences supporting the plaintiff's case and no one
can say that the evidence did not contribute materially to the result.
trial therefore seems an unavoidable consequence of the inadmissibility of the
evidence. (at p492)
7. The appeal should be allowed and a new trial directed. (at p492)
McTIERNAN J. The plaintiff suffered serious and permanent personal injuries
in a collision between a panel-van which he was driving
on the Pacific Highway
towards Gosford and a semi-trailer which the defendant was driving on that
road in the opposite direction.
The plaintiff alleged in the action that his
injuries were caused by the negligence of the defendant, consisting in a
breach of his
duty to drive the semi-trailer with reasonable care and skill.
The defendant denied the allegation of negligence. The case was tried
Maguire J. with a jury, who returned a verdict for the plaintiff with damages
amounting to 23,245 pounds. The defendant appealed
to the Full Court of New
South Wales. (at p493)
2. His major ground of appeal was that the damages were excessive and a minor
ground was that a witness, W. F. Joy, a professional
engineer, was not
sufficiently qualified to give evidence as an expert regarding the movement of
a semi-trailer which the witnesses
in the case called "jack-knifing". This is
a term applied to the behaviour of a semi-trailer by truck drivers when the
prime-mover,
for example, enters a bend with a downward grade and the wheels
of the trailer continuing their course, that part of the vehicle
swings away
from the prime-mover. (at p493)
3. The Full Court, (Owen, Richardson and Brereton JJ.) unanimously dismissed
the appeal. They affirmed the decision of Maguire J.
that the witness, W. F.
Joy, was sufficiently qualified to give evidence as an expert on the
phenomenon of "jack-knifing" and its
causes. (at p493)
4. In the defendant's notice of appeal to this Court these two grounds of
appeal were taken, but the question of W. F. Joy's qualification
evidence as an expert was put first and the question whether the damages were
excessive relegated to last place. The latter
ground of appeal was abandoned
at the hearing. (at p493)
5. A witness, A. J. Brown, who was sitting next to the plaintiff in his
panel-van, gave evidence of the collision. The plaintiff
could not give
evidence as to how the accident occurred. He broke down after answering a few
questions and could not continue giving
evidence. The evidence of the witness
A. J. Brown began with events occurring when the panel-van was approaching
Piles Creek on the
Pacific Highway over which there is a bridge or culvert.
The panel-van was travelling north on its correct side of the road. It was
descending a grade towards the bridge. The incline on which they were running
was about a third of a mile in length. On the opposite
side of the bridge the
road bent to the right and it was downhill on that road until near the bridge.
The witness said that you could
see from the panel-van across the gorge
between the two sections of the road divided by the bridge, and it was
daylight at the time.
Continuing his evidence, the witness A. J. Brown said he
saw a semi-trailer coming down the road on the further side of the bridge
it was travelling on its correct side when he first saw that vehicle. Then the
witness said that he noticed that the semi-trailer
"seemed to be going across
the road" and that "when it approached the corner I saw the trailer pass the
prime-mover of the truck
in the centre of the road". He described the movement
of the trailer as a "jack-knife". Describing the further movement of the
semi-trailer
he said its trailer part was coming down on the side of the
centre of the road on which the panel-van was being driven, and the trailer
part of the defendant's vehicle was passing the cabin of the prime-mover.
Before the panel-van reached the bridge the witness said
that the plaintiff
drove it off the bitumen to the ditch running on their correct side of the
road. The evidence shows that this
manoeuvre, obviously the only one which the
plaintiff could take, did not succeed in taking the panelvan out of the course
jack-knifing trailer of the defendant's vehicle. The right front end of
the trailer crashed into the driver's compartment of the
panel-van. The
plaintiff suffered most serious injuries and the witness, A. J. Brown, was
also injured, but was not rendered unconscious.
His estimate of the speed of
the semi-trailer when he saw it coming downhill towards the bridge was
thirty-five miles an hour and
he said that the vehicle did not slacken speed
from the time he saw it until the collision occurred. The witness was,
according to
his evidence, an experienced driver of motor vehicles. At the
time the accident happened it was drizzling rain. The evidence of the
A. J. Brown, which I have set out, states the substance of the plaintiff's
case. (at p494)
6. Some particulars of the semi-trailer which appear from the evidence are
that it was unladen, its unladen weight was six tons
and it was forty-five
feet long. (at p494)
7. The defendant gave evidence that there had been enough rain to wet the
road, that his semi-trailer was running down the road
towards the bridge, its
speed was thirty miles an hour and he was driving on his correct side of the
road ; and that as he came to
the bend in the road he could see the panel-van
when it was two hundred yards away. (at p494)
8. The evidence of the defendant, on which he asked the jury to exculpate him
from the plaintiff's allegation of negligence, was
short. It was to the effect
that when he passed over the bridge he "touched" his trailer brakes. He said
that is "an extra precaution
taken on bends", more so in wet weather ; and
when he touched the brakes "the trailer seemed to skid and I slid into a
and crossed the road". According to his evidence, the trailer was
plaintiff's panel-van and pushed it off the road "leaving the corner of the
trailer embedded in the side of the panel van".
His evidence as to speed "in
the very last moment" before striking the panel-van was that the speed "could
be probably down to fifteen
or twenty miles an hour". The defendant made no
allegation of contributory negligence against the plaintiff. The plaintiff's
of negligence was founded upon the evidence of the speed at which
the defendant drove the semi-trailer down the hill into the bend.
plaintiff sought to prove that speed could be a factor contributing to the
jack-knifing of a semi-trailer travelling on a winding
road such as that on
the Gosford side of the bridge and taking the severe bend in the road. The
jury or some of them may not have
needed any enlightenment on this subject.
But it is not possible to determine a priori the amount of knowledge which a
jury may have
of the subject or that they have sufficient experience of the
behaviour of articulated vehicles to be capable of forming a correct
upon it. The plaintiff's advisers acted wisely in calling an expert to give
evidence on the subject, especially as the defendant's
case was really that
his vehicle actually skidded across the road because of its wet condition,
thus seeking to negative any negligence
on his part. As stated above, the
expert was W. F. Joy, a professional engineer. (at p495)
9. In summing up to the jury the learned trial judge gave only the following
direction on the expert's evidence. "According to the
evidence of Mr. Foster
Joy, if you accept it, that sort of vehicle" (an articulated vehicle) "has
particular characteristics which
are not associated with the ordinary motor
car and one of the characteristics, according to his evidence, if you accept
taking a bend an articulated vehicle such as this we are concerned
with has a tendency to swing out ; in other words, there is a
time lag between
the alteration in the direction of the prime-mover on the one hand and the
trailer portion of the vehicle on the
other". Continuing, the learned judge
said this : "You are entitled to consider all the circumstances of the case.
What might be
a perfectly proper speed to drive any particular vehicle on a
straight road might not be a proper speed to drive that same vehicle
semi-trailer or not, when one is negotiating a bend in the road. What might be
a perfectly proper speed for any sort of
a vehicle on a dry road might not be
a proper speed on a wet road. I am mentioning these matters merely as being
matters that you
are entitled to take into consideration in determining
whether or not reasonable care was or was not exercised by the defendant,
Clark, in relation to this particular vehicle on this particular day under the
particular circumstances where this accident occurred".
In the Full Court,
Owen J., who gave the judgment for the Court, dealt with the ground of appeal
founded upon the objections to Mr.
Joy's evidence at the trial as follows :
"In the course of the plaintiff's case, a man named Joy was called, he being a
is not unknown as a witness in these courts, and who, not
infrequently, is called to give so-called scientific evidence in motor-car
collision cases. The objection made to his evidence was that it was not shown
that he was sufficiently qualified as an expert to
give the evidence which he
in fact gave. His evidence was to the effect that, where a vehicle such as a
semi-trailer is travelling
downhill and the prime-mover is turned to its left,
centrifugal force tends to cause the rear part of the vehicle to swing out to
its right. He said also that where, as here, such a vehicle was travelling at
thirty-five miles per hour downhill that tendency would
operate, and expressed
the opinion that that was probably the cause of the accident. This evidence
was objected to on the ground
that the witness was not sufficiently qualified
to give it. I feel considerable doubt whether it needs such expert knowledge
qualified to express an opinion of that kind. The matter is one on which
I would have thought any intelligent person could speak
with some authority
but, in any event, I think the witness was sufficiently qualified. He said
that he had had considerable experience
in the investigation, on behalf of
insurance companies and others, of road accidents and their causes, and I
think it is impossible
to say that the learned judge fell into error in
allowing the evidence to be given, although, for my part, I would not have
that the weight to be attached to it would be very great". This
passage contains an accurate statement of the substance of the evidence
by Mr. Joy which the defendant contends was inadmissible. That evidence was
clearly admissible if Mr. Joy was sufficiently
qualified to give it. At the
outset of his evidence he gave some evidence of his qualifications and then he
gave considerable evidence
without objection. It included this evidence : "Q.
You have heard evidence as to the semi-trailer's movement along the road ? A.
Yes. Q. With a vehicle such as that, an articulated vehicle, it depends for
its movements upon traction from the prime mover, in
front ? A. Yes, and in
this case it was approaching down a grade - I saw the scene of the accident
and I viewed the road approaching
the scene, and from the northern end and the
southern end, in other words, from the Gosford end and the Sydney end, the
a bitumen surface approximately twenty to twenty-two feet wide with
gravel shoulders eight feet wide on the one side and four feet
wide on the
other side. They both approach a distance of flat, reasonably level road. They
both approach down the grade towards the
bridge over Piles Creek and a
distance of flat and reasonably level road in two directions - by two
directions I mean level longitudinally
in the direction of travel and level
transversely - there is no bank on the road at that point. Approaching from
the Gosford end
it is a long grade approximately one in three - I am wrong,
one in thirty-three - and it winds slightly but it is approximately -
see at least a third of a mile of it and it is a downgrade, a gentle well made
downgrade all the way. Q. That is from - .
A. From the Gosford end coming
towards Sydney ; coming from the north and proceeding south. On the other side
of the bridge there
is also a long wellformed downgrade, slightly steeper,
bitumen with gravel shoulders eight feet and four feet. That approaches the
level portion at the bottom near the bridge. The two
form nearly a
right-angle, not quite a right-angle, the junction being the bridge and the
flat portion of the highway, thereabouts.
Q. The flat portion is south of the
bridge ? A. Yes. Visibility for drivers, of both motor vehicles, that is
approaching from the
southern end or the northern end, would be good. In this
case, I was shown a position on the roadway where the Standard Vanguard
That was the plaintiff's panel-van. The objection to the witness giving expert
evidence was made when the plaintiff's counsel,
having summarized to the
witness the material facts proved by the evidence led for the plaintiff
describing how the accident happened,
asked Mr. Joy this question : "Assuming
that happened, what in your opinion was the cause of that occurring ?" In
rejecting that
question the learned trial judge said that if the witness was
sufficiently qualified he could tell the Court what can cause vehicles
in certain ways, but that is not the same thing as asking him to express an
opinion as to what caused the defendant's vehicle
to move in the way described
in the evidence led for the plaintiff. Then plaintiff's counsel asked a
question framed in accordance
with the judge's ruling. Counsel for the
defendant objected to the question and challenged the qualifications of the
witness to express
an opinion on "the behaviour of motor vehicles on roadways,
and particularly the behaviour of semi-trailers on roadways". Counsel
plaintiff elicited from the witness that he had investigated accidents in
which semi-trailers were involved on a number of
occasions, that the accidents
had happened on curves and grades and that in cases of some of the accidents a
semi-trailer had moved
from its side of the road on to the other side and the
impact was with the front end of the trailer. The witness further said that
over many years he had been considering such problems and had made reports to
persons engaging him to consider them. Counsel for
the defendant then asked
leave of the Court to ask the witness questions on the voir dire. The evidence
which the witness gave at
the outset before his qualifications were called
into question was as follows. He was a professional engineer and had been in
for thirty-six years and had fifty years experience of engineering
problems in Australia and abroad. In the course of his practice
investigated road accidents for insurance companies and aircraft accidents for
Lloyds Aviation Group ; he was Lloyds' aviation
surveyor for twenty-five years
: during the war he was an engineer officer in the Royal Australian Air Force
: he is a past Associate
Member of the Institute of Engineers and past
Associate of the Institute of Engineer Surveyors. As I have already stated,
his evidence
proved that he investigated many accidents in which semi-trailers
were involved, on curves and grades and where, as in the present
surface of the road was bitumen. On the voir dire counsel for the defendant
asked the witness questions as to his investigation
of accidents in which
semi-trailers were involved. The witness gave a number of specific instances.
Some were cases in which the
witness said that he "personally accompanied the
driver on a reconstruction of an accident with regard to the behaviour of
semi-trailers
attached to prime-movers". Asked whether he had done any
automobile engineering course, the witness said he had not, adding that
been trained in places where automobile engines have been built. His present
practice, he said, is particularly "in engineering
surveying ; surveying
machines" ; and that it also involves "automobile engineering work of various
kinds where an opinion is required
or an investigation or report with regard
to causes of failure or causes of something else happening on roads is
concerned, and traffic
engineering". In order to carry out such work he said :
"You have to have general knowledge of the vehicle and its power, and its
weight, its length and its steering, manoeuvring and its braking and the rate
at which it travels grade both ways, if there are grades
both ways". The
semi-trailer in the present case was an "International". In answer to
questions the witness said that he had in the
course of his practice examined
the engines of many of such vehicles and personally inspected and supervised
their dismantling and
repair. The enquiry into the qualifications of the
witness went back to his apprenticeship in the Clyde Engineering Co. at
and his studies at the Sydney Technical College where the subjects
which he studied were mathematics, applied mechanics, drawing
and physics.
There is much more in the appeal book which was elicited in the course of the
enquiry on the voir dire as to the qualifications
of the witness to be called
to give evidence as an expert in this case. It is sufficient to say that it
strengthens the proofs of
his qualifications which have been detailed, if
indeed that is necessary. In the case of Reg. v. Silverlock (1894) 2 QB 766 ,
Russell C.J. discussed the question whether a witness was an expert on
handwriting. He said that to be qualified to give evidence
as an expert a
witness need not become peritus in any definite way. "The question is," said
Lord Russell, "is he peritus? Is he skilled?
Has he an adequate knowledge?
Looking at the matter practically, if a witness is not skilled the judge will
tell the jury to disregard
his evidence. . . . When once it is determined that
the evidence is admissible, the rest is merely a question of its value or
and this is entirely a question for the jury, who will attach more or
less weight to it according as they believe the witness to
be peritus" (1894)
2 QB, at p 771 . In my opinion, there was evidence on which the learned trial
judge was justified in holding that
Mr. Joy had sufficient knowledge and
experience on the subject of the jack-knifing of semi-trailers to warrant the
opinion which
he expressed as to what are the probable causes of jack-knifing,
to be left to the jury, and that the direction which the learned
judge gave as
to that evidence was correct. I think that the reasons of the Full Court for
its judgment on that question are right.
In my opinion, the appeal should be
dismissed. (at p499)
FULLAGAR J. I agree with the judgments of the Chief Justice and Menzies J.,
which I have had the advantage of reading, and I do
not think that there is
anything that I can usefully add. (at p499)
MENZIES J. In an action by the respondent against the appellant for damages
for personal injury, the jury returned a verdict in
favour of the plaintiff
for 23,245 pounds damages. The collision between a panel-van driven by the
plaintiff in a northerly direction
along the Pacific Highway and an unladen
six-ton semi-trailer transport driven by the defendant in a southerly
direction, which gave
rise to the action, took place at a point on the road
some five miles on the Sydney side of Gosford. At the time, light drizzling
rain was falling and the road was wet. The plaintiff was unable to remember
the accident or anything about it, but the evidence of
a passenger in the
panel-van, one Brown, was to the effect that the collision occurred because
the semi-trailer did not follow the
course of the prime-mover as it came up to
a left-hand curve on a flat section of the road after coming down a decline,
but the front
off-side corner of the trailer first projected across the centre
of the road, then the trailer overran the prime-mover and both slid
broadsided across the road and crashed into the panel-van, which the
plaintiff, attempting to avoid a collision, had swung over
to the extreme edge
of his correct side of the road. The defendant's version was different. He
gave evidence that when he touched
his brake, the wheels of the semi-trailer
skidded to the right on a mucky section of the road and that the collision
occurred when
the semi-trailer had reached a line about three feet across the
centre line of the road. (at p500)
2. An appeal upon both the question of liability and the quantum of damages
was dismissed by the Full Court. This appeal is concerned
with the question of
liability only, and the one ground taken is that certain evidence tendered on
behalf of the plaintiff and objected
to on behalf of the defendant was wrongly
admitted. The Full Court held that the evidence was admissible. (at p500)
3. The evidence in question was that of Mr. Foster Joy, whom it was sought to
qualify as an expert to support Brown's factual evidence
by giving scientific
reasons for a vehicle behaving as Brown described the movements of the
transport. After an examination of Mr.
Joy's qualifications as an expert,
which, with accompanying argument, covered some twenty pages of the transcript
of the proceedings,
the learned trial judge ruled in favour of the
admissibility of some opinion evidence and said to counsel for the plaintiff:
ruled in your favour that Mr. Foster Joy is qualified as an expert,
but I do not think it is within the province of an expert witness
an opinion as to what was the cause of any particular event. He can tell us as
an expert what can account for various
things, if there are various of them,
which can cause vehicles under different circumstances to perform in different
ways. That is
how it seems to me and that is the ruling I give. I think you
had better adhere to it and frame your question in accordance with
it." In the
course of the evidence that was admitted pursuant to this ruling, Mr. Joy
said, inter alia: "A vehicle with or without
a semi-trailer attached,
particularly with a semi-trailer attached, unladen and travelling down a grade
and being suddenly called
upon to make a turn, the tendency for the trailed
portion of the assembly to swing out due to the turning of the prime-mover,
tendency for the trailed portion of the vehicle to swing out is greater
where the speed of the vehicle is increased; in other words,
the greater the
speed the greater the centrifugal force, the greater the tendency for the
trailed vehicle to swing out. It can swing
out to such an extent that the
prime-mover can endeavour eventually to pull it around into form but it cannot
be done quickly. The
momentum of the trailed portion which runs into quite a
weight at a speed can tend to go on in the direction in which it was primarily
travelling and it takes a terrific pull to pull it off its intended direction
of travel and there is a lag. Although the prime-mover
can clear an
obstruction when travelling forward there is a slight lag between the movement
of the prime-mover and the movement of
the vehicle being trailed. In other
words, the primemover can get out of the road of something which can be struck
by the front corner
of the semi-trailer. . . . It is not uncommon - having
seen this scene and noting the grades, the down grade and the flat and the
left-hand turn of the grade up, and that turn is as near as - the plan will
show, or as near as I can remember - I saw it on Saturday
- it is merely at
the turn of a right angle turning left. A vehicle travelling down the first
grade from Gosford at a speed, not
slowly by any means, at a speed and taking
the turn, the vehicle gets around the turn and the trailer wants to rush on
rush out to the wrong side and that is what I think would happen
here." Replying to the following question by Mr. Miller: "I want
you to assume
that the semi-trailer was travelling at a speed of approximately thirty-five
m.p.h. What is your opinion as to that
speed in that situation?". Mr. Joy
said: "On a left-hand turn? You would expect the semi-trailer to swing out,
particularly an unladen
trailer." When asked: "In the case of an unladen
semi-trailer, is there in your experience, a tendency of the trailed portion
swing on curves?", his reply was: "If you travel sufficiently fast, yes."
4. Much of Mr. Joy's evidence was not really opinion evidence at all and it
may be that so much as was not inadmissible as irrelevant,
but we are here
concerned only with that part of his evidence that put forward a scientific
explanation for what occurred and was
admissible only if Mr. Joy were an
expert. As to this, I have, with respect to those who have taken a different
view, reached the
conclusion that Mr. Foster Joy was not qualified as an
expert to express his conjectures, which paraded as scientific opinions, that
if the semi-trailer was being driven at thirty-five miles per hour at the
place where the collision occurred, it was likely to swing
out to its right;
or that what happened was that the prime-mover got around the turn and the
trailer rushed out to the wrong side
- and, therefore, that his evidence to
this effect was wrongly admitted. (at p501)
5. Opinion evidence to account for a happening that is described to a witness
is admissable only when the happening can be explained
by reference to an
organized branch of knowledge in which the witness is an expert. As Lord
Mansfield said in Folkes v. Chadd (1782)
3 Dougl 157 (99 ER 589) , (as quoted
by Lord Merrival in United States Shipping Board v. The Ship St. Albans (1931)
AC 632, at p
642 , "the opinion of scientific men upon proven facts may be
given by men of science, within their own science". I have no doubt
is an organized branch of knowledge which would afford an explanation of a
semi-trailer keeping on its course as the prime-mover
drawing it veered to the
left so that in the end the vehicle as a whole crossed to the right of the
road, but Mr. Foster Joy was
not skilled therein, as his reference to
centrifugal force as the explanation of what occurred perhaps demonstrates
more forcefully
than any criticism of his credentials. It is unnecessary to
detail the various qualifications that were relied upon to equip him
express the opinions that he did. It is sufficient to say that such skill as
he had was derived from experience rather than from
any course of study, and
his experience was principally as an engineer concerned with the construction
and repair of engines and
the construction of buildings. He had also had some
experience in the investigation of aircraft accidents and road accidents for
insurance companies, and he gave evidence that he had frequently watched the
behaviour of semi-trailers. He was not a scientist or
mathematician either by
study or experience. This is not a case where a witness has some
qualifications and it is in question whether
they are sufficient to give his
opinions the authority of an expert. If such were the case, any appellate
court would give great
weight to the decision of the trial judge admitting his
opinion evidence and would but rarely form an independent opinion of its
upon the sufficiency of those qualifications. This, however, is a case where a
review of his evidence reveals that Mr. Foster
Joy had no expert
qualifications in the branch of knowledge upon which he was allowed to speak
as an authority. (at p502)
6. On the question of an appeal court reviewing the decision of a trial judge
that a witness is or is not an expert, the statement
in Wigmore on Evidence
3rd ed. (1940) vol. II, par. 561, that "the trial Court must be left to
determine, absolutely and without
review, the fact of possession of the
required qualification by a particular witness", if it is intended as a
statement of the law
rather than of policy - and the words italicized perhaps
indicate the latter - is too widely expressed and the American cases cited
support the proposition show that courts of appeal will review the decision of
a primary judge upon a witness's qualifications
when the qualifying facts
relied upon are undisputed, or where there was no evidence of any
qualifications, or the primary judge
has made a palpable mistake, or his
decision "appears on the evidence to be erroneous or to have been founded upon
some error of
law". See also Nightingale v. Biffen (1925) 8 BWCC 358 ; Wise v.
Musolino (1936) SASR 447 ; Enston v. Pardel (1958) 75 WN (NSW) 370
further, United States Shipping Board v. The Ship St. Albans (1931) AC 632 ;
Shepherd v. Pike (1955) 72 WN (NSW) 85 at p 86
; Reg v. Spooner
[1957] VicRp 73
; (1957) VR 540,
at p 541 . In truth, the decision of a trial judge that a witness is qualified
to give expert evidence
is very much
a question of fact and it is entitled to
all, but no more than, the weight that a court of appeal gives to a finding
the hearing of an action. In Bratt v. Western Air Lines (1946) 166
ALR 1061 and the annotation thereto (1946) 166 ALR,
what appears to
me to be the correct rule is stated as follows: "The qualification and
competency of one to give opinion
as an expert is primarily in the
discretion of the trial court, and the admission or exclusion of such
testimony on the
ground that
the witness was or was not qualified to testify
as to his opinion as an expert, will not be reviewed or reversed by the
court except where such discretion has been abused, as where there
is absolutely no evidence that the witness had the qualifications
of an expert
and his opinion testimony has been admitted as that of an expert, or where in
deciding upon the question of his competency
the trial court has proceeded
upon erroneous legal standards". (at p503)
7. Evidence having been wrongly admitted, notwithstanding objection to it,
the question now is whether this is a case where a new
trial should be
ordered. (at p503)
8. This is a case where I would have thought that the jury, unassisted by any
expert evidence, could on the factual evidence have
reached the conclusion
that the defendant's transport did first protrude across, and then cross, the
centre line of the road because
the trailer did not follow the prime-mover in
taking the curve, but this circumstance provides no justification for the
of inadmissible opinion evidence that science explained or supported
this version of the happening. It may be that in the circumstances
no room for the reception of the opinions of experts, because the tendency of
a trailer to overrun a prime-mover as it
changes course might be thought to be
something of which an intelligent but unskilled person would be aware. This
is, however, of
little importance now because, in my opinion, inadmissible
evidence was submitted to the jury, and even if there were no room for
evidence at all, that cannot now be used to excuse the reception of Mr. Joy's
evidence; it is only if the evidence can be
regarded as insignificant that a
new trial should not follow its wrongful admission. (at p504)
9. The Full Court thought Mr. Joy's evidence to be of little weight, and with
that estimate I agree. The plaintiff had a strong
case and the defendant, in
cross-examination, admitted that he applied his brakes as a precaution to
prevent the trailer swinging
out. Furthermore, in his summing-up the learned
judge, although he referred to Mr. Joy's evidence, did so in terms which
only so much of that evidence as might almost be regarded as a
matter of common knowledge. He said: "This was a semi-trailer, as
called. It was forty-five feet in overall length. Its unladen weight was in
excess of six tons and it was an articulated vehicle,
and according to the
evidence of Mr. Foster Joy, if you accept it, that sort of vehicle has
particular characteristics which are
not associated with the ordinary motor
car, and one of the characteristics, according to his evidence, if you accept
it, is on taking
a bend an articulated vehicle such as this we are concerned
with has a tendency to swing out; in other words, there is a time lag
the alteration in direction of the prime-mover on the one hand and the trailer
portion of the vehicle on the other. Gentlemen,
if that is the position you
might take the view - it is entirely a matter for you as I have said - but you
might take the view that
the handling of that sort of a vehicle if reasonable
care is to be exercised requires some different handling, perhaps a greater
degree of care, than would be called for in the matter of driving an ordinary
motor vehicle such as you or I might drive". (at p504)
10. These things taken together afford some ground for concluding that
notwithstanding that evidence was erroneously admitted, the
Court should not
exercise its discretion to order a new trial, occasioning, as it probably
would, nothing more than further litigation
without a different result. This
probability is, however, not enough to warrant refusing a new trial. In
Piddington v. Bennett &
Wood Pty. Ltd.
[1940] HCA 2
; (1940) 63 CLR 533 , Dixon J. (as he
then was) said: "The reception of inadmissible evidence gives an
unsuccessful
party against
whom it was tendered a prima facie right to a new trial. But if
it appears that the verdict cannot have
been influenced
by the inadmissible
evidence or that independently of that evidence a verdict other than that
found would have been
unreasonable
or unsustainable the
prima facie right to a
new trial is displaced". (1940) 63 CLR, at p 554 Here, therefore, the question
the verdict cannot
have been influenced by the inadmissible
evidence, and, having regard to the importance attached to
to the fact
that it was admitted as evidence of an expert, and to the
reference to it in the learned trial judge's
summing-up,
I do not feel
can reach an affirmative conclusion on this point. In Balenzuela v. De Gail
[1959] HCA 1
101 CLR 226 , where the Court
decided that a new trial should follow
the wrongful rejection of evidence because it could
not be said
evidence rejected
could not have affected the verdict, Dixon C.J. said: "When
material evidence has been erroneously
at the instance of the
who succeeds, then to deny nevertheless to the unsuccessful party the remedy
of a new trial
must have some sure ground
for saying that the
reception of the evidence would not have affected the result or that it
to have done so". (1959) 101
CLR, at p 232 Later, his Honour said that the
true view may be "that at common law it was
to grant a new trial
court felt some reasonable assurance that the error of law at the
trial whether in a misdirection
or wrongful admission or rejection
of evidence
or otherwise was of such a nature that it could not reasonably be supposed to
influenced the result" (1959) 101
CLR, at pp 234, 235 . Although I think
it quite likely that the jury would have found a verdict
for the plaintiff
without the evidence
wrongfully admitted, I find that I lack the assurance
that Mr. Joy's evidence could not reasonably
be supposed to have influenced
the result. (at p505)
11. In these circumstances, I think that the appeal should be allowed and
that there should be a new trial. (at p505)
WINDEYER J. I have no doubt that, for reasons I shall give, much
inadmissible evidence was received. Nevertheless, if it were not
members of this Court think there must be a new trial, I would hesitate to
allow the appeal. Of course a new trial cannot
be refused merely because the
jury's decision seems to have been right as it seems to me this one was. The
issues must be decided
by a jury, and by a jury properly instructed and on
proper evidence. Yet a new trial may be refused if, disregarding any evidence
wrongly admitted, a different verdict from that given would be set aside as
unreasonable. And the position here seems to me not far
from that. I can see
no basis at all for the suggestion that without the inadmissible evidence the
plaintiff would not have made
a case to go to the jury. The defendant's
semi-trailer failed to negotiate a bend in the road and went so far across the
it collided with the plaintiff's vehicle, although the plaintiff in
an endeavour to escape had swerved off on his side of the road
as far as he
could go. The semi-trailer came to a standstill with the trailer portion
across the road and facing west, and with the
primemover facing east, its
nearside almost touching the nearside of the trailer. These facts alone I
think established a strong
prima facie case of negligence on the part of the
defendant. And a passenger in the plaintiff's vehicle who was called as a
related what occurred as it appeared to him, using the word
"jack-knife" to describe it. This expression has been long used colloquially
in the United States, meaning to double-up like a jack-knife. It has
apparently been adopted here by drivers of articulated vehicles
to describe
what happened in this case. It is obvious that when an articulated vehicle,
such as a semi-trailer, travelling at any
speed, is turned at a sharp corner
it may jack-knife, unless it be driven with care. If there be a risk of
jack-knifing occurring
notwithstanding that the vehicle be driven with care
and skill, that would only tend to show that to take such a vehicle on a
road was negligent. And if, as the defendant stated, applying the
brakes of the trailer as a necessary precaution against jack-knifing
turning a corner is risky in wet weather because this may cause the trailer to
skid, that shows only that the vehicle should
be driven at a speed which,
having regard to the condition of the road and of the weather, will avoid this
risk. The defendant's
case was that, without any fault on his part, the
trailer skidded on the wet road. It was a matter for the jury; but there was
that told strongly against this. (at p506)
2. It was no doubt necessary for the jury to understand what is meant by a
semi-trailer jack-knifing. If it were thought that they
would not be aware of
the nature of a semi-trailer, a photograph or diagram and a brief explanation
by a competent witness of the
lengths and weights of the prime-mover and the
trailer and the nature of the joint between them, the system of brakes, and so
would suffice to enlighten them. Once they were possessed of that
knowledge it would hardly be necessary to explain why the equipment
jack-knife on a sharp bend after travelling at a fast speed downhill. If
further evidence was thought to be needed of the behaviour
on a turn of a
semi-trailer, it could be given by anyone with practical experience of driving
such a vehicle. To explain jack-knifing
in terms of physical causation only an
elementary knowledge of physics is needed. It could be done, if it were
necessary to do it,
in simple terms by reference to momentum, acceleration
resulting from travelling downhill, and generally in relation to Newton's
first law of motion. Evidence concerning the scene of the accident could
always be given by anyone who had seen the place and who
could describe what
he had seen. Evidence of the width of the road could be given by anyone who
could use a measuring tape and had
measured it. If evidence were needed of the
gradient of the road it could be given by any surveyor who had ascertained it.
plaintiff's advisers were not prepared to rely on ordinary witnesses
to speak of ordinary things. They called one William Foster
Joy, thinking
apparently that by describing him as an "expert" they could enlist him as an
advocate. From the time he entered the
witness box the proceedings took a
strange course, despite the attempts of the learned trial judge to direct
them. The witness described
himself as a consulting engineer and a past
associate member of the Institute of Engineers and past associate member of
the Institute
of Engineer Surveyors. What were the particular attainments by
which he qualified as an associate member of those bodies, and why
relinquished his membership did not appear. But at that stage no one seemed
really concerned with his competence as an engineer.
He was put forward as an
expert in the investigation of road accidents] He said he had seen the place
where this accident occurred,
and he then explained in general terms, and by
reference to photographs, the character and gradient of the road. There could
objection to that, although the police constable or a surveyor who had
made a plan could have done it as well or better. But counsel
plaintiff apparently regarded a road accident as like a bodily ailment, and
thought of the witness as if he were a medical
expert skilled in the diagnosis
of disease who, although he had not seen the patient, might be invited to
assume the existence of
symptoms described and then asked to give his opinion
as to the nature of the ailment. Here was a witness skilled, it was said, in
the diagnosis of the causes of road accidents. So counsel related to him what
purported to be the circumstances of this accident,
and then asked: "Assuming
that happened, what, in your opinion, was the cause of that occurring?"
Naturally this question was objected
to and rejected, the learned trial judge
remarking, however, that "if he is sufficiently qualified he can describe the
vehicles and
how they move and what the result of certain actions is - if he
is qualified". His Honour's advice was, however, either misunderstood
unheeded by counsel, for the witness was then asked whether in his "years of
experience in investigating accidents" he had investigated
accidents in which
semi-trailers were involved. He said that he had and that he had reported to
the persons engaging him - that was
to say insurance companies - and had
expressed opinions as to the causes. But telling underwriters what, in his
opinion, were the
causes of other accidents could not entitle him to tell a
jury what he thought was the cause of this one. That should have been obvious.
Apparently it was not, for counsel, relying on the additional information he
had elicited that past activities of the witness had
made him aware of
accidents involving semi-trailers, repeated the rejected question. It was
still patently inadmissible. But counsel
who appeared for the defendant at the
trial, instead of objecting, sought and was given leave to question the
witness on the voir
dire. He cross-examined him about the circumstances of
other accidents that he had investigated in which semi-trailers were involved.
Forth both sides the question seems somehow to have become, was the witness -
an experienced investigator of accidents generally
- sufficiently experienced
in semi-trailer accidents] After asking some thirty-six or more questions
or three other accidents to semi-trailers of
which the witness had some knowledge, counsel for the defendant submitted that
not qualified to express an opinion, because, he said, those accidents
were "nowhere near the circumstances of this case". Near or
far, this was wide
of the mark. The witness was an experienced loss assessor and experienced in
making investigations for insurance
companies into accidents of motor vehicles
and aircraft. And if loss assessing and accident investigating involve
techniques that
are an organized branch of knowledge, his opinion of how
losses should be assessed and accidents investigated might perhaps be
in an action against a loss assessor or accident investigator for
negligently performing his duties. But how could his hearsay knowledge
other accidents, however like this one, make his opinions relevant in this
action? His Honour, trying again to bring the matter
to somewhere near where
it should have been, said: "I would have thought somebody might have asked him
what sort of technical knowledge
or training is required to understand these
things and then asked him what sort of technical training and knowledge he has
So counsel then turned his attention to this and asked him about his
knowledge of automobile engineering. He had no academic qualifications
degree or diploma; but he gave evidence of having served an apprenticeship to
an engineering company and having over many years
worked for various employers
engaged in a variety of engineering undertakings and of having studied, for
some period not stated,
at the Sydney Technical College. His actual work for
most of his employers was he said that of a designing engineer. He had
as a consulting engineer. In answer to his Honour, he said that he
was acquainted with the make of semi-trailer which the defendant
was driving.
His Honour then ruled that he was qualified as an expert to give evidence
within limits, observing that "there is a
difference between asking a
properly-qualified expert to tell us what can cause a vehicle to behave in a
certain way and, on the
other hand, asking him to express an opinion as to the
cause of this accident". In my view his Honour was, as the matter then stood,
justified in accepting the witness as qualified to give evidence of the kind
he indicated. He had given an impressive recital of
what seemed to have been
responsible employments with a number of well-known engineering firms. And,
although he was not searchingly
questioned on what duties he had actually
performed in those employments, it seemed that by his experience and practical
he was qualified to give evidence of fact within the limited area his
Honour said he would permit. His Honour was not to know that
what he would
say, in so far as it went beyond argumentative statements of the obvious,
would reveal him as apparently confused on
simple scientific matters or as
incapable of explaining clearly what he had in mind. He said that on a
left-hand turn "you would
expect the semi-trailer to swing out, particularly
an unladen trailer . . . to radially swing to the right". He was asked what
cause that to happen. His answer was "Centrifugal force of the whole
assembly on the turn moving at a speed sufficient for the force
behind it to
take that weight out". There was a lot more like that; for example he said
that "travelling as an unladen vehicle, the
road adhesion between the
prime-mover and the semi-trailer is less than the road adhesion when there is
a lot of weight in the semi-trailer".
The plaintiff's case was not that the
rear of the trailer swung out, but that the composite vehicle jack-knifed. The
witness's evidence
was garbled and in parts somewhat contradictory. A new
trial cannot be granted because a witness seemingly qualified as an expert
shows by his answers much less knowledge than his seeming qualifications
suggested or than he professed to have. But what happened
here was that
inadmissible evidence got to the jury. The witness persistently referred to
the circumstances of this accident. He
expressed opinions. His evidence thus
travelled outside the boundaries that his Honour had properly laid down; and
counsel seemingly
did not try to keep it within them. The acrid remarks in
Taylor on Evidence concerning expert witnesses do not lose significance
the expertise is spurious: "These witnesses are usually required to speak, not
to facts, but to opinions; and when this is the
case, it is often quite
surprising to see with what facility, and to what an extent, their views can
be made to correspond with the
wishes or the interests of the parties who call
them". (at p510)
3. With regret, I agree that, notwithstanding the strength of the plaintiff's
case and the failure of the defendant's counsel to
persist in his objections,
there should be a new trial. (at p510)
Appeal allowed with costs.
Order of the Supreme Court of New South Wales discharged. In lieu thereof
order that the appeal to that Court be allowed with costs,
the verdict of the
jury set aside and a new trial be had: the costs of the former trial to abide
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter