Sikora & Woodrow [2021] FamCAFC 153 (18 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Sikora & Woodrow
[2021] FamCAFC 153
Appeal from:
Woodrow & Sikora
[2021] FCCA 1540
Appeal number(s):
EAA 72 of 2021
File number(s):
PAC 6094 of 2018
Judgment of:
AINSLIE-WALLACE J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
Application in an Appeal for an extension of time– Where the primary judge
delivered ex tempore reasons
– Where there was a delay in providing the
settled reasons to the parties – Where the applicant was one day late in
the Notice of Appeal – Where there is sufficient explanation for
the delay - Where the appeal is arguable – application
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) rr 12.10A, 22.03
Cases cited:
Gallo v Dawson
(1990) 93 ALR 479
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
The Applicant:
The Respondent:
Solicitor for the Independent Children’s Lawyer
Alex Naidovski
PAC 6094 of 2018
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
THE INDEPENDENT CHILDREN’S LAWYER
AINSLIE-WALLACE J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The time in which an appeal against orders made on 12 May 2021 is extended
until 4:00 pm 27 August 2021.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of
this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Sikora & Woodrow
been approved by the Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
REASONS FOR
AINSLIE-WALLACE J
1 Ms Sikora (“the mother”) and Mr Woodrow (“the
father”) are the parents of X who was born in 2009 and Y was
born in 2015
(“the children”). Parenting proceedings commenced in December 2018
in the Federal Circuit Court and the
final determination of those proceedings is
part-heard before the primary judge.
2 In the hearing so far, only the mother’s oral evidence had been
taken, none of her witnesses, the experts nor the father and
his witnesses have
been heard.
3 On 12 May 2021, before the hearing was adjourned, the father sought interim
orders be made that he spend supervised time with the
children, pending the
recommencement of the hearing. The primary judge made interim orders that the
father spend supervised time
with the children for two hours each alternate
Saturday from 9am to 11am or such other two hour period as nominated by the
supervisor,
B Contact Service.
4 The primary judge gave ex tempore reasons for making the interim orders on
12 May 2021. Those reasons were not provided to the
parties in settled form
until 7 July 2021.
5 The mother wishes to appeal those orders. Her Notice of Appeal was not
filed within time and she seeks an extension of time in
which to bring the
6 On 10 August 2021 the father filed a response to the mother’s
application seeking orders that the mother’s appeal be
dismissed and the
orders made by the primary judge be “enforced”.
7 It is helpful to set out some background to give
context to the application.
8 It seems from the primary judge’s reasons that there is no issue that
the children should live with the mother, the dispute
appears to be whether they
spend time with the father and, if so, how that time would be structured. The
father seeks orders that
the children spend time with him, at first for a few
hours supervised, then which would incrementally increase to unsupervised and
extended period of time. The mother seeks an order that the father spend no time
nor communicate with the children and sought that
the he be enjoined from
approaching the children or their schools or her residence. The primary judge
noted that in the course of
her cross examination, the mother modified her
stance to conceding the possibility that the father could send the children
and gifts [7].
9 The primary judge observed that in the past, orders had been made for the
father to spend supervised time with the children. From
the chronology of
events set out in his reasons it is tolerably clear that the supervised time was
altogether successful and as a
result one supervision centre now refuses to
carry out the supervision of the time between the father and the children.
10 The father has, it seems a history of breaches of Apprehended Violence
Orders, and he has been charged and convicted in relation
to some of them. His
Honour noted at [39] that two of those breaches concerned the father having text
communication with the mother
and in providing gifts to the children.
11 The mother and the Independent Children's Lawyer opposed the interim
orders being made. Each asserted that for the father to have
supervised time
would expose the children to an unacceptable risk of harm.
12 His Honour set out the expressed risk:
27. For the purposes of the interlocutory interim
hearing, it is submitted on the mother’s behalf that even supervised time
would expose the children to an unacceptable risk of harm, essentially because
it is submitted the father has a history of non‑compliance
with rules and
requirements of supervision centres, and does not adhere to the service
agreements of the centre, and is a person
whose parenting capacity is otherwise
compromised by his propensity, it is submitted, to perpetrate family violence
or, and in addition,
his use of illicit substances, or, and in addition, the
adverse notice that he comes under in the criminal justice system.
28. The independent children’s lawyer primarily submits that to start
supervised time with the possibility that as a result
of the completion of the
final hearing, no time would be ordered, would be potentially psychologically
damaging to the children because
of the stop, start arrangement, and the
proximity of the dates for the conclusion of the final
13 His Honour reflected on the asserted risk and concluded at [33] that there
had been no change since orders for supervised time
were made in May 2019 and
said that taking into account the mother’s expressed concerns, the
children’s potential exposure
to the father’s behaviour was the same
as in May 2019.
14 His Honour’s reasons also reflect that he was well aware that all of
the evidence had not been tested nor had the experts
been heard.
15 The primary judge considered the asserted risk and whether for the
children to have supervised time with the father would expose
unacceptable risk of harm of the type asserted. He concluded that if the
children’s time with the father was supervised,
the risk to them of being
impacted by his parenting ability was ameliorated and would enable the
supervisor to determine whether
he was affected by drugs. He also concluded
that if the supervisors were provided with the expert reports in the matter it
act as a further protection for the children.
16 The primary judge concluded that supervised time with the children in
shorter periods than that sought by the father was in the
children’s best
interests in that it would enable them to maintain their relationship with him
and did not expose them to an
unacceptable risk of harm.
The proposed appeal
17 The mother appears for herself and drew the
grounds of appeal. The grounds assert that the primary judge’s orders
to “properly exercise jurisdiction to ensure the children’s
safety” (Ground1); in making the orders in the absence
of testing the
expert opinions and, that the orders fail to address and properly consider the
risk posed by the father (Ground 2).
Ground 3 contends that his Honour’s
failure to provide reasons was a failure to afford the mother procedural
fairness and
Ground 4 complains that the order giving the Independent Children's
Lawyer leave to provide the expert reports to the supervisors
“should have
been mandated”.
Extension of time
Family Law Rules 2004
(“the Rules”) provides that a Notice of Appeal must be filed within
28 days after the order appealed from is made.
That time expired on
June 2020, the date on which the mother attempted to file the Notice of
19 The principles by which this application falls to be considered emerge
Gallo v Dawson
(1990) 93 ALR 479
and in the judgment of McHugh J at
480, his Honour said:
... The grant of an extension of time under this rule is
not automatic. The object of the rule is to ensure that those Rules which
times for doing acts do not become instruments of injustice. The discretion to
extend time is given for the sole purpose of enabling
the Court or Justice to do
justice between the parties. This means that the discretion can only be
exercised in favour of an applicant
upon proof that strict compliance with the
rules will work an injustice upon the applicant. In order to determine whether
will work an injustice, it is necessary to have regard to the history
of the proceedings, the conduct of the parties, the nature
of the litigation,
and the consequences for the parties of the grant or refusal of the application
for extension of time. When the
application is for an extension of time in which
to file an appeal, it is always necessary to consider the prospects of the
succeeding in the appeal. It is also necessary to bear in mind in such
an application that, upon the expiry of the time for appealing,
the respondent
has “a vested right to retain the judgment” unless the application
is granted. It follows that, before
the applicant can succeed in this
application, there must be material upon which I can be satisfied that to refuse
the application
would constitute an injustice...
(Citations omitted)
20 In considering whether strict application of the rules would work an
injustice on the applicant, it is necessary to consider the
merits of the appeal
because if the appeal is devoid of merit, it would be futile to make the order
21 Having considered the judgment and the proposed grounds of appeal and
noting the father’s opposition to the application,
I am of the view that
the appeal is arguable such that to extend time would not be futile.
22 Turning then to the reasons for the delay. It is clear that the
mother’s attempts to negotiate the electronic filing of
her appeal caused
her to file outside the time limit for filing.
23 The mother sought to file her appeal on the last day within time. In her
affidavit she said that she had been waiting for receipt
of the settled reasons
and to receive “an important report” which delayed the filing of the
appeal. While the mother’s
grounds and her affidavit in support of an
extension of time speak of the primary judge’s failure to provide reasons,
it is understood that the primary judge gave oral reasons at the time
of making the interim orders. However, there was a delay in
the settled reasons
being provided to the parties.
24 So far as the settled reasons are concerned, it important that reasons
given ex tempore be promptly settled and made available
to the parties so that
they can give consideration to whether there are proper grounds to appeal. The
delay here of some months
was unfortunate but it would be unrealistic at the
same time not to appreciate the workload and the disposition of cases in the
Circuit Court. However, as I say, the delay in having settled reasons
played into the mother’s leaving the filing of the appeal
until the last
day. Alas, then her failed attempts to file caused her to be out of time.
25 I am satisfied that the mother has satisfactorily explained the delay in
filing the appeal and I will grant an extension of time
in which to file the
I certify that the preceding twenty-five (25)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Ainslie-Wallace
Dated: 17 August 2021
RTF format (321 KB)
Signed PDF/A format