Tomson & MacLaren [2021] FamCA 620; (27 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Tomson & MacLaren
[2021] FamCA 620
File number(s):
HBC 595 of 2020
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– DE FACTO RELATIONSHIP
– Where applicant seeks a declaration pursuant to s 90RD that the
relationship was a “de
facto relationship” – whether parties
in a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis
no de facto relationship established – application dismissed.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
Crowley & Pappas
[2013] FamCA
Jonah & White
[2011] FamCA 221
Sinclair & Whitaker
[2013] FamCAFC 129
(2013) FLC 93-551
Lynam v Director General of Social Security
(1983) 52 ALR 128
Galea v Galea
(1990) 19 NSWLR 263
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
26, 27, 28 July 2021
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Simmons Wolfhagen
Counsel for the Respondent:
Michael Trezise
HBC 595 of 2020
MS MACLAREN
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. That the Court declares that the Applicant Mr Tomson and the Respondent Ms
Maclaren were not in a de facto relationship for the
purposes of s 4AA and
Family Law Act 1975
2. That the Initiating Application filed by the Applicant Mr Tomson on 3 July
2020 be dismissed.
3. Pursuant to
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) it was
reasonable to engage counsel to attend.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Tomson & MacLaren
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
INTRODUCTITON
1 Mr Tomson is the Applicant in the substantive
application filed 3 July 2020 seeking orders for property settlement pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
Cth (‘the Act’).
2 There is first a preliminary issue for the Court’s consideration in
respect of its jurisdiction given that the Applicant claims
relationship with the Respondent Ms Maclaren.
3 The Respondent denies that any such relationship enjoyed by the parties
achieved the status of a de facto relationship pursuant
to the provisions of the
4 The Applicant is 59 years of age. He is a farmer. He was previously
married and says he separated from his former wife in 2011.
He was divorced in
5 The Applicant lives at B Town on a farming property which he owned prior to
the demise of his relationship with his former wife.
6 The Respondent is 48 years of age. She formerly worked for a Government
organisation. She is now a full-time parent.
7 The parties are the parents of a daughter X born in 2014, now aged six
years. X continues to live with the Respondent. It appears
not disputed that
X's time with the Applicant has been sporadic at least of late.
8 The Applicant has two adult daughters from his previous marriage. The
Respondent has no children other than X.
9 The Respondent lives in her home in Suburb F which is agreed she owned
prior to the parties meeting.
10 The Respondent is a beneficiary, trustee and former appointer of the
MacLaren Family Trust. Her parents are also trustees and
beneficiaries of that
11 It is conceded that the Respondent made a significant injection of funds
into the corpus of the trust albeit the precise amount
not evidenced at this
stage of proceedings.
The Applicant’s case
12 The Applicant says that he first met the
Respondent at around Easter of 2011. He said in cross-examination that between
and September 2011 he and the Respondent had a ‘fling’, but
became 'romantically involved' from September 2011. He says
that the sexual
relationship between them commenced in March 2011.
13 The Applicant indicates that the first meeting of the Respondent was at a
bar and that he was in the company of his sister. The
Respondent says that this
was in September 2011.
14 The Applicant says that from the commencement of their relationship, at
least from September 2011, the relationship was monogamous
and that the parties
would variously stay together at his property at B Town or the
Respondent’s home in Suburb F.
15 The Applicant says that the parties publicly exposed and acknowledged
their relationship. He says that he was treated as a member
Respondent’s family including being invited on family holidays, special
family occasions and anniversaries.
16 The Applicant says that the parties travelled overseas together including
with X from her birth.
17 The Applicant acknowledges that he received an advancement of
approximately $640,000 from the MacLaren Family Trust. His affidavit
acknowledges that the advancement was by way of loan. There remains a dispute
between the parties as to the amount remaining owing
in respect of that loan.
The loan was obtained to make a property settlement payment on the Applicant's
former wife in the sum of
approximately $375,000 together with a further amount
of $333,742 required to 'refinance' his mortgage so as to provide a release
under that mortgage for his former wife.
18 The Applicant deposes in his affidavit of 15 December 2020 at [43] –
[44] the following:
In or about 17 October 2016 [the Respondent] and I
purchased a house at C Town. That is at D Street. We paid $165,000. It was
down and in disrepair and needed a general fix up. I have renovated that
property. I completely repainted the inside of that house
Respondent].
19 In his evidence the Applicant suggests that the Respondent, together with
X, would live at his B Town farm approximately 80 per
cent of the time. He says
that the Respondent used his farm as a postal address.
20 The Applicant argues that the Respondent is motivated by financial
considerations in her denial of there being a de facto relationship.
The Respondent’s case
21 The Respondent denies that she and the Applicant
were in a de facto relationship. She admits a relationship between about
2012 and August 2015. She consistently in her evidence described that
relationship as one of 'dating'.
22 The Respondent concedes that following August 2015 she continued to
associate with the Applicant, but says that she did so only
for the benefit of
X. She concedes that the parties continued to enjoy some holidays together with
X and that the Applicant attended
the family functions and anniversaries, but
she says that he did so only by invitation.
23 The Respondent says that the sexual relationship between them ceased in
24 The Respondent denies any significant joint purchases with the Applicant.
Specifically, she says that the C Town property was
purchased by and registered
in the name of the MacLaren Family Trust.
25 She does not concede any major contributions by the Applicant over and
above some minor and unprofessional assistance with rectification
work to the C
Town property.
26 The Respondent says that she has always maintained her own residence and
denies the extent of her mutual sharing of residences
claimed by the Applicant.
27 The Respondent says that she and the Applicant have always remained
financially independent save and except for 'commercial' type
loans between them
which are documented by either loan agreements in respect of the larger amounts
or by way of loans and repayments
evidenced on bank statements. She says that
travel expenses and other expenditure were shared equally to the stage of later
financial and precise reconciliations.
28 The Respondent says that any public recognition of her relationship with
the Applicant was only one of them 'dating'. The Respondent
says that public
records including taxation documents, Centrelink applications, and child support
applications dating from 2015 corroborate
her claim that the relationship, such
as it was between herself and the Applicant ceased in about August 2015, but was
any event, a relationship of commitment in the sense of a de facto
relationship.
29 The Respondent similarly suggests that the Applicant is motivated in his
application by financial motives.
RELEVANT LAW
Section 90RD(1)
of the Act provides that the
Court may make a declaration that a de facto relationship existed, or never
existed, between two persons.
Section 90RD(2)
provides further that a declaration as to the existence of
a de facto relationship may also declare any or all of the following:
(1) the period, or periods of the de facto relationship
for the purposes of paragraph 90SB(a);
(2) whether there is child of the de facto relationship;
(3) whether one of the parties to the de facto relationship made substantial
contributions of a kind mentioned in paragraph 90SM(4)(a),
(b) or (c);
(4) when the de facto relationship ended;
(5) where each of the parties to the de facto relationship was ordinarily
resident during the de facto relationship.
Section 4AA
Meaning of de facto relationship
(1) A person is in a de facto relationship with another person
(a) the persons are not legally married to
each other; and
(b) the persons are not related by family (see subsection (6)); and
(c) having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a
relationship as a couple living together on a genuine
domestic basis.
Paragraph (c) has effect subject to subsection
Working out if persons have a relationship as a
(2) Those circumstances may include any or all of the
(a) the duration of the relationship;
(b) the nature and extent of their common residence;
(c) whether a sexual relationship exists;
(d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements
for financial support, between them;
(e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property;
(f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life;
(g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a
State or Territory as a prescribed kind of relationship;
(h) the care and support of children;
(i) the reputation and public aspects of the
relationship.
(3) No particular finding in relation to any
circumstance is to be regarded as necessary in deciding whether the persons have
facto relationship.
(4) A court determining whether a de facto relationship exists is entitled to
have regard to such matters, and to attach such weight
to any matter, as may
seem appropriate to the court in the circumstances of the case.
(5) For the purposes of this Act:
(a) a de facto relationship can exist
between 2 persons of different sexes and between 2 persons of the same sex;
(b) a de facto relationship can exist even if one of the persons is legally
married to someone else or in another de facto
relationship.
Crowley & Pappas
[2013] FamCA 783
Tree J identifies the
difficulty for courts in determining whether or not there is a de facto
relationship given the plethora of
factors that might argue for or against such
a relationship. At [8] his Honour says:
Those provisions, or their state counterparts, have been
the subject of considerable judicial discussion, principally in an attempt
more precisely analyse what will comprise “a couple”. Much of that
analysis seems to have its genesis in the difficulty
in satisfactorily
distilling the essence of such a common, everyday concept. From those decisions
the following propositions may
(a) whether a de facto relationship exists
or not is a question of fact, not a matter of discretion;
(b) a de facto relationship does not need to be akin to a
although the nature of the
association involved in a marriage relationship may be instructive;
(c) the parties determine the nature of their relationship and it may evolve and
alter, even dramatically, over time;
(d) there need not be full time living together;
(e) the relationship may be unhappy, but still subsisting;
(f) sexual or other exclusivity is not necessary;
(g) the gist of the inquiry is the degree to which parties have merged their
lives into one.
That connotes
financial, emotional and physical interdependence. (footnotes
34 As put to each counsel in their final submissions, it is entirely
plausible for each of the parties to have a different view or
understanding of
the nature of their relationship. That is, one person may believe that they are
in a relationship which satisfies
the status of 'de facto' and the other not so.
The Full Court in
Sinclair & Whitaker
[2013] FamCAFC 129
(2013) FLC 93-551
Given the nature of the definition of a de facto
relationship in the Act, the ultimate decision as to whether there is a de facto
relationship in any given time is a matter for the court and not a matter for
the parties. Although their perception of the nature
of the relationship is a
relevant matter, it is not determinative.
35 Each counsel in the matter now before me, however, urged me to make
findings of credit, or lack thereof, so as to assist me in
my determination as
to the status of the relationship between the parties.
Jonah & White
Murphy J observed at [8] and
The issue here, in my view, is not so much the veracity
or reliability of the parties’ accounts of events, but rather, the picture
presented by the totality of them and the conclusion/s resulting therefrom.
... I consider that the evidence of each of the parties was affected
significantly by the fact that their recollection now, in respect
past, was refracted through the prism of their own perceptions of the
relationship and of the varying degrees of disappointment
felt by each at its
37 At [60] in
Jonah & White
(supra) Murphy J opined:
In my opinion, the key to that definition [de facto
relationship] is the manifestation of a relationship where “the parties
have so merged their lives that they were, for all practical purposes, 'living
together' as a couple on a genuine domestic basis”.
manifestation of ‘coupledom’, which involves the merger of two lives
as just described, that is the core of
a de facto relationship as defined and to
which each of the statutory factors (and others that might apply to a particular
relationship)
are directed.
38 Similarly, before the introduction into the Act, Fitzgerald, J in
v Director General of Social
where His Honour was
required to determine whether the parties were living together on a bona fide
domestic basis, noted:
.. Each element of a relationship draws its colour and
its significance from the other elements, some of which might point in one
direction and some in the other. What must be looked at is the composite
picture. Any attempt to isolate any individual factors
and to attribute to them
relative degrees of materiality or importance involves a denial of common
experience and will almost inevitably
be productive of error. The endless scope
for differences in human attitudes and activities means that there will be an
almost infinite
variety of combinations of circumstances which may fall for
consideration. In any particular case it will be a question of fact
and degree,
a jury question, whether a relationship between two unrelated persons of
opposite sex meets the statutory test.
39 The Applicant, asserting a fact, namely the existence of a de facto
relationship, carries an onus of establishing that there was
relationship and to do so according to the requisite standard of proof being on
the balance of probabilities.
is not for the Respondent, and arguably logically impossible, to carry an onus
to prove a negative being that the relationship
THE EVIDENCE – CREDIT
The Applicant
40 The Applicant gave
evidence by affidavit sworn or affirmed 15 December 2020. He was cross-examined
extensively. Counsel for the
Respondent puts the credit of the Applicant
squarely at issue. Counsel asserts that the Applicant has been selective and
in his affidavit material and has also created false documents
including the forging of the Respondent's signature in order to shore
support his case.
41 Counsel for the respondent argues that the applicant's case suffers under
the principles in
where either the
applicant could have adduced evidence from potentially corroborative witnesses,
but without explanation, has not
done so or, alternatively, has previously
completed documents, the contents of which are now contrary to the assertions he
before this Court.
42 I had the advantage of seeing and hearing the Applicant give his evidence
and be cross-examined. I did not find him to be an impressive
witness. At the
very least, the Applicant did not possess a clear or accurate historical
recollection. His evidence in cross-examination
when challenged as to
historical facts and discrepancies in his material was often less than
satisfactory. For example, the Applicant
in his evidence in chief changed a
date at [5] of his affidavit of his first meeting with the Respondent.
Initially he said they
late 2010 early
2011’. That
was amended to read ‘
we met in 2011 in March or April, it was about
Easter time’
. In cross-examination he explained such an error in his
sworn document as
'yes, it was a rushed application’.
43 At [43] of his affidavit the Applicant deposes:
In, or about 17 October 2016 [the Respondent] and I
purchased a house at C Town. That is at D Street. We paid $165,000. It was run
down and in disrepair and needed a general fix-up.
44 I find this paragraph, assertion and its intent to be misleading. The
evidence is that the title to the C Town house was at all
times registered in
the name of the MacLaren Family Trust. The purchase funds came from the
MacLaren Family Trust (save and except
an unresolved assertion by the Applicant
that he contributed $10,000). The Applicant's counsel in his final address
properly conceded
that the tenor and content of this paragraph is
misleading.
45 The Applicant agrees that he was advanced monies from the MacLaren Family
Trust totalling some $640,000. There remains a dispute
as to the amount owing
and the amounts that the Applicant claims to have repaid. At [59] of his
affidavit the applicant deposes:
I paid [the Respondent] back funds for that loan. [The
Respondent] would sign receipts for those payments Please find attached to
my affidavit and marked Annexure H receipts for payments made to [the
Respondent]. ...
46 Included in Annexure H is a document purported by the Applicant to be a
receipt signed by the Respondent and himself. The Respondent
signature to be hers. The document references a sum of $45,000 and ‘G
Bank account’. It purports to be a
receipt from the ‘MacLaren
Family Trust’. It is dated ‘1 January 12’. If, as I
understand it, the Applicant
asserts that an advancement of $640,000 was made to
him from the MacLaren Family Trust in 2012 then it is simply chronologically
impossible that he should be making a repayment in cash of $45,000 on 1 January
2012. The Respondent’s unchallenged evidence
139. I did loan [the Applicant] several amounts of
money over time, in two categories, short term loans and a long-term loan, they
were as follows:
a. Loaned to [the
Applicant]:
i. $375,000 on 17.10.2013
ii. a further $444,724 to pay out his
other short-term small loans, all of which have been repaid as a priority before
making long term loan repayment.
1.10.2014, we did a tally up and signed the loan agreement, for the balance
$640,000. [The Applicant] signed this on 1.10.2014.
b. [The Applicant] has repaid toward the
long term loan:
i. On 8.1.2014, $65,000 into the
Family Trust G Bank A/c
ii. On 6.6.2014, $106,500 in the Family trust G Bank A/c
iii. On 10.3.2016, 100,000
3.10.2016 $10,000, I asked him to pay this direct to the vendor in the Maclaren
family house purchase as we didn’t have the
cash readily available. It was
a repayment of the loan though.
6.1.16 $17,500, paid to my bank account, then transferred to the Family Trust
17.10.2016 $2,500 paid to my bank account, then transferred to the Family Trust
vii. 20.12.17 $100,000
viii. 10.12.2018, $30,000
ix. 8.10.19, $10,000
47 Annexed to the Respondent’s affidavit is a loan agreement dated 1
October 2014 acknowledging the initial advancement as ($375,000)
in October 2013
and signed by the Applicant.
48 The Respondent says that the document referred to in annexure H is
concocted and denies her signature. She says that no sum of
$45,000 was
received on or about 1 January 2012 or at all. The Applicant was cross-examined
in detail about this. He maintained
the legitimacy of the receipt. Further, he
gave evidence that he was present at the time of the deposit by the Respondent's
into the G Bank with the implication, at least, of contemporaneity with
the receipt and the deposit. The plausibility of a deposit
being made directly
into the branch of the bank on a New Year’s Day public holiday is dubious
at best. Further, and in rebuttal,
the Respondent’s mother gave clear and
concise evidence that no such transaction occurred and that she neither received
deposited an amount of $45,000 or any cash from the Applicant. I found her
evidence to be clear, concise, consistent and impressive.
49 The Applicant has produced a number of his tax returns, but not others.
He concedes that he did not note the Respondent as his
de facto spouse.
Interestingly, the documents provided seem to not include the usual and required
section for the notification of
spouse. In any event, he deposes that he acted
on the advice of his tax agent/accountant not to disclose the Respondent as his
He did not, however, adduce evidence from his tax agent where such
evidence, if truthful, may have assisted his case. As such,
the inference
available to me pursuant to
Jones v Dunkel
(supra) was raised by the
Respondent's counsel with some merit. Alternatively, the Respondent argues that
the Applicant was, in
fact, being honest not noting her as his de facto spouse
where to claim so now is disingenuous in the sense contemplated by the
principle and later, albeit not achieving the status of
‘principle’, in
Jordan v Jordan
[1996] FamCA 15
(1997) FLC 92-736.
50 The Applicant claims that he made out a Will including the Respondent as a
beneficiary. He has been unable to produce the Will
and claims that it was
removed surreptitiously by the Respondent, together with numerous other
documents, from his home. He says
that he completed the Will himself from a
Will Kit obtained from the H Town Post Office. His evidence is that the Will
was witnessed
at the H Town Post Office, but interestingly he was clear in his
evidence that only one person apparently witnessed the document
which, in any
event, would seem to invalidate it. The Respondent denies the removal of a Will
or any documents from the Applicant's
that she removed his telephone for a period of three days. The Applicant
produces no copy
of the asserted Will or no corroborative evidence as for
instance from the asserted witness.
51 The Respondent adduced evidence from Ms J in her affidavit filed 21
December 2020. Ms J deposes that she is a Facebook friend
with the Applicant
and that on or about 5 February 2020 she received a Facebook notification
advising that the Applicant had updated
his relationship status from single to
'is in a civil partnership'. This was at a time roughly contemporaneous with
the commencement
of these proceedings and some three months after even the
Applicant himself says the relationship between he and the Respondent had
The Applicant’s responses and explanations in cross-examination were
neither persuasive nor satisfactory.
52 At Annexure H of his affidavit the Applicant also provides a receipt dated
15 September 2016 for an amount of $18,000. He says
that the document carries
both his and the Respondent's signature. The Respondent denies that this is her
signature. The purported
receipt references the amount being for 'C Town'. The
evidence, however, suggests that a contract for the purchase of the C Town
was not signed until October 2016. Similarly, also at Annexure H, the Applicant
produces a document from G Bank being a deposit
record. It is dated 10 March
2016 for a deposit amount of $100,000. In handwriting on the document (but
perhaps with the last word
being in different pen) appears 'loan repayment Mr
Tomson + HOUSE’. Again, it is generally agreed that the house was not
until some seven months after March 2016. The Applicant conceded in
the witness box that the word 'house' ‘looks like my writing’.
53 The Applicant maintains that the parties were in a de facto relationship
until 2019. It is not disputed that on 8 December 2020
he lodged a notification
with the Department of Centrelink in respect of 'relationship details’.
He claimed to have been a
de facto relationship with the Respondent form 7
August 2011 (which in itself is yet a further discrepancy in his evidence as to
the commencement date of the relationship). Significantly, the document carries
the date of 12 October 2019 together with the Applicant's
signature. In
cross-examination he was unable to give any reasonable or satisfactory
explanation as to why he should complete such
a document of October 2019 and
then not lodge it until December 2020. Indeed, the Applicant’s Initiating
Application filed
with this Court deposes to separation occurring on 18 December
54 In assessing the credibility of the parties and their witnesses I have the
advantages noted by Kirby A-CJ in
Galea v Galea
(1990) 19 NSWLR 263
including the following:
(a) The hearing of the evidence in its
(b) Hearing and seeing all evidence in context, chronologically and logically
(c) Having time during adjournments and during the running of the case to
reflect upon the evidence and to weigh such evidence against
all other evidence
whilst fresh to the mind.
(d) Hearing and seeing interruptions, hesitations and delays in the giving of
testimony; and
(e) Observing body language and
55 Nevertheless, I am also acutely aware of the pitfalls of giving too much
weight solely to the demeanour of a party or witness in
court where they are, of
course, in an unfamiliar and stressful environment and where people act and
react differently to those stressors.
56 The Applicant in his affidavit annexes numerous documents including those
referenced above. The Respondent challenges the validity
of most of those
documents including those asserted to carry her signature. Given the time-line
discrepancies noted above, plus
the inherent implausibility of some assertions
and the unsatisfactory explanation by the Applicant in cross-examination, I
some doubts as to the legitimacy of a number of such documents.
Notably, no expert handwriting evidence was adduced by either party.
The Respondent
57 The Respondent was a more impressive witness.
She gave her evidence in a direct, responsive and informed fashion. She was
in her responses when challenged as to matters that might have argued
against her case such as, for example, the fact that she continued
to maintain a
form of social relationship with the Applicant following what she says was the
cessation of their relationship in 2015
which she described at that time as
being 'toxic'. She was able to make admissions against interest in the sense of
accepting that
there were 'unusual' aspects of the relationship that she claimed
with the Respondent which she says never moved beyond this stage
of 'dating'.
The Respondent also provided a number of documents annexed to her affidavit but
where, contrary to those relied upon
by the Applicant, I find such document to
be generally corroborative of her evidence.
58 Each party otherwise adduced evidence from witnesses in support of their
version of the public recognition of the relationship.
The Applicant’s
witnesses deposed generally to identify the parties as a couple. The
Respondent’s witnesses gave evidence
more to show the relationship being
on something of a superficial social level consistent with the
Respondent’s evidence of
it achieving no higher state than 'dating'. Not
unusually, the evidence of these witnesses was, in my view, possibly
subjectively
honest, but suffering by reason of each person's relationship with
one party or the other together with a tendency to emphasise positive
respect of the party requesting them to give evidence. The evidence of most of
these witnesses suffered to various degrees
under cross-examination.
59 Ms K affirmed an affidavit on 27 July 2021 part
way through the trial. She is the mother of the Respondent. She had not
to give evidence. She had sat in the back of the Court presumably
being supportive of the Respondent and heard the evidence of the
Leave was sought and given for her to swear and have read an affidavit
essentially as rebuttal evidence.
60 Ms K was assured and assertive that she had never received cash from the
Applicant and certainly not in respect of the $45,000
cash payment allegedly
made to her on or about 1 January 2012 where the Applicant maintains that he
personally handed a sum of $45,000
in cash to the Respondent and Ms K and was
present in the vicinity of the G Bank, Hobart when Ms K made the deposit.
61 I generally accept Ms K as a witness of truth. I note the comments made
in respect of this evidence above. I have also received
by tender G Bank
statements which do not corroborate the Applicant's evidence of a deposit on or
of $45,000. Suffice to say that the
Applicant has produced no bank statements to corroborate his claim and where
such evidence might
reasonably be available by discovery or subpoena.
62 Ms K also gave evidence that in or about 2017 she advanced a sum of
approximately $17,000 to the Applicant for the purchase of
a motor vehicle.
This was a personal loan which was eventually repaid. Prima facie, this
evidence does not necessarily support
the Respondent’s argument as to
there being no de facto relationship or, more relevantly, that any relationship
that did exist
between the Applicant and the Respondent became
‘toxic’ by 2015 and where the Applicant had refused to make full or
repayments on the loan from the MacLaren Family Trust. That is, counsel
for the applicant understandably asserts that the rendering
of such a loan
between Ms K and the Applicant argues against the evidence of the respondent as
to the nature of her relationship
with the Applicant and that such a
“toxic” relationship had ended by 2015.
63 Mr L provided an affidavit of 18 December 2020
for the Respondent. He is a registered tax agent and chartered accountant. He
has been the accountant for the Respondent for ‘over five years’.
He confirms that he has never included any person
as 'spouse' including de facto
spouse in any of the Respondent’s tax returns. Mr L gave unchallenged
evidence that as a tax
agent/accountant he was obliged to complete that section
of the document in respect of spouses and that the document specifically
includes such a section. Relevantly, the Applicant did not adduce evidence from
his own tax accountant to the contrary.
64 Ms J swore on affidavit on 18 December 2020. She
is a friend of the Respondent of 36 years duration. As with many of the other
witnesses in this matter, she gave some evidence as to her observations and
opinions in respect of the relationship between the Applicant
and Respondent.
Importantly, however, Ms J confirmed that in January 2017, being almost three
years prior to the Applicant’s
evidence as to the end of the relationship,
she was married and invited the Respondent '
' to attend. The
respondent produced that invitation annexed to her affidavit. This evidence
offers some corroboration to the Respondent's
case that there was no
relationship of a committed or coupling type between the parties as of late 2016
when the invitation was sent.
Ms J also gave the abovementioned evidence as the
Applicant’s change of Facebook status in February 2020.
Mr MacLaren
65 Mr MacLaren is the Respondent's father. He
provided an affidavit of December 2020. His evidence was supportive, as
of his daughter and any corroborative or probative value must be seen
the within this light.
66 The Applicant asserts that he made a Will
nominating the Respondent as a beneficiary and similarly noted her as a
beneficiary to
his superannuation entitlement. He can produce neither document.
He adduced evidence from Mr M who deposed that in about April 2020
Respondent attend the Applicant's home and remove an 'armful of documents'. Mr
M was challenged as to the veracity and
accuracy of his evidence by some
geographical limitations given his distance from and position in respect of the
Applicant’s
property. The implication from the Applicant is the
Respondent removed his Will and other important documents. I am not satisfied
that the Applicant has proven the asserted facts on the balance of probabilities
given the poor evidence of the Applicant himself
in respect of his alleged
making of a Will, such as maintaining that it was witnessed by one person only
and that he did not keep
a copy or provide a copy to any executor and what
appears to be a number of generalities and assumptions in the evidence of Mr
67 The Applicant adduced evidence from his adult
daughter Ms N. Her affidavit is sworn 14 January 2021. Her evidence was
of little assistance to her father. She tended towards superlatives
as in [13] where she deposed to:
... my partner and I have stayed at C Town on multiple
occasions ...
68 Cross-examination exposed that she had stayed with the parties on only one
occasion. She has lived in the United Kingdom for at
least twelve months. She
did not meet the Respondent until about 2013. She was an infrequent visitor to
her father's home prior
to moving to the United Kingdom. Her credibility
otherwise suffered by a collateral matter which she was reluctant to admit
cross-examination, and did so only at my direction.
69 Ms P gave evidence for the Applicant. She swore
an affidavit on 18 January 2021. She says that she was asked by the Respondent
to sign a statement, now in evidence, to Centrelink on 17 April 2019 to the
effect that the parties have not been in a de facto relationship.
refutes that statement. She says, however, that she was contacted by the
Applicant subsequent to signing the document and
was informed that she 'might
get into trouble with Centrelink'.
70 In that sense, as with many of the other witnesses, her evidence was
equivocal, unremarkable and of little probity. My observations
of Ms P were of
a person reluctant to give evidence for either party and not fully informed by
either. Perhaps of some probity is
Ms P’s evidence that the document she
was asked to sign by the Respondent is dated 17 April 2019 whereas the Applicant
that the relationship continued until at least November 2019.
71 Ms Q gave the evidence for the Applicant. Her
affidavit was sworn 13 January 2021. She met the parties at C Town. She has
the Applicant for longer. Her affidavit is factually incorrect in her
understanding that the parties 'purchased the property together'
at C Town when
it is now conceded that the property was purchased by the MacLaren Family Trust.
She also speaks in generalities and
superlatives, but in cross-examination
agreed to seeing the parties 'at least three times per year'. The impression
from Ms Q’s
evidence, particularly in respect of the C Town House is of
misinformation or naïve assumption.
72 Mr S swore an affidavit on 14 January 2020 on
behalf of the Applicant. He is the partner of Ms Q. He is also mistaken in his
belief that the property at C Town was purchased by the parties. The wording of
his affidavit being at times in the form of the
double-negative assists little
in the sense of the probity [8].
73 Mr R provided an affidavit for the Applicant
filed 9 March 2021. He was not required for cross-examination
74 His evidence is of little assistance. He has known the Applicant for a
number of years. He deposes that the parties attended
a party at his property
on an undisclosed date. He deposes to his grandson playing with X, but gives no
details as to place or time.
His evidence is otherwise unremarkable.
75 Mr T provided an affidavit for the Applicant.
His evidence also suffers by reason of the use of superlatives as for example at
[1] deposing to having 'seen [the Respondent] on a daily basis...' He retreated
significantly in this evidence in cross-examination.
Mr T presented as
unsophisticated with some literacy issues. He remains in some form of
employment or contractual relationship
with the Applicant. His evidence was of
little assistance.
76 The Respondent adduced evidence from Mr V. His
affidavit was sworn 11 December 2020. He lives in W Town in Northern Tasmania.
He is a tradesperson. His evidence was of no corroborative or probative
assistance to the Respondent.
77 Ms BB provided an affidavit for the Respondent
sworn 18 December 2020. She is the respondent's sister. She deposes to
the Applicant to her birthday party in 2019. She gave some evidence
apparently from her own observations as to the content of overnight
bags in the
Respondent's motor vehicle. I found this evidence to be partisan, presumptive,
and of little assistance.
78 The Respondent adduced evidence from Mr Y. His
affidavit is sworn 17 December 2020. He is the Respondent's neighbour. He gave
evidence as to his own observations of the Applicant visiting the Respondent.
Again, his evidence like that of many of the Applicant’s
suffered from the scrutiny of the cross-examination and ultimately offered
little or no probative assistance.
79 Ms Z sworn an affidavit on 17 December 2020. She
is another neighbour of the Respondent. Her evidence was unremarkable.
80 Ms AA provided an affidavit for the Respondent
sworn 16 December 2020. She has known the Respondent only since January 2019.
Her daughter attends the same infant schools as X. She deposes to having met
the Applicant only on one occasion being at X's fifth
birthday party.
CIRCUMSTANCES FOR CONSIDERATION
The duration of the relationship
81 The Applicant is
uncertain and vague as to the date of the commencement of what he says was a
relationship. He asserts an earlier
meeting date than does the Respondent who
was consistent in her evidence that the parties met at a bar together with the
Applicant’s
sister in September 2011. Little turns on this date.
82 Significantly, however, the Applicant says that the relationship continued
until November 2019. He says that it was a de facto
relationship for its
duration until that time in the sense of being committed, sexual, effectively
sharing joint residence, and financial
interdependent. Relevantly the Applicant
himself adduces evidence from Ms P who deposes that the Respondent asked her to
document on 17 April 2019 denying any de facto relationship.
83 The Respondent says that the relationship never achieved the status of a
de facto one. She describes it as 'dating'. In any event,
she says that the
sexual element of the relationship ceased in the 2014 or 2015. She evidences
applications by her for child support
assessment and Centrelink benefits in
early 2015. Importantly, the Applicant does not disclose in his trial material
that he was
the recipient of an application for child support assessment in
early 2015 and received frequent notifications and assessments thereafter,
although, he does reference the child X (DOB ... 2014) in detail. Consequently,
the Applicant's credit suffers by reason of this
omission and his
vagueness/uncertainty as opposed to the evidence of the Respondent and I find as
persuasive the evidence of the
Respondent’s representations to Centrelink
and the Child Support Agency generally and specifically as to the duration of
relationship, whatever its status.
The nature and extent of their common residence
84 Each party owned and occupied their own
residences prior to their meeting in September 2011. They maintained those
separate properties
throughout the relationship. There was no purchase or
otherwise occupation of any other residence or property by them and despite
Applicant’s discredited evidence and assertions in respect of the purchase
of the house at C Town. Neither party sold
or otherwise relinquished their own
85 Each of the parties concede that they on occasions stayed at the other
party’s home. The Applicant asserts a greater frequency
than does the
Respondent. Each adduces evidence from various witnesses in support of his or
her assertion. The nature of such evidence
is, as is common, of little
probative utility given that it relies on historical recollection and is
partisan and generally suffered
under cross-examination as to recollection and
86 Importantly for my determination, is the fact that each retained their own
residence and no joint home was purchased. In matters
of credit and historical
recollection I generally prefer the evidence of the Respondent and do so in
respect of the issue of staying
at each other's residence to be less frequent
than that asserted by the Applicant. Notably the Respondent was in employment
until shortly prior to the birth of X who then attended pre-school
care and school from an early age in Hobart which gives some support
Respondent’s evidence. The Applicant’s farming property and home is
approximately one hour travel time from Hobart.
Whether a sexual relationship existed
87 Each of the parties accept that a sexual
relationship existed between them. Again, the Applicant’s evidence in
historical recollection is less satisfactorily than that of the
Respondent who is consistent even under vigorous cross-examination
was no sexual relationship between the parties after February 2015 despite her
admissions that they subsequently holidayed
together and shared a bedroom at
88 On the evidence before me, and consistent with the assertions of the
Applicant, it seems that the sexual relationship at relevant
monogamous.
The degree of financial dependence or inter-dependence, and any
arrangements for financial support between them
89 The tenor of the Applicant's affidavit material
prima facie is of a high level of financial interdependence including joint
90 There is no evidence that the parties ever had a joint bank facility.
91 The Respondent gave evidence, again which was subject to vigorous
cross-examination, that there was a consistent and formal reconciliation
expenditure between the parties throughout their relationship, whatever its
nature. The Respondent has completed a summary of
her historical bank
statements showing precise detail of a repayment or reconciliation from one
party to the other in respect of
even the smallest of payments made for the
other party or for joint benefit.
92 Consistent with her credit throughout her evidence, I generally accept
this evidence of the Respondent. To the contrary, the Applicant
gave evidence
in his affidavit [25] in a more general and uncorroborated fashion. I prefer
the evidence of the Respondent.
Ownership, use and acquisition of their property
93 The Applicant’s evidence again suffers as
to credibility in respect of this issue. At [43] of his trial affidavit the
In or about 17 October 2016 [the Respondent] and I
purchased a house at C Town. That is at D Street. We paid $165,000 for it
94 The evidence is now uncontroversial that the house was purchased by and
registered in the name of the MacLaren Family Trust. There
is no evidence which
satisfies me that the Applicant made any direct financial contribution to the
purchase of the property. His
counsel in the final submissions concedes that
the Applicant's evidence in this respect is misleading.
95 The Applicant continues to assert that he did make a financial
contribution to the purchase by way of a deposit paid to the real
estate agent.
I accept the evidence of the Respondent to the contrary that any payment by the
Applicant to the real estate agent
was only by way of a convenient diversion of
a part repayment by the Applicant of the substantial loan taken by him from the
Family Trust.
96 The Applicant also refers to one motor vehicle purchased during the
relevant time and apparently registered for a time in the joint
names of the
parties. I accept the Respondent’s explanation at [137] of her trial
affidavit to the effect that the purchase
and registration of an old vehicle was
made as a simple matter of convenience.
The degree of mutual commitment to a shared life
97 The Applicant asserts a committed relationship
until November 2019. In his representation to Centrelink of 12 October 2019 he
references X but not the child support assessment. He does not, however in his
affidavit disclose the Applicant having made an application
for child support
assessment from him in early 2015, being a fact that I find to be within his
98 The Applicant says that a ring had been purchased for the Respondent
signifying a form of intention of engagement. His evidence
was that 'we were
moving towards being engaged'. Prima facie this would be some evidence of
commitment. At [32] of his affidavit
the Applicant deposes:
While we were in Melbourne [the Respondent] was looking
at engagement rings she was unhappy with the second-hand engagement ring she
purchased from CC Outlet in Hobart. At that time [the Respondent] and I were
intending to become engaged’.
99 There is no objective corroboration of the Applicants assertion in the
form of an announcement of engagement public or otherwise.
The concept of
'moving towards being engaged’ is an odd one and particularly for a man in
his late 50’s. It is not
evidence, in my view, sufficient to evidence a
commitment on the balance of probabilities, and particularly where the
gives unchallenged evidence at [123] of her affidavit to the effect
that the Applicant’s assertion is fabricated. She refers
purchasing a dress ring from CC Outlet for $650. As is common in issues of
credit between the parties in this matter,
the Respondent's evidence is more
highly particularised and believable. Again, there were no were joint bank
accounts, no joint
purchases of property and no single residence, all of which
might to be ordinarily indicators of, albeit not determinative, of a
Whether the relationship is or was registered under a
prescribed law of State or Territory as prescribed type of relationship
100 There is no evidence that the relationship was
registered under state law but again this is not determinative of the question
The care and support of children
101 Whatever its status, this relationship brought
into the world X born in 2014. There is a dispute between the parties as to
or not to the pregnancy was planned. Indicative of some commitment in
the relationship, has been the continued involvement of the
Applicant in
X’s life, albeit where he says to a greater extent than is conceded by the
Respondent. It is agreed, that the
parties and X shared holidays, including
overseas holidays, after the child's birth. The Respondent also concedes that
she continued
to visit the Applicant’s home at B Town with X for a period
after she says the relationship in any sense had terminated, but
where she says
that this was simply her altruism in maintaining a relationship for X with the
102 There is unchallenged evidence that the Respondent applied for the child
support assessment in early 2015 against the Applicant
with regular and frequent
notifications of assessment to the Applicant thereafter and where there is no
evidence of withdrawal of
the assessment or challenge to it by the Applicant.
The Applicant emphasises, however, that the Respondent did not pursue her direct
regular payments from him under this assessment until at least the end of 2019.
Nevertheless, the application for child support
unchallenged by the Applicant is
highly probative in my view.
Notation and public aspects of the relationship
103 The evidence suggests that the parties publicly
exposed themselves as being in a relationship. They agreed that the
relationship
was sexually monogamous at least until when the Respondent says
that the sexual relationship ended in 2015. They travelled together
overseas. At times they travelled together to attend the Respondent's family
functions. The Applicant continued to attend
the Respondent's family functions
until 2019.
104 Nevertheless, there is evidence which are argues against public
recognition of a coupling or committed relationship. Firstly,
the Respondent
made applications to the Child Support Agency and to Centrelink in early 2015
claiming in both applications to be
a single person.
105 Secondly, in 2018, at a time during which the Applicant says that the
parties continued to be in a committed relationship, the
Respondent made an
application against her former employer, a government department. At [64] of
her affidavit the Respondent says
that she made a claim against the Department
and a report was completed. At Annexure N of her affidavit the Respondent
a copy of that report dated 11 January 2018 and at page 2 it
Ms Maclaren is a 45 year old single parent of a 3 day
year old daughter.
She stated that she has an amicable relationship with her daughter’s
father, a 56 year old man who pays child support.
Her daughter is attending DD Child Care currently three days a
106 At Annexure M of her affidavit the Respondent provides a letter from DD
Child Care Centre confirming her enrolment of Xl in August
2016 and referencing
herself as “a single parent”.
107 The Respondent adduced evidence from Ms J by affidavit sworn 18 December
2020, who deposes at [3]:
When I married in 2017 my fiancé and I invited [the Respondent] and a
friend to attend.
108 The Respondent annexes that invitation to
her own affidavit. She argues that this is evidence other than of a publicly
relationship with the Applicant at least in 2017.
109 The Applicant also annexes to her affidavit to a number of invitations to
the Respondent, including to her own birthday function,
a Father's Day function,
and X’s birthday all before the Applicant asserts that the relationship
ended. The implication from
the Respondent is that it would be unusual to
formally invite your partner to such functions.
110 The Respondent's evidence at [33] of her affidavit, and unchallenged, is
that she has:
...always maintained single-parent private health
insurance to cover for X and myself. The applicant has his own health insurance
arrangement. I have my own Medicare card with X on it. [the applicant] has his
own, these have never been together, because that
was not the nature of our
relationship.
111 Given the often conflicting indicators in this matter, there are,
however, some public aspects of the relationship which support
Applicant’s case. For instance, the Respondent's mother gave evidence to
making a personal loan to the Applicant for the
purchase of a motor vehicle in
demise of any relationship
with the Applicant and describing the previous
relationship as 'toxic'. The Applicant argues, with some merit, that loan some
years later by the Respondent's mother is inconsistent with the respondent's
own evidence as to the status of the relationship.
Conclusion as to whether the parties lived in a de facto
relationship and, if so, for what period of time
112 There are aspects of this matter which tends
towards the Applicant’s case that the parties lived in ‘genuine
or committed de facto relationship until late 2019 as he
asserts. Arguably, the indicators might be stronger in respect of the period
until early 2015 although, of course, the Applicant himself maintains that the
relationship was a committed, public, and mutually
interdependent one until
November 2019. Importantly, he does not depose to any significant changes in
the relationship from early
2015, except of course, the birth of X. However,
there are yet other aspects of this relationship which do not support the
assertion of a committed de facto relationship at all.
113 It is worthy of repetition by way of emphasis in these Reasons that it is
the Applicant who makes the assertion of fact of a de
facto relationship and
therefore carries the onus of proof on the balance of probabilities. Further,
experience suggests that simply
because the relationship between these parties
had unusual aspects then this is not determinative of there either being or not
a de facto relationship pursuant to the Act.
114 The factors that lend towards there being a de facto relationship as
asserted by the Applicant include the following:
(i) The relationship in some form or other
endured for some duration, and probably from about September 2011;
(ii) There is a child of the relationship born in 2014;
(iii) The relationship in some form continued for a number of years after the
Respondent asserts its demise in early 2015 in circumstances
where she describes
it as a 'toxic' relationship as of 2015;
(iv) The relationship was sexual and apparently monogamous albeit at least until
(v) The Respondent's own mother provided a personal and unsecured loan to the
Applicant some two years after the Respondent herself
asserts the demise of a
'toxic' relationship;
(vi) The Respondent herself concedes that the parties continued to take holidays
together, including with members of the her own
family and with X for a number
of years after the time she asserts to be the end of the relationship;
(vii) The Respondent herself concedes that she remained a frequent, although not
as frequently as asserted by the Applicant, visitor
to the respondent’s
property following which she says was the end of the relationship, including
staying overnight;
(viii) There is no evidence of either party re-partnering prior to the date that
the Applicant says the relationship ended in or
(ix) There is some evidence, despite my findings in respect of Mr M's evidence,
to support the Applicant’s assertion that the
Respondent removed documents
from his home in that she concedes that she did remove his telephone for a
period of some three days.
115 Similarly, however, there are aspects of the evidence which argue against
there being a committed relationship between these parties,
‘coupling’ so as to achieve the status of 'de facto
relationship’. They include:
(i) In circumstances where the Applicant
carries an onus of proof, his credibility suffers against that of the Respondent
of disputed fact. His affidavit is selective and misleading in its
content and its omissions as noted in these reasons above;
(ii) The evidence of Ms J as to the Applicant’s Facebook status post
together with the lack of a credible explanation by the
Applicant and the
Applicant’s own lodging of a document with Centrelink in 2020 are
indicative of attempts to shore up his
case after the event;
(iii) In or about January 2015 the Respondent made applications to the Child
Support Agency and Centrelink claiming a single person
status. The Applicant
was, on the evidence, aware of at least the child support assessment in 2015.
The Respondent has adduced
other evidence of similar type including her
unchallenged evidence as to having a single person’s Medicare/health
for herself and X and her workplace damages claim. The evidence must
be viewed against the credibility of the Applicant whose case
seems to be that
the relationship continued essentially unchanged in its nature until November
(iv) There is no sufficient or persuasive evidence of any joint purchases or
joint bank accounts for these parties save and except
the purchase and joint
registration of the motor vehicle which I accept was adequately explained by the
Respondent, and where it
is now conceded by the Applicant that his evidence of
the joint purchase of the C Town house is incorrect and misleading;
(v) On the evidence I am satisfied that the parties retained separate residences
staying only occasionally at each other's home and
in this respect I prefer the
evidence of the Respondent as to the frequency of each staying over and
consistent with my observations
of the Respondent as a more credible witness
generally than the Applicant. The evidence generally supports this finding as
extraneous factors such as X’s schooling and the respective
employment of the parties;
(vi) I accept the Respondent's evidence and that of Ms J of invitations by the
Respondent to the Applicant such that would not ordinarily
be rendered between
persons in a de facto relationship and, in the case of, Ms J of an invitation to
her wedding to the Respondent
'and friend' in late 2016 to evidence of a lack of
public recognition of a relationship by that time, but where again the Applicant
maintains a relationship continuing in type and recognition until November
(vii) I accept the evidence of the Respondent in respect of precise accounting
and financial reconciliations of the expenditure of
each of the parties
consistent with there being no financial dependence or interdependence between
(viii) I accept the evidence of Mr L, the accountant on behalf the Respondent as
to the normal and required practice of disclosing
a de facto relationship in
taxation documents. I do not accept the Applicant's evidence, to the contrary,
of advice from his own
the tax agent and take the inference pursuant to
(supra) that the honest evidence of the tax accountant may not have
assisted the Applicant’s case and where the Applicant offers
explanation for failing to adduce such potentially corroborative evidence;
(ix) The Applicant’s evidence in respect of financial arrangements and
repayments to the MacLaren Family Trust is unsatisfactory.
I prefer the
evidence of the Respondent and the Respondent's mother, Ms K. The Applicant
maintained the legitimacy of a receipt
for $45,000 made out on 1 January 2012
and that he attended a bank with the Respondent mother that day where he
personally handed
cash in that amount to the Respondent's mother and was at the
bank when she deposited the monies. The relevant bank accounts show
deposit. The Applicant was not able to provide any contrary bank statement or
other evidence. The plausibility of attending
a bank on New Year’s Day
escapes me. The Applicant’s own chronology in respect of obtaining the
loan and making repayments
is not plausible or convincing. He himself deposes
that the loan was not advanced until 2012. At best, this is a failed attempt
the Applicant to give evidence for the collateral purpose for what he claims to
be partial repayments of what he admits to be
a substantial loan from the
MacLaren Family Trust and, in my opinion, most likely a
fabrication.
116 I am unable to find on the evidence that the
Applicant has discharged his onus of proof to the requisite standard in his
that the parties lived or were otherwise in a de facto relationship.
In particular, I place considerable weight on the public documents
statements made by the Respondent to Centrelink and the Child Support Agency in
early 2015 after which, although armed with Child
Support Agency applications
and assessments, the Applicant does not only not disclose same in his affidavit
but maintains there to
be a continuing de facto relationship for a further
almost five years. Equally I place weight on the evidence of the Respondent
to the end of the relationship, such as it was, in early 2015 by way of her
communications to others and the recognition by others,
such as Ms J’s
wedding invitation.
117 I place considerable weight on there being no significant joint
purchases, mingling of finances, or joint financial accounts of
the parties.
The Applicant’s attempts to assert significant joint purchases have been
discredited. To the contrary, I accept
the Respondent’s evidence of there
being even the most minute financial reconciliations as indicative of no
financial mingling
or interdependence.
118 I find that the parties maintained separate residences and substantially
resided separately as evidenced by the Respondent.
119 I find the Respondent to be a more credible witness in respect of issues
of disputed fact where her evidence was consistent, informed
and factually
detailed as opposed to that of the Applicant. I am of the view the Applicant
has exaggerated parts of his evidence
such as, the frequency of staying at each
other’s home. Further, his evidence in respect of collateral issues
including the
repaying of $45,000 in cash to the Respondent’s mother and
the asserted ‘joint purchase’ of C Town completely lacks
Documents relied upon by the Applicant as corroboration in fact discredit him
and I am inclined to agree with the assertion
of the Respondent that at least
some are false in their content or at least the subject of later manipulation or
120 Counsel for the Respondent, leaves an alternative for me to find that
there may have be have a de facto relationship for a period
of time and perhaps
until such public statements were made by the Respondent to Government
Departments in early 2015. However, on
the evidence as a whole, I am unable to
find sufficient commitment, ‘coupling' or indicators of a ‘merging
at any time. Whilst individual factors are superficially
indicative of a de facto relationship, the comprehensive picture is not
indicative. I prefer that the relationship, despite its monogamous nature and
the bringing into the world of the X, never achieved
the status of a committed
genuine domestic relationship or de facto relationship, but was, as the
Respondent claims, more a relationship
of “boyfriend/girlfriend” or
“dating” or even perhaps a better description being, as the
Respondent puts
it, in the jargon of “friends with benefits”
121 The application will be dismissed upon a declaration of there being no de
facto relationship within the
Family Law Act
I certify that the
preceding one hundred and twenty-one (121) numbered paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 27 August 2021
Moby v Schulter
[2010] FamCA 748
at [60] and
At paragraph
[2011] FamCA 221 at
(1983) 52 ALR 128
Evidence Act
Wellard & Mason
[2021] FamCAFC 115
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298.
(1977) FLC 90-267.
RTF format (671 KB)
Signed PDF/A format