D20-21\081 [2020] SCTA 189 (3 November 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\081
FILE NUMBER
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Complainant
The Trustee
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(Cth) (the Complaints Act) and held on 21 September 2020 before Justin
Malbon, Member
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
decision under review is that of the Trustee refusing to compromise the
Complainant’s claim arising from his complaints
fee increases without agreed notice and the insufficient refunding of fees.
Trustee notified the Complainant of its decision by letter dated 8 June 2017.
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal affirms the decision of the Trustee.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
Tribunal requested, under s32 of the Complaints Act, submissions from the
submission was received from the Complainant.
Trustee declined to provide a submission, choosing instead to rely on
information previously submitted to the Tribunal.
submissions were exchanged and responses were invited.
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
papers provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant complains the decision of the Trustee was
unreasonable for the reasons summarised in this determination.
Complainant is currently aged 77 years.
complains that:
Trustee] represented to me that the management fee charged for [membership of
the Fund] would be 1.8% per annum plus an ‘account
fee’ of $81 minus
an Management Fee Rebate of 0.32% and a Rebate of Advisor Trail Commission of
0.66%. With the total fees
stated to be: '0.82% + $81.00 pa'. [The Trustee] only
rebated 0.6% for the Advisor Trail Commission and therefore charged total fees
of 0.88% pa.
Trustee] increased its management fees without 3 month's prior notification.
Complainant submitted via his lawyer that:
I note the ...trustee’s justification for rebating my client
0.6% rather than the 0.66% that was represented to him is that:
‘For clarification, the adviser remuneration is inclusive of the GST
component paid (10% reflected as 0.06% of the total 0.66%
charged). That is, the
adviser would only receive 0.60% as remuneration. This is because the GST
component is a tax and is therefore
not refundable.’
This argument was first raised by [the Trustee] by letter dated 7 June 2017,
following a number of communications from [the Trustee]
to my client in which
they consistently confirmed that the rebate figure was 0.66%... At no time prior
to this date was any rebate
figure other than 0.66% stated and no reference was
ever made to withholding the GST component of the advisor commission.
...[the Trustee] represented to my client on multiple occasions in the period
between 2006 and 2017 that he would receive a rebate
of ‘100% of the
advisor commission being ‘0.66%’. No mention of the GST portion not
being rebated occurred until
[the Trustee’s] letter to my client of 7 June
2017. I note that the 2005 PDS provided to my client also states that the
rebate: ‘for sums of $400,000 and over 0.66%’.
Fee Increase
I note that there appears to be no dispute that the 2005 PDS issued to my
client disclosed a management fee of 1.8% (before rebates)
and stated:
‘Additional explanations of fees and costs: “We will notify you
at least 3 months before
increase in fees occurs to enable you to
assess the impact of the increase on your investment”
Complainant complains he did not receive prior notice of an increase in fees, as
represented would be the case in the 2005 PDS.
Trustee wrote to the Complainant in a letter dated 14 May 2020 and explained in
detail the basis upon which it charged its fees
to the Complainant. The Trustee
added that:
I confirm that all changes in the Management Fee since 1 April 2007
are entirely attributable to changes in Underlying Investment
Costs, reflected
in the Investment Fee component of the Management Fee.
The [Fund] Investment Fee component of the Investment Fee and the
Administration Fee component of the Management Fee have not changed
April 2007.
2. GST withheld from asset based commission refund
You have stated that, at the time your Accounts commenced, you were informed
by your adviser and [the Trustee] that you would receive
an asset based
commission rebate of 0.66% per annum. However, you only received 0.60% per annum
due to the 0.06% component being
retained for GST.
The applicable asset based commission amount of 0.66% per annum is described
in the ... 2005... PDS on page 48 of each as being ‘inclusive
GST’. This accurately reflects that the commission is subject to GST and
that the portion of the commission representing
GST is due to the adviser. In
respect of the refund amount, each PDS states as follows:
“You may negotiate with your financial adviser to refund part or all
of their remuneration in relation to your account. Any
refund will be credited
to your account. If you choose not to use a financial adviser you will not be
entitled to any rebates of
the commission outlined below.”
However, on further review, I am confident that the disclosure accurately
represents the rates. It is clear that GST is included in
the asset based
commission rates in the ... 2005 ... PDS. The disclosed asset based commission
rates being “inclusive of GST”
establishes the rates as gross rates
whereby a component of the disclosed rate is attributable to GST. Thus, in my
view disclosure
provides prospective members adequate information to reasonably
conclude that if a rebate is negotiated with a financial adviser,
and GST does
not apply, a net rate would be applicable.
Notwithstanding the above, I acknowledge that on 15 March 2012, [a Trustee]
representative informed you by email that the commission
rebate you received was
0.66% per annum and appreciate that this information was incorrect. On this
basis, we have completed calculations
of the GST component of the asset based
commission charged from that time.... These calculations include an assessment
of the lost
earnings on the GST figures between 15 March 2012 and the date your
Accounts were closed in 2017, then interest based on the Bank
Bill Swap Rate +
3% applied to 31 May 2020. These amounts cumulatively total $2,766.75 for
[Account 1] and $4,128.52 for [Account
2] for a combined figure of
On behalf of [the Trustee] I would like to sincerely apologise that this is
the first time you are receiving some of the information
provided in this letter
and Annexures. As outlined in my email to the SCT dated 30 April 2020, which I
understand has been exchanged
with you by the SCT, the Trustee has made an ex
gratia offer of $5,000.00 in recognition of the delay and poor service you
experienced
during the complaints process with [the Trustee] and the SCT.
I confirm that this offer remains open for you to accept at any time during
the SCT complaint process. Further to this standing offer,
in recognition of the
incorrect information provided to you in 2012, we would like to offer you the
additional amount of $6,895.27.
This amount reflects the 0.06% portion of the
asset based commission rebate retained for GST since 15 March 2012 and the
missed interest and earnings opportunity on that amount explained
As such, the final offer made by the Trustee totals $11,895.27 in full and
final settlement of your complaint to [the Trustee] and
resolution sought by the Complainant is payment of $31,000 including interest to
Events not in dispute:
first column below specifies the day on which the event or events specified in
the second column occurred.
− The Complainant was born.
− The Fund made it not necessary to inform members
of increases to indirect costs.
− The Complainant contacted the Fund via the
‘contact us’ service requesting information on the fees charged on
his account, their composition and the rate of returns over 3, 5 and 10 years.
− The Fund received the Complainant’s
letter dated 2 September 2016, requesting the annual percentage figures charged
from inception for his accounts.
− The Fund responded to the
Complainant’s request for further information relating to his account.
− The Complainant sent the Fund a complaint
requested again to have the information sent to him.
− The Fund provided him a transaction history
from 3 March 2006 to 27 September 2016.
− The Complainant sent the Fund a complaint
− The Fund responded to the Complainant stating
it was unable to provide annual breakdown of Indirect costs in proportion to
dollar figure the Complainant has paid.
− The Trustee’s decision was notified to the
Complainant.
− The Complainant lodged a complaint to the Trustee
− The Trustee’s review decision was notified
to the Complainant.
− The date of the Complaint to the Tribunal.
− The Complainant requested detailed calculations
of all fees and charges on his accounts for the relevant years.
− The Trustee provided further information to the
Complainant regarding a detailed transaction list since inception of the
Complainant’s superannuation account.
− The Trustee made an ex-gratia offer to the
Complainant of $5,000.00 made in recognition of the delay and poor service
experienced
in the handling of his complaint by the Fund.
− The Trustee completed a further investigation and
review of the Complainants concerns. The Trustee provided in recognition
incorrect information provided to the Complainant in 2012, an offer for an
additional amount of $6,895.27.
Tribunal considers that the trust deed relevant to this complaint is that of the
Fund in effect on when the Complainant’s
accounts commenced (i.e. 6 March
2006), being the trust deed dated 14 February 2006 (the Trust Deed).
Trust Deed provisions relevant to the complaint are:
5.3 The Trustee's Powers
(a) Subject to this Deed, the Trustee has complete management and control of the
Fund as if it were a natural person owning the Fund
and is completely
unrestricted in the exercise of its Powers. It may do anything it considers
appropriate to properly administer
and maintain the Fund, exercise any Power,
and to perform its duties
legal proceedings:
commence, discontinue, prosecute, defend,
settle, compromise or arbitrate any proceedings by or against the Fund or the
otherwise concerning the Fund or this Deed and compound or allow time
for payment or satisfaction of a debt due to the Fund or the
Trustee or of a
claim or demand by or against the Fund or the Trustee or pay or charge interest
in respect of any amount involved
in any such proceedings;...
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
salient points made by the Complainant are as follows:
The Complainant
submits he was consistently overcharged management fees because the Fund
represented in the PDS it would rebate him
0.66% in adviser remuneration, but
only rebated 0.6%.
consistently overcharged management fees because the Fund increased the stated
management fee percentage of 1.8% (Account 1)
and 1.72% (Account 2) without
providing him the required three months prior notice and associated opportunity
to assess the impact
on his investments.
The Complainant
submits the actual fees charged consistently exceeded the disclosed 1.8% and
1.72% (before rebates) over the 10-year
term of his investment.
At no time did
he receive three months prior notice of any increases in fees.
At no time did
he receive notification in either dollar or percentage terms of any of the
multiple increases in the fees charged to
his accounts.
references to changes in fees were generic in nature and were insufficient to
allow him to ‘assess the impact of the
increase on your investment’.
The Complainant
seeks a refund of the fees charged in excess of this stated percentage minus
applicable rebates.
The Trustee
salient points made by the Trustee are as follows:
The Trustee
maintains the Complainant’s account has been correctly administered
according to the terms and conditions of the
product, with the appropriate
disclosure provided.
The Management Fee
The Management
Fee covers the costs of administration and servicing client accounts as well as
the costs of investing contributions.
Management fee refund
A portion of the
management fee may be refunded. The refund is calculated on the monthly account
balance. Please note this information
is relevant to both Accounts.
Value of combined account balances
$0 to less than $200,000
$200,000 to less than $400,000
$400,000 and over
Administration fee
administration fee is based on the account balance of each investment option
chosen and is calculated on the daily balance in
each investment option
selected. The fee is then deducted daily from the assets of each fund, before
the unit price or interest rate
is calculated.
Value of combined account balances
$0 to less than $200,000
1.53% pa/ 1.30% pa
$200,000 to less than $400,000
1.53% pa/ 1.30% pa
$400,000 and over
1.53% pa/ 1.30% pa
An additional
administration fee of 0.13 (0.11 net) per month is applicable if the account
balance falls below $10,000.00 and is charged
on the difference between the
account balance and $10,000.00.
Value of combined account balances
$0 to less than $200,000
$200,000 to less than $400,000
$400,000 and over
rebate applicable for Account 2; the percentage is based on the combined account
balances that the member and any eligible
linked investor have with Fund
Value of combined account balances
Before Fee Refund (Gross)
After Fee Refund (Net)
$0 to less than $200,000
$200,000 to less than $400,000
$400,000 and over
Indirect cost Ratio (ICR)
The ICR is an
estimate of the fees for investing in the Fund’s assets which are deducted
from investments rather than paid directly.
It includes investment management
fees paid to external investment managers, any performance based fees paid and
other expenses incurred
in investing the assets.
Asset based commission
Management Fee, the Fund pays the Financial Adviser (FA) a standard commission.
The rate of standard commission is calculated
according to the total value of
investments that a client, or a client and an agreed linked investor, hold in
Fund products, which
are serviced by the same FA.
Value of combined account balances (serviced by the same financial
Rate of asset-based standard commission (inclusive of GST)
$0 to less than $50,000
$50,000 to less than $100,000
$100,000 to less than $200,000
$200,000 to less than $400,000
$400,000 and over
Adviser Remuneration Refund
As detailed on
Page 44 of the PDS:
“You may negotiate with your financial adviser to refund part
or all of their remuneration in relation to your account. Any
refund will be
credited to your account. If you choose not to use a financial adviser you will
not be entitled to any rebates of
the commission outlined below.”
The Trustee clarifies, the adviser remuneration is inclusive of the GST
component paid (10% reflected as 0.06% of the total 0.66%
charged). That is, the
adviser would only receive 0.60% as remuneration. This is because the GST
component is a tax and is therefore
not refundable.
As such, if a client had negotiated a 100% refund of adviser remuneration
with their financial adviser, the principle applies.
Also advised on
Page 44 of the PDS:
“If you choose not to use a financial adviser you will not be
entitled to any rebates of the commission outlined below.”
Whilst the Complainant does not have a listed adviser, the Fund made a
discretionary decision to continue the previously established
refund of adviser
remuneration.
The Trustee is
unable to comment on any advice or information provided to the Complainant by
the Adviser at the time the Accounts
commenced. The Complainant is respectfully
directed to address any concerns regarding the Advice received directly with the
and his respective licensee.
Notification
In light of the
above, as there has not been a change to the fees associated with this product
the Trustee did not issue a significant
event notification to clients about
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
Tribunal must initially determine, under s37(6) of the Complaints Act, whether
the decision of the Trustee to refuse to compromise
the Complainant’s
claim arising from his complaints about the imposition of fee increases without
agreed notice and the insufficient
refunding of fees, was fair and reasonable in
its operation in relation to the Complainant in the circumstances.
issue is not what decision the Tribunal would have made on the evidence before
the Trustee but whether the decision was fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal took the whole of the evidence and
submissions into account. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the material it has
relied on has been provided to both Parties
Complainant complains:
Trustee] represented to me that the management fee charged for [the Fund] would
be 1.8% per annum plus an ‘account fee’
of $81 minus an Management
Fee Rebate of 0.32% and a Rebate of Advisor Trail Commission of 0.66%. With the
total fees stated to be:
‘0.82% + $81.00 pa’. [The Trustee] only
rebated 0.6% for the Advisor Trail Commission and therefore charged total fees
of 0.88% pa.
Trustee] increased its management fees without 3 month’s prior
notification.
the Trustee fail to fully rebate the Complainant’s adviser trail
commissions?
Trustee explained the basis on which it imposed the fees in detail to the
Complainant in a letter to him dated 14 May 2020.
Tribunal has reviewed the letter along with other submissions and correspondence
of the Trustee and the Complainant and is satisfied
the imposed the fees were
within the terms of the governing rules of the Fund, including the relevant
the Complainant, via his lawyer, also complains he was not fully refunded the
adviser fees as had been agreed. More specifically,
he submitted that:
We note that you have limited the offer of a refund to the period
after 15 March 2012, being the date upon which [a Trustee] representative
informed my client by email that he was ‘receiving 100%’ of the
advisor fees and that this was 0.66% per annum. This
statement you acknowledge
is incorrect, as he was only receiving 0.6%.
My client did negotiate with his financial advisor and the financial advisor
agreed to forgo all of his asset-based commission in
relation to my
client’s account. The advisor advised my client that this commission was
0.66% per annum.
What the PDS does not say is that [the Trustee] will withhold the GST
otherwise payable to the financial advisor from the amount rebated
investor. As the PDS does not say this, [the Trustee] unilaterally deciding to
retain this portion of the financial advisor’s
remuneration is without
basis and contrary to the clear statements in the PDS that my client will
receive all of the financial advisor’s
remuneration being:
If it was always intended that [the Trustee] would withhold the GST portion
then the PDS could have disclosed a rebate of 0.6% and
included a statement that
this was less than the amount of commission that would have been paid to the
financial advisor, due to
the GST portion being withheld. I understand that this
only occurred from 2016.
My client is therefore entitled to be compensated for [the Trustee’s]
failure to provide the full 0.66% rebate for the full
period of his investment.
If he is not so compensated then this renders the PDS misleading and deceptive.
I note in this regard that my client sees it as a matter of principle that he
be fully compensated for the fees charged in excess
of those represented in the
PDS provided to him and upon which he based his decision to invest with [the
Trustee stated on 7 June 2017
For clarification, the adviser remuneration is inclusive of the GST
component paid (10% reflected as 0.06% of the total 0.66% charged).
That is, the
adviser would only receive 0.60% as remuneration. This is because the GST
component is a tax and is therefore not refundable.
Trustee wrote to the Complainant stating:
I appreciate that you were not satisfied with the explanations
provided to you in previous complain responses regarding this issue.
However, on
further review, I am confident that the disclosure accurately represents the
rates. It is clear that GST is included
in the asset based commission rates in
the 2005 [Account 1] PDS and 2005 [Account 2] PDS. The disclosed asset based
commission rates
being “inclusive of GST” establishes the rates as
gross rates whereby a component of the disclosed rate is attributable
Thus, in my view disclosure provides prospective members adequate information to
reasonably conclude that if a rebate is
negotiated with a financial adviser, and
GST does not apply, a net rate would be applicable.
Tribunal agrees with this explanation.
Complainant appears to be relying on the Adviser’s error in stating in an
email to him
...that he was “receiving 100%” of the advisor fees and
that this was 0.66% per annum. This statement you acknowledge
is incorrect, as
he was only receiving 0.6%.
is evident the adviser received 0.6% in commissions and not 0.66%. He did not
‘receive’ the 0.06% component as it was
paid to the government for
GST. The Complainant received a rebate of the amount of commission received by
the adviser. It is a matter
of general knowledge that a goods and services tax
of 10% applies in Australia.
increases in fees without three months prior notification
2005 Fund PDS states in the context of an explanation about increases or
alterations in the charges, including contribution, management
and additional
administration fees that:
We will notify you at least three months before any increase in
fees occurs to enable you to assess the impact of the increase on
investment.
Complainant says he relied on the statement and that: ‘I was never
notified of increased fee amounts or percentage figures
to enable me to assess
the impact on my investments which were charged between 2006 and when I
transferred my investments in November
Trustee’s 2007 annual report stated:
From the respective dates, a component of the ongoing management
fee, namely fees paid to investment managers became variable. In
future this
component may vary
without prior notice to you
. [Emphasis appeared in the
original document]
30 June 2008 annual statement issued to the Complainant stated:
Investment and performance based fees
Investment fees for [the Fund] investment options are variable and
change from time to time without prior notice to you
. Performance-based fees
for underlying managers may be introduced at any time in the future without
prior notice. [Emphasis appeared
in the original document]
Tribunal is satisfied the Complainant was notified in 2007 and 2008 that fee
changes may vary without prior notice.
for present purposes, however, he had not been notified that fee changes may
occur without prior notice, the Tribunal is
not satisfied the Complainant acted
in reliance of the 2005 PDS statement to his detriment. That is, the Tribunal is
not satisfied
he changed his position in reliance of the statement.
statement said he would be given at least three months prior notice of an
increase ‘to enable you to assess the impact of
the increase on your
investment’. If there had been fee increases during the period of his
membership of the Fund from 2006
to 2017 he was in a position to assess the
impact of the increase and respond in some way to the increase if he considered
it adversely
impacted on his financial position.
appears to the Tribunal he did not change his position once he did become aware
of any fee increase.
other words, had he been given at least three months prior notice of fee
increases during his membership of the Fund, the Tribunal
is not satisfied he
would have acted any differently to the way he acted in the absence of being so
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decision under review
if it is satisfied that the decision, in its
operation in relation to the
Complainant, was fair and reasonable in the circumstances. For the reasons
stated above the Tribunal
is so satisfied.
Tribunal affirms the decision of the Trustee.
Justin Malbon, Presiding Member
Date of Tribunal signature: 3 November
RTF format (336 KB)
Signed PDF/A format