Taylor and Secretary, Department of Social Services (Social services second review) (Social services second review) [2024] AATA 3622 (11 October 2024)
Taylor and Secretary, Department of Social Services (Social services
second review) (Social services second review) [2024] AATA 3622
(11 October
Division: GENERAL DIVISION
File Number:
Julian Taylor
Secretary, Department of Social Services
Senior Member D.
Pursuant to
Administrative
Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
, the Tribunal decides to affirm the decision under
review. The Applicant has a debt to the Commonwealth totalling $22,115.30 and
this debt should not be waived.
..................................
......................................
Senior Member D. J. Morris
SOCIAL SERVICES – pensions, benefits and allowances - job search
allowance – where the applicant falsely claimed job search
allowance under
several identities and received payments to which he was not entitled –
where a debt resulted from the applicant
knowingly making false claims to obtain
benefits to which he was not entitled – whether the debt should be waived
relevant statutory provisions – where the respondent has earlier
decided to write the debt off because the applicant has been
standard of satisfaction in such cases – consideration of Bradshaw v
McEwans Pty Ltd – tribunal satisfied
applicant received benefits to which
he was not entitled – tribunal satisfied this constitutes overpayment
further satisfied that applicant has a debt to the Commonwealth
and that no part of it should be waived – decision under review
therefore affirmed.
Legislation
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Social Security Act 1991
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes Act 1958
Bradshaw v McEwans Pty Ltd
(1951) 217 ALR 1
Director of Public Prosecutions v Taylor
[2018] VCC 2271
Luxton v Vines
[1952] HCA 19
(1952) 85 CLR 352
R v Bahntoff
(Unreported Vic C of A 14 May 1998)
Taylor and Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2021] AATA 19
Taylor v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] FCA 309
Taylor v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCAFC 144
Taylor v The Queen
Taylor v The Queen
[2021] VSCA 131
REASONS FOR DECISION
Senior Member D. J.
Applicant in this matter is Julian Richard Taylor. That is the name under which
he lodged his application for review with the
Tribunal, although the papers
before the Tribunal reveal that he has also been known by other names in the
past, including by legal
changes to his name. These names include, but may not
be limited to: Steven Mark Barr, Steven Robert Barr, Steven Mark Bahntoff,
Julian Mark Bahntoff, Julian Steven Taylor, Steven Robert Bahntoff, Steven
Robert Parker and Steven Mark Bechtold-Meyer.
matter before the Tribunal is, first, whether Mr Taylor received a social
security benefit to which he was not entitled, in this
case job search allowance
(‘JSA’). If the answer to that question is ‘yes’, the
second question is whether,
by receiving JSA to which he was not entitled, the
Applicant thereby incurred a debt to the Commonwealth. If the answer to that
question is also ‘yes’, the third question is whether all or
some of the resultant debt should be waived pursuant to
Social Security Act 1991
matter has a long history. It had been listed for hearing on at least seven
occasions, and on each occasion the hearing was vacated.
There were requests
from the Respondent for
orders under the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(Cth) (‘the AAT Act’) in relation to certain documents
which were lodged under s 37 of that Act, and various decisions
by the Tribunal
to attempt to accommodate the requests of the Respondent to protect the identity
of third parties, whilst still affording
the Applicant procedural fairness in
terms of the documents which the decision-maker of the reviewable decision had
before them.
The fact of the Applicant being abroad also complicated matters, in
respect to time differences, video capacity and means to convey
documents to
directions hearing was held on 22 January 2024 and the substantial hearing was
held by video, as is permitted under s 33A of the
AAT Act, on 30 April 2024 and
2 May 2024. The Applicant appeared by video from London and the Respondent, and
the Tribunal participated
by video link.
Applicant represented himself, made oral and written submissions, and gave
evidence. The Respondent was represented by Ms Peta
Heffernan, a senior lawyer
with The Australian Government Solicitor. The first day of the hearing was
shortened by a video link failure.
The second day of the hearing was also
truncated because the Applicant advised the Tribunal that he had only a short
time off from
his work, so leave was given for Mr Taylor to make written closing
submissions by 16 May 2024, and the Respondent in reply by 30
May 2024. Both
parties did make written closing submissions. On 30 May 2024, the matter was
reserved. Subsequently, the Applicant
sent several other emails to the Tribunal,
without leave, apparently related to this application. They were inconsequential
the nature of bumf, as will be further explained later in these
Tribunal admitted the following into evidence:
(a) Redacted T
documents received on 20 February 2024 (Exhibit R1);
(b) Tribunal Book, paginated 1 to 654 (Exhibit R2);
(c) Respondent’s Updated Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions with
annexures A-G (Exhibit R3);
(d) Notice of appeal dated 13 April 2022 (Exhibit A1);
(e) Applicant’s statement dated 9 February 2021 (Exhibit A2);
(f) Federal Court unsworn affidavit dated 13 April 2022 (Exhibit A3);
(g) Information obtained under Freedom of Information, lodged 1 January 2020
(Exhibit A4);
Tribunal also had regard to a joint list of authorities and
legislation.
RELEVANT BACKGROUND
Applicant was born in the United Kingdom in 1965. He emigrated to Australia in
1969 in company with his parents and a sibling.
He was educated in South
Australia and attended university, graduating with a second-class honours degree
in civil engineering. In
1988 he acquired Australian citizenship by conferral in
the name Steven Robert Barr. However, in April 1995 he decided to renounce
citizenship. After that he held a Subclass BB 155 visa as a permanent resident
with a right of return.
Applicant was first before the Courts in May 1991. He was convicted before the
Magistrates’ Court in Melbourne of the offence
Obtaining property by
(19 counts) and fined $150 on each charge.
February 1994, he was before the District Court of Queensland in Brisbane. He
was convicted of the offences of
False pretences
(5 counts);
Misappropriation of
property (2
counts) and
Attempted false pretences
. On each count he was sentenced to
a concurrent term of imprisonment for three years and six months, wholly
suspended for three years
and six months, and ordered to pay compensation of
June 1994 he was before the County Court of Victoria. He was convicted of the
offences of
Obtain financial advantage by deception
(five counts); and
For these offences he was given a total effective sentence of
eight months’ imprisonment, with four months suspended for four
in June 1994, the Applicant was before the Magistrates’ Court in Melbourne
and convicted of the offences of
Fail to answer bail.
was sentenced to four months’ imprisonment, suspended for 12 months.
February 1998, the Applicant was before the County Court of Victoria and
convicted of the following offences:
Defraud the Commonwealth
(27 counts)
defraud the Commonwealth
(19 counts). For these
offences, which will be called the ‘Commonwealth fraud offences’, he
was sentenced on each charge
to six years’ imprisonment. He was also
convicted of
Breaching a restraining order
(two counts) and sentenced on
each charge to 18 months’ imprisonment. He was further convicted of the
Operate bank account
in false name
, and sentenced to
six months’ imprisonment. The total effective sentence imposed by the
Court was eight years gaol, with a
non-parole period of six years.
November 2018 Mr Taylor was sentenced in the County Court of Victoria of four
Use a copy of false document
; one charge of
Seven charges of
Obtain a financial
advantage by deception
one charge of
Make/Use/Supply identification
information
contrary to provisions of the
Crimes Act 1958
(Vic). In November 2018, he
was sentenced to a total effective sentence of two years and eleven months, with
a non-parole period
of two years and two months. An amount of 752 days
pre-sentence detention was declared.
Applicant obtained registration from the Victorian Institute of Teaching by
falsely declaring he had no prior convictions. That
false declaration enabled
him to be employed as a bogus teacher in several Gippsland schools.
21 December 2018, the Applicant’s visa was cancelled by a delegate of the
Immigration Minister under
Migration Act
’) on character grounds relating to his criminal
convictions. He did not pass the character test provided for in the
Taylor sought review of the visa cancellation, and in 2021 Senior Member Nikolic
of this Tribunal affirmed the delegate’s
decision. He subsequently sought
a review of the Tribunal’s decision in the Federal Court of Australia, and
then in the Full
Court of the Federal Court. In both Courts he was unsuccessful.
The Applicant then made an application for special leave to appeal
to the High
Court of Australia, but that was refused in December 2022.
to his immigration proceedings, the Applicant appealed the sentence imposed by
the County Court of Victoria, but leave to
appeal was refused by the Court of
Appeal of the Supreme Court of Victoria in July 2019. Mr Taylor then applied for
leave to bring
a second appeal. That application for review was refused by the
Court of Appeal, on the papers, in May 2021.
Applicant then made a special leave application to the High Court of Australia
to appeal against the decision of the Victorian
Court of Appeal. On 9 September
2021 Gageler and Gleeson JJ refused special leave, stating that there is no
reason to doubt the correctness
of the decision of the Court of Appeal of the
Supreme Court of Victoria and, further, that it was not in the interests of
to grant special leave to appeal.
March 2023, Mr Taylor was deported to the United Kingdom under
Migration Act
, as he was an unlawful non-citizen. He has no lawful right of
RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS
Respondent noted that between July 1992 and December 1993 the Applicant was
incarcerated at the Arthur Gorrie Correctional Centre
in Queensland (TD, p
15 December 1993, the Applicant applied for JSA under the name Steven Robert
Barr (TD, p 491).
February 1994 and June 1994 the Applicant was again incarcerated following
convictions on offences relating to fraud, false
pretences and misappropriation
of property (TD, pp 17, 18 and 71).
November 1995, the Applicant was arrested and charged with Commonwealth fraud
offences, including defrauding the Commonwealth pursuant
to s 29D of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) (TD, p 17).
was detained at Port Phillip Prison in Victoria, and in January 1998 he pleaded
guilty to all counts in the indictment against
him. He was sentenced to a term
of imprisonment of eight years, in relation to the Commonwealth fraud offences
(TD, p 17).
September 1998, Centrelink, part of the Respondent’s Department, wrote to
the Applicant advising that he had been paid JSA
to which he was not entitled,
in the names of various people identified in the letter at various times between
the period 24 December
1993 and 3 August 1995. He was advised that consequently
he had a debt for overpayment of JSA in the amount of $22,115.30 (TD, p
Applicant entered into correspondence with Centrelink seeking information on the
basis of the debt, and in April 2003 asked for
details of ‘charges laid
against him’ (TD, p 290). Later in the same month, Centrelink responded
and confirmed that no
charges were laid against him in relation to debt (TD, p
457). The following day a fresh notice was sent to the Applicant advising
the JSA debt.
was further correspondence between the Applicant and Centrelink. In September
2013, Centrelink wrote to the Applicant regarding
recovery of his debt, stated
at that time to be $20,146.73 (TD, p 469).
Applicant sought review by an authorised review officer (‘ARO’), who
is an officer of the Department not involved
in the original debt decisions. In
May 2020, the ARO made a decision to affirm the decision to raise a debt against
the Applicant
in the sum of $22,115.30 for overpayment of JSA (TD, p 313).
May 2020, the Applicant sought review by the Tribunal of the ARO’s
decision. On 17 July 2020, Member Nalpantidis of Social
Services and Child
Support Division of this Tribunal, at first review, affirmed the decision under
review. On 27 July 2020 Mr Taylor
as he is entitled to do, sought second review
by the General Division of the Tribunal.
14 January 2022, the Applicant filed an application with the Federal Court
seeking judicial review of the decision to raise a debt
against him (Federal
Court proceeding VID 23 of 2022). Mr Taylor claimed he was denied procedural
fairness, and there had been legal
unreasonableness in relation to the debt
raised against him.
3 June 2022, the Respondent applied for the Federal Court proceeding to be
stayed pending the outcome of Mr Taylor’s Tribunal
application.
7 August 2023, His Honour Justice Moshinsky ordered that the Federal Court
proceedings be stayed pending the outcome of the Tribunal’s
proceedings on
the basis that there was overlap between the relief sought in the Federal Court
and the Tribunal proceeding, and the
relief sought before the Tribunal was
broader than what could be sought in the Federal Court proceeding.
of Mr Taylor’s deportation from Australia, on 21 April 2023 the Secretary
decided to write off the balance of the debt
raised against the Applicant,
pursuant to s 1236 of the Act.
12 May 2023, The Australian Government Solicitor, acting for the Secretary,
wrote to Mr Taylor informing him of the decision to
write off the balance of the
JSA debt raised against him in September 1998, which at the date of write-off
stood at $19,094.27. On
the same day, the Applicant said he would still pursue
his application for second review on the basis that he claimed there was no
in the first place, and he is entitled to be reimbursed for the amounts that had
already been paid towards the debt, adjusted
for inflation.
Is there a JSA debt?
Respondent contended that the Applicant had claimed JSA in the names of seven
other men, all his fellow prisoners at one time.
The individual details of the
seven persons follow, but their names, although clear to the parties on the
papers before the Tribunal,
are not disclosed in these reasons.
Respondent submitted that around 16 December 1993, an application was made to
the Registrar-General of Births for a certified
copy of a birth certificate in
the name of a person who will be called ‘Person A’ who was born on a
cited day in November
1973 (TD, p 93).
24 December 1993, a claim for JSA was made in the name of Person A with that
birth date.
December 1993 and March 1994, a total sum of $1,700 was paid into bank accounts
in the name of Person A, and his address was
stated to be a residence in
Annerley in Queensland.
A was gaoled on 9 June 1992, and as at November 1997 he was serving a life
sentence for the crime of murder (TD, p 95).
Respondent submitted that the claim for JSA was not made by Person A on the
following bases: that he was in gaol at the time the
JSA claim was made, and at
the time the application for a copy of his birth certificate was made. The
Respondent further submitted
that the birth certificate was requested to enable
the requestor to open a bank account in the name of Person A.
24 January 1994 a birth certificate was obtained in the name of a person who
will be called ‘Person B’, who was
born on a cited day in January
1960 (TD, p 107).
the same date a claim for JSA was lodged in the name of Person B, and an address
quoted was a residential address in Indooroopilly
in Queensland. Bank account
details were provided, and a previous employer named. It was stated that Person
B paid rent to a named
January 1994 and 14 March 1994 the total sum of $1,377.60 was paid into bank
accounts in the name of Person B.
B was gaoled at the Arthur Gorrie Correctional Centre from 22 March 1993 to 19
November 1994, and then transferred to the Sir
David Longland Correctional
Centre, where he died on Christmas Eve, 1994 (TD, p 119).
Respondent submitted that the claim for JSA was not made by Person B on the
following bases: that he was in gaol at the time the
JSA claim was made, and at
the time the bank accounts were opened in his name, and that the birth
certificate in Person B’s
name was obtained just before the claim for JSA
was made, in order to enable the requestor to open bank accounts in the name of
Respondent further submitted that Person B was in prison at the time he
allegedly worked for the named employer and was in gaol
at the time he was
allegedly renting premises from the named landlord.
August 1994, a birth certificate was obtained in respect of a person who will be
called ‘Person C’, who had a date
of birth on a cited day in
September 1968 (TD, p 136).
15 August 1994, a claim for JSA was made in the name of Person C. In the claim,
Person C was claimed to be residing at an address
in Fitzroy in Victoria. A
credit union account number was provided. Person C’s previous employer was
named, and it was stated
that he paid rent to a named person.
the period between August 1994 and February 1995, a total sum of $5,123 was paid
to Person C’s nominated credit union account
(TD, pp 141-142).
Respondent submitted that the claim was not made by Person C on the following
bases: Person C was in gaol from July 1992 to October
1994 and from November
1994 to the present (i.e. the time of the Tribunal’s hearing in May 2024).
He was in prison on the date
the JSA claim was made. A birth certificate in his
name was obtained just prior to the JSA claim, which enabled the requestor to
open a credit card in his name three days before the JSA claim was made.
C was also in prison at the time he was allegedly employed by the named person
and at the time he allegedly entered into tenancy
agreements with named people.
The bank statements for Person C show that on the same day the JSA was paid into
the credit union account
in Person C’s name, almost all the entire sum was
then withdrawn from the account.
December 1993, an application was made in the name of a person who will be
called ‘Person D’ who had a date of birth
of a cited day in February
1969 (TD, p 156).
28 January 1993, a claim was made for JSA in the name of Person D, with his
address stated as a residence in Hawthorn in Victoria.
His employer was stated
to be a named person where he had been employed in sales. It was stated he paid
rent to a named person (TD,
pp 146-153).
August 1994, a further claim for JSA was made in the name of Person D. This time
his address was stated to be at a residence in
Dandenong in Victoria. It was
stated that he worked for a company in June 1994 in a clerical position until
the company went bankrupt.
August 1994 and March 1995, a total sum of $5,417 was paid into the bank account
nominated by Person D.
Respondent submitted that the JSA claim was not made by Person D on the
following bases: that a birth certificate was obtained
just prior to the first
JSA claim to enable the requestor to open a bank account in Person D’s
name, and that the bank account
was opened on 19 August 1994, just prior to the
second claim for JSA being lodged.
July 1994, a birth certificate was obtained in respect of a person who will be
called ‘Person E’, with a date of birth
of a cited day in May 1970
(TD, p 200).
late September 1994, a JSA claim was made in the name of Person E, with an
address stated as a residence in Ringwood in Victoria
and a post office box at
the Ringwood Post Office. It was stated that he had been employed as a plumber
until the business went broke
and he paid weekly rent to a named person.
National Australia Bank account details were provided.
September and October 1994 a total sum of $744 was paid to Person E.
Respondent submitted that the JSA claim was not made by Person E on the
following bases: that a birth certificate in his name
was obtained just prior to
the JSA claim being paid to enable the requestor to open a bank account in
Person E’s name; that
the Ringwood Post Office box cited in the JSA
application was at the time rented by a doctor; and that in February 1994 Person
made a statutory declaration that the only bank accounts he has ever had are
with the Commonwealth Bank and that he never opened
any new accounts, nor
authorised anyone else to do so (TD, pp 208-209).
January 1995, a birth certificate was obtained in respect of a person who will
be called ‘Person F’ with the date of
birth of a cited day in August
1970 (TD, p 228).
February 1994, a JSA claim was made in the name of Person F with the stated
address of a residence in Blair Athol in South Australia.
His employer was
stated as a transport company where he worked as a labourer until the company
went bankrupt. He paid $90 weekly
rent to a named person and a credit union
account number was provided.
February 1994, a further JSA claim was made in the name of Person F. This time
his address was stated to be a residence in Marsden
in Queensland, and a
previous employer was named. A Bank of Queensland bank account number was
the period January to August 1995 a sum of $5,183 was paid to Person F.
F was in prison between February 1996 and September 1996 (TD, p 236). The
Respondent submitted that the claim for JSA was not
made by Person F on the
bases that: a birth certificate in his name was obtained just before the first
JSA claim was made to enable
the requestor to open an account in Person
F’s name; and the address provided in the JSA application is actually the
address of a post office.
Respondent submitted that a birth certificate was obtained in the name of a
person who will be called ‘Person G’,
with a date of birth on a
cited day in September 1960 (TD, p 264).
February 1995, a JSA claim was made in the name of Person G, citing a
residential address in Fairview Park in South Australia.
The application stated
that he worked as an ‘office boy’ for a car dealership in December
1994 and that he paid $95 per
week to a named person. Bank Account details were
the period February 1995 to April 1995, a sum of $2,581.10 was paid to Person G
(TD, pp 270-272).
G was in prison from 9 February 1993 to 19 November 1993 at the Arthur Gorrie
Correctional Centre in Queensland and then from
30 November 1993 to November
1996 at a prison in Victoria (TD, p 276).
Respondent submitted that the JSA was not lodged by Person G, on the bases that:
the bank account was opened on the same day the
JSA application was made, which
was a time Person G was in prison. The address provided in the JSA application
and tenancy agreement
is the address of a shop which also serves as a post
office agency (TD, p 39).
What is the Applicant’s connexion?
Respondent contended that the claims for JSA for the seven men, Persons A to G,
were made by Julian Taylor. The Respondent submitted
that there are clear
similarities between the names and addresses used for the seven men and those
used by the Applicant.
address used for the second JSA claim of Person D, in Dandenong, is the same
address as that used by Person E in correspondence
with the Australian Taxation
Office, and is similar to an address used by the Applicant between 1991 and
1994. The address used by
Person F on a residential tenancy agreement in the
town of Slacks Creek is identical to the address of Mr Taylor for the period
1994 to June 1994. The Applicant had used the same address, in Herbert
Street, Dandenong, recorded in the Employment Separation Certificates
D and Person E in correspondence with the Australian Taxation Office. The
address used by Person C on a residential tenancy
agreement of ‘5 Laroche
Street’ in Woodbridge, Queensland (an address which does not exist), is
very similar to the address
of the Applicant of 5 Laroche Street in Chestmead
(the adjacent suburb), for the period from December 1993 to January 1994. The
also noted that Person A and Person G both used the same address of
“PO Box 1435, Coorparoo” for their tax assessments
(TD, pp 84 and
25). The rent receipts submitted, purportedly by Person F and Person G, are
sequentially numbered and appear to be
from the same receipt book (TD, pp 237
Respondent also noted that, in the JSA claims for all except Person A, the
reason for each of the persons ceasing work was that
their employer went
bankrupt, or ‘went broke’. Both the JSA claims for Person A and
Person B state the name of the same
purported employer.
Respondent submitted that both Person A and Person B had their JSA payments
directed to the same bank account (TD, pp 83 and 118).
Respondent noted that Mr Taylor was incarcerated at the Arthur Gorrie
Correctional Centre at the same time two of the persons,
Person B and Person G
were at the same prison.
Respondent submitted that Mr Taylor’s bank account statements from
December 1993 (TD, pp 63-64) show regular deposits of
sums of around $300 to
$400 into his account from unknown sources, whereas the bank accounts of Persons
A to G show regular deductions
for around $300 to $400 over the corresponding
period. The Secretary therefore submitted that the Applicant was deducting sums
those accounts and depositing them into his own account.
Respondent also submitted to the Tribunal that the Applicant pleaded guilty to
charges in the indictment against him in respect
of the Commonwealth fraud
offences whereby it was alleged that he used the identities of prisoners, dead
people and acquaintances
to claim over $700,000 in tax refunds. It was in
particular alleged in relation to those admitted offences that the Applicant
identities of persons he had come to know while serving time for other
charges in both Victoria and Queensland, and as part of a
he set up false addresses, and money was deposited into accounts held under
false names and then withdrawn through
automatic teller machines.
Respondent therefore submitted that an inference should be drawn, taking into
account the totality of the evidence, that it was
the Applicant who lodged each
of the JSA applications in the names of Persons A to G, and that his subsequent
receipt of payments
of JSA by using the identities of other persons led directly
to an overpaid of JSA to him, and thereby a debt.
THE APPLICANT’S SUBMISSIONS
his opening submissions, Mr Taylor submitted:
The issues identified by the Respondent are not correct. The issue at heart
is has there been correct procedures followed. Either
it is a criminal matter or
a civil matter. There must be a trial and charges.
The AFP have done an investigation. They gave the file back to [name
redacted, initials KL]. KL then decided to convict me on a criminal
Never had a hearing. No trial. No documents served on me. KL made all these
decisions himself. He is a pathetic little
parasite staff member. He needs to
adopt due process. The issue is has correct procedure been followed. He can
bring a case; he needs
to bring it before a jury. Despite numerous requests,
they cannot show me a transcript of a trial because nothing has happened. KL
decided I am guilty. It is like robodebt.
THE RESPONDENT’S ORAL SUBMISSIONS
Heffernan noted in her opening remarks that the debt was written off after Mr
Taylor was deported. She said that the Secretary
contends the Applicant received
JSA to which he was not entitled and thereby incurred a debt. She submitted
there is a body of circumstantial
evidence and, on the balance of probabilities,
the Applicant received the benefit.
Heffernan noted that the more probable inference on the material before the
Tribunal is in favour of what the Secretary is contending.
She said the
Respondent’s case is that Mr Taylor made applications in the names of
seven other persons, and that the benefit
paid to them was not payable to him.
He made false representations to the Department. She submitted that if the
Tribunal finds that
the Applicant received the funds, there is no doubt that he
did not receive the money in good faith. There is no evidence of administrative
error, but there is evidence of a deceptive scheme.
Heffernan further submitted that there is no evidence that special circumstances
are applicable, and the only factor is that the
Applicant no longer resides in
Australia and at present cannot return. She submitted that there is no basis for
a waiver or write-off
of the debts.
APPLICANT’S ORAL EVIDENCE
Heffernan asked the Applicant whether he recognised the names of the seven men
(who are in these reasons referred to as Persons
A to G). Mr Taylor responded:
“I have heard some of those names before”.
The following
exchanges then occurred.
Ms Heffernan: Where did you hear
Applicant: In Queensland.
Ms Heffernan: What period of time?
Applicant: Around 1996.
Ms Heffernan: How did you come to know them?
Applicant: They were all remanded prisoners.
Ms Heffernan: You were remanded at that time?
Applicant: Yes.
Ms Heffernan Person A?
Applicant: He would have been there at the same time.
Ms Heffernan: Person B?
Applicant: Probably there at the same time.
Ms Heffernan: Person C?
Applicant: He was in a different unit at Arthur Gorrie.
Ms Heffernan: How long where you there?
Applicant: Two years on remand – sorry, 18 months.
Ms Heffernan: Person D?
Applicant: Don’t recall that name.
Ms Heffernan: Was his brother there?
Applicant: I don’t know his family.
Ms Heffernan: Person E?
Applicant: Never heard of the name.
Ms Heffernan: Have you heard of Person F?
Applicant: Yes. He was in the remand centre as well probably at the same
Ms Heffernan: Was [redacted] at Arthur Gorrie with you?
Applicant: He was in Arthur Gorrie.
Ms Heffernan: Did you complete tax returns for those persons?
Applicant: I don’t recall. I completed some.
Tribunal: Did you do tax returns?
Applicant: I did many tax returns for people and all the money went to their
prison accounts.
Ms Heffernan: Do you remember [redacted)?
Applicant: I don’t recall the name.
Ms Heffernan: Do you recall evidence to the Tribunal that you did do tax
returns for all these people?
Applicant: I don’t recall that – I am not saying I did, or I
Ms Heffernan: You were convicted for lodging tax returns for other people
and taking their returns.
Applicant: I was convicted. What the Court didn’t understand was
the money went to their prison accounts.
Ms Heffernan: You agreed to 46 charges in the County Court?
Applicant: Under duress, yes.
Ms Heffernan: You recall the following names [names redacted)?
Applicant: Under duress, yes. I was forced into it.
Tribunal: Forced by whom?
Applicant: Forced by my barrister and the Court system.
Tribunal: You say your barrister forced you?
Applicant: I was sold down the river.
Ms Heffernan: You haven’t denied lodging tax returns for those
Applicant: I don’t recall.
Ms Heffernan: I put it to you, you haven’t denied lodging
Applicant: I would help people in the remand centre to lodge their tax
Tribunal:` You helped people lodge tax returns, but they lodged
Applicant: All I did was help them.
Ms Heffernan: Are you familiar with the T documents?
Applicant: You blanked out so much of them.
Ms Heffernan: Copies of birth certificates, tenancy agreements,
employment certificates and others – have you not looked
Applicant: Why would I look at them?
the second day of the hearing, the Applicant was taken to various documents
within the T documents lodged by the Respondent for
the hearing. He denied ever
seeing any documents including one which he apparently signed, stating,
“Take me to trial and we will see”.
denied any knowledge of any documents lodged in the names of Persons A to G and
“If you think you have a case, take me to
the conclusion of the oral evidence on the second day, the Applicant said that
he had to return to work because he only had a certain
time off for the Tribunal
proceedings. He sought to make oral closing submissions, but the Tribunal
reminded him that he had been
told there would not be that opportunity, but that
leave would be given to both parties to make written closing submissions. The
Applicant then accused the Tribunal of being biased and said,
a stitch up”.
The hearing then concluded. The Tribunal issued a
direction to the parties to lodge closing submissions, on the receipt of the
of which the matter would be reserved.
WRITTEN CLOSING SUBMISSIONS – THE APPLICANT
Applicant lodged a closing submission with the Tribunal which consisted of an
unsworn and unsigned affidavit of 28 pages.
Applicant opened with criticism of the Tribunal hearing and described the
Tribunal as a
“weak spineless hatchet man for the government. A yes man
to his satanic overlord”.
He described the current Tribunal and the
Senior Member who presided at the 2021 hearing relating to the cancellation of
“sadistic psychopaths who willing break up families simply because they
are told do so by the dark sadistic parasitic government.
I hope I am wrong and
there does exist a higher power so that Morris and [the other Senior Member]
will receive their punishment
in the afterlife for their deliberate destruction
of lives in return for a blood payment called a salary. Selling their souls
they possess no skills to make an honourable living and can only exist
by acting as money hungry skill-less mercenaries to evil dictators.
They do, as
all governments do, destroy and create nothing. Morris and [redacted] are
effluent floating in the septic tank that is
the Australian
government.”
got this somewhat splenetic proem off his chest, Mr Taylor then made submissions
that the Respondent’s Department does
not have jurisdiction to make the
decision that he was guilty in the first place. He wrote:
Functus officio,
No longer having power and jurisdiction and
fundamento cadit opus
, the foundation being removed,
the structure falls. The whole case of the Department thus fails and Morris, no
matter how much he
hates it, how much he hates me for being right, how much it
eats away from him, how much his hatred of me consumes me and how much
contradicts the orders he has received from his satanic overlord and paymaster,
he must rule in my favour.
(Emboldening in the original.)
Taylor submitted that the Department has “unlawfully already convicted
me” and that any decision on his ‘conviction’
or otherwise is
not for the Department to decide internally as it is a decision for a jury in a
Chapter III Court.
Applicant then reproduced the contents of his correspondence with the Department
asking for details of charges that have been
laid against him. He then listed
some pages of Latin maxims and texts from both the Old and New Testaments, and
other quotes from
sources unclear. He reiterated his arguments that the
Department had ‘convicted’ him of an ‘offence’ and
not do that because it was not a Chapter III Court.
Taylor also made an assertion about the legal validity of the status of Her Late
Majesty as Queen of Australia, and that, in his
submission, it therefore
followed that no Senator or Member of the House of Representatives is duly
elected, and consequently that
the Minister administering the Respondent’s
Department is not a ‘lawful’ minister, and any actions in the
Department’s
name, or the name of previous departments administering the
Act, are unlawful.
regard to Persons A to G, Mr Taylor said:
I point out that all the individuals the Department claim to have received
money were all known to each other and so it could be concluded
that anyone of
these individuals could have been the perpetrator of this alleged fraud.
Taylor then provided, in tabular form, a list of deductions by the Department
between April 1996 and August 2018 which he asserted
totals $9,893.91 but
“is now over AUD $10,000.00” and is an amount “stolen from me
by the Department of Social
Taylor then quoted extracts from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and
finished off with a conclusion that the current
Tribunal and officers of the
Department are:
‘spineless gut-less psychopathic
hiding behind the
abuse of government power.’
to one side this somewhat baroque wrapping paper, essentially, the nub of Mr
Taylor’s closing submission is that the
Department did not have the
the Tribunal must find
in his favour.
26 June 2024, the Applicant sent an email to the Tribunal with a 65-page
affidavit apparently relating to a dispute some self-styled
has had with Warrington Council in the United Kingdom. It was not apparent how
this material was relevant to his
application to the Tribunal He also sent an
email to the Tribunal referring to him having a hip operation and stating his
he would have had to wait longer for it, had he still been in
Australia. The Tribunal disregards both of these unsolicited
communications.
WRITTEN CLOSING SUBMISSIONS – THE RESPONDENT
Respondent noted that the parties had lodged a joint list of authorities,
including cases relevant to how the Tribunal should
assess and weigh
circumstantial evidence contained in the Tribunal Book.
Respondent submitted that in
Bradshaw v McEwans Pty Ltd
(1951) 217 ALR 1
’), the High Court of Australia (Dixon, Williams,
Webb, Fullager and Kitto JJ) said, at page 5:
The difference between the criminal standard of proof in its application to
circumstantial evidence and the civil is that in the former
the facts must be as
to exclude reasonable hypotheses consistent with innocence while in the latter
you need only circumstances raising
a more probably inference in favour of what
is alleged. In questions of this sort where direct proof is not available it is
if the circumstances appearing in the evidence give rise to a reasonable
and definite inference: they must do more than give rise
to conflicting
inferences of equal degrees of probability so that the choice between them is
mere matter of conjecture: see per Lord
Robson, Richard Evans & Co Ltd v
[1911] UKLawRpAC 47
[1911] AC 674
at 687). But if circumstances are proved in which it is
reasonable to find a balance of probabilities in favour of the conclusion
then though the conclusion may fall short of certainty is it not to be regarded
as a mere conjecture or surmise: cf per Lord
Loreburn, above, at 678.
Respondent noted that this principle in
was repeated by Dixon,
Fullager and Kitto JJ in a case in the following year,
Luxton v Vines
[1952] HCA 19
(1952) 85 CLR 352
Respondent noted that Mr Taylor had admitted in his oral evidence, at the
hearing, that he was in prison with Persons A, B, C,
E, F, and G (but not Person
D). He said he completed tax returns for ‘a lot’ of prisoners, and
agreed he may have helped
these persons. He agreed that the grounds of his 1998
conviction for Commonwealth fraud offences included lodgement of tax returns
those persons, and that in his correspondence with Centrelink contesting the
debt, he had not denied that he had lodged JSA claims
in the names of Persons A
He agreed that the subject of his 1998 conviction for Commonwealth fraud
offences including lodgement of tax returns for those persons,
and that in his
correspondence with Centrelink contesting the debt he had not denied that he had
lodged JSA claims in the names of
Persons A to G.
in his oral evidence, Mr Taylor denied lodging JSA claims for Persons A to
response to the Applicant’s suggestion that as Persons A to G all knew
each other, and that any one of them could have perpetrated
the fraud, the
Respondent submitted that several of them were in prison when the JSA claims
were made, whilst Mr Taylor was not,
and that his suggestion ignores the other
evidence linking the JSA claims to him directly.
CONSIDERATION
Was the Applicant overpaid JSA?
matter before the Tribunal is not related to when Mr Taylor (as Steven Barr)
made a valid claim himself for JSA after he was released
from prison, and was
paid whilst he was looking for work. It concerns seven other JSA claims for
Persons A to G.
Taylor’s arguments before the Tribunal (putting aside his flamboyant
criticisms of the presiding member, the Department,
the government and some
officers of the Department) centred on the fact that he has not been charged in
relation to receiving JSA
to which he is not entitled.
Applicant does not seem to grasp (or perhaps does not choose to grasp) that he
is not being charged with financial fraud. The
reviewable decision is that he is
being required to repay social security debts for payments he received to which
he was not entitled,
according to the relevant requirements in the Act.
was significant to the Tribunal that Mr Taylor’s denials, in relation to
his conduct, were very selective. In his application
for second review under the
part of the form headed with ‘Why do you claim the decision is
wrong?’, the Applicant wrote
Clearly the decision is incorrect. The tribunal did not take into account
that there is no evidence that I received any money. The
for this matter has never been provided and examined in a court of law. The
Centrelink decision is arbitrary
and there has been no procedural fairness or
natural justice.
the Applicant did not deny that he lodged fake claims for JSA, he instead
challenged that the first review could have made
its findings without criminal
charges being laid. The Applicant admitted knowing each of Persons A to G,
except quibbled about whether
he knew Person D or not.
admitted that he prepared tax returns for fellow prisoners when he was in Arthur
Gorrie Correction Centre, including the named
persons. But when questions were
put to him about particular documents, he simply refused to look at references,
and in one case
denied vehemently receiving some correspondence from the
Department, only a little later in the hearing having to admit he had, when
documentary evidence was put before him from the lodged T documents.
Tribunal considers that the High Court authority in
in this matter.
related to a claim for damages by a widow. It
was alleged in a civil trial that Mr Bradshaw’s death was caused by the
driving of a servant or agent of the respondent company using a van
owned by McEwans (a large hardware firm).
facts were that the deceased had departed a railway station around sunset to
cycle three miles to his home. A witness saw a van
owned by the respondent
travelling towards the scene of the accident with no lights on. A second witness
saw a stationary van and
the body of the deceased lying at an angle from the
front wheel. It was dark, the van had no lights on, and there were no
streetlights.
No evidence was given as to the deceased’s injuries, any
marks on the road, or on the van or the presence of a bicycle. The
admitted that the van was being driven by its employee. The trial judge declined
a non-suit order sought by the respondent
and directed the jury that the
evidence was clear that there was an impact at or near the scene between the
deceased and the respondent’s
van. The jury awarded compensation to Mrs
Bradshaw. The respondent appealed to the New South Wales Supreme Court which by
set the compensation award aside. Mrs Bradshaw then appealed to the
High Court.
High Court allowed the appeal and restored the jury’s verdict,
difference between the criminal and civil standard of proof in their application
to circumstantial evidence is that the former
requires the facts to exclude
reasonable hypotheses consistent with innocence whereas the latter needs only
circumstances raising
a more probable inference in favour of what is alleged.
Where direct proof is not available and a conclusion falls short of certainty,
it is enough if the circumstances appearing in the evidence give rise to a
reasonable and definite inference, provided they do more
than give rise to
conflicting inferences of equal degrees of probability so that the choice
between them is a matter of conjecture.
If circumstances are proved in which it
is reasonable to find a balance of probabilities in favour of a particular
conclusion, it
is not to be regarded as mere conjecture or surmise.
the appellant’s evidence was not of great weight, it raises the inference,
indicative of negligence, that the respondent’s
van was unlit on a dark
road when it collided violently with the deceased;
the respondent called no evidence which might displace the appellant’s
argument, there was no contrary reasoning offering
a higher degree of
probability. This was enough to warrant the submission of the case to the
the respondent called no evidence to support its hypotheses suggesting
contributory negligence, for which it bore the onus of proof,
it was open to the
jury to reject them.
these general principles in this case, the Tribunal is satisfied that the facts
before the Tribunal raise a more probable
inference in favour of what is
alleged. The Applicant knew each of Persons A to G (though in his oral evidence
he cavilled over knowing
one of them). He agreed they were fellow prisoners at
the same time he was in gaol (in one case it appears one was the brother of
prisoner). He agreed in writing that these same persons were the subject of tax
returns he lodged but where he pleaded guilty to
Commonwealth fraud offences in
retaining their tax refunds.
evidence about obtaining birth certificates and bank accounts being then opened,
using those birth certificates, was not challenged
by the Applicant. The fact
that in several cases the men were in prison and incapable of applying for a
birth certificate or JSA
on the dates they allegedly did, was not challenged.
The address similarities and links to the Applicant and the JSA claims in
cases was not challenged, nor was the evidence before the Tribunal that
soon after JSA was paid into the bank accounts opened in
the names of these
seven men, the money was withdrawn, and deposits of the same quantum promptly
appear on the bank statements of
the Applicant’s own bank accounts.
terms of mounting arguments that might displace the Respondent’s
submissions, Mr Taylor really only put one (putting aside
his maundering
submissions on the title of Her Late Majesty and the consequent legitimacy of
the Minister for Social Services and
the actions of her Department). His
contention was that, as Persons A to G all knew each other, any one of them
could have perpetuated
the fraud. The Tribunal finds that improbable to the
extent of being satisfactorily excluded, because of the commonality in addresses
with those associated with the Applicant, the fact that he was the only one of
the group who was at liberty at all the relevant times,
and the background fact
that he had prepared tax returns for these men, and therefore had their full
names and dates of birth. There
is no evidence that any of the others had that
same information about their fellow prisoners. The Applicant did have that
information,
however, because they had given it to him when he helped them
prepare their tax returns for lodgement.
Importantly,
in my coming to a state of satisfaction that the Applicant did receive JSA by
making these claims in the names of Persons
A to G, is that Mr Taylor has at no
stage proffered any cogent alternative hypothesis, which might be plausible to
entertain. His
only refrain, apart from the argument referred to in the previous
paragraph, is – at its heart – that because he has
convicted, the Department was somehow acting ‘illegally’ in
attempting to recover the overpayment of JSA.
is no conflicting inference, or inferences, borrowing the words in
, of an equal or equal degrees of probability and offering a
compelling reasonable alternative hypothesis. I am satisfied that, in
this conclusion, the Tribunal has done so based not only on surmise or
conjecture, but taking into account the circumstantial
material before it and on
a balance of probabilities excluding any reasonable other hypotheses.
Tribunal finds that it is satisfied that Julian Taylor lodged applications for
JSA in the names of Persons A to G without their
knowledge, and that the
payments were made by the Department into bank accounts which he, not they,
controlled, for his own benefit.
Tribunal further finds that the Applicant was ‘overpaid’ JSA to the
extent that all the JSA payments made to these
seven persons in relation to
claims they themselves did not lodge (but the Applicant did) were monies he was
not entitled to receive.
Does the overpayment amount to a debt to the
Commonwealth?
1223(1)(b) of the Act provides that if a person receives a social security
payment to which he or she was not entitled to
obtain that benefit, the amount
of that payment is a debt to the Commonwealth by the person and the debt is
taken to arise when the
person obtains the benefit of the payment.
1223(1AB)(c) of the Act provides that a person who received a social security
payment is taken not to have been entitled to
obtain the benefit if the payment
was not payable or, at s 1223(1AB)(d), the payment was made as a result of the
contravention of
the social security law, a false statement or a
misrepresentation.
Tribunal is satisfied that the JSA was not payable to the Applicant in relation
to the claims made in the names of Persons A to
G, and that the payments
themselves were made as the result of false statements and
misrepresentations.
Should the debt be recovered?
money has been paid without authority to a person,
of the Act provides
that it is recoverable from the person unless the Secretary exercises any of the
statutory discretions not to
recover the debt. At the time the Secretary decided
to write off the debt, the sum of $3,021 had been recovered from the Applicant.
The Respondent submitted that the debt is now in the region of $20,509.46 (as at
the date final submissions were lodged).
is no contention by the Applicant that there has been error by the Department
that would enliven the provisions of s 1237A of
the Act (noting that Mr
Taylor’s over-arching contention is that the recovery of any of the debt
is ‘unlawful’).
is no contention by the Applicant that the discretionary powers available to the
Tribunal in s 1237AAD of the Act are relevant
in his case. In any event, the
Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s submissions that the Applicant knowingly
made false representations
by lodging with Centrelink claims for JSA for Persons
A to G without their knowledge: therefore the Secretary’s waiver
(or the Tribunal’s in this second review) is not available
because of the exception in s 1237AAD(a)(ii) of the Act.
Taylor did not advance any argument as to why, if he accepts the debt will be
recovered, there was any reason for the Commonwealth
not to pursue
Respondent has written the debt off, on the basis that, as Mr Taylor has been
deported, it is not practicable for the Commonwealth
to recover the debts. Of
course, when a debt is ‘written off’ under the Act, it is always
open to the Secretary to pursue
it at some future date – it is not written
off forever. The Tribunal expresses no view on this decision of the Secretary,
was not part of the Applicant’s case.
the hearing, the Tribunal noted to Mr Taylor that he has been deported so
therefore it was unlikely that the Secretary would
reverse the write-off
decision, given that the Applicant cannot re-enter Australia. The Applicant
contested this and said that ‘no;
I still have matters before the
Courts’. The Tribunal finds that this was deliberately misleading and, as
the Applicant was
giving evidence under affirmation, could constitute an offence
under s 62A of the AAT Act. Mr Taylor knew that his right to retain
Australian visa has ended as his legal options in this regard have been
exhausted by the High Court’s decision to refuse
to give him special leave
to appeal. And he knew that when he made this statement to the Tribunal. Even if
the Tribunal took the
charitable view that he might have been referring to the
separate action he has before the Federal Court, currently stayed, that
does not relate to his being barred from re-entering Australia.
Applicant made many caustic comments in his unsigned affidavit lodged as his
closing submissions, especially about the Tribunal
and other persons. In the
Victorian Court of Appeal, Beach and Priest JJA described Mr Taylor’s
submissions to that Court
as a ‘jumble of
gobbledegook’
. Most of his
prolix 28-page closing submission to this hearing may aptly be given the same
description.
R v Bahntoff
(Unreported C of A 14 May 1998: Brooking, Tadgell and
Phillips JJA) remarked that Mr Taylor’s (or Mr Bahntoff’s, as he
then was) offences fit him to become the Professor Moriarty of Victorian
However, Priest and Beach
Taylor v The Queen
[2019] FSCA 162, whilst noting the allusion to
the fictional archenemy of Sherlock Holmes, preferred to describe him as an
‘enthusiastic
– although not entirely successful –
fraudster’ who showed no remorse. The Tribunal respectfully agrees with
latter description.
Tribunal’s view is that Mr Taylor is objectively an intelligent man. As
mentioned above, he qualified as a civil engineer.
Putting aside his activities
as a sham teacher, he has successfully completed several other academic courses
whilst incarcerated.
The papers show he has tertiary qualifications in several
of his names. He was certainly capable of preparing submissions that addressed
the kernel of matters in dispute, rather than producing screeds of
assertions. But he chose not to. I conclude he did not rebut the
Respondent’s contentions, because he knew, having brought
his application
to the Tribunal, he could not meet the Respondent’s case.
questions before the Tribunal are therefore answered as follows. The Tribunal
finds that Mr Taylor received a social security
benefit to which he was not
entitled (JSA, paid in relation to claims falsely made on behalf of seven other
men). The Applicant therefore
incurred a debt to the Commonwealth calculated to
be $22,115.30. The Tribunal finds that none of the resultant debt should be
or written-off under ss 1237A or 1237AAD of the Act.
Tribunal is satisfied that the (very comprehensive) first review decision was
correct, and therefore should be affirmed.
to s 43(1)(a) of the AAT Act, the Tribunal affirms the decision of the Social
Services and Child Support Division dated 17
July 2020. The Applicant has a debt
to the Commonwealth totalling $22,115.30 and this debt should not be
I certify that the preceding 136 (one hundred and thirty-six) paragraphs
are a true copy of the reasons for the decision herein of
Senior Member D. J.
..................................[sgd]......................................
Dated: 11 October 2024
Date(s) of hearing:
30 April and 2 May 2024
Date final submissions received:
Self-represented
Advocate for the Respondent:
Ms Peta Heffernan
Solicitors for the Respondent:
The Australian Government Solicitor
As a general point, submissions
couched in language that is not florid or grandiloquent tend to make the
contentions they are advancing
much more compelling.
Bradley v The
[2020] QCA 252
A. Conan Doyle, ‘The
Adventure of the Final Problem’
magazine; Dec 1893; London.
The fictional character was described in the story as the ‘Napoleon of
RTF format (1.84 MB)
Signed PDF/A format