A. Z. v CA Dispensary Pty Ltd Trading As Ihealth Pharmacy [2025] FWC 3388 (13 November 2025)
[2025] FWC 3388
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Application for unfair dismissal remedy
CA Dispensary Pty Ltd Trading As Ihealth
(U2025/10835)
COMMISSIONER CLARKE
MELBOURNE, 13 NOVEMBER 2025
Unfair dismissal – extension of time – jurisdictional
objection – employee not dismissed.
(Applicant) has brought an Application under
section 394
Fair Work Act
(Act), seeking an unfair dismissal remedy. CA Dispensary Pty Ltd
(Respondent), the Applicant’s former employer, has objected
application on the basis that it was brought outside of the 21 day time period
provided for in subsection (2) of
section 394.
The Respondent has also objected
to the application on the basis that the Applicant was not dismissed. There is
no dispute that,
in a formal sense, the Applicant’s employment with the
Respondent was brought to an end by her resignation.
to the objections raised, the matter was programmed for hearing in relation to
those objections only. This decision deals with
those objections.
Protection of the Applicant’s identity
to the hearing, the Applicant brought matters to our attention which she
considered justified the granting of an order under
sections 593
Act to protect her identity. Those were personal matters unconnected to the
issues in dispute in the proceeding and which
were the subject of processes
outside of the Fair Work Commission. The Respondent did not oppose an order
being made and I was satisfied
in the circumstances that it was appropriate that
such an order should be made. In consequence of that order (made on 4 September
2025), the hearing of the matter was held in private and the name of the
Applicant has been replaced with a pseudonym. The order
also imposed obligations
on witnesses in the proceeding and the parties with respect to the name of the
The cases advanced – time
Applicant was granted permission to be represented by Ms Numan of Clear
Employment Relations. The Respondent was represented by
Mr Wedgewood of the
Pharmacy Guild of Australia.
not in dispute that the Applicant’s employment with the Respondent came to
an end on 4 June 2025, after the Applicant
gave notice of her resignation on 20
May 2025. The Respondent first became aware of the Application when notified
administratively
by the Fair Work Commission. That notification relevantly
stated that “On 26 June 2025, [name withheld] made an unfair dismissal
application”. As 26 June 2025 is one day after 21 day time limit provided
by subsection (2) of
section 394
, the Respondent understandably took the point
that the application could not proceed unless an extension of time was granted,
the Respondent opposed.
to the hearing, the parties were provided with internal records from the Fair
Work Commission which I considered they ought
to be made aware of to assist them
in addressing the extension of time issue. Those internal records relevantly
included an e-mail
time stamped at 11:58PM on 25 June 2025 and a report from a
Fair Work Commission IT Service ticket that indicated that the Fair Work
Commission’s e-mail system received the application at that time but that
its case management system did not process the e-mail
until 12:10AM the
following day (26 June 2025). The Respondent continued to press its objection
notwithstanding this material.
to the Respondent, an electronic communication should be taken to be received
when the recipient records its receipt, which
the Respondent said the initial
notification from the Commission did record as 26 June 2025. It was further said
that Commission’s
recording of the entry of the matter into the case
management system on that date confirmed that this was the date of the receipt.
The focussing on the date or receipt was said by the Respondent to be consistent
with the decision of the Commission in
Kenworth v. Di Placido
which applied
The point in
is however slightly more nuanced that this. In that case, the Full
Bench was dealing with the question of when an employee had become
dismissal of which notice had been given by e-mail. In discussing that, the Full
Bench noted that
section 14A
Electronic Transactions Act 1999
provided that an e-mail “is deemed to have taken place” when the
e-mail becomes capable of being retrieved by the addressee.
any event, the question for determination in the present instance is when the
application by the application was “made”:
“394 Application for unfair dismissal remedy
(1) A person who has been dismissed may apply to the FWC for an order under
Division 4 granting a remedy.
Note 1: Division 4 sets out when the FWC may order a remedy for
unfair dismissal.
Note 2: For application fees, see section 395.
may prevent an application being made under
this Part in relation to a dismissal if an application or complaint has
been made in
relation to the dismissal other than under this Part.
(2) The application
must be made
(a) within 21 days after the dismissal took effect; or
(b) within such further period as the FWC allows under subsection (3).
(3) The FWC may allow a further period for the application to be made by a
person under subsection (1) if the FWC is satisfied that
exceptional circumstances, taking into account:
(a) the reason for the delay; and
(b) whether the person first became aware of the dismissal after it had taken
effect; and
(c) any action taken by the person to dispute the dismissal; and
(d) prejudice to the employer (including prejudice caused by the delay); and
(e) the merits of the application; and
(f) fairness as between the person and other persons in a similar
position.” (emphasis in underline added)
Fair Work Commission Rules 2024
are instructive as to how
an application may be “made”. Rule 9 relevantly provides as
“9 Approved forms
(1) The President may approve forms for the purposes of these Rules.
(2) If the President approves a form for a particular purpose, then subject
to these Rules, the approved form must be used for the
(3) If there is no form approved for a particular application, approved form
F1—Application (no specific form provided) must
be used for the
application.
(4) The President must ensure that approved forms are publicly available.
Note: In 2024, the approved forms were available on the FWC’s
http://www.fwc.gov.au
(5) If these Rules require that an approved form be used, it is sufficient
compliance if a document is substantially in accordance
with the approved
foreshadowed by the note provided beneath sub-rule (4) above, the approved forms
are available on the Fair Work Commission website.
There is no suggestion that
the Applicant did not use the approved form for making her unfair dismissal
application. That form relevantly
provides the following on its first page:
Lodging your completed form
your application and any supporting documents with the Commission within 21 days
after your dismissal took effect. You can lodge:
online using the
Commission’s Online Lodgement Service (OLS)
by email to
lodge@fwc.gov.au, or
by post or in
person at the Commission’s office in your state or
territory.”
follows that a putative applicant in an unfair dismissal claim has
“made” an application when they have “used”
the approve
, “lodging” it in accordance with the
instructions provided on that form. As to what it means to “lodge”
a form by e-mail, the Rules provide at rule 16:
16 Lodging documents by email
(1) A person may lodge a document that is required or permitted to be
lodged with the FWC under these Rules by emailing the document:
(a) if paragraph (b) does not apply—to an email address approved by
the General Manager for the lodgment of documents by email;
(b) if the email is in relation to a matter allocated to a FWC Member—to
the email address of the FWC Member’s chambers
approved by the General
Note: In 2024, the email addresses approved for lodgment of documents
and for FWC Members’ chambers were available on the FWC’s
http://www.fwc.gov.au
(2) If a document is lodged by email:
(a) the document must be attached to the email:
statutory declaration—as a PDF or an image format approved by the General
Manager; and
any other document—as an attachment in Word, RTF or PDF format or another
format approved by the General Manager; and
any security restrictions; and
(b) the covering email must state:
name, address and telephone number of the natural person sending the email;
email address to which the FWC can send notices or other documentation; and
the document is an application commencing a matter—that fact; and
the document relates to an existing matter—the matter number given to the
matter by the FWC; and
(c) the person must either:
the email as a “sent item” showing the email address to which the
email was sent and the date and time that it
was sent; or
a “delivered” statement or a “read receipt” showing the
email address to which the email was sent and
the date and time that it was
delivered or read; and
(d) the person must produce the
retained document if required by the FWC.
Note: The statutory declaration must be signed and witnessed.
(3) If a document lodged in accordance with this rule is an application
commencing a matter:
(a) the General Manager must send an acknowledgment of lodgment, by email,
to the person lodging the document; and
(b) the application is not taken to have been lodged until the acknowledgment of
lodgment has been sent; and
(c) once the acknowledgment of lodgment has been sent, the application is taken
to have been lodged at the time it was received electronically
particular relevance is sub-rule (3) above. This relevantly obliges the General
Manager to acknowledge a lodgement of an application
by e-mail and that until
the General Manager does this, the application is not to be taken to have been
lodged. However, once that
acknowledgement is sent, the application “is
taken to have been lodged at the time
electronically
by the FWC” (emphasis added). In the context of a rule
concerned with lodgement of documents by e-mail, the italicised
extract above can only sensibly refer to the e-mail itself. If the e-mail was
received within time, and later acknowledged,
then the application was
within time. The fact that the entry of the application into the
Commission’s case management system occurred some time after
that e-mail
was received is not determinative of the issue.
is regrettable that the information initially conveyed to the Respondent about
when the Application was made was demonstrably incorrect.
However, for the
reasons given, the objection concerning the timeliness of the application must
be dismissed. It is therefore necessary
to consider the second objection
advanced by the Respondent, namely that the Applicant was not
When a person has been dismissed
application under section 394 of the Act requires a person to have been
“dismissed”. The meaning of dismissed is dealt
with in section 386
of the Act, as follows:
“386 Meaning
(1) A person has been
(a) the person’s employment with his or her employer has been terminated
on the employer’s initiative
(b) the person has resigned from his or her employment, but was forced to do so
conduct, or a course of conduct, engaged in by his or her
(2) However, a person has not
(a) the person was employed under a contract of employment for a specified
period of time, for a specified task, or for the duration
of a specified season,
and the employment has terminated at the end of the period, on completion of the
task, or at the end of the
(b) the person was an employee:
whom a training arrangement applied; and
employment was for a specified period of time or was, for any reason, limited to
the duration of the training arrangement;
and the employment has terminated at the end of the training arrangement;
(c) the person was demoted in employment but:
demotion does not involve a significant reduction in his or her remuneration or
duties; and
she remains employed with the employer that effected the demotion.
(3) Subsection (2) does not apply to a person employed under a contract
of a kind referred to in paragraph (2)(a) if a substantial
purpose of the
employment of the person under a contract of that kind is, or was at the time of
the person’s employment, to
avoid the employer’s obligations under
this Part.”
(emphasis in underline added)
akin to that underlined in both paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (2) in the
definition above has long been relevant to
determining disputes concerning
employment relationships that, in a formal sense or at face value, were brought
to an end by way
of resignation. Disputes of this nature have commonly been
encountered in proceedings in the unfair dismissal jurisdiction. The unfair
dismissal jurisdiction has, since its inception, required that there be a
termination of employment “at the initiative of the
employer” as one
of the essential elements. This is rooted in the historical constitutional
underpinnings of Commonwealth laws
providing for remedies in respect of unfair
dismissal, yet the expression has remained a centrepiece of the scheme
notwithstanding
the shift to reliance on the corporations power and referral of
State powers in recent decades. The expression “at the initiative
employer” and its derivatives have been found to admit of some
circumstances where the final act in bringing the employment
to an end was an
act of the employee claiming the remedy. In considering whether employment
“has been terminated on the employer’s
initiative”, a Full
Bench of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission in
Stanley Works
held that there
“...some action on the part of the employer which is either intended to
bring the employment to an end or has the probable result
of bringing the
employment relationship to an end. It is not simply a question of whether
“the act of the employer [resulted]
directly or consequentially in the
termination of the employment.” Decisions which adopt the shorter
formulation of the reasons
for decision should be treated with some caution....
In determining whether a termination was at the initiative of the employer an
objective analysis of the employer’s conduct is required to determine
whether it was of such a nature that resignation was
the probable result or that
the appellant had no effective or real choice but to
reference to a resignation brought about by employer conduct developed in the
unfair dismissal provisions of successive Commonwealth
workplace relations
legislation over the last two decades. In considering whether a resignation has
been “forced” in
the manner currently dealt with in paragraph (b) of
subsection 386(1), a Full Bench of the Commission in
Bupa Aged Care Australia
“A resignation that is “forced” by conduct or a course of
conduct on the part of the employer will be a dismissal
within the second limb
of the definition in s.386(1)(b). The test to be applied here is whether the
engaged in the conduct with the intention of bringing the employment
whether termination of the employment was the probably
[sic] result of the employer’s conduct such that the employee had no
effective or real choice but to resign.” (emphasis in underline and bold
should be noted that the immediate predecessor of paragraph (b) of subsection
section 642(4)
Workplace Relations Act 1996
, referred to
“forced” resignation but continued the legislative tradition of
requiring such forced resignations to be
characterised as a species of
termination at the initiative of the employer in order to be actionable as an
unfair dismissal. It
relevantly provided as follows:
“For the purposes of this Division, the resignation of an employee is
taken to constitute the termination of employment at
initiative of the employer
if the employee can prove that the employee did not resign voluntarily but was
forced to do so because
of conduct, or a course of conduct, engaged in by the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
was considered by a Full Bench
of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission in
Australian Hearing v. L
in circumstances where it was contended by the
Appellant that it was an essential ingredient in satisfying that section that
the employee
prove that the resignation was an
consequence of
conduct or a course of conduct engaged in by the employer. In rejecting that
submission, the Full Bench said:
“We cannot accept this construction of the section. The section specifies
the matters that an employee who has resigned must
prove in order to displace
the legal effect of the resignation. The employee must prove that the employer
engaged in conduct or a
course of conduct which forced the employee to resign.
There is no warrant for requiring the employee to prove an additional matter,
that the employer intended to force the employee to resign. The plain words of
the section deny such a requirement. Furthermore,
the section is not directed at
the state of mind of the employer, but at the state of mind of the employee. It
is particularly difficult
for an employee to prove an employer’s
intention. In that respect it is relevant to note that where the Act imposes a
requirement
related to the intention or motive of the employer a reverse onus is
usually applied.”
light of the decision in
, it seems that it is no longer the case
that the intention of the employer is necessarily irrelevant to determining
whether a resignation
is “forced” in the relevant sense, although it
is not a requirement to show such intention in every case. In any event,
have been differing views to that expressed in
Australian Hearing
the role or relevance of employer intention even when the legislative scheme did
require forced resignations to be characterised
as “at the initiative of
the employer”. For example, in
Rheinberger v. Huxley
Moore J approached
the issue this way:
“The issue that emerges from these facts is whether the applicant has
demonstrated there has been a termination of her employment
at the initiative of
the Company. The applicant relied on several passages from a recent Judgement of
a Full Court in
Mohazab v. Dick Smith Electronics Pty Ltd
[1995] IRCA 625
(1995) 62 IR
Particular reliance was placed on the following passage:
‘It accords with the purpose of the Convention to treat the expression
‘termination at the initiative of the employer’
as a reference to a
termination that is brought about by an employer and which is not agreed to by
the employee...’
These observations had been preceded by a discussion by the Full Cout of the
relationship between the Convention concerning Termination
of Employment at the
Initiative of the Employer, which is Sch 10 to the Act, and the importation into
the Act of the meaning of expressions
in it by operation of s. 170CB. The
applicant further relied on a later passage in which the Full Court
‘In these proceedings it is unnecessary and undesirable to endeavour to
formulate an exhaustive description of what is termination
at the initiative of
the employer but plainly an important feature is that the act of the employer
results directly or consequentially
in the termination of the employment and the
employment relationship is not voluntarily left by the employee. That is, had
the employer
not taken the action that it did, the employee would have remained
in the employment relationship.’
However, it is plain from these passages that it is not sufficient to
demonstrate that the employee did not voluntarily leave his
or her employment to
establish that there had been a termination of employment at the initiative of
the employer. Such a termination
must result from some action on the part of
the employer intended to bring the employment to an end
and perhaps
action which would, on any reasonable view, probably have that effec
leave open the question of whether a termination of employment at the initiative
of the employer
the employer to intend by its action that
employment will conclude
. I am prepared to assume, for present purposes that
there can be a termination at the initiative of the employer if the cessation
the employment relationship is the probable result of the employers
(emphasis in
underline and bold added).
similar effect was the decision in
Hastie v. Impress
, which, like
Australian Hearing,
section 642(4)
Relations Act 1996
and in addition the particular significance of the then
nascent addition of the adjective “forced”, which is also now
s. 386(1)(b):
“The employer’s conduct (
when it is not evidenced was intended to
bring about the resignation directly
) must be conduct that is in some way or
in some manner oppressive or repugnant in the ordinary course, and/or else so
impacted on
the volition of the employee such that the resignation was a
reasonable response to that conduct in all the circumstances.
If this were not the case, then it would be difficult to distinguish between
many instances of voluntary resignations which arise
from a discretionary
judgment of the employee, and resignations which are the result of the conduct
of the employer. This is because,
for all practical purposes, most decisions by
an employee to resign their employment arise from the conduct of the employer,
manner or form. That is, employer conduct is causally responsible at
some level for most resignations.
But not all the species of the conduct of an employer have the probable
result of the employee’s resignation or make the resignation,
objective view, a reasonable response to the employer’s conduct. It is
only a sub set of employer conduct that ought
to attract the remedy against a
harsh, unjust or unreasonable termination of employment based on a termination
at the initiative
of the employer.
If this is so, in what manner then has the amended statutory provisions
affected this approach to determination whether an employee
was terminated at
the initiative of the employer or if the employee resigned voluntarily?
Putting aside the onus specified in the Act, the critical issue here is
whether the inclusion of the adjective “forced”
affects in any way
of the above discussion of the authorities as they were before the introduction
of the Workchoices legislation.
To describe the conduct of the employer as forcing an outcome suggest that
the conduct in some manner or form compelled or mandated
or obliged or
necessitated the resignation of the employee. These seem to be the common
dictionary meanings of “forced”.
In a narrow sense, no resignation is ever forced unless there is some
observable physical intervention by the employer. Consequently,
all resignations
are likely to be voluntary, in a narrow sense. Such was commented on by Dowsett
J in his minority decision in
Pawel v Advanced Precast Pty Ltd
“As to ‘compulsion’, it is difficult to contemplate
circumstances in which it can be said that an employee has been
compelled to
resign, but not dismissed, unless one accepts the somewhat bizarre reference in
the course of argument to an employer
holding a gun to the employee’s
That said, to describe an employer’s conduct as forcing a resignation
does not demand a narrow reading such as this
. Force may be applied in a
physical sense, as Dowsett J describes it, or else it may be applied indirectly,
by the conduct or the
course of conduct by an employer which makes an outcome.
Of course, many such examples of such conduct might be provided, and a person
may be forced or compelled to adopt a course of action by a variety of actions
taken by their employer.
Generally, the exercise of force may take many forms, and there is little
point in exploring these in detail. But common manifestations
‘force’ will always exhibit an outcome in which
a person acts
contrary to their desired intention, and because of the conduct of another
person that was directed at or towards them
I do not think the definition should be limited to cases in which an
employee can demonstrate that the employer took positive action
of some kind
that was motivated to bring about the resignation,
though many cases no doubt
will fall into that category
. The conduct of an employer,
, may nonetheless generate circumstances in which the resignation of an
employee was the probable result.
It would appear to me, then, that on an ordinary or natural reading of the
term “forced”, an employee may be forced (or
compelled) to resign
for reason of
the employer expressly demands the resignation
though not necessarily, in conjunction with a threat of termination
makes the conditions of work so oppressive or repugnant to the
employee (and the employment relationship),
else, so bears
down on the volition of the employee, that the resignation was a reasonable
probable response to the circumstances
the employee faced at the time.
In effect, therefore, it appears that the inclusion of the adjective
“forced” in
does not require a new or
additional test as to whether a resignation was at the initiative of the
employer to that which may have
been alluded
to by the Full Bench in
O’Meara v Stanley Works Pty Ltd
(under the pre-reform Act). Rather,
it simply recasts descriptively and makes express the implied nature of a
resignation by an employee
that is taken to constitute a termination at the
initiative of the employer, and it
of the Act) does so in
juxtaposition to a “voluntary” resignation. The Explanatory
Memorandum, as quoted above, does
not invite a different reading.
Further, I note that in some instances in which members of the Commission
have applied the test of “force” to a determination
as to whether a
resignation was termination at the initiative of the employer for purposes of
of the Act, they have drawn on the availability of an “effective
choice” in demonstration of that finding.”
(emphasis in underline and bold
added, footnotes omitted).
light of the above, in considering the current matter, I have adopted the
following approach:
a) A resignation may be forced in the relevant sense
was the intended result of the employer’s conduct
because the
employer’s conduct left the employee with no real or effective choice
other than to resign.
b) The inclusion of the word “forced” does not signify that the
employee must be physically overborne or be explicitly
issued with an ultimatum.
The focus is on the conduct of the employer and its intended and/or probable
c) In order to be considered forced, the resignation must be a reasonable
probable response to the employer’s conduct; and
d) Each of the above involves an objective analysis.
establishing a repudiation of the employment contract may also be relevant in
determining whether an employee has been dismissed.
A repudiation occurs where
there is a sufficiently serious breach of the contract of employment so as to
indicate the party in breach
no longer wishes to perform the contract. Where the
employer is the party in breach, the repudiation gives rise to a right to the
employee (as the innocent party) to either terminate the employment (by
resigning) or to affirm the contract. An election to resign
in response to a
repudiation is properly regarded as a termination at the initiative of the
employer under
section 386(1)(a)
, in the sense that it is the employer’s
conduct which is the principal contributing factor in bringing about the end of
employment relationship, being conduct that had the probable effect of doing
The repudiatory conduct by
the employer may in some cases be sufficient to bring about the end of the
employment relationship on
cases advanced on the dismissal issue
Respondent relied on a witness statement from Ms
the Operations Manager
of the Respondent, together with the Applicant’s position
description
, contract of
and a bundle of text
messages between Ms Monzie and the
The Applicant relied
on her witness statement.
parties prepared written submissions.
Respondent’s contention was that the Applicant’s resignation was
entirely voluntary rather than forced. The resignation
itself stated otherwise,
although this of course is not determinative:
“Please accept this letter as notification that I am resigning from my
position as Dispensary Team Lead at Ihealth pharmacy,
effective 4
I must state that this resignation is not voluntary. I was forced to resign
due to unreasonable demands, change in terms of employment
and false claims made
against myself. This action was a result of duress, coercion and unfair
I have no choice to resign to avoid further negative
consequences.”
resignation was given via email, one day after the Applicant had sent an e-mail
to the Respondent in the following terms:
“I do not agree to being removed from my role as team lead of
dispensary and with the way I have been treated regarding my shoulder
such, this is constructive dismissal and I have no choice but to take legal
Whilst this may have been reflective of the Applicant’s views at
the relevant time, her submissions at the hearing did not contend
that the mere
fact she did “not agree” to the employer’s conduct was
sufficient to ground a finding that her resignation
had been forced.
the course of conduct that the Applicant considers forced her resignation
consisted of the following:
(a) The Respondent’s response to an injury the Applicant had suffered in
May of 2025 (including with respect to her return
(b) The workload, and the Respondent’s reactions to complaints concerning
this, including concerns that the demands placed
upon pharmacists were unethical
and potentially placed their professional registrations at risks;
(c) The removal of overtime;
(d) A refusal by the Respondent to engage with the Applicant about her
responsibilities;
(e) A demotion;
(f) Being denied a promotion on the basis of a refusal to supply medical
cannabis to a patient who admitted he was drug dependent
and distributing the
medical cannabis to other people; and
(g) Inaction following the sexual harassment of a colleague.
I deal with each of these matters in turn below. For completeness, I note
that it was no part of the Applicant’s case that her
resignation was
offered in the heat of the moment, such that her resignation could not be relied
on as effective. The Applicant had
previously offered a resignation (and
presumably retracted it with her employer’s consent) around 3 months
The day before the
resignation the subject of the current matter, the Applicant had commenced a
period of personal leave
reported mental health concerns to her employer.
was not in dispute that, immediately prior to her resignation, the Applicant was
a qualified pharmacist working in the role of
Team Lead – Dispensary in
the Respondent’s business. Nor was it in dispute that one of the main
products dispensed by
the Respondent’s pharmacy business was medicinal
Injury and response
is not in dispute that the Applicant sustained a shoulder injury outside of
work. Following the injury, the Applicant obtained
a medical certificate for the
period 5-9 May which she provided to her employer and advised she would return
to work on the coming
which was 12 May 2025. When the Applicant did return to work, evidently after
taking a further day of leave
her arm was still in a sling.
Her initial complaint about the employer’s response to this was described
variously as “refusing to communicate with
me in the normal way and
imposing unreasonable requirements that I come in early and work
“to put in place a return-to-work plan, disregarded my health, and
pressured me to return to work despite being
and refusing
“to engage with me directly about team lead responsibilities. Instead,
they bypassed me and dealt with other
oral evidence it appears that most, if not all, of those concerns related to the
behaviour of Mr Matthew Ghobrial, the owner of
the Respondent. The Applicant
said that Mr Ghobrial “...treated me completely differently, it was the
like the cold shoulder.....
And wouldn't really address me when I was in the
room, although he addressed me when I returned in dispensary on the first day in
front of everyone and said we must have been drinking to cause that injury,
which was unprofessional.”
The Applicant also said “..when I got back, I was expected to carry duties
as normal. There was no return to work plan. Matthew
and Gloria never sat me
down to see how I was going. In fact, I was just expected to work - continue
working as normal.”
Ghobrial was not a witness and I was asked to draw an adverse inference
concerning his absence. There was no cross examination
by the Respondent on
these issues.
can readily accept that a failure to adapt duties in response to an injury is a
cause for a legitimate complaint. Whist this was
not an injury that was
associated with a Workers’ Compensation claim so as to trigger a formal
under State Legislation, it equally would
have been glaringly apparent that a conversation about the injury was required.
Upon presenting
to work after a week of sick leave in a sling, any reasonable
manager would be alive to the possibility that being confined to the
arm and most likely experiencing pain and fatigue could have workplace
consequences worthy of a discussion, not the least
of which a might be a
potential exacerbation. It rightly falls on the employer to initiate that
conversation. By the same token,
it is passing strange that an articulate health
professional such as the Applicant would not, upon feeling ignored, do something
to initiate that conversation. In any event, the evidence was that Ms Monzie,
the Operations Manger of the Respondent, messaged the
Applicant on the Monday
she first commenced her personal leave and offered her
, and when the
Applicant did attend work after her leave concluded she asked her how she was
feeling and offered that if she wasn’t
feeling well she could go
This is not inconsistent
with the Applicant’s evidence that Ms Monzie “never sat me down to
see how I was going”,
but rather the evidence discloses a mismatch between
Ms Monzie’s view and the Applicant’s view about the level of
that the situation demanded. The Applicant said under questioning from
me that when she first returned to work, she said to her colleagues
presence of Mr Ghobrial that she could continue some of her job duties and would
see how far she could get
Indeed, some days later she refused some duties on account of her
I find that at the least
there was a proposition put to the Applicant that she could respond to,
concerning the management of her
injury in the workplace, and the Applicant had
taken it upon herself to notify the Respondent of what she was and was not able
manage (and, at least to some extent – did so).
less than ideal, this situation could only constitute a few strands of straw on
the proverbial camel’s back in any course
of conduct which was said to
force a resignation. Ms Monzie was not in a position to contradict the
proposition that Mr Ghobrial
did not discuss the issue with the Applicant, but
that does not mean that the issue was entirely ignored by the Respondent. It was
remiss of the Respondent to not follow up with Applicant promptly, but her
injury was the context for changes to her working hours
some days later, which
are discussed at paragraphs
I agree with the Applicant’s view that it was unprofessional to make a
joke about the Applicant’s injury being
the result of drunkenness, this
level of behaviour could not objectively amount to much of consequence in a
compounding course of
conduct, culminating in a resignation that is claimed to
be forced. As to the claims of different treatment following the injury,
weren’t sufficiently particularised to enable any meaningful conclusions
to be drawn. Certainly, it was not long after
the Applicant’s return to
work that she did have dealings with Mr Ghobrial, which were evidently the
source of a great deal
of concern to the
Applicant had concerns that her workload was excessive, particularly in respect
of how many items were required to be dispensed,
which she said was “90
units per hour”.
Applicant’s understanding was that the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency set a limit of around 150 scripts
per day to be dispensed
before an additional pharmacist was required, however she said that in the
Respondent’s business pharmacists
are required to dispense nearly 600
scripts per day each. She considered that this was excessive and placed the
pharmacists’
registrations at
The Applicant said she
raised these concerns with Ms Monzie, who “dismissed” them. No
documentary evidence was provided
as to what the relevant limits were.
Monzie gave evidence about her interactions with the Applicant in relation to
the above matters. She stated that she had expressed
the view to the Applicant
that the dispensing practices were not a compliance risk, however invited the
Applicant to consider whether
she had considered another role within the
pharmacy which could be less demanding. She disagreed with the Applicant’s
characterisation
of her response as “dismissing” her concerns. In
cross examination, Ms Monzie elaborated on her evidence about this conversation,
and gave some context that she had understood that the Applicant had been
struggling with her mental health and that her suggestion
another role in the pharmacy was made informally and was responsive to that
understanding.
Ms Monzie says
she passed on the Applicant’s concerns to Mr Ghobrial and this led to the
two of them discussing an offer being
made to the Applicant for a new role. Ms
Monzie’s evidence is that the Applicant’s discussion with her
concerning workload,
and her own discussion with Mr Ghobrial, were mere days
before the Applicant resigned, such that the time between the events
permit any further consideration of how those complaints might be
addressed. Whilst Ms Monzie chose not to identify in her evidence
if there was
in fact a regulatory limit on the number of prescriptions to be filled per
pharmacist, she stated that on 27 May 2025
(8 days after the Applicant’s
last day at work) there was an unannounced audit on the pharmacy by the
Victorian Pharmacy Authority,
which raised no concerns about dispensing
practice. No evidence was given as to whether the dispensing practices on the
any different to those the Applicant had in fact
experienced.
Monzie’s evidence on the workload issue is essentially to the effect that
the workload was not objectively a difficulty,
but it was proving to be a
difficulty for the Applicant. On the evidence I have before me, I am not able to
make any findings about
whether the workload was objectively unreasonable. What
is clear is that Ms Monzie’s reaction to the complaint, in seeking
identify whether another role could be offered to the Applicant in order to
provide a less demanding workload, could not be reasonably
described as
intending to bring about a resignation or leaving the Applicant with no choice
but to resign.
Applicant’s uncontested evidence is that throughout her employment, prior
to her injury, she would work what she described
as “copious amounts of
. As to morning
overtime, the Applicant’s evidence is that she would occasionally come in
to do administrative work.
work was, in the Applicant’s assessment, “light
15 May, the Thursday of the Applicant’s first week back at work, she was
asked by Mr Ghobrial to perform some morning overtime
to help dispensing
medications. The Applicant’s evidence is that she advised against this on
the basis of her injury, being
behind on tasks due to her injury and the
additional workload associated with teaching interns. She said that Mr Ghobrial
his position until she eventually relented, with words to the effect
“I will try, but I am in a lot of
that day, in a text message exchange with Mr Ghobrial, the Applicant made a
similar statement:
“I’ll do my best tomorrow, but it’s a bit of an unfair ask
given I’m quite injured in and in a lot of pain
Ghobrial’s response was as follows:
“All good, if you think it will be difficult with your arm, just do
problem solving. But in that case I think an 8am start should
sufficient”.
understand the Applicant’s objection to this is that Mr Ghobrial had made
the availability of overtime conditional on the
range of duties that the
Applicant was fit to perform and that this was retaliatory and unfair.
not agree that this is objectively unfair. As I understand the evidence, there
was no requirement or request to work any overtime
on that day
request was made “to come in early the following day to help the team
. Once it became
apparent to the Respondent that those were not duties the Applicant could
perform (and that likely ought to have
been apparent at an earlier stage), it is
not unreasonable that the Respondent withdrew the request to perform those
duties. Such
conduct does not on any objective view make any material
contribution towards being forced to resign. Viewed objectively, the conduct
directed to providing modified duties to the Applicant to accommodate her
injury, rather than intending to bring about a resignation.
A resignation is not
a reasonable or probable response to such conduct.
was no evidence that the Applicant was entitled under the terms of her
employment to self-select when she would perform overtime
as her own priorities
dictated. Had this been an evident feature of the Applicant’s employment,
it would be clear that she
had been deprived of a material benefit of her
employment in earning additional income.
A refusal by the
Respondent to engage with the Applicant about her responsibilities
issue was not sufficiently explored in the evidence to enable any findings to be
made about it. The Applicant’s evidence
on the issue was vague and in any
event, the period over which this is said to have occurred was in the short
period between the
Applicant’s return to work in the week beginning 12 May
and her last day of work on 19 May.
Commission was provided with a letter of offer for the position of
Pharmacist.
It is not in dispute
that during her employment the Applicant had been promoted to a team leader
position. Immediately prior to 19
May 2025, the Applicant was working as the
Team Lead for the Dispensary team. She described her official role as a
“team leader
pharmacist”
19 May 2025, the Applicant had a discussion with Mr Ghobrial. Her recollection
of the conversation was that she was told she was
being moved from her role as a
Team Lead of the Dispensary Team to a Team Lead of the Counselling Team. In oral
evidence she was
invited to accept that an offer was put to her to change
position, and she did not accept this. She was adamant that it was not an
at all and that that, when she sought clarification as to whether this was
permanent or temporary, Mr Ghobrial said “Oh,
Ms Monzie’s
evidence is that she was not an observer to that conversation but had discussed
what occurred with Mr Ghobrial
after the event. She says Mr Ghobrial put the
offer of the move to the Applicant and “it wasn’t necessarily
but it was very clear that she wasn’t happy with it, and that
she walked away, walked out from the
. In any event,
it is clear that the Applicant never commenced in the new role.
Applicant left the workplace in state of distress following that conversation,
prior to the conclusion of her normal work day.
She subsequently exchanged text
messages with Ms Monzie, who was evidently moved to write to her, “Be
careful on your way home
please”, at 9:44AM. Shorty afterward, at 10:07AM,
the Applicant wrote the e-mail to the Respondent set out in paragraph
correspondence elicited a response from Mr
Among other things,
that correspondence clearly put to bed any notion that the move from Team Lead
Pharmacy to Team Lead Dispensary
was an “offer”, and there is no
need to make an adverse inference as to Mr Ghobrial’s absence in order to
that conclusion. The move was described as “the recent change from
Team Lead – Dispensary to Team Lead – Consulting/Counselling”
and “a temporary lateral move, with no change in your classification or
pay”. It should be stated at this point that
the Respondent called no
evidence to demonstrate the source of any right to unilaterally enforce a
“lateral move”, temporary
or otherwise. Mr Ghobrial’s
correspondence said that “The decision was based on operational needs and
was also made in
consideration of your wellbeing, following your expressed
feelings of being overwhelmed in the dispensary leadership role”.
was described as a “decision to transition you into a different team
leadership position where your skills could continue
to be valued in an
alternative setting”. Mr Ghobrial’s message also
“At this stage, your intentions regarding your ongoing employment with
iHealth Pharmacy remain unclear. We respectfully request
that you confirm in
writing whether you wish to continue your role or intend to resign, so the
business can proceed accordingly”
It is inescapable in these
circumstances that the Applicant was being told that her employer had
unilaterally, albeit temporarily,
re-allocated her to a different role and that
she was being issued with an ultimatum to either come to terms with that, or
that day, at 4:02PM, the Applicant wrote to Ms Monzie via text message in the
following terms:
What’s happened today has had unfounded effects on my mental and
emotional well being and I’m not fit to return to work
I will be seeing my GP tomorrow and will send you a medical
certificate.”
seems the medical certificate was in fact provided at some time the same day and
covered the period from 19 May to 16
It was not in dispute that
by the time the Applicant did give notice of her resignation the following day,
she was on personal leave.
Applicant describes the change in the Applicant’s position as a demotion,
whereas the Respondent points out that the change
involved no change in pay or
classification. I am unable to make a finding on the state of the evidence as to
whether the move was
appropriately described as a demotion, but this is beside
the point for present purposes. There is no dispute that the Applicant
employed as a Pharmacist, pursuant to a letter of offer and position description
and promoted to a team leader within a month
or two. The letter of offer said
nothing of her duties other than to refer to the position description. Her
evidence is that she
was not supplied with a new position description following
the promotion. However, the initial position description for Pharmacist
broad enough to encompass a range of duties including to “Counsel
consumers on their medication (both prescription and
over the counter products)
in an up-to-date, evidence based
the scope of the employment evolved with the promotion to Team Leader. The
Applicant’s evidence about the Dispensary
Team Lead Position was as
“So, my role was a dispensary lead for the majority of the employment
was all-encompassing. I – there was another team-lead
pharmacist in the
VOLT team. She would only work part-time so the majority of time there was only
me. I had to oversee dispensary
operations, liaise with the other teams, provide
support, oversee the counselling and help the VOLT team. I also had to be the
between the medical practitioners at the medical clinic (indistinct) the
pharmacist consultant then while also liaising with the
other pharmacies and
medical clinics that we had. I was also the main clinical educator for all our
interns in the complex while
also being the (indistinct) pharmacy (indistinct)
roles, then issues would arise. For instance patients in the pharmacy wanting to
escalate to a manager or any kind of managerial HR things I had to handle as
well, as well as onboarding, interviewing and (indistinct)
The Applicant accepted that she would on occasion conduct counselling
within the scope of that role if the pharmacy was extremely
short staffed and
there was no other
Applicant’s evidence was that the Counselling Team Lead position involved
a severe reduction in those duties and that she
would be “counselling
patients all day on phone
. Ms Monzie
described the Counselling Team Lead position as involving managing a team of
four interns who were performing the counselling,
as well as performing some
counselling directly and dealing with more complex counselling matters that may
be escalated to her.
On any view
then, there clearly is a significant change in duties in moving to the latter
were differing views as to whether there was any difference in seniority between
the two roles and the evidence on this issue
is inconclusive. I accept that they
were lateral in their pay and classification, but the roles were clearly
distinct. Even if the
roles were at the same level,
they were different
and the written communication from Mr Ghobrial on 19 May was consistent
with this. Thus the real question is not whether there was
a demotion, but
whether the employer’s decision to place the Applicant in a different job
for some indeterminate period constituted
a repudiation of her employment
contract. Although this was agitated as a subsidiary argument by the
, it is in my view a
highly meritorious one and one that I accept. As was observed by the discussion
of repudiation in Full Bench
decision of
City of Sydney RSL & Community
“Similarly, if an employer seeks to bring about a change in the
employee’s duties or place of work which is not within
the scope of the
express or implied terms of the contract of employment, the conduct may evince
an intention to no longer be bound
by those terms. Therefore, in these
circumstances if an employee does not agree to the change, which if agreed would
amount to a
variation of the contract, the employee may claim to have been
constructively
dismissed.”
completeness, it was open for the Applicant to either accept the repudiation by
resigning (which is what she did) or to instead
affirm the contract as varied. I
do not accept the circumstances of a temporary move to a different job with the
same salary left
the Applicant with no real or effective choice other than to
resign at that time that she did, while on personal leave.
Denial of a promotion
Applicant’s evidence on this issue is that she discharged a drug dependent
patient from the pharmacy who admitted to supplying
medicinal cannabis to third
parties. She said that Mr Ghobrial’s response to this was to tell her that
she was “not ready
to be an owner or a
I have no reason to disbelieve the Applicant’s evidence on this issue, I
am unable to conclude that she was denied a
promotion in the absence of any
evidence that a promotion was otherwise available.
following sexual harassment
limited evidence on this issue was that the Applicant made a complaint that a
former colleague had been sexually harassed and
that this had been “swept
harassment in the workplace is disgraceful, unlawful conduct and any suggestion
that it has occurred warrants a response. One
can readily understand that
employees would feel unsupported if it seemed that complaints of this nature
were not addressed or worse
if the behaviour was tolerated. The difficulty with
the Applicant’s evidence however is that it provides me with no basis to
be satisfied that the Applicant would have visibility over the steps taken to
investigate or respond to a sexual harassment complaint
that did not directly
involve her.
all of the circumstances, the Applicant had a sound foundation for a considered
and rational decision that she would be better
of working somewhere other than
in the Respondent’s business in light of the Respondent’s response
to her injury. But
that is not the same as a forced resignation. The unilateral
change in the Applicant’s role likewise did not force her resignation
the time she chose to resign, but it did constitute a repudiation of her
employment contract, in response to which she was entitled
to resign. A
resignation as an acceptance of a repudiation is a termination of employment on
the employer’s initiative, and
as such is a dismissal under section
386(1)(a) of the Act.
the reasons given in paragraphs
above, the Applicant’s
claim was brought within time.
Respondent’s jurisdictional challenges to the Applicant’s
application are dismissed.
matter will be listed for directions in short order.
COMMISSIONER
Appearances
Ms A. Numan
for the Applicant.
Mr D. Wedgewood
, for the Respondent.
Hearing details:
9 September.
City of Sydney RSL & Community Club Limited v.
(1996) 67 IR 154.
At p 160-161.
Hastie v. Impress
[48]-[51], [54]-[62].
O’Meara v. Stanley
Mohazab v. Dick Smith Electronics (No2)
[1995] IRCA
Broadlex Services v.
United Workers Union
[2020] FCA 867.
Exhibit R1.
Exhibit R2.
Exhibit R3.
Exhibit R4.
Exhibit A1.
Annexure E of Exhibit
Annexure B of Exhibit
Hearing Book, page 7.
PN133, Exhibit R4 at Hearing
Exhibit R4, Hearing Book
Exhibit A1 at [6b].
Exhibit A1 at [6a]
Exhibit A1 at [6g].
Exhibit R4, Hearing Book
pages 74, 75, 78.
Exhibit A1 at [6(c)].
Exhibit A1 at [6(d)].
PN221, 281.
Exhibit A1 at [6(f)].
Annexure A to Exhibit
Exhibit A1 at [6(f)].
Exhibit R3.
Hearing Book p61-62.
Hearing Book page 80.
Hearing Book pages
Exhibit R2.
PN454, Applicant’s
submissions at [15].
PN153-155, Exhibit A1 at
Exhibit A1 at [6(k)].
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government
RTF format (726 KB)
Signed PDF/A format