Shrestha v Minister for Immigration & Anor [2013] FMCA 235 (5 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SHRESTHA v MINISTER FOR
IMMIGRATION & ANOR
[2013] FMCA 235
MIGRATION – Application seeking review of a
decision of the MRT – application filed out of time – application
an extension of time – no jurisdiction to hear substantive proceedings
– extension of time refused.
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) cls.802.212, 802.215
BZABK v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2012] FCA 774
SANDIP SHRESTHA
First Respondent:
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP
Second Respondent:
MIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
File Number:
SYG 72 of 2013
Judgment of:
Lloyd-Jones FM
Hearing date:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
The Applicant:
The Applicant appeared in person
Solicitors for the First Respondent:
Ms B. Rayment of Sparke Helmore
The Second Respondent:
The Second Respondent filed a submitting notice of
(1) The application for an extension of time is
(2) The applicant is to pay the first respondent’s costs of, and
incidental to, the application, fixed in the sum of
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SANDIP SHRESTHA
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION &
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
MIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
is an application seeking review of a decision of the Migration Review Tribunal
(the “Tribunal”), Case No. 1111407,
made on 10 December 2012. The
applicant filed the application on 16 January 2013, 37 days after the decision
was handed down by
the Tribunal. On 2 April 2013, I made orders refusing the
applicant’s application seeking an extension of time in which to
application from the MRT in this Court. These reasons give effect to those
The Proceedings
Rayment, appearing for the Minister, informed the Court she would be seeking an
immediate hearing of the application’s application
for an extension of
time as the application had been filed two days out of time.
Section 477(1)
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) (the “
Migration Act
application to the Federal Magistrates Court for a remedy to be granted in
exercise of the court's original jurisdiction under
section 476
relation to a migration
decision must be made to the court within 35 days of the date
of the migration decision.
Ms Rayment indicated to
the Court that the applicant had only become aware of the Tribunal’s
decision approximately two weeks
before filing the application on 16 January
2013, but that this would have still given the applicant enough time to lodge
the application
within the 35 day window.
Rayment submitted that the reason for her seeking a refusal the application for
an extension of time was more fundamental than
the application being filed two
days out of time, as the application was an abuse of process. She indicated the
applicant had applied
for a Child (Residence) (Class BT) visa, however, was not
the dependant of an Australian Citizen or a New Zealand permanent resident.
Rayment also indicated the applicant was over the age of 25 and did not have any
of the conditions that would allow him to meet
the criteria for the visa.
Accordingly, Ms Rayment argued that it would not be in the interests of the
administration of justice
for time to be extended and asked the Court to refuse
the application for the extension of time. Ms Rayment also indicated that
application would wish to withdraw his application as he conceded the flaws in
the Tribunal’s Decision Record dated 10 December 2012, it found at [27]
AND REASONS
noted above, cl. 802.212 [of the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth)] requires that
the review applicant be a dependent child of an Australian citizen, holder of a
permanent visa or eligible New
Zealand citizen and, subject to certain
circumstances provided in cl. 802.212(2), be under 25 years of age at the time
of the application.
only information before the Tribunal about the review applicant’s parents
is contained in the “Application for
Migration to Australia by a
Child” Form 47CH. This indicates that his mother and father and one
sibling are residents of Nepal.
The review applicant has not provided any
evidence that he is a dependent child of a person who is an Australian citizen,
of a permanent visa or eligible New Zealand citizen. The Tribunal is not
satisfied that the applicant is a dependent child of an
Australian citizen,
holder of a permanent visa or eligible New Zealand citizen as required by cl.
802.212(1)(a).
Tribunal finds that the review applicant was 25 years of age at the time of the
application. The Tribunal accepts as evidence
of this the Departmental movement
records for the applicant as contained on the Tribunal’s file. The review
applicant has
not provided any evidence that he was incapacitated for work due
to total or partial loss of his bodily or mental functions as set
1.03(b)(ii) as referred to by cl. 802.212(2).
30. Accordingly
the Tribunal finds the applicant does not meet the requirements of cl.
of support/sponsorship
31. As also
noted above, cl. 802.215(a) requires that the application be supported by a
letters (sic) of support from a State or
Territory government welfare authority,
or, the applicant be sponsored by an Australian citizen, holder of a permanent
visa or eligible
in cl. 802.215(b).
32. Neither
of these elements was addressed in the review applicant’s application. No
letter in support was provided nor was
any sponsorship form completed or any
other indication given as to any proposed sponsorship arrangements.
33. Accordingly
the Tribunal is not satisfied that the application is supported by a letter of
support from a State/Territory welfare
authority as is required by cl.
802.215(a), or that the review applicant is sponsored by a person who has turned
18 and is an Australian
citizen, a holder of a permanent visa or eligible New
Zealand citizen as required by cl. 802.215(b).
follows that the Tribunal finds that the review applicant does not satisfy the
requirements of cl. 802.215.
CONCLUSIONS
35. For the
reasons given above the Tribunal finds the applicant
does not satisfy
requirements of cl. 802.212 and cl. 802.215.
time the visa application was lodged the Child (Residence) (Class BT) visa
contained the following subclasses: Subclass
802 (Child) and subclass 837
(Orphan relative). The review applicant indicated that he sought the visa in
subclass 802 (Child).
There is no evidence to suggest that the review applicant
meets key criteria for the other subclass. Furthermore the review applicant
unable to satisfy the definition of “orphan relative” contained in
subregulation 1.14 as an applicant must not have
turned 18 at the time the
application is lodged. This means the review applicant is unable to satisfy the
time of application criteria
contained in Subdivision 837.21.
Rayment also indicated the Court she sought the orders she did, as these would
prevent the applicant from having an opportunity
to appeal the decision. This
would not be the case if the application were withdrawn by the applicant or
dismissed by the Court.
Ms Rayment handed up a decision of his Honour Foster J
BZABK v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2012] FCA 774
his Honour dealt with the terms of orders made in respect of proceedings in the
Federal Magistrates Court and difficulties
that subsequently arise. In those
proceedings, the applicant did appeal as the orders made below in the Federal
Magistrates Court
were not plain on their face which was addressed by Foster J.
Ms Rayment indicated that if the Court was minded, it should refuse
application for an extension of time so no appeal could be lodged.
applicant, when asked, indicated that he did not have anything to
am satisfied that the oral submissions made by Ms Rayment accurately address the
issues contained in the application for an extension
of time. I am also
satisfied that the Tribunal’s Decision Record accurately address the
particular circumstances in this matter.
The application is an abuse of process
and, accordingly, the application for the extension of time should be
I certify that the preceding seven (7) paragraphs are a
true copy of the reasons for judgment of Lloyd-Jones FM
Date: 5 April 2013
RTF format (102 KB)
Signed PDF/A format