URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1977/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd v Hastings Shire [1977] UKPCHCA 1; (1994) 180 CLR 266 (27 July 1977)
PRIVY COUNCIL
B.P. REFINERY (WESTERNPORT) PTY. LIMITED v PRESIDENT, COUNCILLORS AND
RATEPAYERS OF THE SHIRE OF HASTINGS
180 CLR 266
PRIVY COUNCIL
PRIVY COUNCIL
LORD WILBERFORCE(2), LORD MORRIS OF BORTH-y-GEST(2), VISCOUNT DILHORNE(1),
LORD SIMON OF GLAISDALE(1) AND LORD KEITH OF KINKEL(1)
Contract - Construction - Implied term - Conditions for implication
Preferential rating agreement between company and shire -
Company going out of
occupation of rated property - Whether implied term that agreement conditional
on company remaining in occupation
- Whether implied term that assignee
entitled to benefit of agreement - Westernport (Oil Refinery) Act 1963 (Vict.)
- Local Government
Act 1958 (Vict.), s. 390A.
1977, May 25-27, July 27
LORD SIMON OF GLAISDALE delivered the majority judgment of their Lordships as
This is an appeal from a judgment of the Full Court of the Supreme Court of
Victoria upon a case stated by the County Court at
Melbourne under s. 304 of
the Local Government Act 1958 (Vict.), as amended. It involves the
interpretation of an agreement (the
rating agreement) made between the
appellant company and the respondents on 7 May 1964, pursuant to the
provisions of s. 390A of
the Local Government Act. It will be necessary to set
out later more fully the relevant provisions of that agreement and of s. 390A.
At this stage it is sufficient to say that the agreement was concerned with
the preferential rating of an oil refinery of which
the appellant company was
in occupation at the time both of the rating agreement and also of the
application to the Court but of
which it had been intermediately out of
occupation. On any showing the agreement presents difficulties of
construction. The Full
Court construed it by holding that there was an implied
term in the agreement that it should come to an end on the appellant company
ceasing to be in occupation, notwithstanding subsequent reoccupation.
2. As Lord Wilberforce said in Prenn v. Simmonds (11): "In order for the
agreement ... to be understood, it must be placed in
its context. The time has
long passed when agreements, even those under seal, were isolated from the
matrix of facts in which they
were set and interpreted purely on internal
linguistic considerations."
(9) The Moorcock (1889), 14 PD, at p 68; Shirlaw v. Southern Foundries
(1926) Ltd.,
(1939) 2 KB 206
, at p 227.
(10 ) Heyman v. Darwins Ltd.,
(1942) AC 356
, at p 361; Berger v. Boyles,
(1971) VR 321
, at p 324.
(1971) 1 WLR 1381
, at p. 1383;
(1971) 3 All ER 237
, at p. 239.
3. Such a consideration of the matrix of an agreement is particularly called
for when it is sought to imply in it a crucial term
which the parties have not
expressed. In the instant case consideration of the context of the agreement
is, in their Lordships'
opinion, essential.
4. The immediate matrix of the rating agreement was two-fold: first, the
statutory provision, s. 390A, inserted in the Local Government
Local Government (Decentralized Industries) Act 1963 which came into force on
28 May 1963, empowering a local authority
to enter into an agreement with an
industrial occupier for preferential rating in such terms as are contained in
the rating agreement;
secondly, an agreement ("the refinery agreement"), which
was given statutory force on the same day, between the State of Victoria
the appellant company, providing for the construetion by the appellant company
of an oil refinery and appurtenant facilities
within the district of the
respondent local authority. The two statutory provisions - one providing for
the construction of the
refinery, the other permitting its preferential rating
- are obviously twin implementations of a policy of securing decentralization
of industry by offering preferential rating. They must have been preceded by
tripartite negotiations between the State of Victoria
on the one part, the
general worldwide B.P. industrial complex on the second par, and the
respondents on the third part. The appellant
company was specifically
incorporated in 1963 within the B.P. group as a wholly owned subsidiary of the
B.P. Co. of Australia (a
holding company referred to in the refinery
agreement) to establish and operate the refinery which was to be sited within
the respondents'
district. (It appears from later correspondence that there
was in Australia within the B.P. group by 1969 another company operating
refinery at Kwinana (Western Australia) and also a company called B.P.
Australia Ltd.) The first evidence of the success of such
negotiations was the
refinery agreement dated 15 May 1963. It appears as the schedule to the
Westernport (Oil Refinery) Act 1963
(Vict.) (No. 7018), which was required to
give effect to the refinery agreement and which passed into law on 28 May
5. The parties to the refinery agreement were the Premier of Victoria for and
on behalf of the State and the appellant company.
There were four recitals, of
which the first two only need be quoted:
"I. The Company is desirous of establishing an Oil Refinery at Crib Point in
the said State.
II. The State for the purpose of encouraging the decentralization of
industry desires to assist the Company in establishing the
said refinery."
6. Clause 1 defined certain terms in the agreement. They included the
"'Commencing date' means the date of execution of this Agreement.
'Commissioning date' is the date on which the Company first receives
petroleum for processing into the refinery from a tanker.
(The actual
commissioning date does not appear from the evidence.)
'Company' means B.P. Refinery (Westernport) Pty. Limited and if the rights
of the Company are assigned pursuant to this Agreement
to any company means
that assignee company."
7. Clause 3 of the refinery agreement laid down the obligations of the
company. The principal one was:
"After the commencing date and without undue delay (to) commence and
complete the construction of the refinery and thereafter
maintain operate and
use the refinery and all additions and alterations thereto."
8. At the cost of the State (not exceeding pounds 3.5m.) the company
undertook to construct jetties at the refinery site and sea-going
small craft; also to dredge and keep dredged substantial navigable channels
and shore-side areas of water. The company
itself was at its own cost
responsible for the maintenance of the jetties "until twenty years after the
commissioning date and
for such further periods as are from time to time
agreed between the Company and the Premier"; and the company was also
responsible
for the construction of various jetty facilities. In the erection,
equipment and operation of the refinery, the company undertook
to "comply with
accepted modern refinery practice and the standards and specifications
required for the time being in the construction
and operation of refineries in
Great Britain and the United States of America".
9. By cl. 4 of the refinery agreement the State undertook a number of
obligations designed to facilitate the construction and
subsequent operation
of the refinery. One of these - the construction and maintenance of internal
roads on the refinery site -
was to be at the cost of the company.
10. Clause 6(b) and (c) of the refinery agreement are of crucial significance
in this appeal. They read:
"(b) Without affecting the liability of the parties to each other under this
Agreement either party shall have the right from
time to time to entrust to
other persons the performance of such portion or portions of its obligations
and operations authorized
under this Agreement as it may consider expedient.
(c) The Company shall have the right to assign or otherwise dispose of this
Agreement or any interest therein to a company in which The British Petroleum
Company of Australia Ltd. a company incorporated in
the Australian Capital
Territory ... holds thirty per centum or more of the issued share capital."
11. Clause 6(g) provided:
"If the Company -
(1) enters into liquidation (other than a voluntary liquidation for the
purpose of reconstruction); or
(3) abandons or repudiates this Agreement -the State may by notice in
writing determine this Agreement ..."
12. Their Lordships would draw attention to certain features of the refinery
agreement. First the enormous scale of the investment
to Lord Simon of be
made, principally by the company but also by the State. Secondly, the length
of time envisaged by the agreement
- for example, the company's obligation to
maintain the jetties was at least twenty years. Thirdly, nevertheless, except
as provided
by cl. 6(g) the refinery agreement had no provision at all for its
termination. Fourthly, the provision for performance by third
Fifthly, the provision for assignment to any company in which the B.P. Co. of
Australia had a thirty per cent or more
interest. Sixthly, the contemplation
of a voluntary liquidation for the purpose of reconstruction. (The last three
features indicate
that the personality of the appellant company as a party to
the refinery agreement was not of primary importance.)
13. On the same day, 28 May 1963, as the refinery agreement received
statutory sanction, the Victoria Parliament passed the Local
(Decentralized Industries) Act 1963 (No. 7014). This inserted a new section in
the Local Government Act 1958. Under
the 1958 Act general rates are made and
levied at last annually by the council of every municipality. They are payable
by the occupier
of rateable property within a municipal district, the normal
basis of assessment being an amount per dollar of either the unimproved
capital value or the net annual value of the property. The Act also makes
provision for special rates and extra rates. The Local
(Decentralized Industries) Act 1963 inserted a new section, 390A:
"(1) The council of any municipality may enter into an agreement with any
person liable to be rated in respect of any land within
the municipality which
is not within a radius of twenty-five miles of the General Post Office at
Melbourne and which is used or
to be used for industrial purposes as to the
amount of rates that will be payable by him under this Act and the amount of
so agreed to be paid shall notwithstanding anything in this Act be for
all purposes the rates that may be made and levied under
this Act in respect
of that land.
(2) No such agreement shall be made unless the council is of the opinion
that the establishment or maintenance of that industry
within the municipality
makes a substantial contribution towards the industrial development of the
municipality and encourages
the decentralization of industry in Victoria.
(4) The amount of rates to be paid under an agreement may be an amount
specified in the agreement or may be an amount calculated
in accordance with a
method specified in the agreement."
14. On 7 May 1964, the appellant company being then the occupier of the
refinery site at Crib Point within the respondents' municipal
entered into an agreement with the respondents pursuant to s. 390A - namely,
the rating agreement which falls for construction
in the instant appeal. The
respondent was called the "Shire" in the to agreement, the appellant company
"the Company". It is desirable
to quote from the recitals:
"(i) The Company is desirous of establishing an oil refinery on certain
lands situated at Crib Point (Hereinafter called 'the
refinery site').
(ii) The Company has entered into an Agreement with the State of Victoria
relating to the establishment of the said refinery
and the construction of
port facilities at Crib Point which Agreement as ratified by the Westernport
(Oil Refinery) Act 1963 is
hereinafter called 'the Refinery Agreement'.
(iii) The Company occupies and intends to become the registered proprietor
of the refinery site and is liable to be rated in
respect thereof.
(iv) The Shire is of the opinion that the establishment and maintenance of
the said refinery within the municipal boundaries
of the Shire, makes a
substantial contribution towards the industrial development of the
municipality and encourages the decentralisation
of industry in Victoria.
(vii) The Shire and the Company have agreed upon the amount of the rates
payable by the Company on the refinery sue."
15. Game 2 of the rating agreement regulated the rates which would be payable
by "the Company" in respect of the refinery site
for a period of upwards of
forty years. It may be summarized as follows: (1) For the year ending 30
September 1964, pounds 1,000.
(2) For the year ending 30 September 1965,
pounds 2,000. (3) For the year ending 30 September 1966, until the
commissioning date
as defined in the refinery agreement, pounds 3,000. (4)
There were complicated provisions for the sum payable by way of rates in
year of commissioning. (5) The provision for rates for the ten years after the
commissioning year was for an annual amount
of not less than pounds 25,000 and
variable upwards by reference to the total amount of the capital expenditure
of "the Company"
upon the refinery site from time to time, the variation
depending on an equation of capital expenditure of pounds 20,000,000 with
rates of pounds 33,000 per annum. (6) For the next thirty years the formula
governing the ten year period referred to in (5) above
was to continue with a
variation in a contingency which need not be rehearsed here.
16. Clause 4 provided that the rating agreement would cease to have effect at
the end of the thirty-year period referred to in
17. Clause 5 must be cited in full:
"From and after the said commissioning date the Company shall after the
preparation of each annual Balance Sheet and Statement
of Accounts and on or
before the first Tuesday in December in each year give to the Shire a
statement certified by the Company's
auditors of the amount of the Company's
capital expenditure upon the refinery site and such details thereof as the
Shire may reasonably
require the first of such statements to include the
amount of such capital expenditure to that date and to specify the amount of
such capital expenditure as at the commissioning date and subsequent
statements to include the amount of such capital expenditure
during the twelve
(12) months preceding the date to which the accounts of the Company are made
18. By cl. 9 the rating agreement was subject to the approval of the
Governor-in-Council (in accordance with s. 390A), which was
given in due
19. There are several matters of importance which should be noticed right
away. First, and most important, the rating agreement
had express provision
for its termination at the end of the forty-year period (ten plus thirty): it
contained no express provision
for its termination on the appellant going out
of occupation; any such term in the agreement would therefore be a matter of
implication.
Secondly, the rating agreement being expressly framed to cover a
period of forty years or more, it is to be assumed that it was
preferential rating over this long period which was held out to the appellant
company as the incentive to the establishment
of a large refinery within the
respondents' district. Thirdly, like the refinery agreement, the rating
agreement bore testimony
to the great sums which were envisaged as to be
invested in the refinery. Fourthly, the rating agreement was set within the
of the refinery agreement, not only by implication but also by
express reference. Not only is the rating agreement referred to in
recitals, but the operation of the agreement - the determination of the rates
payable in any year - is to depend not only on
the amount of capital
expenditure but also on the commissioning date defined in the refinery
agreement. The main significance of
this is that the refinery agreement
contained provision for assignment within the B.P. group in Australia and also
for performance
by third parties. Fifthly - and again critically - if the
rating agreement were to be interpreted purely on internal linguistic
considerations, with the result that "Company" was to be read as referring
only to the appellant, it would be possible for the
B.P. group to arrange that
the capital expenditure on the refinery site should be made by some company in
the group other than
the appellant. This would be no breach of either the
refinery or the rating agreement. But, since the ratability of "the Company"
under We rating agreement is geared to capital expenditure by "the Company",
the rates payable by "the Company" during the last
forty years of the
agreement could then be considerably less than the parties obviously
contemplated. For example, to take the
figures of the pivotal equation, if the
capital expenditure on the site by some other company in the BY. group were
pounds 20m.,
the annual rates payable by "the Company" would be, not pounds
33,000, but pounds 25,000. And however much the capital expenditure
further increased in this way, the annual rates would still remain at pounds
20. Their Lordships would draw attention to two other matters which must be
borne in mind when it comes to the implication of
any term in the rating
agreement. First, both parties secured substantial benefits over a long
period. For the appellant company
it was the preferential rating. For the
respondents there were the recited advantages of industrial development within
their area;
there were the large rates (albeit preferential) on the refinery;
and there would be full rates on hereditaments ancillary to the
(e.g., housing for the workers, and shops to serve them). Secondly, the
expenditure of a very large sum of money on an
important industrial
installation in a particular place may well be irrevocable. If the incentive
to the siting within the respondents'
district should be withdrawn, the
installation could not by the mere passing of a corporate resolution be
removed elsewhere, as
if it were a unit in a cottage industry. Once tempted to
a particular site it is there for good - or ill.
21. The rating agreement was approved by the Governor-in-Council on 26 May
1964. Thereafter, until 31 December 1969, the appellant
company remained in
occupation of the refinery site, and its liability to pay rates was calculated
in accordance with cl. 2 of
the rating agreement. On 15 December 1969, the
appellant company wrote to the Secretary of the Shire of Hastings, the letter
signed by L. F. Ogden, General Manager:
"For several months now, B.P. in Australia has been considering its
corporate structure with a view to seeing how it could be
streamlined and
improved. The conclusion which has yet to be approved by our Head Office in
London amounts, very briefly, to the
transfer of share-holdings in our two
refinery companies at Kwinan (a) and Westernport to B.P. Australia Limited,
who will also
acquire most of B.P.'s other interests in Australia, and become
the main operating company responsible for the supply, shipping,
refining and
marketing. The Holding Company in Australia, The British Petroleum Company of
Australia Limited, will, however, continue
I am notifying you of this change, which is aimed to be effective from the
beginning of 1970, before any public announcements
are made because I know the
interest the Councillors and yourself have in the activities of B.P.
Westernport.
You may rest assured that the change which is envisaged will make no
difference to our concern with the development of our activities
Westernport, and I hope I may assume that there will be no difficulty over
transferring to B.P. Australia Limited those rights
and privileges which by
suitable agreements have been vested in B.P. Refinery (Westernport)
Proprietary Limited."
22. The letter gave notice of the sort of corporate reorganization to be
expected within a complex like B.P. and which was specifically
contemplated by
the refinery agreement.
23. Mr. Ogden's letter of 15 December 1969, was acknowledged by the Shire
Secretary on 23 December 1969:
"I desire to acknowledge receipt of your letter of 15th December, . . . and
in reply have to advise that the effect of the transfer
of the shareholdings
in B.P. Refinery (Westernport) Proprietary Limited to B.P. Australia Limited
on the agreement between this
Council and your Company will be considered at
an early meeting and you will be advised in due course of Council's
determination
in the matter."
24. However, the appellant company did not wait. On 31 December 1969, a
resolution was passed for a members' voluntary winding
up of the appellant
company, a liquidator being appointed. On 1 January 1970, the appellant
company yielded up occupation of the
refinery site to B.P. Australia Ltd.
Their Lordships assume that this transfer was in accordance with the refinery
25. On 9 February 1970, the Shire Secretary wrote to the General Manager of
the appellant company:
"With further reference to your letter of the 15th December, I have to
advise that my Council has now considered the opinion
handed down by its
Solicitors in relation to the effect of the Company change, on the agreement
between B.P. Refinery (Westernport)
Pty. Ltd., and this Council.
The Solicitors have advised that the agreement will have no effect once the
change has taken place, and as a result Council has
resolved to allow the
agreement to lapse."
26. On 26 February 1970, Mr. Ogden, as General Manager, Westernport Refinery,
wrote, this time on behalf of B.P. Australia Ltd.:
"I note the advice in your letter of 9th February and I would appreciate an
opportunity to discuss with you and with your Council
a fresh agreement to
record the rates levied in respect of the Westernport Refinery site.
These rates will become payable by B.P. Australia Limited which, as in the
case of the refinery company, is a wholly-owned subsidiary
of the holding
company for our group in Australia, The British Petroleum Company of Australia
Limited. As mentioned in my letter
of 15th December, the circumstances of our
presence and activities at Westernport are in no way affected by the
alteration of our
corporate structure. Considerable capital works are now in
progress at the refinery site and extensions of the refinery plant will
constructed in the near future.
I trust that you can arrange an early opportunity for discussion of these
27. On 14 April 1970 the Shire Secretary replied:
"In reply to your letter of the 26th February, I desire to advise that the
matters raised by you were placed before Council at
a Meeting on the 17th
March, and I have been instructed to advise that Council may give further
consideration to your request at
a later date.
You will be advised in due course of any further action taken by Council."
28. However, the next step seems to have been the respondents' levying of a
general (not preferential) rate on B.P. Australia
Ltd. From the time of the
transfer the appellant company ceased to give to the respondents statements of
the capital expenditure
on the refinery site pursuant to cl. 5 of the rating
agreement; nor, so far as the evidence shows, did anyone else do so.
29. B.P. Australia Ltd. appealed against the general rate levied on them,
contending that they were entitled to the benefit of
the rating agreement. But
in B.P. Australia Lid v. Shire of Hastings (12), the Supreme Court dismissed
the case of B.P. Australia,
holding that the rating agreement was personal to
the appellant company; and that s. 390A should be construed as if the middle
part of it read: ". .. as to the amount of rates payable by him under this Act
under the agreement from time to time ..." (as the
decision was summarized by
the Full Court in the instant case); and that the last part of the subsection
should be "read down"
accordingly.
30. The appellant company did not seek to argue in the instant case that B.P.
Australia Ltd. v. Shire of Hastings was wrongly
(1973) VR 194.
31. Even on that construction, it was argued, the rating agreement enured to
the benefit of the appellant company, which was a
party to the agreement and
had resumed occupation in circumstances shortly to be described: the rating
agreement did fix the statutory
rates to be payable by him from time to time.
Nevertheless the Full Court was bound by that decision, and their reasoning
to take account of it. So their Lordships feel entitled to express
some misgiving. As Lord Mersey said in Thompson v. Goold and
Co. (13): "It is
a strong thing to read into an Act of Parliament words which are not there,
and in the absence of clear necessity
it is a wrong thing to do."
32. It seems to their Lordships a particularly strong thing to do so when it
amounts to modifying, as against the fiscal subject,
words which have a plain,
natural and ordinary meaning in his favour. And although Acts Nos. 7014 and
7018 are not in the technical
sense in pari materia they were obviously passed
on the same day in pursuance of a self-same policy and the construction put
s. 390A means that an assignee of the appellant company who was expressly
contemplated in the refinery agreement (annexed to No.
7018) as having rights
under that agreement would be denied the preferential rating under No. 7014.
Having invested enormous sums
in a refinery sited to the advantage of the
respondents and the State B.P. would either have to accept being (contrary to
the intention
of the refinery agreement) locked in an outmoded and
inconvenient corporate structure or have to forgo the preferential rating
which was the incentive held out for the installation and subsequent
maintenance and operation of the refinery within the respondents'
Even though it were reasonable to restrict the operation of s. 390A to the
period covered by any agreement thereunder,
it hardly seems legitimate to go
further. The Supreme Court rightly held that a municipality could only enter
into rating agreements
as authorized by s. 390A. But their Lordships can see
no ground for holding that the inclusion of a provision for assignment in
agreement purporting to be made and authorized under that section would have
been ultra vires. It would not be so unless the
last part of sub-s. (1) is
"read down" as in B.P. Australia Ltd v. Shire of Hastings.
33. It was no doubt in view of the decision in B.P. Australia Ltd. v. Shire
of Hastings that the B.P. organization now took steps
to place the appellant
company in reoccupation of the refinery site, in the expectation or hope that
it would be able to take advantage
(1910) AC 409
, at p. 420.
rating agreement and s. 390A. On 25 September 1973, the Supreme Court made an
order that winding up of the appellant company should
be perpetually stayed.
By a lease in writing dated 28 September 1973, B.P. Australia Ltd. as lessor
demised the refinery site with
its buildings and plant to the appellant
company as lessee for a term of three years.
34. Pursuant to the lease, the appellant company resumed occupation of the
refinery site and its installations on 28 September
1973, notifying the
respondents. Before the first Tuesday in December 1973 (and again before the
first Tuesday in December 1974)
the appellant company gave to the respondents
statements under cl. 5 of the rating agreement of "the appellants' capital
expenditure
upon the refinery site including the amount of such expenditure
during the twelve months preceding the date to which the accounts
appellant are made up, namely 31 December" (case stated, par. 14). The case
stated does not specify such amounts: but the
words their Lordships have
quoted suggest that the appellant company had at least de facto resumed the
obligation under the refinery
agreement to continue to develop and/or maintain
the refinery site.
35. By a rating assessment notice dated 29 January 1974, the respondents
assessed the appellant company in respect of the refinery
site at a general
rate of $154,960 (whereas a preferential rate calculated in accordance with
the rating agreement would have been
$50,000). The appellant company appealed
to the County Court at Melbourne against the assessment, contending that it
was entitled
to be preferentially rated under the rating agreement. The
learned County Court judge on 12 September 1975, dismissed the appeal,
"In the end I have come to the conclusion that not only is this a personal
contract, as the Supreme Court has already decided,
but that there was a
fundamental condition of continuing occupancy by the appellant. A reading of
the whole of the agreement leads,
in my opinion, to the finding that it
contemplates that the appellant will continuously occupy the site and
therefore be liable
for rates. I am further of the view that the actions of
the parties and the correspondence amounted to an agreement that the agreement
was at an end or, if it did not, the appellant was in fundamental breach and
the respondent rescinded the contract by its letter
of 9 February 1970,
inelegantly expressed though it may have been."
36. The appellant company requested that a case should be stated for the
determination of the Supreme Court. On 5 May 1976, the
Full Court upheld the
decision of the learned County Court judge. They held, first, that it was an
implied condition of the rating
agreement that it should continue in operation
only so long as the appellant company should be the occupier of the refinery
and rateable as such; so that on the appellant company going out of
occupation on the 1 January 1970, the rating agreement came
to an end. The
Full Court held, secondly, that, if the agreement had not come to an end by
the operation of such an implied term,
the letter from the appellant company
of Me 15 December 1969, and the letter of the respondents of 9 February 1970,
in their circumstances,
amounted to "a mutual acquiescence between the
appellant and the Shire that (the rating agreement) was to be treated as
discharged."
In view of these findings the Full Court held it unnecessary to
determine the third - "wider and more difficult" - point argued
on behalf of
the respondents - namely, that there had been a repudiation or fundamental
breach of the rating agreement by the appellant
company, the rating agreement
having allegedly imposed on the appellant company an obligation to remain in
occupation of the site
and to maintain, operate and use the refinery for the
purpose, inter alia, of enabling the rates to be calculated.
37. On 17 June 1976, the Full Court gave leave to appeal to Her Majesty in
38. Their Lordships turn to the first issue - namely whether there was an
implied term in the rating agreement that it should
come to an end on the
appellant company ceasing to be in occupation of the refinery site. The Full
Court adopted the view expressed
in B.P. Australia Ltd. v. Shire of Hastings
(14): ".. . the agreement itself from its terms did not contemplate any
by the company of any rights and obligations thereunder, or indeed,
any change in the company's ownership or occupancy of the rated
39. The Full Court carefully reviewed some of the authorities on the
implication of terms in a contract - namely Taylor v. Caldwell
(15), Turner v.
Goldsmith (16), Measures Bros. Ltd. v. Measures (17), and Reigate v. Union
Manufacturing Co. (18). These authorities
led the Full Court to hold, in view
of B.P. Australia Ltd. v. Shire of Hastings, that it was an implied condition
in the rating
agreement that it should subsist only so long as the appellant
company remained in occupation.
40. Their Lordships do not think it necessary to review exhaustively the
authorities on the implication of a term in a contract
(1973) VR 194
, at p. 196.
(15) (1863) 3 B and S 826, at p. 833
[1863] EngR 526
(122 ER 309
, at pp. 312-313).
(1891) 1 QB 544
, at p. 550.
(1910) 2 Ch 248
, at pp. 258, 259.
(1918) 1 KB 592
, at p. 605.
parties have not thought fit to express. In their view, for a term to be
implied, the following conditions (which may overlap) must
be satisfied: (1)
it must be reasonable and equitable; (2) it must be necessary to give business
efficacy to the contract, so that
no term will be implied if the contract is
effective without it; (3) it must be so obvious that "it goes without saying";
must be capable of clear expression; (5) it must not contradict any
express term of the contract.
41. Their Lordships venture to cite only three passages - albeit they are
familiar to every student of this branch of the law.
In The Moorcock (19)
Bowen LJ said:
"I believe if one were to take all the cases, and they are many, of implied
warranties or covenants in law, it will be found
bat in El of them the law is
raising an implication from the presumed intention of the parties with the
object of giving to the
transaction such efficacy as both parties must have
intended that at all events it should have. In business transactions such as
this, what the law desires to effect by the implication is to give such
business efficacy to the transaction as must have been
intended at all events
by both parties who are business men.
It is because the implication of a term rests on the presumed intention of the
parties that the primary condition must be satisfied
that the term sought to
be implied must be reasonable and equitable. It is not to be imputed to a
party that he is assenting to
an unexpressed term which will operate
unreasonably and inequitably against himself.
In Reigate v. Union Manufacturing Co. (20), Scrutton LJ said:
"A term can only be implied if it is necessary in the business sense to give
efficacy to the contract i.e., if it is such a term
that it can confidently be
said that if at the time the contract was being negotiated some one had said
to the parties, 'What will
happen in such a case?', they would both have
replied: 'Of course, so and so will happen; we did not trouble to say that; it
too clear."'
42. In Shirlaw v. Southern Foundries (1926) Ltd. (21), MacKinnon LJ said:
"Prima facie that which in any contract is left to be implied and need not
be expressed is something so obvious that it goes
without saying; so that, if,
while the parties were making their bargain, an officious bystander were to
suggest some express provision
for it in their agreement, they would testily
suppress him with a common, 'Oh, of course.'"
(1889) 14 PD 64
, at p. 68.
(1918) 1 KB 592
, at p. 605.
(1939) 2 KB 206
, at p. 227.
43. The main thrust of the argument for the appellant company was that it was
not necessary to give business efficacy to the rating
agreement to imply a
term in it that it should come to an end on the appellant company going out of
occupation of the refinery
site, notwithstanding reoccupation after however
short an interval. Their Lordships feel the force of this contention. But the
alleged implied term is, in their Lordships' view, to be rejected on a simpler
and clearer ground.
44. In their Lordships' view the term which the Full Court held should be
implied in We rating agreement must be rejected on the
ground that, taking
into account the matrix of facts in which that agreement was set, to imply
such a term would be wholly unreasonable
and inequitable. A group of companies
such as the B.P. group may from time to time for good reasons wish to make
changes in its
corporate structure - particularly when a period of as long as
forty years is envisaged. This possibility was, as has been said,
in the refinery agreement, and the identity of the member of the B.P. group
occupying the refinery site cannot have
been of the least importance to the
respondents. If it was the case, as it must have been, that tripartite
negotiations took place
between the State, the Shire and representatives of
the B.P. group before the refinery agreement was made and that the offer of
substantial rating concessions for a period of more than forty years was an
inducement to the B.P. group to enter into the refinery
agreement and to incur
the massive capital expenditure necessary to establish a refinery at Crib
Point - and it may be that in
the absence of that inducement the B.P.
representatives would not have wanted and would not have agreed to establish
- then it was, to say the least, inequitable to imply a term the
application of which in the circumstances of this case means that
benefits conferred by the rating agreement were only enjoyed for five and a
half years from 7 May 1964, to 31 December
1969, instead of for more than
forty years. When the rating agreement itself contained no provision for its
termination before
the expiry of forty years from the commissioning date, to
imply a term which operated to deprive those who had been induced to establish
the refinery of the advantages of those rating concessions on the ground that
those advantages were only to enure so long as the
appellant company remained
in occupation of the premises, cannot, in their Lordships' opinion, be
regarded otherwise than as unreasonable
and inequitable.
45. In the light of the provisions of the refinery agreement to which
attention has been drawn, it cannot have been the presumed
intention of the
parties that such a term should be included in the agreement. If an officious
bystander had asked the appellant
company at the time the rating agreement was
negotiated whether andat was ,tat was intended, he would have been suppressed
"testily" will do - with "Of course not]". Indeed, their Lordships
doubt whether the reaction of the respondents at the time the
agreement was
being negotiated would have been any different, even though years later they
sought to take advantage of the change
of occupation of the site.
46. Whatever else be the outcome of the appeal, their Lordships are satisfied
that it would not be legitimate to imply a term
in the rating agreement
involving that it should come to an end on assignment in accordance with the
refinery agreement.
47. The Full Court, like the Court in B.P. Australia Ltd. v. Shire of
Hastings, was naturally impressed by the difficulty of operating
cl. 5 of the
rating agreement on assignment: it was primarily this that caused the Full
Court to imply the term they did. But a
far more fundamental difficulty about
the rating agreement emerged during the course of argument before their
Lordships. It affects
its very heart and substance - namely, the
quantification of rates in cl. 2. Capital expenditure by some other company in
Australia group would not enure to the respondents' advantage by way of
increase of rates over pounds 25,000 (representing, so their
Lordships were
told, relevant capital investment of pounds 15m., as against the pivotal
figure in the formula of pounds 30m.).
The appellant company might have
transferred all its assets to B.P. Australia Ltd. and taken simultaneously an
immediate lease
back without ever going out of occupation. The implied term
contended for by the respondents and upheld by the Full Court would
such circumstances avail the respondents. The appellant company would continue
to enjoy preferential rating, but without
the capital expenditure by B.P.
Australia being taken into account in the quantification of rates. In other
words, the term implied
by the Full Court not only operates inequitably; it
fails to give business efficacy to a defective contract and vindicate the
intention of the parties.
48. Recognizing that a term has to be implied into the rating agreement to
give it business efficacy and having reached the conclusion
that the term the
Full Court held should be implied must for the reasons stated be rejected,
what term should be implied which
satisfies the five conditions stated?
49. In their Lordships' view in the light of the matrix of facts in which the
rating agreement is set, the answer to that question
is clear. It is to imply
a term which would make the rating agreement accord with and not differ from
the refinery agreement -
to imply a provision that if the rights of the
"company" (the appellant company under the agreement) were assigned or
disposed of to a company in which the British Petroleum Co. of
Australia Ltd. held thirty per cent or more of the issued share capital,
"company" should mean that assignee company.
50. Such a term would be both reasonable and equitable. It is capable of
clear expression. It does not contradict any express
term of a contract, but
adds to it; and it gives business efficacy to the contract. In the light of
the provisions in the refinery
agreement it was something so obvious that it
went without saying, and if an officious bystander had asked whether that was
common intention of the parties the answer would have been "Of course".
51. If such a term is implied, the difficulties about the operation of cl. 5
as well as of cl. 2 of the rating agreement, in the
event of such an
assignment by the appellant company and the occupation of the refinery by the
assignee company, disappear.
52. Their Lordships now turn to the alternative ground on which the Full
Court decided in favour of the respondents, namely, that
the exchange of
correspondence at the end of 1969 and the beginning of 1970 - specifically the
appellant company's letter of 15
December 1969, and the respondents' letter of
9 February 1970 - constituted an agreement to terminate an ex hypothesi
contract. Their Lordships venture to put it in this way, because a
contract can only be terminated by agreement if there is manifested
between the parties so to terminate it. The appellant company's letter of 15
December 1969, cannot be read as a contractual
offer to rescind; and the
respondents' letter of 9 February 1970, cannot be read as an acceptance of an
offer - or even as a counter-offer.
It is merely notice of a resolution which
the council has passed. Their Lordships are therefore in no doubt that, unless
agreement came to an end by virtue of some such implied term as
that proposed by the respondents, it did not terminate by agreement.
53. With regard to the respondents' third contention on which the Full Court
did not find it necessary to pronounce - namely,
that the rating agreement was
terminated by the repudiation or fundamental breach by the appellant company
in going out of occupation
- their Lordships are of opinion that the argument
is untenable unless a term such as the Full Court held was to be implied is
implied. In their view for the reasons stated no such term is to be implied.
54. The crux of their Lordships' decision only emerged in the course of
argument before the Board. While their Lordships naturally
regret that the
grounds on which they have reached their conclusion were not considered in the
County Court or by the Full Court
and that they accordingly have not had the
advantage of the views of the learned Judges in those Courts thereon, the
point having
been taken before the Board, they must decide it. As it was not
raised in the appellant company's case their Lordships as at present
feel that the fair order as to costs would be that the costs orders below
should be undisturbed and that before their Lordships
each side should bear
its own costs. If either party wishes to make any further submissions about
costs their Lordships will entertain
them. These should be made in writing in
the first ]stance addressed to the Registrar. If they considered it necessary
their Lordships would reconvene to hear oral submissions from
counsel about costs. Parties are requested to notify the Registrar
fourteen days if they will be making any further submissions.
55. Subject thereto their Lordships would allow the appeal and remit the case
to the Melbourne County Court to make the appropriate
order. They will humbly
advise Her Majesty accordingly.
LORD WILBERFORCE AND LORD MORRIS OF BORTHY-y-GEST, dissenting:-
This appeal is concerned with a general rate for the year 1973-1974 levied
by the Shire of Hastings upon the appellant in respect
of an oil refinery site
at Westernport, which is within the respondents' municipal district. The
appellant appealed to the County
Court under s. 304 of the Local Government
Act 1958 (Vict.) which dismissed the appeal. On the request of the appellant,
then stated a special case for determination by the Supreme Court of
Victoria. On 5 May 1976, the Full Court of the Supreme Court
confirmed the
County Court's decision.
2. The dispute arises out of an agreement between the appellant and the
respondents dated 7 May 1964, entered into pursuant to
S. 390A of the Local
Government Act 1958. This is a provision inserted in the Act in 1963 with a
view to encouraging the decentralization
of industry by rate concessions. It
reads as follows:
"(1) The Council of any municipality may enter into an agreement with any
person liable to be rated in respect of any land within
the municipality which
is not within a radius of twenty-five miles of the General Post Office at
Melbourne and which is used or
to be used for industrial purposes as to the
amount of rates that will be payable by him under this Act and the amount of
so agreed to be paid shall notwithstanding anything in this Act be for
all purposes the rates that may be made and levied under
this Act in respect
of that land.
(2) No such agreement shall be made unless the council is of the opinion
that the establishment or maintenance of that industry
within the municipality
makes a substantial contribution towards the industrial development of the
municipality and encourages
the decentralization of industry in Victoria.
(3) No such agreement shall have any force or effect until it has been
approved by Order of the Governor in Council published
in the Government
(4) The amount of rates to be paid under an agreement may be an amount
specified in the agreement or may be an amount calculated
in accordance with a
method specified in the agreement."
3. It may be noted that sub-s. (1) refers to an agreement "with any person"
as to the amount of rates "that will be payable by
4. On 15 May 1963, the appellant, which is a member company of the British
Petroleum Group, and was (until 19 December 1969) a
wholly owned subsidiary of
the British Petroleum Co. of Australia Ltd. and thereafter of B.P. Australia
Ltd., entered into an agreement
("the State Agreement") with the State of
Victoria, which agreement was given statutory effect by the Westernport (Oil
Act 1963 (Vict.) (Act No. 7018). The company agreed to erect an oil
refinery on a specified site within the respondents' municipal
district and
thereafter to maintain, operate and use the refinery with all additions and
alterations thereto. The "Company" was
defined to mean the appellant and, if
the rights of the company were assigned pursuant to the agreement to any
company, that assignee
company. The company had power to dispose of its rights
under the agreement or any interest therein to a company in which the British
Petroleum Co. of Australia Ltd. held at least thirty per cent of the issued
5. On 7 May 1964, the appellant and the respondents entered into a rating
agreement pursuant to s. 390A. The agreement was between
the Shire of the one
part and the appellant "hereinafter called 'the Company'" of the other part.
This agreement recited that (i)
the Company desired to establish an oil
refinery at a specified site; (ii) the Company had entered into the State
Agreement; (iii)
the Company occupied the refinery site and was liable to be
rated in respect thereof; ... (vii) the Shire and the Company had agreed
the amount of the rates payable by the Company on the refinery site.
6. The agreement then proceeded to fix the amount of rates payable by "the
Company" on a rising scale over a period. These were
nominal amounts up to the
commissioning date. Thereafter they were to be calculated according to the
total amount of the capital
expenditure of "the Company" upon the refinery
site by reference to the balance sheet and statement of accounts of "the
There were various periods stated totalling forty years, at the end
of which the agreement was to cease to have effect. Clause 5
of the agreement
was as follows:
"5. From and after the said commissioning date the Company shall after the
preparation of each annual Balance Sheet and Statement
of Accounts and on or
before the first Tuesday in December in each year give to the Shire a
statement certified by the Company's
auditors of the amount of the Company's
capital expenditure upon the refinery site and such details thereof as the
Shire may reasonably
require the first of such statements to include the
amount of such capital expenditure to that date and to specify the amount of
such capital expenditure as at the commissioning date and subsequent
statements to include the amount of such capital expenditure
during the twelve
(12) months preceding the date to which the accounts of the Company are made
up." (The emphasis on "the Company"
is supplied.)
7. There was no provision in the rating agreement enabling the company to
assign the benefit of it to any other company, and it
is doubtful whether any
such provisions would have been valid in view of the terms of s. 390A.
8. The effect of the agreement, if now applicable to the appellant, would be
that the rates for 1973-1974 would amount to $50,000.
Without the benefit of
the agreement, and calculated under the Local Government Act, they would be
$154,960. The rating agreement
obtained statutory force on approval by the
Governor in Council on 26 May 1964.
9. The events leading to the current dispute are as follows. They are as
found in the case stated, outside which it is impermissible
appellant constructed the refinery on the refinery site, commissioned it, and
operated it. On 31 December 1969, the
appellant went into a members' voluntary
liquidation. On 1 January 1970, it gave up occupation of the refinery site to
B.P. Australia
Ltd. On 21 January 1970, the appellant's liquidator, in the
course of distributing its anus in specie, transferred the refinery
the plant to B.P. Australia Ltd. This transfer may be taken to have also
transferred the benefit of the State agreement.
B.P. Australia Ltd. remained
in occupation of the refinery site from 1 January 1970 to 27 September 1973.
10. There was correspondence between the appellant and the Shire regarding
the rating agreement. On 15 December 1969, the appellant
notified the Shire of
the intended reconstruction and transfer. It asked for an assurance that
"there will be no difficulty over
transferring to B.P. Australia Ltd. those
rights and privileges which by suitable agreements have been vested in B.P.
(Westernport) Proprietary Ltd.". The Shire replied to this on 9
February 1970. It said that solicitors had advised "that the agreement
have no effect once the change has taken place, and as a result Council has
resolved to allow the agreement to lapse".
11. To this B.P. Australia Ltd. (sic) replied on 26 February 1970, suggesting
a new agreement. The Shire then assessed rates on
B.P. Australia Ltd. on the
normal basis - that is that the rating agreement did no apply. B.P. Australia
Ltd. appealed to the County
Court on the basis that they were entitled to the
benefit of the rating agreement. The matter come before the Full Court of the
Supreme Court of Victoria on a case stated, which decided that the benefit of
the rating agreement was personal to the present
appellant company and could
not be conferred upon B.P. Australia Ltd.:
"It seems clear enough" said Adam J in his judgment, "and indeed was not
disputed before us, that the rating agreement regarded
simply as a contract
inter partes conferred the rating benefits therein referred to on B.P.
Refinery (the present appellant) -
the occupier of the rated property at the
time of the agreement - and no other person."
12. As regards s. 390A, the Court held that this merely gave necessary legal
authority to certain rating agreements, which would
otherwise be in conflict
with the general law of rating, and did not authorize a municipality to enter
into agreements as to the
rates which might be payable by persons who might
subsequently become the ratepayer in respect of the relevant land (22).
13. In consequence of this decision, against which there was no appeal, B.P.
Australia Ltd. paid rates on the normal basis. Moreover
it did not give to the
respondent Shire any statement of capital expenditure on the refinery site as
required by cl. 5 of the rating
agreement. Nor was any such statement given
during the relevant period by the appellant: indeed the appellant was in no
14. Consequent on the decision of the Full Court, the liquidator of the
appellant, on 25 September 1973, applied to the Supreme
Court of Victoria,
under the Companies Act 1961, for an order that the winding up of the
appellant be stayed, and an order to that
effect was made by Crockett J. On 28
September 1973, B.P. Australia Ltd., which was, and still is, the owner of the
refinery site,
entered into a lease with the appellant by which B.P. Australia
Ltd. demised the refinery site and buildings and, according to the
stated, the plant to the appellant for three years, at no rent. The lessee
(22) B.P. Australia Ltd. v. Shire of Hastings,
(1973) VR 194.
to carry out refinery processes on the site as directed by the lessor. It is
not stated who was to finance any expenditure.
15. The appellant resumed occupation of the site under the lease and claimed
the benefit of the rating agreement. As has been
stated, the question whether
it us so entitled came before the County Court. The judge rejected the
appellant's appeal on the ground
(i) that the rating agreement was a personal
contract with a fundamental condition of continuing occupancy by the
appellant. He
further held (ii) that the agreement had been brought to an end
by mutual agreement, and (iii) that the appellant had committed
a fundamental
breach of the agreement and that the respondents had rescinded it.
16. On further appeal, the Full Court on the first point agreed with the
judge. It held that the parties to the rating agreement
intended, and there
was an implication to the effect, that the contract was to remain in force
only so long as there continued
to exist a state of affairs where the refinery
site was in the occupation of the appellant, it maintaining the refinery and
in a position to render accounts of its capital expenditure on the site
from time to time. That state of affairs ceased on 1 January
17. The Court also upheld the second ground - that is, that the agreement was
discharged by mutual consent. It did not decide
the third ground.
18. We deal first with the first, and main, ground of appeal. The appellant's
argument rests essentially upon the language of
s. 390A and in particular upon
the last phrase in sub-s. (1): "and the amount of rates so agreed to be paid
shall notwithstanding
anything in this Act be for all purposes the rates that
may be made and levied under this Act in respect of that land." This, it
said, is general language which has to be applied on each and every occasion
on which, during the currency of an agreement,
rates have to be levied in
respect of the relevant land. Even if the sub-section has to be limited to
occasions during which the
company - that is the other party to the agreement
- is in occupation (as indeed is indicated by the words "the amount of rates
that will be payable by him"), the sub-section still applies, for the company
was, in the relevant years, the occupier.
19. The respondents' contention in answer to this is that the subsection must
be read down so only to apply so long as the relevant
agreement continues in
force and must cease to operate when the agreement ceases to operate. Then,
when the agreement is looked
at, that can only be read as applying to a
situation of continuous operation by the company with which it is made, and
case of intermittent occupation.
20. We find great force in the respondents' argument. The whole tenor of the
agreement is that the appellant would establish the
refinery and maintain and
develop it. Provision is made for the assessment of the rates each year
according to action to be taken
on the site by the appellant. In each year,
the appellant had to provide a statement, certified by its auditors, of
expenditure
on the site, and this is to be done after the preparation of each
annual balance sheet.
21. Not only is the implication of continuity - from year to year of
operation and from year to year of expenditure and accountancy
clear, but, further, the agreement will not work if continuity is broken. If
the refinery is transferred to another company,
the necessary certificates
according to the terms of cl. 5 cannot be given either by the assignee company
or by the appellant company.
22. Nor can cl. 5 be operated if and when (as here) the refinery is
retransferred to the appellant. The appellant accepted that,
during the period
covered by an assignment, cl. 5 would not apply, so that full rates would have
to be paid, but argued that on
a re-transfer, there would be a capital payment
by the appellant by way of consideration which could be treated as expenditure
for the purpose of cl. 5. This argument will not do. In the first place, there
might not be any such capital payment - as indeed
there was not in the actual
events of the present case: and even if there were, there would be no
necessary coincidence between
the payment made and any amount spent on the
she. finally, born the point of view of the rating authority, very difficult
as regards budgeting and planning, would be created if during a
period of forty years, after an assignment had been made and the
charged, there were to be the possibility of the agreement reviving and
reducing the rates. From their point of view
there was every reason to keep
the rating agreement as a personal agreement to the company and on any
transfer of the site to re-negotiate
23. The legal consequences of these considerations are not difficult to draw.
If, in order to make an agreement work, or, conversely,
in order to avoid an
unworkable situation, it is necessary to imply a term; if moreover implication
of that term corresponds with
the evident intention of the parties underlying
the ageement, the law not only can but must imply the term. The term to be
is simply that the agreement should continue in operation only so long
as the appellant should be the occupier of the refinery she
and rateable as
such, and should cease to operate as soon a the appellant should give up
occupation of the refinery. Implication
of such a term, in such circumstances,
is amply supported by authorities (23). Its basis is simply that when the
company ceases
to occupy the site, the subject matter of the agreement ceases
24. We therefore agree entirely with the Full Court that on this ground, the
appellant can no longer claim the benefit of the
agreement. We need not
examine the other grounds canvassed in that Court - that the agreement was
discharged by mutual consensus,
or that the appellant had repudiated the
agreement. It is clear in our opinion that the appeal must fail.
25. We must however deal briefly with a fresh argument which found its way
into the appeal: that was, as we understood it (for
it has never been
formulated in writing and has assumed a protean character) that the words "the
Company" in the agreement of 7
May 1964, may be read as including any company
in the British Petroleum Group of companies which happens to occupy the
site. This result is sought to be achieved by means of the recital in
the rating agreement of the State agreement, and of the presence
in the State
agreement of a definition in the following terms:
"'Company' means B.P. Refinery (Westernport) Pty. Limited and if the rights
of the Company are assigned pursuant to this Agreement
to any company means
that assignee company."
26. With this must, it is said, be read cl. 6(c):
"The Company shall have the right to assign or otherwise dispose of this
Agreement or any interest therein to a company in which
The British Petroleum
Company of Australia Ltd. ... holds thirty per centum or more of the issued
share capital."
27. Another version of this argument appears in the majority judgment and
consists in saying that a term ought to be implied that
if the rights of the
appellant company were assigned or otherwise disposed of to a company in which
the British Petroleum Co. of
Australia held thirty per cent or more of the
issued share capital,"Company" should mean that assignee company.
28. Of this argument we would say:
1. It was not put forward in either court below, nor taken or hinted at in
the appellant's printed case.
2. It is inconsistent with the decision of the Full Court in the earlier
case concerned with B.P. Australia Ltd., and involves
contending that that
unappealed decision was wrong. In our respectful opinion it was right.
3. It is inconsistent with the appellant's own action in December
(23) See Turner v. Goldsmith,
(1891) 1 QB 544
, at p 550; Measures Bros. Ltd.
v. Measures,
(1910) 2 Ch 248
, at p 258.
1969, when it requested that their rights and privileges vested in the
appellants might be transferred to B.P. Australia Ltd.
4. It introduces a method of interpretation which is novel and unsound. We
have referred above to the agreement of 7 May 1964,
which contains its own
definition of "the Company" - that is, the appellant. Every reference in that
agreement to the Company -
we have mentioned the main references above - is
beyond doubt a reference to the appellant company and to no other entity. To
an expressed definition agreed between the parties by reference to a
recital of another agreement of a different character between
parties involves a process alien to normal methods of construction.
5. The introduction of the new "implied term" cannot be justified under the
normal principles. It is not necessary in order to
produce business efficacy,
is inconsistent with the expressed terms of the rating agreement, and, in our
opinion, is not authorized
by s. 390A. In effect it would impose upon the
Shire a contractual party to which the Shire has not assented.
6. The extended definition does not produce the result aimed at. For one of
two things: either the extended definition means
"any company in the B.P.
Group" - but in that case it departs from the "incorporated" definition; or,
if the "incorporated definition"
is taken, it produces the wrong result, for
the assignee company is B.P. Australia Ltd. to which alone the benefit of the
agreement has been transferred and which has not re-transferred it to
the appellant. It cannot produce the appellant company which
has parted with
the State agreement and now has merely a three year lease of the site.
29. We would uphold the judgment of the Full Court and dismiss the appeal.
30. Solicitors for the appellant, Linklaters and Paines.
31. Solicitors for the respondent, Simmons and Simmons.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter