1420166 [2015] RRTA 328 (21 May 2015)
[2015] RRTA 328
(21 May 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Carolyn Wilson
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the
direction that the applicant satisfies s.36(2)(a
of the Migration
Statement made on 21 May 2015 at 3:53pm
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to section 431(2)
Migration Act
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration to refuse to grant the applicant
a Protection visa under s.65 of
Migration Act 1958
applicant who claims to be a citizen of Sri Lanka, applied for the visa [in]
October 2012 and the delegate refused to grant the
visa [in] January 2013.
differently constituted Tribunal affirmed the delegate’s decision on 3 May
2013. By order of the Federal Circuit Court dated
[in] December 2014 the matter
was remitted to the Tribunal for reconsideration. Judge Simpson of the Federal
Circuit Court found
the Tribunal had failed to provide the applicant more time
to put forward evidence he was obtaining from his mother.
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 8 April 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments. The Tribunal hearing was conducted
with the assistance of an
interpreter in the Tamil (Sri Lankan) and English languages.
applicant was represented in relation to the review by his registered migration
agent. The representative attended the Tribunal
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
the following reasons, the Tribunal has concluded that the matter should be
remitted for reconsideration.
applicant is a [age] year old single Tamil man from [his village]. North Western
Province, Sri Lanka. He was around [number]
years of age when he came to
Australia as an illegal maritime arrival.
arrival in August 2012 the applicant claimed his parents had sent him to
Australia because the local CID (Criminal Investigation
Department) had started
questioning his father about alleged links to the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam (LTTE). When his father
started hiding the CID said to the
applicant’s mother that if she didn’t tell them where the father was
they would take
away her son, that is, the applicant. His father as [an
occupation] had worked in areas previously controlled by the LTTE.
his written application in October 2012 the applicant said that [in early] June
2012 the CID came to their house to question his
father. They told his father
he was under suspicion because he had travelled to LTTE controlled areas many
times in the past. The
applicant says this is true, but that his father went to
those areas only for [his occupation]. The CID told him they would speak
with him, but his father went into hiding. The CID came to their house 4 times
before the applicant left Sri Lanka. They
told his mother they would take the
son, the applicant, if they could not find the father. The applicant fears if
he returns the
CID will pursue him and his life will be in danger. He fears he
will be wanted in connection with the accusations against his father.
Furthermore, he believes he will be targeted for his illegal departure from Sri
delegate did not believe the applicant’s claim that his father had been
targeted by the CID for questioning about alleged
LTTE links. The delegate
considered that if his father was under suspicion for having been in LTTE
controlled areas then he would
have been questioned much earlier, as he had been
travelling there for many years for [his occupation].
previously constituted Tribunal also did not believe the applicant’s
claims that his father had been targeted by the CID.
They found it implausible
the CID would seek to question his father three years after the civil war ended,
considering the father
had been [working] in far north Sri Lanka for most of his
working life. They found that if he had been of interest he would have
questioned or detained during the civil war. The previously constituted
Tribunal saw no utility in postponing a decision to
await the provision of an
alleged letter from the police that the applicant’s mother was going to
send as evidence.
previously constituted Tribunal noted in their decision that the applicant
appeared at hearing to be younger than his stated age.
At that hearing he would
have been around [age]. At the hearing in April 2015 the applicant’s
stated age was [age], but to
this Tribunal he also appeared younger than [age].
The Tribunal has no reason to suspect the applicant has lied about his age, but
makes this observation merely to state that it accepts he was a minor when he
first came to Australia and is still a relatively young
man. The Tribunal has
kept this in mind when considering his claims and his ability to present
supporting evidence in a timely manner.
the hearing before the Tribunal the applicant gave evidence that was consistent
with what he had told the Department and the previously
constituted Tribunal
since before he left Sri Lanka,
but his mother told him she has heard nothing
from the father since early 2013. Initially his father would come back when it
safe to see the family, but there has been no word from him for over two
years. He said his mother has told him about three letters
she received from the
police. The first two are letters asking for his father to attend the police
station and the third letter
calls for the applicant to attend the police
station. The letters are from [two months in] 2013 [] and the third from [in]
His mother emailed the letters to him by sending them from a
communications shop where she could scan and send the letter by email.
mother does not have a computer at home. She knew they were important letters,
but she has lost the original copy of the second
letter. The third letter she
sent to him in March 2015. Following the hearing the applicant forwarded to the
Tribunal the original
email he had received from Sri Lanka enclosing a scanned
copy of that third letter.
Tribunal explored with the applicant at hearing as to why the police would be
calling for him, when if they were investigating
his family they would have
realised by now he had left Sri Lanka. The Tribunal also explored whether there
might be some other explanation
as to why the police were looking for his father
and himself, as it was not evident on the face of the police letters that it had
anything to do with a suspicion of LTTE connections. The applicant could only
speculate on what the police might know or their motivations,
but he maintained
he was fearful of retuning to Sri Lanka. He said he relied on the information
from his mother, who told him it
was unsafe for him to return because the police
were still interested in finding his father and if not his father, then the
Tribunal invited the applicant to consider submitting evidence from his mother.
The Tribunal indicated it would take oral evidence
by telephone or consider a
written statement. The applicant expressed concern about the risks for his
mother giving evidence by
telephone but said he would talk to his representative
and mother about this.
the hearing the Tribunal received a hand written statement from the
applicant’s mother, with an English translation.
The Tribunal gives the
letter considerable weight. The letter corroborates much of what the applicant
claimed, as well as giving
further information. For example, his mother details
in the letter physical harassment she and her daughter have suffered from police
still coming around looking for her husband.
Tribunal considers the consistency of the applicant’s core claims and the
fact he raised these claims at the earliest possible
opportunity are supportive
of a conclusion that the applicant’s claims are genuine. The Tribunal
has considered the possibility
that the evidence in support, such as the letters
from the police and the letter from his mother, have been concocted to support
false claims. However, the Tribunal found the applicant to be a convincing
witness at hearing and finds the letter from his mother
to be persuasive and
apparently genuine.
these reasons, the Tribunal accepts the applicant’s father and thus his
family have come to the attention of the local CID.
The Tribunal is prepared to
accept this is due to an alleged suspicion, first raised in 2012, that his
father may have had involvement
with the LTTE. The Tribunal acknowledges both
the delegate and previously constituted Tribunals found it implausible that this
have occurred in 2012, and that given the many years the applicant’s
father worked in LTTE controlled areas that such a suspicion
would have been
acted upon much earlier. However, the Tribunal notes from the Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT)
Country Report – Sri Lanka
February 2015) that the military and security forces maintain a strong presence
in the north of Sri Lanka and that there is ongoing
monitoring of possible LTTE
activity and any anti-government resentment. DFAT also reports on credible
reports of torture being
carried out by Sri Lankan security, including on
civilians suspected of LTTE connections. The Tribunal concludes that whilst
the father should have been questioned earlier by local authorities if
there was concern about his travel to LTTE areas, it cannot
say that it is
implausible that he may have only been questioned about this for the first time
in 2012, given the ongoing presence
of security forces in the applicant’s
combination with the interest in the applicant’s family, the Tribunal has
considered what may happen to the applicant if
he returns after having departed
illegally. The DFAT
Country Report – Sri Lanka
provides the
following information on the treatment of returnees to Sri
Article 14(1)(i) of Sri Lanka’s Constitution
entitles any citizen to ‘the freedom to return to
Sri Lanka’. Entry
and exit from Sri Lanka is governed by
Immigrants and Emigrants Act
(the I&E Act). Under Section
45(1)(b) of the Act, it is an offence to depart other than via an official port
of entry or exit,
such as a seaport or airport. Penalties for leaving
Sri Lanka illegally can include custodial sentences of up to five years and
fine of up to 200,000 Sri Lankan rupees (around AUD 1,600).
Returnees are generally considered to have committed an offence under the
I&E Act if they depart Sri Lanka irregularly by boat.
Upon arrival in Sri Lanka, involuntary returnees, including those on
charter flights from Australia, are processed by the Department
of Immigration
and Emigration (DoIE), the State Intelligence Service (SIS) and Airport
During the processing of returnees, DoIE officers check travel document and
identity information against the immigration database.
SIS checks the returnee
against intelligence databases. Airport CID verifies a person’s identity
to then determine whether
the person has any outstanding criminal matters.
For returnees travelling on temporary travel documents, police undertake an
investigative process to confirm the person’s identity,
which would
address whether someone was trying to conceal their identity due to a criminal
or terrorist background, or trying to
avoid, among other things, court orders or
arrest warrants. This often involves interviewing the returning passenger,
the person’s claimed home suburb or town police, contacting the
person’s claimed neighbours and family and checking criminal
records. DFAT assesses that Sri Lankan returnees are treated according to
these standard procedures, regardless of their
ethnicity and
religion–Tamil, Sinhalese and Muslim returnees are treated the same way on
arrival in Sri Lanka. DFAT further
assesses that detainees are not subject
to mistreatment during their processing at the airport.
Offences under the Immigrants and Emigrants Act
Most Sri Lankan returnees from Australia are
questioned by police on return and, where an illegal departure from
Sri Lanka is suspected,
are charged under the I&E Act. DFAT understands
that in most cases, these individuals have been arrested by the police at
international airport. As part of this process, most returnees will have
their fingerprints taken and be photographed. They are transported
by police to
the Magistrates Court in Negombo at the first available opportunity after
investigations are completed, when custody
and responsibility for the individual
shifts to the courts or prison services. The Court makes a determination as to
the next steps
for each individual. Those arrested can remain in police custody
at the CID Airport Office for up to 24 hours. Should a magistrate
available before this time–for example, because of a weekend or public
holiday–those charged are held at the nearby
Negombo Prison.
Tribunal accepts the applicant will be questioned upon return at the airport and
may be detained for up to a few days. The Tribunal
accepts he will likely have
to pay a fine. The Tribunal notes these procedures are part of a law of general
application relating
to illegal departures from Sri Lanka. The Tribunal accepts
DFAT’s assessment that all Sri Lankans, regardless of ethnicity,
treated according to standard procedures. Were the applicant an ‘ordinary
Tamil’ the Tribunal would conclude the
applicant will be treated according
to standard procedures, and that such treatment does not amount to serious harm.
However, the
Tribunal concludes the applicant is not an ‘ordinary
Tamil’ due to adverse attention paid to his father and now to him.
Tribunal also notes information from the UNHCR about the extent of monitoring of
people who have returned after departing illegally:
post-return monitoring data indicate that in 2011, upon arrival in the village
of destination, 75% of the refugee returnees
were contacted at their homes by
either a military (38%) or police (43%) officer for further
“registration”. 26% of these
returnees were again visited at home
for subsequent interviews, with a handful receiving a number of additional
visits by the police
Tribunal considers that the interest shown by the local CID in his father
combined with his illegal departure make it more likely
the applicant will be of
interest to the local authorities. The Tribunal considers that even if he is
granted bail within a few days
of returning as per the standard procedures, he
will likely be subjected to closer monitoring by the local authorities than an
Tamil returnee, and that such monitoring could involve significant
harassment and physical mistreatment that would amount to serious
Tribunal considers the reason he will be targeted is because of an imputed
political opinion of being connected to or
a supporter of the LTTE because of
the allegations against his father. The Tribunal considers the chance of him
being detained and
suffering serious physical harm, is not remote or
insubstantial and in fact is significant enough to amount to a real chance. The
Tribunal considers the detention and physical mistreatment would amount to
serious harm. In conclusion, the Tribunal finds the applicant’s
persecution is well-founded.
the persecution feared is at the hands of local law enforcement the Tribunal
finds the applicant cannot access state protection.
Further the Tribunal
considers relocation is not an option in this case when the authorities, even
local ones, are the agents of
the reasons given above, the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant is a
person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the
Refugees Convention. Therefore the applicant satisfies the criterion set out in
s.36(2)(a).
Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the direction that the
applicant satisfies s.36(2)(a) of the Migration Act.
Carolyn Wilson
ATTACHMENT A - RELEVANT LAW
The criteria for a protection visa are set out in
s.36 of the Act and Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
Regulations). An applicant for the visa must meet one of the alternative
criteria in s.36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c). That is,
the applicant is either a
person in respect of whom Australia has protection obligations under the
‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other ‘complementary
protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same family unit as such a
person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same class.
Refugee criterion
Section 36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a
protection visa is that the applicant for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied Australia has protection
obligations under the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees as
amended by the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees (together, the
Refugees Convention, or the Convention).
Australia is a party to the Refugees Convention and generally speaking, has
protection obligations in respect of people who are refugees
as defined in
Article 1 of the Convention. Article 1A(2) relevantly defines a refugee as any
person who:
owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group
or political opinion, is
outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is
unwilling to avail himself
of the protection of that country; or who, not having
a nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence,
unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to
Sections 91R and 91S of the Act qualify some
aspects of Article 1A(2) for the purposes of the application of the Act and the
Regulations
to a particular person.
There are four key elements to the Convention definition. First, an applicant
must be outside his or her country.
Second, an applicant must fear persecution. Under s.91R(1) of the Act
persecution must involve ‘serious harm’ to the applicant
(s.91R(1)(b)), and systematic and discriminatory conduct (s.91R(1)(c)). Examples
of ‘serious harm’ are set out in s.91R(2)
of the Act. The High Court
has explained that persecution may be directed against a person as an individual
or as a member of a group.
The persecution must have an official quality, in the
sense that it is official, or officially tolerated or uncontrollable by the
authorities of the country of nationality. However, the threat of harm need not
be the product of government policy; it may be enough
that the government has
failed or is unable to protect the applicant from persecution.
Further, persecution implies an element of motivation on the part of those
who persecute for the infliction of harm. People are persecuted
for something
perceived about them or attributed to them by their persecutors.
Third, the persecution which the applicant fears must be for one or more of
the reasons enumerated in the Convention definition -
race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion. The
phrase ‘for reasons of’
serves to identify the motivation for the
infliction of the persecution. The persecution feared need not be
attributable to a Convention reason. However, persecution for multiple
motivations will not satisfy the relevant test unless a Convention
reasons constitute at least the essential and significant motivation for the
persecution feared: s.91R(1)(a) of the Act.
Fourth, an applicant’s fear of persecution for a Convention reason must
be a ‘well-founded’ fear. This adds an objective
requirement to the
requirement that an applicant must in fact hold such a fear. A person has a
‘well-founded fear’ of
persecution under the Convention if they have
genuine fear founded upon a ‘real chance’ of being persecuted for a
stipulated reason. A ‘real chance’ is one that is not
remote or insubstantial or a far-fetched possibility. A person
well-founded fear of persecution even though the possibility of the persecution
occurring is well below 50 per cent.
In addition, an applicant must be unable, or unwilling because of his or her
fear, to avail himself or herself of the protection of
his or her country or
countries of nationality or, if stateless, unable, or unwilling because of his
or her fear, to return to his
or her country of former habitual residence. The
expression ‘the protection of that country’ in the second limb of
1A(2) is concerned with external or diplomatic protection extended to
citizens abroad. Internal protection is nevertheless relevant
to the first limb
of the definition, in particular to whether a fear is well-founded and whether
the conduct giving rise to the fear
is persecution.
Whether an applicant is a person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations is to be assessed upon the facts as they
exist when the decision is
made and requires a consideration of the matter in relation to the reasonably
foreseeable future.
Complementary protection criterion
If a person is found not to meet the refugee
criterion in s.36(2)(a), he or she may nevertheless meet the criteria for the
a protection visa if he or she is a non-citizen in Australia in respect
of whom the Minister is satisfied Australia has protection
obligations because
the Minister has substantial grounds for believing that, as a necessary and
foreseeable consequence of the applicant
being removed from Australia to a
receiving country, there is a real risk that he or she will suffer significant
harm: s.36(2)(aa)
(‘the complementary protection criterion’).
‘Significant harm’ for these purposes is exhaustively defined in
s.36(2A): s.5(1). A person will suffer significant harm
if he or she will be
arbitrarily deprived of their life; or the death penalty will be carried out on
the person; or the person will
be subjected to torture; or to cruel or inhuman
treatment or punishment; or to degrading treatment or punishment. ‘Cruel
inhuman treatment or punishment’, ‘degrading treatment or
punishment’, and ‘torture’, are further defined
in s.5(1) of
There are certain circumstances in which there is taken not to be a real risk
that an applicant will suffer significant harm in a
country. These arise where
it would be reasonable for the applicant to relocate to an area of the country
where there would not be
a real risk that the applicant will suffer significant
harm; where the applicant could obtain, from an authority of the country,
protection such that there would not be a real risk that the applicant will
suffer significant harm; or where the real risk is one
faced by the population
of the country generally and is not faced by the applicant personally: s.36(2B)
of the Act.
Section 499 Ministerial Direction
In accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made
under s.499 of the Act, the Tribunal is required to take account of policy
prepared by the Department of Immigration –PAM3 Refugee and
humanitarian - Complementary Protection Guidelines and PAM3 Refugee
humanitarian - Refugee Law Guidelines – and any country information
assessment prepared by the Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade expressly for
protection status determination purposes, to the extent that they are relevant
to the decision under consideration.
UNHCR Eligibility
Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers
from Sri Lanka, 21 December 2012.
RTF format (152 KB)
Signed PDF/A format