Chalmers & Moffat [2021] FamCA 633 (31 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Chalmers & Moffat
[2021] FamCA 633
File number(s):
AYC 339 of 2018
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PARENTING –
Interim application by father to spend more time with the child now that the
child has commenced school
– Application opposed by Mother –
Application granted.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
Goode & Goode (2006) FLC 93-286
Eaby & Speelman
(2015) FLC-93
Mazorski & Albright
[2007] FamCA 520
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Orman Solicitors
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Skinner & Associates
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Nicholson
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Victorian Legal Aid Commission
AYC 339 of 2018
MR CHALMERS
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. Orders 3 and 6 of the Interim Orders made by consent on the 18 November
2019 be discharged.
2. Until further Order the child X born in 2015 spend time with the father Mr
Chalmers (‘the father’) as follows:
(a) Each alternate weekend from after school or 3:30pm Friday to before
school or 9.00am Monday commencing 24 September 2021.
(b) Each other alternative Thursday from after school or 3:30pm to before
school or 9.00am Friday, commencing 2 September 2021.
(c) For Father's Day weekend, in the event that X does not ordinarily spend
time with the father, from after school or 3:30pm Friday
to before school or
9.00am Monday in lieu of the following weekend.
3. Changeovers that do not occur at X’s school shall take place at B
Services (‘the Contact Service’) (at the equal
expense of the
parties, if any) and in the event that the Contact Service is not available, and
until the Contact Service accepts
the parties’, at C Shop.
4. Until further Order, the father’s ordinary time with X shall
continue to occur during all school holiday periods.
5. Each parent forthwith enrol in and complete the Parenting Orders Program,
and provide a copy of the Certificate of Completion to
the solicitor for the
other parent and the Independent Children’s Lawyer.
6. The Independent Children’s Lawyer have leave to and shall within 7
days provide a copy of the affidavit of Mr D filed 27
July 2021 to Ms F.
7. That pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) information
courses, programs and services available,
is set out in the Fact Sheet attached
8. That pursuant to
section 65DA(2)
Family Law Act 1975
the particulars of the consequences that may follow if a person contravenes
these Orders and details of who can assist the
parties adjust to and comply with
an Order are set out in the Fact Sheet attached hereto and these particulars are
included in these
9. Pursuant to
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) it was
reasonable to engage counsel to attend.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Chalmers & Moffat
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
Application
1 This is an interim parenting application brought
by the father Mr Chalmers in respect of the one child of the parties namely X
in 2015 (aged six years).
2 Both the father and the Independent Children's Lawyer (‘ICL’)
propose the following orders:
(1) Order three and six of the interim orders made by
consent on 18 November 2019 be discharged.
(2) Until further order, the child X born in 2015 spend time with the father as
(a) Each alternate weekend from after school
or 3:30pm Friday to before school or 9.00am Monday commencing 24 September
(b) Each other alternative Thursday from after school or 3:30pm to before school
or 9.00am Friday, commencing 2 September 2021.
(c) For Father's Day weekend, in the event that X does not ordinarily spend time
with the father, from after school or 3:30pm Friday
to before school or 9.00am
Monday in lieu of the following weekend.
(3) Changeovers that do not occur at X’s School
shall take place at B Services (‘the Contact Service’) (at the equal
expense of the parties, if any) and in the event the Contact Service is not
available, at C Shop.
(4) Until further order the father's ordinary time with X shall contact (sic)
during all school holiday period.
(5) Each parent forthwith enrol in and complete the Parenting Orders Program,
and provide a copy of the Certificate of Completion
to the solicitor for the
other parent and the ICL.
(6) The ICL have leave to and shall within 7 days provide a copy of the
affidavit of Mr D filed 27 July 2021 to Ms F.
3 I am now able to make orders 5 and 6 above by consent.
4 The mother, Ms Moffat, opposes the application and asks that it be
dismissed thereby continuing the interim orders of 18 November
2019, but which
have themselves been amended with the consent of the parties and apparently to
accommodate X commencing full-time
Relevant Background
5 The parties have been litigating both parenting
and property matters for some three years. The substantive applications are
for trial before her Honour Justice Hartnett as soon as December 2020
with an estimated hearing time of five days. Counsel for each
of the parties
and the ICL agree that the trial will occupy all of the available five days.
6 Pursuant to the interim orders of 18 November 2019, but as amended by the
parties themselves X currently lives with mother and spends
time with the father
as follows:
(1) in week one from Friday at 8.00am until Sunday at
5.00pm; and
(2) in week two on each of Tuesdays and Fridays from 8.00am until
7 I calculate, therefore, the X currently spends the two nights per fortnight
with his father, but equally spends time with his father
on five separate days
per fortnight, albeit also attending school for a substantial period of the
Tuesdays and Fridays.
8 The father's proposal would have X spending four nights per fortnight with
9 It is generally agreed that the parties’ relationship has been, and
continues to be, extremely acrimonious. These proceedings
commenced in the
Federal Circuit Court in mid-2018, but were effectively discontinued by reason
of an attempted reconciliation with
the parties finally separating in January
2019. The history suggests a number of prior separations and
reconciliations.
10 In his substantive application the father's position, at its highest, is
that X should live primarily with him for nine nights
per fortnight and five
nights with the mother. The mother’s position is that X live with her and
spend only 'identity time'
with the father supervised on four occasions per
The father's case
11 The father relies on his affidavit sworn 15 April
2021. He also relies on the report of Mr D, psychologist, who has prepared a
report on this family dated 16 July 2021.
12 Essentially, the father argues that there has been a change in
circumstances since the making of the interim consent orders in
November 2019
and namely that the X now attends full-time school thereby impacting on the
quality of the time between the father
and X on Fridays. The father relies on
Mr D’s recommendations, albeit untested, and most clearly evident at [67]
of his report
as follows:
It may be that the course of least resistance is the
most prudent approach. Within the model of parallel parenting, it may be that
the most sensible option available for this family is for X to reside with his
mother and to spend 4 or 5 nights with his father
in a 14 night cycle, probably
from either Thursday or Friday from the completion of school until the
commencement (sic) school on
a Monday morning, and overnight on the alternative
Thursday. It may be that a sensible first step in the process is for X to have
4 nights with the father increasing to 5 nights at the beginning of the 2022
academic year. There should be a sharing of holidays
and significant
13 The father also relies on the Mr D’s reporting as to both the
comfortable relationship between X and the father and X’s
own preferences
as to his regime of time between his parents. At [49] Mr D reports:
X indicated that he would like to be able to spend more
time with his father, and told me that he liked spending time in his father's
of hugs and cuddles
, and that they play together. X told me that he cared
reluctant for him to do so.
14 At paragraph [51] and [52] Mr D observes:
X was also seen in the company of his parents
separately. In the company of his father, there was an unmistakable sense of
positive affection and comfort. Mr Chalmers and X shared a real sense
of connection, joy and pleasure with each other. Mr Chalmers
easily immersed
himself into play and activity with his son, that was both imaginary and
symbolic. Mr Chalmers easily and cooperatively
played with X... X and his
father entered into easy conversation and they understood each other; they
maintained a very active dialogue
and an abundance of physical affection that
was spontaneous and unconscious.
As a clinical observation, Mr Chalmers and played easily and cooperatively,
there they were in synchrony, they maintained an almost
constant dialogue, and
were immersed in their activities cooperatively to the exclusion of me, such
that my observation of them was
irrelevant. Together, they interacted in a
relaxed, warm, spontaneous and reciprocal manner. X was observed to initiate
both physical
and emotional contact...
15 Relevantly [59] Mr D observes, and the father relies upon, the
My observation of X in the company of his parents was
remarkably reassuring, as they shared an unmistakable reciprocal sense of
affection and enthusiasm. X reported to me that he loved his father,
felt safe with his father, felt well cared for by his father,
described his
father as a special person upon which he could depend on and rely, and he
struggled to understand what the time available
for him with his father was
being so limited. X conveyed little in the way of apprehension, anxiety,
awkwardness, or avoidance of
his father, and to the contrary, my observations of
them together was warm, spontaneous, affectionate, reciprocal and conveyed a
serve and volley quality.
16 The father conceded that the relationship with the mother has been a
mutually antagonistic one. He denies many of the allegations,
but has made some
limited admissions. The father argues that the untested allegations of family
violence are of limited relevance
within the context of this interim dispute
where he is already enjoying unsupervised and overnight time with X.
The mother's case
17 Counsel for the mother argues firstly that a
further determination of the interim time for X is unnecessary and hence the
application should be dismissed. She argues that the X is
already spending time and substantial time with the father over some five
separate days per fortnight, including a period of two consecutive overnights.
She says that the substantive applications are listed
for trial as early as
December of this year and it is for that process to properly test the competing
proposals of the parties and
the evidence in support of each where she
emphasises she will be seeking orders that that the father's time with X be
'identity time' on four supervised visits per year.
18 Whilst acknowledging the report and recommendations of Mr D, counsel for
the mother emphasises that this is simply another piece
of evidence yet to be
tested and that Mr D's conclusions and recommendations will be the subject of
such testing. In this sense,
the Court was alerted to a previous family report
by family consultant Ms F prepared in the H Town Registry in 2019 where the
concludes at least in part that
‘... If evidence of the wife is
accepted then there should be identity time only for X with the
19 Counsel for the mother further points out that the Court is not yet
appraised of all of the relevant material including some further
850 pages of
DOCS (New South Wales) material subject to a recent subpoena.
20 The mother acknowledges X's comments to Mr D, but urges caution in the
Court placing too much weight on the comments of a six-year-old
admitted relationship between the parents is of extreme animosity.
21 Essentially, however, the emphasis of the argument of the mother is that
the Court should not readily intervene to alter arrangements
that have been on
foot for a considerable period of time and which give the child frequent time
with the father, including overnight
time, and also where the parents themselves
have been able to address the issue raised by the father namely this child's
at school by adding the Tuesday time to the orders of 18 November
2019 as well as adding an hour to the time on Fridays.
The ICL case
22 The ICL puts a position supportive of the
father's application. She relies to a high degree on the untested report of Mr
with emphasis on matters of immediate interest and impact in respect of X
and, in particular, protecting him from exposure to the
antagonistic
relationship between his parents.
23 Whilst the father in his affidavit at [25] seems to believe there is a
calming of his relationship with the mother, the ICL and
Mr D urge more caution.
Mr D's report at [10] describes the father thus:
[The Father] presented as an extremely tense and anxious
man, who proved to be an extremely poor historian. He presented as overwhelmed
by the history, and consumed by an external locus of control, that is, the
tendency to place blame and responsibility for the current
difficulties, these
proceedings, and the lack of settlement upon [the mother] and her recalcitrance.
[The father] showed a disarming
rationalisation for the multiple Breaches of
Intervention Order, the allegations of family violence and his own contribution
difficulties, that gave the very clear impression that he either
understated, under emphasised, or failed to appreciate the active
contribution
made to his own problems.
24 Further, at [56] Mr D continues:
It is almost impossible to provide a clear and concise
summary of this dispute given the chronically conflicted and chaotic nature
the history, the overwhelming amount of detail in the subpoenaed documents, and
the extensively reported concerns regarding the
parental conflict. The sheer
weight of material reflects the enormity and complexity of this dispute. It
seems to me inescapable
that there has been severe family violence, and that it
is likely this has been of a coercive and controlling nature. However, the
family’s presentation is multilayered, it is complex, there are historical
child protection issues involving [the mother’s]
other children, embedded
within the spousal conflict, highlighted by the numerous Intervention Orders,
Breach of Intervention Orders,
and the multiple allegations and counter
allegations. In a matter where there are so many claims, so many counterclaims,
conflict and so much litigation, it is difficult to pull together a
meaningful formulation.
25 Against this background, Mr D, perhaps with not complete optimism,
suggests at [63]:
They very clearly fall into the category of high
conflict, with a significant overlay of family violence and probably substance
There are multiple layers of difficulty that is both historical and
ongoing. It may be that the most helpful way to proceed is
to fully embrace the
reality of the situation, and to implement Court Orders that seek to impose as
much as possible, clear boundaries,
unambiguous guidelines, and the clearest and
most unambiguous sanctions should intervention orders be
26 Further, at [65] Mr D casts doubts on the utility of the current
arrangement and then continues:
At the very least, I would suggest that the Court
implement an arrangement whereby X is collected from school and delivered to
and that as much as possible, the transition between his parents be
buffered by the school experience.
27 Finally, at [71] to Mr D opines:
X clearly needs to spend time with both his parents,
needs a relationship with his extended family, and needs to be spared the
unrelenting
intrusion into his psychological functioning as a consequence of his
parent’s (sic) conflict. X also needs to be spared the
exposure to his
parent’s conflict and exposure to his father's denigration of his mother.
[The mother] needs to be able to
parent her son unimpeded by the abuse of [the
father] and [the father] needs to be allowed the opportunity to positively
to his son's development. Notwithstanding the overarching ideal of
have having both parents actively and constructively involved
in X's life, this
will require structure, certainly in parallel parenting. Court orders will be a
necessary part of X's family live
moving forward.
28 The ICL argues that the orders as suggested by her attend to a degree to
Mr D's concerns and specifically as limiting if not, if
not avoiding, for X the
exposure to his parents conflict.
The Relevant Law
29 The orders that I am asked to make are parenting
orders and, as such, I am to have X's best interests as my paramount
consideration
pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (' the
30 The process of consideration for the Court is a mandatory one of
referencing the proposals of the parties and the ICL together
with the probative
evidence to the many considerations set out in
and (3) of the
against the background of the Objects and Principles of the legislation set out
as follows:
(1) The objects of this Part are to ensure that the best
interests of children are met by:
(a) ensuring that children have the benefit
of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the
extent consistent with the best interests of the child; and
(b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence;
(c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them
achieve their full potential; and
(d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities,
concerning the care, welfare and development of
(2) The principles underlying these objects are that
(except when it is or would be contrary to a child’s best
interests):
(a) children have the right to know and be
cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are
married, separated,
have never married or have never lived together; and
(b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and
communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and
other people
significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and
other relatives); and
(c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care,
welfare and development of their children; and
(d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children; and
(e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy
that culture with other people who share that
31 As emphasised in the submissions of counsel for the mother, the nature of
interim hearings the are such that they do not have the
considerable advantages
of a final trial in that the evidence of the parties, their witnesses, and the
experts is untested by cross
examination. Experience suggests that the testing
and challenging of the evidence at the trial is a crucial and perhaps
fundamental
aspect of a process ultimately of determining the best interests of
children as to their living and parenting arrangements. This
interim hearing,
however, and is the norm, was conducted on the face of the affidavit material
untested and supported only by submissions
from counsel. It follows that the
Courts at this stage are often are unable to make findings of disputed fact and
credit with a
tendency, therefore, to rely upon the agreed or uncontroversial
facts to assist the determination. Nevertheless and despite these
limitations
of a truncated the hearing, the Court remains mandated to conduct the hearing by
a course of statutory consideration
set out in the well-known decision of the
Full Court in
where their Honours say
... the procedure for making interim parenting orders
will continue to be an abridged process where the scope of the enquiry is
“significantly
curtailed”. Where the Court cannot make findings of
fact it should not be drawn into issues of fact or matters relating to
merits of the substantive case where findings are not possible. The Court also
looks to the less contentious matters, such as
the agreed facts and issues not
in dispute and would have regard to the care arrangements prior to separation,
the current circumstances
of the parties and their children, and the
parties’ respective proposals for the future.
32 However, the above should not be understood as courts at this interim
stage being relieved of the obligation of considering all
of the evidence. In
Eaby & Speelman
Court elaborated:
It is true that in
Goode & Goode
the Full Court said that the circumscribed nature of interim hearings means that
the court should not be drawn into issues
of fact or matters relating to the
merits of the substantive case where findings are not possible. However, that
does not mean that
merely because the facts are in dispute the evidence on the
topic must be disregarded, and the case determined solely by reference
agreed facts. Rather, the proper approach to contentious matters of fact in the
determination of interim hearings is as explained
Marvel v Marvel
[122] and [123], as follows:
[2010] FamCAFC 13
the majority (Boland and Thackray JJ) discussed at [88] of their reasons the
care necessary to be exercised in making findings in
interim parenting
proceedings. Their Honours said:
[88] In our view, findings made
at an interim hearing should be couched with great circumspection, no matter how
firmly a judge’s
intuition may suggest that the finding will be borne out
after a full testing of the
[123] Later, at [100] their Honours
amplified their comments and said:
[100] The intuition involved in
decision-making concerning children is arguably of even greater importance when
a judge is obliged
to make interim decisions following a hearing at which time
constraints prevent the evidence being tested. Apart from relying upon
uncontroversial or agreed facts, a judge will sometimes have little alternative
than to weigh the probabilities of competing
claims and the likely impact on
children in the event that a controversial assertion is acted upon or rejected.
It is not always
feasible when dealing with the immediate welfare of children
simply to ignore an assertion because its accuracy has been put in
33 Neither party in this interim hearing raises the issue of parental
responsibility. The orders that that each party seeks sit comfortably
the definition of 'substantial and significant time' pursuant to
Section 60CC(2)(a)
the benefit to the child of having a
meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents
34 The evidence of Mr D
suggests that X has an established, meaningful and supportive relationship with
each of his parents. The
discrete nature of the application now before me is
unlikely to impact in any great sense on those relationships whether the
application
is granted or refused.
Section 60CC(2)(b)
the need to protect the child from physical
or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or
35 Mr D’s report is striking in respect of
both the history and nature of the conflictual relationship between these two
The sources of the conflict and family violence will undoubtedly be
explored in great detail at the trial. At this point, however,
it is, firstly,
reasonable to expect that X, although only six years of age, has experienced and
been exposed to this conflict and,
secondly, that it is the duty of the Court to
make orders which will limit or remove such exposure.
Section 60CC(3)(a)
any views expressed by the child and any
factors (such as the child's maturity and level of understanding) that the court
relevant to the weight which would be given to the child's views
36 X is just six years of age. I accept the
submission of counsel for the mother that the Court, particularly in such an
stage, should be cautious in giving too much weight to the views and
preferences of such a young child. That caution is emphasised
and compounded by
this six-year-old child living between the two such highly conflictual parents
and where the levels of information,
voluntariness, and rationality behind such
statements of preferences by X's is yet to be tested.
37 Nevertheless, X was able to express positive comments in respect of his
relationship with his father which was corroborated by
Mr D’s observations
of the two together. In such circumstances it is perhaps not unexpected that X
would express a wish to
spend more time with his father. Nevertheless, I remain
loath to place any great weight on X’s statements at this stage.
Section 60CC(3)(b)
the nature of the relationship of the child
(i) each of the child's parents; and
(ii) any other persons
(including any grandparent or other relative of the child)
relationship with each of his parents is one of relatively high frequency. He
lives with his mother but spends time
with his father currently on five separate
days per fortnight including a block of two overnights each second weekend. It
that, as observed by Mr D, X has a high degree of comfort and
familiarity in the presence of each of his parents. Unfortunately,
report also indicates some exposure for X to parental conflict in that he seems
to attempt to attribute some blame to one
or other of his parents.
39 The nature of the X’s relationship with his father will be little
impacted, if any, by the discrete change sought by the
father in this
application. That is high frequency of time with each parent will be
maintained. The father argues with some merit
that the changes he asks for
would give greater quality to his time with X in that his daytimes at the moment
are impacted by X attending
school. It is well-established that the
Court’s focus is on the quality of parent – child relationships
rather than
simply an allocation of the quantity of
Section 60CC(3)(c)
the extent to which it each of the child's
parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity ;
(i) to participate in
making decisions about major long – term issues risk in relation to the
(ii) to spend time with the child; and
(iii) to communicate
with the child; and
Section 60CC(3)(ca)
the extent to which each of the
child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil the parent’s
obligations to maintain
under this factor are not agitated at this hearing before me.
Section 60CC(3)(d)
the likely effect of any changes in the
child circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation
(i) either of his or her parents; or
(ii) any other child, or
person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom the
child has been living;
set out above, the orders sought by the father are relatively discrete in the
changes anticipated for X. X is observed as being
comfortable with each of the
parents and it is not argued that there would be any negative impact on X if the
Court were to accede
to the father's application.
Section 60CC(3)(e)
the practical difficulty and expense of the
child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that
or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to
maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents
on a regular
42 The ICL emphasises the actual and potential
impact on the X of the practical aspects of face-to-face changeovers between
two highly conflictual parents. Put simply, it is argued that X's best
interests are served by face–to–face changeovers
for him between his
parents being avoided. The historical and continuing conflictual relationship is
set out in appalling detail
in Mr D's report.
Section 60CC(3)(f)
the capacity of each of:
(i) the child's
parents; and
(ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other
relative of the child);
to provide for the needs of the child, and including
emotional and intellectual needs
perversely, Mr D's report indicates that individually each of these parents are
adept and child focused thereby each establishing
individually a successful
relationship with their son. They have even shown a capacity to agree and be
flexible outside of the court
orders. Their personal views and reactions of
each other, however, remain extremely conflictual and antagonistic with a
potential to impact on their son’s emotional and psychological
44 The current interim orders demonstrate a capacity in each of the parents
to attend to X’s physical needs.
Section 60CC(3)(g)
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background
(including lifestyle culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the
parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court
thinks are relevant
45 X is just six years of age. His personality is
developing as his capacity to establish and maintain relationships both within
and outside of his family. In this sense he is very much a vulnerable child.
The continued hostile relationship between his parents
suggests that neither has
developed a full understanding and insight into the needs of a six-year-old and
those vulnerabilities.
Section 60CC(3)(h)
if the child is an Aboriginal child Torres
Strait Islander child;
(i) the child’s right to enjoy his Aboriginal or
Torres Strait Islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with
other people who share that culture); and
(ii) the likely impact any proposed
parenting order under this Part will have on that right;
is not a relevant consideration in these proceedings.
Section 60CC(3)(i)
the attitude to the child, and to the
responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s
47 On the material before me, each of these parents
is culpable in respect of the actually or potentially exposing the six-year-old
X to their own manifestly toxic relationship.
Section 60CC(3)(j)
and (k) any family violence involving the
child or a member of the child's family and any family violence orders
48 These issues have been canvassed above and are
exposed in detail in Mr D's report with emphasis on Mr D having little or no
that these two parents have the ability to address these issues or to
quarantine their young son from them.
Section 60CC(3)(l)
whether it would be preferable to make the order that
would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in
relation the child
49 The mother’s counsel expresses
caution in the Court making the orders sought by the father in that the mother
be seen as in any way acquiescing to any further time for X with the
father. I found this submission rather odd where the evidence
suggests that
this mother and the father, surprisingly, have been able to negotiate variations
from the 2019 orders. Nevertheless,
I am fully understanding of the position to
be argued by the mother at the trial in December 2021 and, in my view, the Court
orders of the type sought by the father would not and should not
prejudice in any way the prosecution of her of her application.
Findings and Considerations
50 I have rarely read a family report which is so
explicit and damning of the culture of family violence and antagonism between
parents despite such issues being aired almost inevitably in parenting
matters coming before this Court. The report gives virtually
no optimism
towards any co-operative parenting regime for X moving forward. The evidence
suggests that each parent is culpable to
a degree and I expect that the
forthcoming five day trial will focus much of its time and energy on these
unfortunate and unsavoury
issues. It is reasonable to expect that that young X
has been exposed to his parents’ family violence and their negative
views of each other. It is equally reasonable to expect that a
continuation of this situation will potentially be extremely damaging
as a six-year-old child deserves care and support of his parents rather than
involvement in their personal adult disputes
and conflict.
51 Despite my comments as to the culpability of these parents, to their
credit they appear to have been able to negotiate consent
orders and subsequent
flexibility in an arrangement for X which has him enjoying a relationship of
high-frequency and some quality
with each of the parents.
52 The orders of November 2019 were made whilst X was at pre-school and prior
to him attending full time school. Whilst it is again
to the credit of the
parents that they have been able to negotiate some amendments to those orders
since X has commenced school,
the fact remains that X's time with his father
often occurs during school days and, as mentioned above, where the Court’s
is on the quality of relationships between children and parents rather
than simply the allocation of time. I am of the view that
the father's proposal
attends to a greater degree for X's relationship with the father in the sense of
this quality whilst not impacting
in any way on the quality of X's relationship
with the mother.
53 I also accept the submission of the ICL that the X must be spared the
potential for manifest conflict between his parents. The
current arrangements
have a high potential for such conflict where the parents are obliged to meet
for changeovers. The ICL's proposal
and that of the father would effectively
eliminate the face – to face meetings of the parents save and except for
during school holidays.
54 Consequently, where I see the changes sought by the father to be discreet
and where they do not effectively diminish or negatively
impact on X’s
relationship with his mother but where there are the positives for X set out in
these Reasons, I am of the view
that the father's proposal attends to the best
interests of X. Whilst I am mindful that these parents will face a full trial
a number of days as soon as December of this year, I also share the
concerns of the ICL and Mr D that the in the interim the Court
should attend to
any potential exposure for X to his parents conflictual and potentially violent
relationship.
55 For these reasons, there will be orders in the terms of the minute sought
by the ICL and supported by the father noting that orders
five and six of that
to the minutes will be by consent.
I certify that the preceding fifty-five (55)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 31 August 2021
(2006) FLC 93–
[2015] FamCAFC 104
(2015) FLC 93-654
[2007] FamCA 520.
RTF format (429 KB)
Signed PDF/A format