1416940 [2015] MRTA 820 (29 June 2015)
[2015] MRTA 820
(29 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
Keysoft Pty Ltd
MRT CASE NUMBER:
DIBP REFERENCE:
BCC2014/2065997
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Suseela Durvasula
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal sets aside the decision not to approve the
application and substitutes a decision that the applicant is approved as a
standard business sponsor.
Statement made on 29 June 2015 at 1:05pm
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration on 7 October 2014 not to approve
the applicant as a standard
business sponsor.
applicant applied for approval as a standard business sponsor under
Migration Act 1958
(the Act) and r.2.61 of the Regulations on 21
August 2014. The delegate decided not to approve the application on the basis
the applicant did not satisfy r.2.59(d) of the
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations) because the delegate was not satisfied that the applicant met
the relevant training benchmarks.
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 5 June 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments. The applicant company was representative
by Mr Carl Olsen,
the managing director and majority shareholder.
the following reasons, the Tribunal has decided to set aside the decision under
review and substitute a decision approving the
applicant as a standard business
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
issue in this case is whether the applicant meets the requirements for approval
of as a standard business sponsor in accordance
with the criteria in r.2.59 and
the additional criteria in r.2.60S, which must be satisfied regardless of when
the application for
approval was made. For the application to be approved, all
the requirements must be met: s.140E(1).
Process for application
requires that the applicant has applied for approval as a standard
business sponsor in accordance with the process set out in r.2.61.
It requires
the applicant to make the application for approval in accordance with the
approved form, to pay the prescribed fee and,
for applications made on or after
1 July 2013 to make the application by using the internet unless the Minister
specifies an alternative
Tribunal is satisfied on the basis of material in the Department's file, that
the applicant made the application for approval
in accordance with the approved
form and paid the prescribed fee. The Tribunal finds the applicant meets the
requirement in r.2.59(a).
Not an existing sponsor
requires that the applicant is not a standard business sponsor.
Departmental records indicate the applicant is not a standard business
at the time of this decision. Therefore, the applicant meets r.2.59(b) is
Lawfully operating business
requires that the applicant is lawfully operating a business either in
or outside Australia. On the material before it, including
evidence of current
company registration with ASIC, financial statements for 2013, copies of the
business activity statements for
2014 and company tax return for 2014, the
Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant is lawfully operating a business in
Given the above findings, the requirement in r.2.59(c) is
Training benchmarks
Regulations
and (e) contain alternative criteria relating to training requirements
an applicant must satisfy if the applicant is lawfully operating
a business in
Australia depending on how long the applicant has been trading.
the applicant has traded in Australia for 12 months or more, the applicant must
meet the benchmarks for the training of Australian
citizens and Australian
permanent residents specified in a written instrument: r.2.59(d). The relevant
instrument is IMMI 13/030.
If the applicant has traded for less than 12 months,
the applicant must have an auditable plan to meet the benchmarks specified in
that relevant instrument: r.2.59(e).
Information
on the Australian Business Register indicates that the applicant has been active
and registered for GST since at least
1 July 2009. The Tribunal has also
considered the financial documents provided to it and is satisfied that the
applicant has traded
in Australia for 12 months or more. Therefore r.2.59(d)
applies to the applicant.
applicant claims to meet Training Benchmark B, which requires the applicant to
demonstrate recent expenditure, to the equivalent
of at least 1% of the payroll
of the business, in the provision of training to employees of the business.
a submission to the Tribunal, the applicant claims that it has a continuous
on-the-job training program in place to certify its
software engineers on the
latest version of FileMaker Pro, a software development tool. The applicant runs
an internal course based
on this training material. The applicant’s chief
engineer, Mr Carl Olsen, administers this course. At the end of the training
course participants must sit a FileMaker certification examination that is run
externally.
training process is a continual and evolving process. From March 2014 to April
2015 Mr Olsen spent approximately 45 to 50 hours
annually on training.
Additionally, he allocates time to employees to keep them up to date with
training materials, blogs and email
lists to upgrade their knowledge.
the hearing, Mr Olsen claimed that the applicant was claiming to meet the
on-the-job training part of Training Benchmark B. The
business currently had 2
full time employees, one part time employee (the prospective nominee) and
himself. There was another director
but he was in the process of retiring. In
the past year he had trained two Australian citizen employees in FileMaker. A
new version
of FileMaker is released every 18 months and employees had to be
trained in this. They set aside 3 to 4 weeks in the year to undertake
training. The FileMaker certification process involved a formal structured
course with identifiable learning outcomes and objectives.
Through the training,
employees were able to upgrade their skills in the use of FileMaker software.
There was a formal examination
at the end of the training course. FileMaker was
a niche product that allowed the business to differentiate itself from other IT
the hearing the applicant sent the Tribunal a copy of the FileMaker training
book and course materials. The introduction and
course overview sets out the
learning outcomes and objectives. The progress of the employee is monitored
through a series of tests
before the employee can proceed to the next section.
Part of Mr Olsen’s job as a trainer is to administer these test questions
and evaluate if the participant has adequate knowledge to proceed. If not, he
must provide further training and education in the
areas where the employee
might be having difficulties. The training is relevant to providing additional
skills and enhancing the
skills of the employee. Without constant training and
updating, the software engineer’s skills would become out of date and
could not operate in current platforms. Mr Olsen provides the training and helps
the employees implement the training they receive
in their current jobs.
Is the training ‘on-the-job training’ as defined by Training
Benchmark B?
applicant claims to meet the ‘on-the-job training’ part of Training
Benchmark B. This requires the applicant to demonstrate
on-the-job training that
is structured with a timeframe and clearly identified increase in the skills at
each stage, and demonstrating:
the learning
outcomes of the employee at each stage;
how the progress
of the employee will be monitored and assessed;
how the program
will provide additional and enhanced skills;
qualified trainers to develop the program and set assessments; and
the number of
people participating and their skill/occupation
Tribunal accepts, based on the evidence provided, that the applicant provides
training to its software engineers on the latest
version of FileMaker Pro, a
software development tool. Based on the course materials and other evidence
provided, the Tribunal is
satisfied that there is a formal, structured training
course in place. The training takes place with a timeframe of 3 to 4 weeks,
every 12 to 18 months, when a new version of FileMaker Pro is released or a new
employee starts. The course materials show identifiable
learning outcomes of the
employee at each stage. The progress of the employee is monitored through a
series of review questions and
is assessed by a formal external examination at
the end of the course. The course materials identify how the program will
additional and enhanced skills to the software engineer employees in the
use FileMaker software. The Tribunal is satisfied that Mr
Olsen is a qualified
trainer in FileMaker Pro. Timesheets and other records show that at least two
Australian citizen software engineers
received training in FileMaker in the past
12 months. The Tribunal is therefore satisfied that applicant provides
on-the-job training
as defined in Training Benchmark B.
What is the expenditure on training?
evidence of its training expenditure, the applicant has submitted a timesheet
for Mr Olsen for the period 6 May 2014 to 8 April
2015 showing that he spent
50.5 hours on training employees for the FileMaker certification examination and
in other training activities
related to FileMaker. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the employees who were trained are Australian citizens.
for Mr Olsen for the period 1 May 2014 to 28 February 2015 show that he is paid
$90 an hour and his annual salary is $187
200. Bank statements for Mr Olsen show
that the net amounts shown on the payslips were deposited into his bank account
on the corresponding
dates. A payroll activity summary for 1 October 2013 to 31
March 2015 shows that Mr Olsen has been paid $55 957 for 591.75 hours
which is about $94 an hour.
the hearing, the Tribunal asked Mr Olsen to explain how the training expenditure
had been quantified, in particular, how his hourly
rate had been calculated. Mr
Olsen stated that he is paid a share of the distributions based on the hours
worked in the business.
This has been calculated as $90 an hour. The Tribunal
noted that information from the applicant’s 2014 tax return and a payroll
advice summary for 2013/2014 show that Mr Olsen’s wages including
superannuation were $22 172. The Tribunal asked Mr Olsen
to explain the
discrepancy. Mr Olsen advised that in 2013/2014, he was only paid $22 172 as he
was overseas for 9 months of the year
and was not working in the business during
this time. It was agreed between him and the retiring director, Mr Suhr, that Mr
would receive a greater share of the distributions, which was $132 277
including distributions. In 2014/2015, Mr Olsen has been paid
a higher share of
the cash flow distributions which is based on a rate of $90 an hour.
Tribunal accepts from the payslips, payroll activity summary and bank statements
that Mr Olsen is paid $90 an hour. The Tribunal
accepts that Mr Olsen’s
annual salary for 2013/2014 was lower as he was overseas for a large part of the
Mr Olsen spent 50.5 hours on training employees, at a rate of $90 an hour, the
Tribunal finds that the recent expenditure on training
by the business is $4
What is the payroll for the business?
applicant’s 2014 tax return indicates that its total salary and wage
expenses were $309 925. A payroll activity summary
for 2013/2014 indicates
that superannuation expenses were $56 903. The Tribunal accepts Mr Olsen’s
evidence that the payroll
expenditure is likely to be similar for the 2014/2015
financial year based on the number of employees. The Tribunal find that the
payroll of the business is $366 828. The Tribunal finds that 1% of this amount
the applicant has demonstrated recent expenditure of $4 545 on training, the
Tribunal finds this exceeds the required amount of
$3 668. The Tribunal finds
that the applicant has demonstrated recent expenditure by the business,
equivalent to at least 2% of the
payroll of the business in the provision of
training to employees of the business. The applicant therefore meets Training
B and in turn meets r.2.59(d).
Written attestations
only applies if the applicant is lawfully operating a business in
Australia. It requires that the applicant has attested in writing,
applicant has a strong record of, or demonstrated commitment to, employing local
labour and non-discriminatory employment
applicant has made the relevant attestation and the Tribunal is satisfied that
the requirement in r.2.59 (f) is met.
Adverse information
requires that there is no adverse information known to Immigration about
the applicant or a person associated with the applicant
or it is reasonable to
disregard. For the purpose of this regulation, ‘associated with’ and
‘adverse information’
and are defined in r.2.57(2) and (3)
respectively.
is no material before the Tribunal to indicate that there is adverse information
known to Immigration about the applicant or
a person associated with the
applicant. The Tribunal finds the requirement in r.2.59(g) is
Offshore business
applies if the applicant is lawfully operating a business outside, and
not in, Australia. As the Tribunal has found that the applicant
is operating a
business in Australia, the Tribunal finds that r.2.59 (h) does not apply in this
Number of nominees
requires the applicant to have provided to the Minister the number of
persons who the applicant proposes to nominate during the period
applicant’s approval as a standard business sponsor.
number must be reasonable, having regard to the information provided to the
Minister, or alternatively, if the Minister proposes
another number, the
applicant must have agreed in writing to nominate no more than the other number
of persons during the period
of the approval as a standard business
applicant has advised the Tribunal that it proposes to nominate one person
during the period of its approval as a standard business
sponsor. Having
considered the information before it, the Tribunal is satisfied that the number
proposed is reasonable. Therefore,
the Tribunal finds the requirement in
r.2.59(i) is met.
Training requirements
applies only where the applicant has previously been a standard business
sponsor. In these cases, the applicant must have fulfilled
any commitments made
relating to meeting its training requirements and must have complied with the
applicable obligations relating
to the training requirements during the
applicant’s most recent approval as a standard business sponsor, unless it
is reasonable
to disregard this.
is no evidence before the Tribunal to indicate that the applicant has previously
been a standard business sponsor. Accordingly,
the Tribunal finds that r.2.59(j)
does not apply in this case.
Additional criteria
2.60S provides for additional criteria that must be met for the sponsorship to
be approved. Broadly speaking, to meet r.2.60S
the Tribunal must be satisfied
that the applicant has not taken any action, or sought to take any action that
result in the
transfer of costs to another person, or another person paying costs, associated
with the applicant becoming an approved
sponsor; and
result in the
transfer of costs to another person, or another person paying costs, that relate
specifically to the recruitment of
a non-citizen for the purposes of a
nomination: r.2.60S(2)
Tribunal must also be satisfied that the applicant has not recovered, or sought
to recover from another person, costs associated
with the sponsorship approval,
or costs that relate specifically to the recruitment of a non-citizen for the
purposes of a nomination:
requirements may however be disregarded if the Tribunal considers it reasonable
to do so: r.2.60S(4).
is no information before the Tribunal to suggest that the applicant has taken
any action or sought to take any action, or has
recovered or sought to recover
any costs, in contravention of r.2.60S.
the above findings, the additional criteria in r.2.60S are met.
the reasons given above, the Tribunal finds that the applicant meets all the
applicable criteria prescribed in the Regulations
to be approved as a standard
business sponsor. The Tribunal finds that the term of approval as a standard
business sponsor is 3 years.
Tribunal sets aside the decision not to approve the application and substitutes
a decision that the applicant is approved as a
standard business sponsor.
Suseela Durvasula
ATTACHMENT - Extracts from the
Migration Regulations 1994
2.59 Criteria for approval as a standard business sponsor
For subsection 140E (1) of
the Act, the criterion that must be satisfied for the Minister to approve an
application by a person (the
) for approval as a standard
business sponsor is that the Minister is satisfied that:
(a) the applicant has applied for approval as a standard business sponsor in
accordance with the process set out in
regulation 2.61
(b) the applicant is not a standard business sponsor; and
(c) the applicant is lawfully operating a business (whether in or outside
Australia); and
(d) if the applicant is lawfully operating a business in Australia, and has
traded in Australia for 12 months or more — the
applicant meets the
benchmarks for the training of Australian citizens and Australian permanent
residents specified in an instrument
in writing made for this paragraph; and
(e) if the applicant is lawfully operating a business in Australia, and has
traded in Australia for less than 12 months — the
applicant has an
auditable plan to meet the benchmarks specified in the instrument, in writing,
made for paragraph (d); and
(f) if the applicant is lawfully operating a business in Australia —
the applicant has attested, in writing, that the applicant
has a strong record
of, or a demonstrated commitment to:
(i) employing local labour; and
(ii) non-discriminatory employment practices; and
(g) either:
(i) there is no adverse information known to Immigration about the applicant
or a person associated with the applicant; or
(ii) it is reasonable to disregard any adverse information known to
Immigration about the applicant or a person associated with the
(h) if the applicant is lawfully operating a business outside Australia and
does not lawfully operate a business in Australia –
the applicant is
seeking to be approved as a standard business sponsor in relation to a holder
of, or an applicant or proposed applicant
visa applicant
a [Subclass 457 visa], and the applicant intends for the visa holder or visa
applicant to:
(i) establish, or assist in establishing, on behalf of the applicant, a
business operation in Australia with overseas connections;
(ii) fulfil, or assist in fulfilling, a contractual obligation of the
(i) the applicant has provided to the Minister the number of persons who the
applicant proposes to nominate during the period of the
applicant’s
approval as a standard business sponsor, and:
(i) the proposed number is reasonable, having regard to the information
provided to the Minister; or
(ii) if the Minister proposes another number of persons as part of
considering the application — the applicant has agreed, in
writing, to
nominate no more than the other number of persons during the period of the
applicant’s approval as a standard business
sponsor; and
(j) if the applicant has previously been a standard business sponsor:
(i) the applicant:
(A) fulfilled any commitments the applicant made relating to meeting the
applicant’s training requirements during the period
applicant’s most recent approval as a standard business sponsor; and
(B) complied with the applicable obligations under Division 2.19 relating to
the applicant’s training requirements during the
period of the
applicant’s most recent approval as a standard business sponsor; or
(ii) it is reasonable to disregard subparagraph (i).
RTF format (123 KB)
Signed PDF/A format