Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association - re Applications for the variation of various clauses in the pre-reform Award and the transitional Award [2009] AIRC 946; (2 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Variation of award
—Variation of award
Cl.29 Sch. 6—Variation of award
Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association
(C2009/2629)
(C2009/2630)
(C2009/2631)
Pharmacy operations
DEPUTY PRESIDENT HAMILTON
MELBOURNE, 2 DECEMBER 2009
Applications for the variation of various clauses in the pre-reform Award and the transitional Award
On 29 June 2009, the Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association (SDA) lodged three applications in the Australian Industrial
Relations Commission under
Sections 553(1)
(1) and Clause 29 of Schedule 6 of the
Workplace Relations Act
(the Act) for award variations to vary both the transitional and pre-reform Victorian Pharmacy Assistants Award 2000.
The matter came before me on 16 July 2009.
Proper service had been effected on the Pharmacy Guild of Australia which stated that the Victorian Branch “does not oppose
these changes”.
The variation sought in each application was to the clause detailing entitlements for Public Holidays. It sought recognition that
when Boxing day or New Year’s day falls on a Saturday or Sunday, that both the Saturday or Sunday and the following Monday
is a public holiday. It sought recognition of an additional public holiday when prescribed in a State, Territory or locality other
than those already set out in the award.
Clause 32 of the pre-reform Award, AP796289CRV - Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association - Victorian Pharmacy Assistants
Award 2000 provides:
32. PUBLIC HOLIDAYS
32.1 Employees (other than casuals) shall be granted the following holidays without deduction of pay:
32.1.1 New Year's Day, Australia Day, Labour Day, Good Friday, Easter Saturday, Easter Monday, Anzac Day, Queen's Birthday, Christmas
Day and Boxing Day.
32.1.2 Provided that if an employee elects to work on any of the above holidays he or she shall be paid at the rate of double time
in addition to his or her ordinary weekly wage with a minimum payment as for two hours .
32.2 Substitution
32.2.1 When Christmas Day is a Saturday or a Sunday, a holiday in lieu thereof shall be observed on 27 December.
32.2.2 When Boxing Day is a Saturday or a Sunday, a holiday in lieu thereof shall be observed on 28 December.
32.2.3 When New Year's Day or Australia Day is a Saturday or a Sunday, a holiday in lieu thereof shall be observed on the next Monday.
32.2.4 In the case of Christmas Day where substitution occurs as in 32.2.1 above, an employee required to work on 25 December will
attract an additional loading of half a day's wages at the ordinary rate for a full day's work in addition to the Saturday/Sunday
rate and the employee will also be entitled to the benefit of the substitute public holiday.
32.3 Melbourne Cup Day
32.3.1 Within the municipal districts mentioned in the Fifth Schedule the
Public Holidays Act 1993
as varied from time to time and within the boundaries of those districts as varied from time to time pursuant to the provisions of
Local Government Act 1989
, employees shall be given the day off without deduction of pay on Melbourne Cup Day.
32.3.2 Outside the area specified above any other day may be substituted by mutual agreement between the parties.
32.4 Holiday on rostered day off
Provided that if a holiday falls on an employee's rostered day off a full-time employee, or a part-time employee who works five days
per week (or six days if they have so elected), shall be entitled to receive by mutual agreement, either:
32.4.1 Another day off in lieu; or
32.4.2 An equivalent day's pay; or
32.4.3 One extra day added to his/her annual leave.
For the purposes of this subclause, the days on which the employee is not rostered to work shall be deemed to be rostered days off.
32.5 An employee who without reasonable excuse fails to attend for work on the working day before and/or after a holiday shall not
be entitled to be paid for such holiday.
32.6 If any other day be by Act of Parliament or Proclamation substituted for any of the above-named holidays the provisions of this
clause relating to such holiday shall apply only to the day so substituted.
32.7 Time off in lieu of payment of the penalty rate prescribed for work on a public holiday pursuant to this clause may be provided
if an employee so elects and it is agreed by the employer.
32.8 Such time off in lieu must be taken at a mutually convenient time and within four weeks of the public holiday or, where agreed
between the employee and the employer, may be accumulated and taken as part of annual leave.
32.9 Time off in lieu must equate to the penalty rate i.e. if the employee works three hours on a public holiday and the additional
penalty rate is time and a half and the employee elects to take time off in lieu of payment the time off would equal 4.5 hours.
Clause 32 of the transitional Award, AT796289CRV - Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association - Victorian Pharmacy Assistants
Award 2000 [Transitional] is in the same form and provides:
32. PUBLIC HOLIDAYS
Employees (other than casuals) shall be granted the following holidays without deduction of pay:
New Year's Day, Australia Day, Labour Day, Good Friday, Easter Saturday, Easter Monday, Anzac Day, Queen's Birthday, Christmas Day
and Boxing Day.
Provided that if an employee elects to work on any of the above holidays he or she shall be paid at the rate of double time in addition
to his or her ordinary weekly wage with a minimum payment as for two hours .
32.2 Substitution
When Christmas Day is a Saturday or a Sunday, a holiday in lieu thereof shall be observed on 27 December.
When Boxing Day is a Saturday or a Sunday, a holiday in lieu thereof shall be observed on 28 December.
When New Year's Day or Australia Day is a Saturday or a Sunday, a holiday in lieu thereof shall be observed on the next Monday.
In the case of Christmas Day where substitution occurs as in 32.2.1 above, an employee required to work on 25 December will attract
an additional loading of half a day's wages at the ordinary rate for a full day's work in addition to the Saturday/Sunday rate and
the employee will also be entitled to the benefit of the substitute public holiday.
32.3 Melbourne Cup Day
Within the municipal districts mentioned in the Fifth Schedule the
Public Holidays Act 1993
as varied from time to time and within the boundaries of those districts as varied from time to time pursuant to the provisions of
Local Government Act 1989
, employees shall be given the day off without deduction of pay on Melbourne Cup Day.
Outside the area specified above any other day may be substituted by mutual agreement between the parties.
32.4 Holiday on rostered day off
Provided that if a holiday falls on an employee's rostered day off a full-time employee, or a part-time employee who works five days
per week (or six days if they have so elected), shall be entitled to receive by mutual agreement, either:
Another day off in lieu; or
An equivalent day's pay; or
One extra day added to his/her annual leave.
For the purposes of this subclause, the days on which the employee is not rostered to work shall be deemed to be rostered days off.
An employee who without reasonable excuse fails to attend for work on the working day before and/or after a holiday shall not be
entitled to be paid for such holiday.
If any other day be by Act of Parliament or Proclamation substituted for any of the above-named holidays the provisions of this
clause relating to such holiday shall apply only to the day so substituted.
Time off in lieu of payment of the penalty rate prescribed for work on a public holiday pursuant to this clause may be provided
if an employee so elects and it is agreed by the employer.
Such time off in lieu must be taken at a mutually convenient time and within four weeks of the public holiday or, where agreed between
the employee and the employer, may be accumulated and taken as part of annual leave.
Time off in lieu must equate to the penalty rate i.e. if the employee works three hours on a public holiday and the additional penalty
rate is time and a half and the employee elects to take time off in lieu of payment the time off would equal 4.5 hours.
and Schedule 3
Fair Work (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Act
provide the Commission with jurisdiction to hear and determine the application.
The SDA application seeks to vary the awards to reflect the statutory position introduced with the
Public Holidays Amendment Act
2008 (Vic.), namely that when Boxing Day falls on a weekend, 26 or 27 December and 28 December are both public holidays, and when
New Year’s Day falls on a weekend, 1 January and the following Monday are both public holidays, and other matters.
In a written submission the SDA sought to rely on provisions of the
Workplace Relations Act
I have had regard to the submissions before me.
Clause 32.6 is unclear in its application to the present matter. I have decided that it is appropriate to vary the award to maintain
the award safety net by deleting clause 32.6 as it appears in the two awards and substituting a clause which is part of the Public
Holiday Test Case 1994 [Print L4534] model clauses, appears in most awards, and is clear in its operation. The clause will provide:
‘Where in a State, Territory or locality, public holidays are declared or prescribed on days other than those set out above,
those days shall constitute additional holidays for the purpose of this award.’
This is consistent with the decision of Whelan C
in relation to an award which similarly did not include such a provision.
I have decided to refuse the remainder of the applications. Having regard to this variation there is no ambiguity or uncertainty,
or need to maintain the safety net. Further section 611(b) of the Act clearly provides that the term ‘public holiday’
includes those days set out in the
Public Holidays Amendment Act
2008 (Vic.). Section 612 then provides that any term in ‘an award’ that provides to the contrary ‘has no effect’.
An Order to give effect to this decision for the pre-reform Award AP796289CRV is contained in
, and an Order to give effect to this decision in the transitional award AT796289CRV is contained in
BY THE COMMISSION:
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
Mr M Moretta
Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association
Hearing details:
Final written submissions:
28 July 2009, 29 July 2009
[2009] AIRC 924
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR991456 >
No downloadable files available