Deripaska v Minister for Foreign Affairs [2025] HCATrans 76 (12 November 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 076
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Perth No P34 of 2025
B e t w e e n
OLEG VLADIMIROVICH DERIPASKA
MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS
BEECH‑JONES
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT CANBERRA ON
WEDNESDAY, 12 NOVEMBER 2025, AT 10.02 AM
of Australia
MR N.C. HUTLEY, SC
your Honours please, I appear with my learned friends
MR C.C. PORTER
MR D.A. WARD
for the appellant. (instructed by Pragma
MR S.P. DONAGHUE, KC
Solicitor‑General of the Commonwealth of Australia
If it please
your Honours, I appear with
MR B.K. LIM, SC
MS E.C. DUNLOP
for the respondent and on behalf of
the Attorney‑General of the Commonwealth of Australia, intervening.
(instructed by Australian
MS S.J. KEATING, SC
please the Court, I appear with my learned friend
MS M.R. SALINGER
on behalf of the Attorney‑General
for the State of Victoria, intervening. (instructed by Victorian Government
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Ms Keating.
Can we start – I will
endeavour to do this relatively shortly – by taking your Honours
through the
Autonomous Sanctions Act
, which your Honours will find
in the joint bundle of authorities, volume 1, tab 5,
GAGELER CJ:
We are working from separate prints,
Mr Hutley. You can just take us to section numbers, without page
To the section. Is that the same with
the regulations, your Honour?
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you. Yes, can we start at
section 3. Your Honours see that that sets out the main objects.
That includes for the enforcement
of what are called “autonomous
sanctions”. If your Honours go over the page in
your Honours’ print, your Honours
will see “autonomous
sanctions” are defined:
autonomous sanction
means a sanction that:
(a) is intended to influence, directly or indirectly, one or more of the
following in accordance with Australian Government policy:
(i) a foreign government entity;
(ii) a member of a foreign government entity;
(iii) another person or entity outside –
then (b) ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
What is the relevant part of that definition for
I think it is really (a)(iii) and
GAGELER CJ:
‑ ‑ ‑ being:
(iii) another person or entity outside Australia; or –
They are alternatives.
(b) involves the prohibition of conduct –
This, in effect, involves a entity – a person –
outside and involves his conduct. Now, section 4 also contains the
of “asset” which, as your Honours will see, is
extremely broad. It means:
an asset of any kind or property of any kind, whether tangible or intangible,
movable or immovable, however acquired –
and (b) deals
a legal document or instrument in any form (including electronic or digital)
evidencing title to, or interest in, such an asset or
such property.
definition, as is no doubt apparent to your Honours, is pivotal to the
operation of regulations 14 and 15, with which we are
concerned. Now, your Honours will also see a definition over on the next
page, in section 4:
sanction law
means a provision that is specified in an
instrument under subsection 6(1).
Regulations 14 and 15 have been specified as sanction laws.
This means that the contravention of either of those provisions is a
offence. If your Honours note section 9, I do not think it necessary
to go beyond that. Then one turns to Part 2, and
one has the central
provision of section 10. Your Honours are particularly concerned
with 10(1)(a) and (b). It says:
The regulations may make provision relating to any or all of the
(a) proscription of persons or entities (for specified purposes or more
generally);
(b) restriction or prevention of uses of, dealings with, and making available
of, assets –
Yes. Proscription of the person was described by the primary judge in
the core appeal book at paragraph 15. I will not go, your
Honours, to
it. It in effect amounts to the capacity to put people, as it were, beyond the
law, and we say his Honour’s conclusion
was accurate. The only
relevant constraint upon making of such regulations, your Honours, is in
section 10(2), that:
the Minister must be satisfied –
of those matters, which obviously form the constitutional relation for
the purposes of the foreign affairs power. The regulation‑making
which I will not take your Honours to further, is at section 28.
Section 11 enables the regulations to have extraterritorial
Regulations 14 and 15 have that effect. Section 12 then provides that
the regulations are to:
have effect despite –
various things, including:
(a) an Act enacted before the commencement of this section –
If your Honours note section 13, which applies to legislation
enacted after the commencement, Acts that are to be interpreted as subject
such regulations unless expressed to the contrary.
GAGELER CJ:
Is any of that relevant to the argument?
than in the sense of the background as to the intended breadth and operation of
these. One is here dealing with the construction
of the regulation, I accept it
is to that that one essentially goes. I think your Honours can pass
over 14. Section 16 provides
for a number of offences. It says:
An individual commits an offence if:
(a) the individual engages in conduct; and
(b) the conduct contravenes a sanction law.
Subsection (2) is about an authorisation, we can pass over that.
Subsection (3) says an individual – says:
An offence against subsection (1) or (2) is punishable on conviction by
imprisonment for not more than 10 years, a fine –
in the manner set out as specified in subsection (4).
Subsection (5) deals with a body corporate. Subsection (7) sets out a
defence to a body corporate:
if the body corporate proves that it took reasonable precautions, and
exercised due diligence, to avoid contravening that subsection.
those are the relevant sections of the Act. One then comes to the
Sanctions Regulations
Just before you do,
is really the section that
disapplication would be concerned with, is it not?
Quite. That is why I said that is the section which gives
effect – it empowers the regulations, your Honours, the possible
scope of them being determined by the
earlier ‑ ‑ ‑
Before you leave 16, do you make any point about the fact that the
reasonable precautions due diligence defence is in relation to
body corporates
and not individuals?
Yes, and another thing we make,
when one comes to the construction of these regulations, is the way the
construction is put forward,
there becomes an almost impossible intersection
quoad a body corporate for this objective purpose against the reasonable
One is dealing with, in effect, almost incommensurable concepts, which
tends to suggest that what is being created here is simply
incapable of properly
operating in the context of this legislation.
BEECH-JONES J:
But, Mr Hutley, do we at least get to this point – do you
rely on the fact that ‑ ‑ ‑
I am sorry, your Honour?
BEECH-JONES J:
at least get to this point, that if a lawyer, when we come to breaches of
regulations 14
, it is no defence to them to say I believed the
law did not have that scope?
Quite. Now, if one
comes to the regulation, your Honour, as at the time of the
appellant’s designation, they are the ones in
print which I think
your Honours will have. They are the ones in the joint appeal books. Now,
the relevant definition – I
will come back to some of the
definitions, but your Honours may note the definition of “controlled
asset”, which your
Honours will find at page 2, I think, of the
print that your Honours have. Then one can pass over the various
regulations up to
regulation 6
which is on page 19 of
your Honours’ print. It says:
For paragraph 10(1)(a) of the Act, the Minister may, by legislative
instrument, do either or both of the following:
(a) designate a person or entity mentioned in an item of the table as a
designated person or entity
for the country mentioned in the
And – this also occurred, but it is not particularly relevant
at the moment:
(b) declare a person mentioned in an item of the table for the purpose of
preventing the person from travelling to, entering or remaining
in Australia.
One then has a series of countries. Some are identified by acronym,
which your Honours will find defined in regulation 3, the first
what we can vaguely call North Korea; the second being – just to
get it right – the Former Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, and various
other countries.
Then, beside the country, there are identified persons
who are said to possess certain attributes defined under the section entitled
“Activity”, covering what might be called a vast array of different
activities and relationships. The one with which
we are particularly involved
or concerned is Russia, at 6A, that is:
(a) A person or entity that the Minister is satisfied is, or has been, engaging
in an activity or performing a function that is of
economic or strategic
significance to Russia.
And then various other individuals. It goes on to deal with:
(c) An immediate family member of a person mentioned in paragraph (a) or
That is a common feature that your Honours will see in some of the
other individual – the other sections, but anyway, it is
array. Now, at the time the appellant was designated, the regulations provided
that a designation made under regulation 6A(a)
ceased to have effect after
three years unless extended by declaration. That is regulations 9(1)(a)
and 9(3). The three‑year
sunsetting provision was repealed
If your Honours then move from that regulation to
regulation 10, that makes clear that the Minister may revoke a
or, for that matter, an entity’s –
designation. Your Honours see that under 10(1), 10(2) and 10(3),
particularly. Then
one comes to regulation 11. Paragraph 11(1)(a)
permits a designated person or entity to apply for revocation. Of course, in
structure of the regulations, if a designated person wants a lawyer to
assist him or her with such an application, then the lawyer
and designated
person would first need a permit.
The precedence of regulation 11
means that if a person is dissatisfied with his or her designation, one cannot
infer that that person
or entity would necessarily have to, to use the words of
the Full Court, challenge the validity of that designation in some way.
might end up just applying for revocation.
Now, Part 3 of the
regulations deal with sanctions laws. Not all of these laws are directed to
persons designated under regulation
6, and we will not spend time on them.
Those include regulations 12, 12A, 13 and 13A. That takes
us to 14. That prohibits a person
– or, to use the
(1) A person contravenes this regulation if:
(a) the person directly or indirectly makes an asset available to, or for the
benefit of, a designated person or entity; and
(b) the making available of the asset is not authorised by a permit granted
under regulation 18.
Which we will come to. Then (1A) provides that:
(1A) Strict liability applies to the circumstance that the making available
of the asset is not in accordance with a permit under
regulation 18.
Then it says:
(2) Section 15.1 of the
Criminal Code
applies to an offence under
section 16 of the Act that relates to a contravention of this
regulation.
Now, the offence, of course, to which this is directed is not
committed by the designated person. Rather, it concerns others. It
is directed
at persons who make an asset available to that person or for the benefit of the
designated person. That will include
lawyers and their administrative staff.
The breadth of the prohibition is obvious and deliberate. It is not just making
directly available but also doing so indirectly. And it is not, also,
As we have submitted, “asset” is defined in the
broadest of terms. Obviously, a piece of paper is an asset; intellectual
property of any kind is an asset; a photocopier is an asset which you may make
available “for the benefit of” someone.
Contracts in electronic
form are obviously assets. Any time, and every time, somebody makes any of
these things:
available to, or for the benefit of, a designated person –
unless authorised by a permit under regulation 18, that person
commits an offence which exposes him or her to imprisonment of up to
GAGELER CJ:
Can I just ask, is the question of
whether a person:
makes an asset available to, or for the benefit of, a designated
an entirely objective question?
By no means.
Absolute – one may be intending to make it available for the benefit
of someone and it may not be for their benefit.
So, I am – by no
means, it does not need to be determined here, but to make an asset available
may be a question of intent.
You – in effect, a person –
it comes up in this way.
A lawyer’s assistant may seek to do
something which he or she believes is for the benefit of the ultimate client,
may be misconceived and they may do an act of making an asset available
for what they believe to be the benefit of the person. An
interesting question
would arise as to whether, if it was not actually for their benefit –
i.e. they are wasting their money
– whether they were committing
a crime or not, but I do not think that needs to be determined for the purposes
of this. But
that possibility, we say, certainly exists.
What about the reverse situation, where an asset is made available for the
benefit of the designated person, but is not believed or
understood to have been
made available, so there is no mens rea?
coming to that. That would appear to be a crime.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Because it is strict liability.
Yes. They are
intending to make it available to the person; that would appear to be sufficient
to create the criminal liability.
GAGELER CJ:
Is there not a
defence of honest and reasonable mistake of fact available?
Not in those circumstances, one would have thought. If one thought one was
making it available to a person who was not designated
at all but it had
actually happened to be for the benefit of a person who was designated, maybe an
issue would arise. If you were
told – for example, an assistant was
told by his or her master solicitor that it is for the benefit for X, whereas it
the benefit of Y, an issue would – and you were in fact
making it for the benefit of Y, who was designated, the question such
your Honours have raised with me may well arise, but short of that, we do
not think it does.
BEECH‑JONES J:
If the assistant was
simply told it is for a client, that would not be enough for the defence, would
Quite. We submit that the breadth of the
prohibition – setting aside the seriousness of the consequence of the
prohibition,
which just adds sting to the breadth – prevents lawyers
and their administrative staff from doing anything meaningful for a
person or entity. That appears to be common ground. I have referred to the
fact that it is a strict liability offence.
The offence has certain
extraterritorial operation, and we have explained that in writing in our
submissions, your Honours, at paragraph
8, dealing with
regulation 14(3). I will not take your Honours through them. It is
not particularly germane to what we are dealing
with. Before we read, go to,
regulation 15, it is necessary to have regard to and be conscious
of – which I have taken your
Honours to – the
definition of “controlled asset”, which is:
an asset owned or controlled by a designated person or entity.
then to regulation 15 itself, it prohibits a person who holds a controlled
asset from using it, dealing with it, allowing
it to be used or dealt with, or
facilitating its use or dealing with it. Again, as your Honours will see,
there is an exception
when the relevant conduct is authorised by
Is there any evidence that that regulation
applies to your client?
My client is to pay its
solicitors, so it applies to my client. Or if my client is to supply, for
example, a document notifying my
client of his designation, which would become
an asset of his, that would apply to that asset – to supplying it to
the solicitor.
That is how draconian this is. It in effect is and is designed
to paralyse ‑ ‑ ‑
am not suggesting it is not draconian, but is there evidence that it applies to
your client?
In this sense: my client got an
authorisation, your Honour, and, therefore, has been acting under that
authorisation ‑ though
they say that that authorisation would be
invalid, if we are right, for the reasons which would be apparent to
your Honour. But
my client, obviously, has been funding this litigation,
so that regulation applies to my client.
The only reason that my client
is not engaging in very serious criminal offences, from the view of the
Commonwealth, is that the
Commonwealth has authorised my client to do so by
issuing a permit which, as we will come to, the Commonwealth can withdraw at any
moment it sees fit to curtail that ability – if that answers
your Honour’s question.
On that, can we turn to
regulation 18. That empowers the Minister to grant permits authorising,
amongst other things, conduct which
would contravene regulations 14
and 15 – if your Honours go to it, it is
regulations 18(1)(e) and 18(1)(f). I will take your
Honours to the
actual authorisation in a little while, if I might. Regulation 18(3)
precludes the Minister from granting a permit:
unless the Minister is satisfied:
(a) that it would be in the national interest to grant the permit; and
(b) about any circumstance or matter required by this Part to be
considered –
Of course, then, the permit can be granted upon conditions. The Minister
may revoke the permit at any time. Can I take your Honours
actual permit under which one is operating here? That is in
revocation in respect of – under – regulation 19, or
is it part of the conditions here?
It is part of the
conditions. Can I take your Honours to it? If your Honours go to the
appellant’s book of further materials
at page 12, I just want to
explain how – it says, the:
Period of Validity
Your Honours will see it at about point 3 on the page:
(a) this Permit expires . . . or
(b) this Permit is revoked –
Then the “Authority”, it sets out the source of authority.
Then there is a reference to “Ancillary Services”
BEECH-JONES J:
Did that period get
BEECH-JONES J:
No, I think it – I will just
check it. I am sorry, your Honour, can I just have that checked? I have
not gone to ‑ ‑
A new permit was granted.
BEECH-JONES J:
Please continue,
Yes, I will just have that checked,
your Honour. What I wish to do is, if your Honours go to
“Permit Holders”, to explain
just how this has to be
structured:
The following classes are Permit Holders:
(a) Australian persons, including bodies corporate, who are legal service
providers engaged to provide legal services.
(b) Any ‘designated person or entity’ as described in
regulation 3
Autonomous Sanctions
Regulations
(c) Any person or entity acting for, or on behalf of, a ‘designated person
or entity’ –
and (d) – and this is of some little
significance:
(d) Any persons, including bodies corporate, who are not Class (a), (b), or (c)
Permit Holders.
And then it sets out the “Authorised Actions” of the various
classes. Then it sets out Class (a) – in effect, the
legal corporations; (b), what the permit holders can do; then 3 is dealing
with Class (c); and 4:
Class (d) Permit Holders are authorised to undertake the following
actions to the extent doing so is required to facilitate Authorised
Actions 1, 2 or 3 –
Now this, as we see it, is the only thing which makes, as it were, the
photocopier not guilty of an offence, that they are, in effect,
people who could
be said to be facilitating the acts of one of the other persons who are
authorised. So, that is how the structure
And then I can
deal – one, there are various restrictions, and your Honours
will see the “Conditions” on the next
page because, of course, these
permits can be authorised subject to conditions, and it is condition (b),
may be amended or revoked at the discretion of the Minister for Foreign
So, in effect, I speak on sufferance. Now, lastly, dealing
That permit was terminated and there was a new permit issued.
They are in the same terms, as I understand it, your Honour.
That is – now, can I turn, then, finally, to
regulation 20.
That deals with permits for the conduct which would otherwise breach
regulation 15.
Amongst the conduct that needs a permit is what is
basic expense dealing –
which your Honours will see in
subregulation (3). In (3)(b) it lists things which a permit is
specifically needed. And your Honours
will see over on the next
(vii) reasonable professional fees;
(viii) reimbursement of expenses associated with the provision of legal
So, in other words, it is quite clear that the Executive fully intended
that all those matters require permits. We have summarised
what we say is the
obvious practical impact of
regulations 14
in our written
submissions at paragraphs 11 and 12, and the Commonwealth does not
appear to dispute that analysis. The Commonwealth
concedes that the regulations
are invalid if they mean what they say because
regulations 14
shut off the designated persons from all legal advice and representation in any
realistic sense.
GAGELER CJ:
How do you frame the constitutional
limitation that you say results in invalidity?
We put it in two ways. Firstly, we say that the regulations have the practical
effect, in the sense discussed by this Court, of
precluding challenging the act
of the Executive in designating my client. Secondly, we say, as our alternate
constitutional point,
it precludes my client from accessing Chapter III
courts. That is the broader point. Our learned friends say that is a
hypothetical;
we say it is not.
We say at the moment, once those
regulations were passed, absent the grace and favour of the Minister, my client
was precluded from
obtaining legal advice in any way related to his status and
in any way to access the Chapter III court in this country. We say that
contrary, whether, at its narrowest, 75(v) of the
Constitution
more broadly, consistent with statements in this Court, Chapter III courts
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Hutley, between those two
possibilities, what about seeking, effectively, declaratory relief as to the
extent of your obligations,
rights, as a designated person? Where does that fit
in with those?
That can only be done,
effectively, in a Chapter III court and therefore is precluded in the way I
have indicated.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, that is caught up in your
alternative broader formulation?
Quite, but we
say the way the Full Court said validity was protected by enabling my
client, if the conduct was the objective purposes
of testing the validity of
their appointment, of their designation, under 75(v) or 39B, was
sufficient to protect the validity of
these regulations. We say that is wrong
and we challenge that that is a way of carving out anything, but it would not
the matter that your Honour has just raised with me because there
could be a number of ways in which one sought to challenge the
position rather
than moving under 75(v) to seek a declaration as to the validity of the
regulations – for example, under 75(iii).
Mr Hutley, can I ask, was any point taken below about the utility
of the declaration that you seek, so long as you have a
Not at the 75(v) point, but I think the
point was taken at the broader point that it was hypothetical, because we were
not moving,
broadly and generally, in a Chapter III
I see. Thank
At no point was it saying that the whole
proceedings were hypothetical.
That point is still
raised against you in the Commonwealth’s submissions
On the alternative point?
I accept that, your Honour,
but not on the central ground – the first ground of
Sorry, Mr Hutley, I was more thinking in
terms of the utility of the relief, rather than whether something was
hypothetical. Was
that point ever raised below?
I think not, your Honour, because it was accepted, unless there was this
carve‑out – to use a broad, rather simplistic
description, such
as the Full Court found – it was found that
regulations 14
would be invalid. That would entail, of course, that our designation would
have been invalid because it would have proceeded upon
a fundamental
misconception by the Minister that her determination was infected by taking into
account an irrelevant consideration.
I think that is the way it was
It is only a mechanical matter, but strictly the
challenge is to
, is it not? It is to the scope of
, and then if 28 is invalid to the extent that you challenge
it, then the regulations are ultra vires as a matter of administrative
Or another way of putting it is
does not authorise this regulation unless this regulation is
read down in the way that –
that would be disapplied to the extent
I understand it, your Honour.
That, in some sense, brings me back to consideration of
sections 12
and the intent which that expresses. We have not run a point that,
strictly speaking, the intention was that either 28 operated
at its full
extent or it did not operate at all. So, I think it does not make, as it were,
a substantive difference to the essential
Can I now turn to
what the Full Court did below. If your Honours go the core appeal book, it
is tab 4 of the Full Court judgment,
if your Honours go to
to 95 ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
Can you also use the paragraphs numbers please,
I am about to.
Paragraph 84, your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
Specifically, the court construed
regulations 14
as, quote, not applying:
to actions taken for the purpose, in an objective sense, of challenging the
validity of decisions or actions under the Act pursuant
Constitution
or s 39B(1) of the Judiciary Act.
Now, our first
point is that that construction immediately, itself, is in desperate need of
construction. We need to understand what
the objective sense of purpose means
in this context. Their Honours, on one level, give an answer, which
your Honours will find
at paragraph 86 of their Honours’
reasons, where it says:
That point is met by the Minister’s reliance on, and explanation of,
“purpose” in an objective sense and taken as
meaning the ultimate
end, object or goal the person seeks to achieve –
And reference is then made to this Court’s decision, the
plurality’s decision, in
Automotive Invest Pty Limited v
Commissioner of Taxation
, to which I will come. And then they refer to the
there are numerous examples of reading down that turn on the object of a
person’s actions or activities, even though that might
raise questions of
fact and characterisation –
We will come to those in a minute. Now, the language to which they refer
BEECH-JONES
Mr Hutley, just while we are there, who do you say the reference
to “the person” is there, or are you coming to that?
Your Honour, expressed
there ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
Client or lawyer, effectively?
No, expressed there
because the difficulty here is – I will come to it, I just want to
answer – the crime is the crime
of the individual who does the act
and one would have thought the purpose must be his or hers, no matter who that
is who does the
act. It is not just a client or a lawyer, it is all manner of
administrative staff and other people who may be involved in the acts
we are concerned. That is what it would appear to be.
We will come
your Honour’s question is what I wanted to comment
upon. Because of
the structure of this legislation, it concentrates upon the minute events which
have the character, in effect –
if I can use it broadly –
of dealing with assets by an agglomeration of persons well beyond what the
designated person and
what might be called the principal lawyer
It deals with each person upon, as it were, the protean number
of ways in which reaction to an engagement by a person of a lawyer
perhaps through an intermediary, of course – because the person,
coming from a whole range of parts of the world, may
engage with a legal firm
and Australia and how that legal firm may in turn react to any such engagement.
So, it is what we call
in effect the quotidian acts which may or may not occur
in point of fact arising from any such process of engagement.
It is a bit like the process of crime legislation in terms of its
reach. In other words, it is not just dealing with the principal
seeks to extend its reach by reference to the asset, i.e. by reference to the
provision of an asset rather than to –
or the activity rather than to
the person itself, and therefore has a reach which is general. That is your
Precisely, your Honour, and any
asset – not just the asset of what you might call the designated
person, but any asset which
comes to be provided or used, in effect, provided
for the benefit of. That is what it said.
What therefore the Full Court
would appear to be saying is that one has to find this objective purpose in
relation to each act of
dealing with an asset, and that may be, on its face, the
objective purpose of the paralegal who is asked to attend the photostatting
rooms, if they still exist in legal firms, to copy a document and bring it back
to his or her instructor; maybe not a solicitor,
maybe the personal assistant of
a solicitor who has been asked by the solicitor to go and have this done, and
your Honours –
and one could multiply the chain. So, that is
what one would appear to be looking for.
GAGELER CJ:
difficult inquiry?
Well, your Honour, it is
wholly obscure what is meant by the objective purpose, and because, as the
Crown – as the Commonwealth
says, for this purpose you seem to ignore
the actual purpose of the individual, the whole question of what is an objective
is a total mystery.
Well, if the objective
purpose is the purpose that a reasonable person in the position of the relevant
person has, what is the difficulty
with that? Is it because there might be a
gap between that objective purpose and circumstances where, despite that
objective purpose,
the relevant person does have a desire, an aim, of obtaining
legal services, for example?
The objective purpose of
a person who has been sent to photocopy is, in our respectful submission, in all
senses, going to photocopy.
If that is the case, that person would be
inevitably exposed to a criminal charge, because that objective purpose will not
purpose which the court has identified as being the purpose which is
protective.
In effect, the effect of this process is to make practically
impossible the engagement. It has exactly that freezing effect which
spoke of, i.e. the practical implications of this
structure is to make it practically impossible for any person safely to deal,
Mr Deripaska or any lawyer, with the – to provide
services potentially leading to – and I will come to the difficulties
associated with that – a potential application
But is that because of the gap?
Because if the person subjectively has the purpose of photocopying, that happily
coincides with the
objective purpose of photocopying.
Quite, but that means – and that is the overwhelming likelihood
of what is going to occur – that person will commit an
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Hutley, are we not really
talking about objective characterisation of what the legal firm is doing? I am
not saying it is against
your Honour says “the legal firm”, the problem is it does not
say “the legal firm”. Because the crime
is attaching to each
individual act, that is the difficulty.
purpose does not have to be limited to the potential purposes of the
photocopier. Photocopying taken for the purpose of
challenging the validity of
decisions pursuant to section 75(v) will rarely be known by the photocopier
to be undertaken for that
purpose, and yet it has been.
Except that the person who, with respect, is liable is the person who does
the act, and it is his, her or their purpose which in this
analysis must be the
objective purpose.
Mr Hutley, the Commonwealth
has an alternative way of expressing its reading down which does not turn on
purpose. You will deal with
that in due course?
by my count is I think the sixth attempt to – and that will come to
questions of legislation. There we have “reasonably
necessary”.
And I will say it
now, “reasonably necessary” is a test that you see, for example,
used with respect to whether the legal
costs that you have incurred are
reasonably necessary to advance the case, such that wasted costs cannot be
recovered. What we say
is a choice, imposing that in this circumstance with all
the difficulties that can happen in the way in which, in effect, legal practice
arrives to subject every act to whether it was reasonably necessary for bringing
for exactly the freezing
potentials which we say lives with objective purpose.
The Commonwealth
effectively admits it because it says it is no different to objective purpose.
When one in effect analyses it,
exactly the same fundamental problems arise.
When we come to the cases – the way we say the cases usually have
it, they have exposed – when they are confronted either
with a power question, whether it be a power because of a constitutional
prohibition or, in effect, one of the other limits on the powers, the
limitation, the reading down or the distributive construction
partial disapplication – has been expressed in language which, as we
say, sets out a factual inquiry.
One of the ways of
possibly looking at it is to actually analyse the way the limit is being
described. If you go back to
Plaintiff S157
, it is described in
terms of not avoiding or confining the ability to challenge. In
the language used I think is something like cannot:
curtail or limit the right or ability –
to challenge.
What is wrong with language like that being used as the reading
Well, your Honour, the difficulty one
is a factual inquiry because the question is only whether that is what you are
doing; the right or ability and whether
the step that has been taken is one
which is referrable to that right.
Your Honour,
the difficulty arises – the difficulty in this field, because of this
extraordinary nature of these norms, is
it has to be expressed – one
has to, in effect, read it out and then see how it operates.
That is why I am asking.
But your Honour, in
effect – and I do not mean to interrogate
your Honour ‑ ‑ ‑
You can. You will not get very far, but you can try.
Until a new form of words is put before me – and we have had
quite a few – a new form of words and see how that plays
the real world, you cannot know it. That is why we say, at the end of the day,
this becomes a legislative act.
BEECH-JONES J:
part of what you are saying is, no matter how you express it, the practical
effect is that no lawyer, junior or senior
– or photocopier or
whoever – worth their salt, is going to run the risk of giving the
services. If they get it wrong,
they end up prosecuted and gaoled. Is that
where we get to?
BEECH-JONES J:
That is the reality of where you
Assuming that is all right, then why does that
not just mean that the section 28 gets disapplied to the extent that it
relates, at
all, to legal services? That would be your submission at its
broadest but still would not invalidate 14 and 15, would
Your Honour, then one will get into whether
it is completely inconsistent with the structure of the regulations themselves,
then you would have a flat inconsistency with the authorisation
requirement that you need authorisation for legal expenses. If your
expresses it in that
language ‑ ‑ ‑
to that extent, you would have an administrative law ultra vires operation
of 14 and 15.
Well, then you would really
get into a situation as to whether the legislature was intending to allow what
you might call full engagement
of lawyers for any purpose as part of this
structure. It would be one of those cases
where ‑ ‑ ‑
it does become the all or nothing question.
becomes flatly – it is not disapplying part of the regulations, it is
knocking out all sections of the regulations.
cannot be all or nothing because we have a permit system. So, we know that
there is a subset of the regulation available.
could authorise it, but what one could say is, absent authorisation, they would
intend to preclude all that activity. If one,
in effect, then chops out a whole
section of that which is precluded – not just part, a whole part of
the regulation 20, if
your Honour goes to it – that gets to
a point which is not partial disapplication.
Mr Hutley, this is why I raised with you at the start – it is
not actually disapplication of the regulations we are concerned
with, it is
section 28 ‑ ‑ ‑
has the distributive operation. So, one looks at section 28 –
and it is very easy to disapply
section 28, you just have to identify what
the limits of disapplication are. Then it is just an administrative law
question of the
extent to which the regulations go beyond that disapplied
But, your Honour, one then, in
effect – what one is talking then about disapplying section 28,
to the extent that it involves
legal services.
that might be at its broadest; the broadest possible
disapplication.
But again, then we get
into – and your Honour has expressed this in
really is getting in here as to having a very interesting drafting session, and
there could be a number of ways in which you
could arrive at it. You could
draft the exception in the terms of our authorisation, which actually took
That is what you really want, you want that as
part of a regulation; a permissible regulation.
your Honour, I am here to say that the regulation is
I know, but practically that is what you
I do not want that, but what we are saying is
if, in effect, the position it has come to is that one can, in a sense, just
form of partial disapplication which may go beyond that which is
required for constitutional validity, because the suggestion
Honour – has fallen from your Honour
Justice Edelman, would probably go beyond that which was required for
constitutional validity;
it would be in excess of it.
Therefore, that
tends to point up that what one is dealing with here is a process which is
inconsistent with conventional principles,
because conventional
principles – and we have set them out in our submissions –
looks to finding within the relevant
legislation – I will accept that
legislation in 28, read through the potential scope of 10, which is a
universe of great extent
– a capacity to find a scheme consistent
with constitutional validity.
Why is not the answer
to that that we see in Justice Gageler’s judgment in
and cases like that, that the Court does not actually need to
craft the precise boundaries of disapplication, it needs to do so for
purposes of the case before it?
I understand,
your Honour, but those boundaries expressed in
expressed a
boundary which was capable of what we would say relative – perhaps
complex – factual inquiry, but clear factual
inquiry. It was a clear
and precise factual inquiry which had to be undertaken, and we accept there can
in that clear factual inquiry
perhaps be questions of judgment and nuances of
sophistication, but in relation that has been met in relation to this particular
problem have been versions, such as objective purpose, reasonable require, which
in effect hide the factual inquiry.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Hutley – I am sorry.
sorry, your Honour. No, I was
GAGELER CJ:
No, I will allow you to finish your answer, Mr Hutley.
I have finished the answer, your Honour.
I just want to relate this to the language of 14(1)(a). Let us go
clerk who actually did the work or
Whoever your Honour wants it to be.
GAGELER CJ:
Let us make
it the company that supplies the photocopying services. Now, if you are looking
at 14(1)(a) and whether there is a breach
of that provision, that company
the person –
that person:
makes an asset –
called the paper:
available . . . for the benefit of –
client. Now, that is any benefit, I take it?
GAGELER CJ:
And whether the photocopier, who would be
at least two contractual relationships removed from your client, is making that
paper available for the benefit of your client is an objective
question, is it not?
I accept that, your Honour,
GAGELER CJ:
All right. Is it not the carve‑out that
the Full Court proposed at paragraph 84 a carve‑out that raises
exactly the same
question of objective characterisation of the act that is being
done? In fact, all it is doing, on one view, is cutting down the
scope of the
benefit to which 14(1)(a) is referring.
difficulty, your Honour, is if you make it any benefit, that is a different
factual inquiry than cutting it down. The problem
is the cutting it down itself
creates what I have called the chilling effect, is in effect the practical
inhibition effect because
much of legal practice and much of legal activity is
involved in questions of searching for things, which you cannot say the
objective purpose is, for example, bringing an application
under 75(v).
You will not know that objectively, and whether it is
or it is not will depend on a whole series of happenstances. The difficulty
if you express it at the level of generality on its first example as just for
the benefit of, then we say that that is not concerned
with the constitutional
issue. That is just in effect saying you can construe it in a way which may get
most people off the hook,
but as we understand, that is not the object of a
construction issue under the relevant provisions of the Interpretation
It is in finding a way to constrain it to within its constitutional
operation and not go beyond, such as that you have created, in
exception beyond what the Commonwealth would want and has expressed by the
regulation, and that is the problem. So, it
is not just the same exercise.
Once you move it down, it becomes a different exercise of a wholly different
We say it really comes from this problem. Accepting the
section 28 point that Justice Edelman has raised, the very breadth of
possibility of regulations of which 14 and 15 are a function means
that they are not apt, taken in the form they have, to be disapplied
which serves to constrain such regulations to within constitutional limits. In
other words, you cannot adapt them without
a legislative process to keep them
just within constitutional limits. You will either massively overshoot, which
is a legislative
activity, or end up undershooting, with the result that,
whether you are or are not saved from breach, becomes a mere matter of
happenstance.
That is why most of the cases traditionally have looked
for a textual hook within the legislation which involves acts which are
with the constitutional norm, be it prohibition or extent of power
and, in effect, aligned the construction of the legislation to
that structure,
such as your Honour the Chief Justice’s proposal in
which was dealing with consorting.
Now, consorting in a
sense, as the act showed involved – and the definition
included – communication. Thus, it was apt,
as your Honour did,
to limit the extent of the operation to communications of a political variety,
because in effect the structure
of the norm under the Act was adaptable to the
constitutional norm. The problem here, we say – and the intractable
which involves us, in effect, standing here and engaging in comparative
legislative drafting – is that there is no relationship
between the
structure adopted under the Act for these regulations and the constitutional
norms with which we are concerned.
The essence of
your case, Mr Hutley, really is what you are saying is that, by reason of
the nature of the carveout and how it might
apply in the real world, leaves the
field of application of what is left too uncertain.
Precisely, your Honour, and therefore has the fundamental undermining
effect which
speaks to, let alone what was dealt with
in – and I always forget the name of the case; it will come to me in
Political advertising in relation to law societies.
BEECH-JONES J:
Thank you, your Honours.
BEECH-JONES J:
like a quiz, Mr Hutley.
When we are moving
around like this, things start to slip one’s mind a bit, but
your Honours
understand ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
do not actually understand. With the
reference was, what do you get
was – and there is much dicta into the effect that you cannot, in
effect, preclude people for engaging lawyers generally.
We would say once you
in effect get down to this drafting exercise, you end up freezing people out
from engaging lawyers, except
for Chapter III courts, because you have to
draft it in a way which practically precludes you from engaging somebody,
because cases
can develop, i.e. engaging a lawyer does not necessarily mean
engaging a lawyer to go to court. In fact, most people engage lawyers
deep desire never to go anywhere near a court. What happens with respect to
going to a court usually comes out of discussing
with somebody what your
problems are.
Now, can I – although I have answered many of
the matters, can I take your Honours, now, to what happened in
Auto Invest
. The actual structure of – as I indicated,
the Full Court adopted the concept of objective purpose and then referred
to paragraph
[110]. Sorry,
Auto Invest
[2024] HCA 36
I do apologise, it is in the joint book of authorities at tab 63,
commencing at page 4378. As I indicated, the Full Court found
objective purpose, made reference to paragraph [110]; there the Court in
fact was dealing with actual purpose. In fact, the
concept of objective purpose
in the plurality judgment of your Honours in
Auto Invest
really was addressed at paragraph [115].
paragraph of the Full Court are you impugning?
do apologise your Honour, I did not hear.
paragraph of the Full Court below are
dealing with the objective intention which they referred to, at
paragraph 84.
Paragraph 84, yes.
GAGELER CJ:
And then onto 86, and
at 86, they referred to the statement essentially coming from [110],
where this Court was dealing with the actual purpose. Where this Court turned
to objective purpose, your Honours will find
at paragraph [115].
If your Honours could take just a moment to look over that, in the first
sentence, the majority referred to an objective purpose
the purpose or intention of a construct –
and further down, the reference is made to:
The purpose of a construct is one that can only be established by inference
from the circumstances as to the purpose that such a reasonable
person in the
relevant position would have had.
Now, that would seem to be the conventional analysis one engages in when
one is speaking of an objective purpose, and it is an objective
purpose of an
act, and therefore naturally one is driven to the injective purpose of the
actor, in the relevant sense.
is not necessarily an objective purpose of an act, it is going broader. That is
why you have the washing machine example.
It could be the objective purpose of
a contract.
I accept that, your Honour.
There can be in effect events which have what might be called an objective
purpose, but here the purpose
which the Full Court spoke about is challenging,
in effect, the validity of the Minister’s decision, pursuant to an act.
that seems inevitably to drive one towards the actor rather than the act
itself, because photocopying simply does not have a purpose
of challenging a
piece of a decision.
Is not all this analysis in
in this part related? It is all about leading up to what the
taxpayer’s purpose is. The taxpayer’s purpose ascertained
objectively as opposed to subjectively. What was in the tax –
but [110] is just as related to [115]. You seem to be drawing
distinction between [110] and [115] as though the Full Court got the
wrong paragraph, and I am just not seeing that. It is all
accumulating, is it
Well, if your Honour goes down
to [116], it refers to Justice Brennan making a distinction between an
actual purpose and an objective
purpose. In other words, the actual purpose of
an individual may be quite different, depending upon – and it might
be apposite
to enquire into that in certain contexts, betide its objective
The actual purpose of a person might then – he or
she seeking to achieve – be a perverse purpose, compared to what one
would infer would be there, as we understand it, the so‑called objective
purpose. So, with respect, we think there is –
and the Court was
observing upon – a distinction between actual purpose and objective
purpose. One of the odd things is that
our learned friends say, in determining
the objective purpose, you should ignore the actual purpose of the
I mean, this whole case was about: you use the
car for a purpose. “You” being the taxpayer. So, it was the
objective purpose. This other case is about: you, the
designated person, having an objectively ascertained purpose of challenging.
am just not seeing the clash; maybe that is my problem.
Anyway ‑ ‑ ‑
doubt, if your Honour is not seeing it, I am not expressing it. What we
say is, if you ask the question of – assume somebody
in the position
of Mr Deripaska comes to a firm and says: I have been designated, what can
I do about it? His or her actual purpose
would be to get advice. It would be
impossible to find that that person had an actual purpose of challenging
under 75(v). It seems
that the Court can see that that could be different
if one created a structure of objective purpose.
The question with that
is, we submit that it is wholly opaque as to the what the facts or circumstances
would be to which one look
to, to determine that so‑called objective
purpose. Therefore, in effect, the elevation of the construct has merely not
in any meaningful sense, what the inquiry is. It is a form of words.
It obscures rather than elucidates and, therefore, in effect,
has exactly the
effect, we say, that this reading down – which we say takes
place – should not and cannot be allowed
to take place.
Because of the consequences of it.
The consequences of it make if a fortiori, yes,
your Honour.
That is, in effect, your central
If all that one got was, perhaps, a letter
saying: please get back on track – the chilling effect and the
effect of precluding
the providing of legal services might not be such as to
preclude – to interfere with the statutory norm, but this effect is
criminal liability of a very significant variety. So, in that sense, we do say
it is significant.
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Hutley, that is a
complaint, as I understand it, both about vagueness and obscurity as well as
being, in a practical sense, too
narrow, is that right?
BEECH-JONES J:
GAGELER CJ:
way of understanding it, Mr Hutley, is that you say even if
reading‑down is available under section 15A to get you that
provision so read down still has the practical effect of which you
Quite, that is our second point. Our point
is it has to disclose something of clarity, which one can understand, but
secondly, if
you ask the question of somebody walking in the door and saying:
what can I do – we say the objective purpose of that is they
like some advice. The fact of that means you cannot walk in the door and ask:
what would I do – which essentially has
the effect of truncating the
ability to, as it were, invoke section 75(v).
BEECH‑JONES
I thought your complaint was the lawyer could not give them a cup of
coffee and a piece of paper rather than them walking in the door,
It is from both sides, your Honour,
because everybody – walking in the door does not get you into
trouble, but walking in the
door and handing over a piece of paper gets you into
But walking in the door in your case and
asking a question of a lawyer and the lawyer answering it would constitute,
would it not,
because you said it is about not?
they have to make available an asset, your Honour.
Well, that is why I am asking the question.
cup of coffee might
not the cup of coffee; I walk in the door and I ask the question.
That is not prohibited on this
analysis, because there is no asset available.
So, in a sense, it is accessing legal services
for which they would be paid.
Yes, but they cannot be
But there is an asset being made available to
the lawyer’s office.
Exactly, your Honour.
The asking ‑ ‑ ‑
is why ‑ ‑ ‑
sorry, I was
listening ‑ ‑ ‑
So, it is not walking in the door. Let us be clear about this. On your
submission, they cannot walk in the door.
sure if you are making an asset available because you have a
Well, you are paying rent.
Well, it has to be available for the benefit.
Yes, it has got to be for the benefit of,
you are paying rent. The lawyer pays rent and provides a venue for
I am pretty sure that my client has not set up
business for the benefit of people who might
no, the lawyer does though.
Your Honour ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
You could not give them written advice.
The very fact that we are having, with respect, this – as it
were – fine paring analysis, and the fact that you can
whether one crosses or does not the cross the line is of the finest variety of
this variety. It really makes the case, and
to every act one has to
apply – and to take up Justice Jagot – this purpose
If there is – we say there was intended to be, but
if it is subjective purpose – i.e. what you actually
something which the Commonwealth did not wish to advance
because they at trial – it was effectively accepted that if it was
subjective purpose, there would be paralysis, for all the reasons I have
advanced. That is what led, in effect, to a putting forward
of this concept of
the objective purpose. Really, in a sense, the Full Court never confronted
the difficulties about it, because
they referred to the passage in
paragraph [110], rather than what you might call the construct and
normative inquiry which would
have to happen if one moved to [115].
Once you have got there, unless in effect you are going to
construct – your construct is that everybody is to have the
person be a reasonable person skilled in constitutional law and
administrative law, and that is your construct for each person doing
then the whole thing just collapses into a morass of uncertainty. It is not
improved by the fifth suggestion as I have
identified, which is turned up in
paragraph 3 of our learned friends’ outline, referring to
“reasonably necessary”,
because exactly the same
question – a series of questions – would arise. You just
shifted the obscurity down the track.
What we say is in all the cases
and all the constructions one can go through, the courts when they had done this
have identified
a structure, a construction of which one can say – I
will not take your Honours through all the cases but they are
there can be a factual inquiry to that which I understand the
needs and bounds of, and that is absent in this case.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Hutley, we will take the morning adjournment now.
11.24 AM SHORT ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 11.37
Thank you, your Honour. In
answer to your Honour Justice Gleeson’s question of whether the
material about the potential impact
of this upon the position of our client, my
client and for that matter my instructing solicitors, in the appellant’s
further material, at page 5 there is an affidavit of Mr Purdy,
my instructing solicitor. He deals with the impact of what he is
dealing with
from paragraph 5 and following, your Honour, on page 7 of that
In the debate that has taken place before the adjournment, I
think we have dealt with the parts of our outline up to near the end
paragraph 4. I would just like to say one or two short matters further
short ‑ ‑ ‑
Would you mind speaking up please, Mr Hutley.
do apologise, your Honour.
Yes, now, we say that the concept of objective
purpose is coherent and workable in some contexts. For example, the
construction of
a contract or the assessment of whether a particular expense by
a company was objectively for business purposes, but it does not
mean it works
in all context.
In the context of regulation 14, it does not
produce, we say, a coherent standard against which to analyse the facts of a
given case.
We say it does not make sense, for example, to ask whether a
reasonable person in a position of a designated Iranian mullah would
the purpose of seeking injunctive relief under 75(v) of the Australian
Constitution
, and the Full Court’s construction does not tell us what
attributes that reasonable person has or should have to undertake
Now, can I then move to 5, and again much of that has been
dealt with in the discussion. We say it does not confine regulations
applications. One reason for that is that when you have a test of objective
purpose, which seeks to attribute to conduct
of a person of purpose which that
reason would reasonably hold, the question of whether one would or would not be
in breach will,
in our respectful submission, become a matter of happenstance.
Nobody could be sure whether they could come in within such a phrase
consequent sphere of freedom that the Full Court purported to carry out,
particularly
where ‑ ‑ ‑
There is as flip side as well; it is the very junior lawyer or the clerk who
is told that they are doing work for the purposes of
section 78B but
actually – or might understand subjectively that they are doing that,
but if they are wrong then they commit
a criminal offence.
Because the use of the asset – the intention is that it is
intended to be for the benefit of the person, and this is a fortiori
their actual intentions are irrelevant, according to the respondent, and you see
that in the respondent’s submissions,
paragraph 39. Therefore,
whether one needs or does not need a permit seems to be a matter of a
BEECH-JONES J:
Sorry, is this the potentially paralysing
effect of an individual who is affected by
regulation 14
having to, as it
were, advert to whether their individual conduct is within the constraint of
some objective purpose?
Quite, the metes and bounds
of which are, we say, wholly obscure. Therefore, we come
GAGELER CJ:
is your paragraph 5, is it?
your Honour. This is the second way in which we say there is a departure
that in effect it does not confine regulation to valid
applications.
You mean valid applications for review,
or valid application ‑ ‑ ‑
another way of putting this is we submit that the effect of 75(v) is not
just to preclude Parliament from curtailing conduct
that has the invocation
of 75(v) as a purpose, objective or otherwise. This is because there are
other ways that Parliament can
impermissibly curtail the court’s:
ability to enforce the legislated limits of an officer’s power.
That is using the words of the plurality in
[2017] HCA 33
at paragraph 48. If a law prevents a person who is
affected by official decision‑making from consulting a lawyer at all, then
that has the impermissible impact to which the plurality in
referred, and this concept of objective purpose, in our respectful submission,
practically is apt to have that impact, not because
the conduct has the purpose
of invoking 75(v).
Rather, the impermissible practical effect comes
alone being advised about whether there might be a way to
have that action
reviewed, let alone being advised of whether one way to do so would be to
invoke 75(v), let alone actually taking
steps to do so, because the likely
position is that a person does not know what they want, other than to get advice
be done about their predicament.
A lawyer might
similarly, unless he or she is skilled in
section 75(v)
, be in a similar
position at first contact of, in effect, in a position of having the purpose of
finding out what can be done. The
court’s ability to discern and declare
whether the limits of official power have been breached is stultified because
has attacked a necessary, we say, and realistic precondition for the
court to do those things. The necessary precondition is that
the subject of
government action will be to obtain legal advice about it. Your Honours,
we have referred in our written submissions
the relevant passages in
, and I will not take you to it.
For that reason, we say
the appeal does not concern legislative invalidity of the type that can be cured
simply by construing the
law as not applying to communications that are
political or as applying to transactions that are interstate transactions, or
applying to courts exercising 75(v) jurisdictions, as occurred in
That is one reason why the Court was driven to have a
resort to the expedient of objective purpose, but that expedient in effect,
analysis, simply does not achieve what such a disapplication or reading
down – if it were to occur – would need
to achieve.
regulations 14
extent that one is reading down
– leads to failure.
That deals with what we wish to say in paragraph 5.
There is, as
your Honours will see, a debate in the written submissions about the
relevant principles to be applied in relation to
this exercise.
Your Honours will see from our outline, we identify the first principle.
Namely, it does not authorise the court
to decide controversies over legislative
invalidity by saying, in effect, we hold this legislation, apply it in all
circumstances
where it operates validly.
There is a suggestion, in our
learned friends’ submissions, that they may be seeking to, as it were,
resuscitate that argument,
which goes back to its rejection in
has been recently been commented upon by your Honour the Chief Justice
Farm Transparency
. We say that that cannot – one has
to, in effect, undertake an exercise of construction, be it by disapplication or
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Hutley, can I just understand,
is this, in effect – are these particulars of your point 3? I
am just trying to understand
the structure of the argument here.
We say 3 has those – all cases have those
elements. We say that is where the fundamental problem is. We say the
why point 3 is what it is.
GAGELER CJ:
understanding you have, essentially, three points. One is you just cannot do
this reading down exercise as one of construction
Point 4, as I understand it, is if you do, you still get
obscurity – uncertainty – which still has
practical chilling effect on the provision of legal services. Then 3 is even if
you could do all that, it does not really
address the anterior problem of being
able to consult a lawyer in the first place.
GAGELER CJ:
Is that it?
And we say that the exercise that is sought to be done here, if it is sought
to be done, is quintessentially legislative.
that this is where language is really important, because there might be a very
significant difference between reading down
and disapplication in that context,
because one
problem with reading down is what you are describing
as the legislative exercise of having a variety of different options open and
the Court being required to craft the alternative. Disapplication is just
saying, well, we do not change the meaning at all of the
regulations, we are
just saying that the scope of
is confined.
Yes, but disapplication has this further issue. The disapplication should
go no further than the constitutional problem, and should
constitutional problem. And if it cannot be sensibly expressed without going
further – and I go back to the example
your Honour gave me of
all legal advice – then you cannot do it, and the so‑called
objective purpose – or, to the
extent of reasonable necessity, if
that is now the next candidate being put up on the block – has
exactly the contrary problem.
It is, as it were, underinclusive and will
necessarily be underinclusive.
If your submissions
necessary constitutional limit, because
anything less than that would have some
serious chilling effect, would it not?
There may be
legal services which can have no reasonable chance of entering in a
Chapter III court.
These are the problems, your Honour. To return to a question from
your Honour Justice Gordon, the terminology becomes absolutely
critical in expressing, in effect, the partial disapplication/reading down,
because otherwise you run into these problems. And we
say when one goes through
the cases – and the recent cases where the Court has dealt with this
either in majority decisions
or, in some cases, in dissenting minority
positions – the expression of what the exception is has been clear.
You can then
look at it and ask the question: what do I, as an individual, need
to prove to fall within it?
I think that is right, but
if you start with the limit itself and identify the limit in a way which
recognises this Court’s
jurisprudence, and then one says: can
I – to put it in your language – craft a reading down
which is not legislative
in nature and, in a sense, does not suffer from the
defects you identify?
Then it may very well be, if the answer to those
two questions is yes, then these ideas about inconsistency, uncertainty, that
of thing, are met in the drafting, rather than, at the end of it, saying:
hang on a minute, we have not got something which is covered.
So, I think it is
the limit, first, which identifies the extent to which you need to craft a
Your Honour, accepting that, but one
does then have – unless the crafting, the limits, are dictated with
precision, one does
inevitably move into what we have called the legislative
I understand that there is a line to drawn,
and the question is whether your line is right or whether the
Commonwealth’s
line is right.
Yes – so far, no one has drawn that line for us. We say the
Commonwealth has not, in all its efforts, we say, and so far
we have been
through two levels of court, a series of written submissions, and we are still
not getting there, which tends to indicate
the problem may be intractable, in
our respectful submission. Sorry, I thought I was speaking over
your Honour.
No, no. Not at
So that is how we would put it. So, we
really refer to what we call the first principle in 5 to, in effect, make
clear that one
cannot go to that step, if that is where the Commonwealth is
going, and they, in effect – certain provisions in their submissions
tend to hint that that may be where one ends up.
The other principles,
to take up what your Honour Justice Gordon has raised with me, are, in
effect, may be methodological steps
taken along the way to exposing the limit of
what can be done in a given situation – while, of course, each being
the ultimate qualification that one cannot engage in, as it were,
legislative choices – that is, policy decisions – about
possible alternate exceptions.
One, in effect, has to, in our respectful
submission, either find it in the language, or the text, or the constitutional
is capable of being expressed in a way which responds to the
legislation with which you are dealing – I will not go back over
particularity of this legislation – in a fashion which is neither
over‑ nor under‑inclusive in the way I have
expressed. We see that
as, in a sense, the struggle one is confronting here. It reflects the fact that
that cannot be done, in
our respectful submission – and I will not go
Now, again, 7, there seems to be a debate raised by the
Commonwealth that your Honours’ judgment in
indicated a new point of departure in the exercise which is involved. Now, we
say that there is no new point of departure, and
your Honours were not
intending – but perhaps we can leave dealing with that to a response
to the extent to which that proposition
is advanced. We have dealt it in
writing. I have said what I wanted to say about the legislative choices; I will
not go back over
The last point we wish to make is our broader
constitutional point, your Honour: the problem with
regulations 14
– or, if it is more appropriately expressed by reference
, then that – beyond their ability, the impact upon
the Court’s ability to exercise the jurisdiction under 75(v) of the
Constitution
. It is suggested these broader issues are hypothetical.
They are not.
My client is currently subjected to disabilities which
apply to nobody else whom the Commonwealth has chosen to subject to its laws,
except other designated persons. Specifically, Mr Deripaska is disabled
from being represented in any Chapter III court unless he
obtains a permit,
and that is a current disablement. He is disabled, for example, from seeking
relief under
section 75(iii)
Constitution
unless he obtains a
permit. He is disabled from defending any case that is brought against him
unless he obtains a permit.
The only reason that he does not currently
feel the effects of these disabilities is the grant, at the minute, of a
consent. But
that, as is demonstrated from the conditions of the consent, can
be removed at any moment by the Minister, and once that happens
that is, he exists under that threat day‑to‑day –
Mr Deripaska and his lawyers will prima facie commit
multiple offences if
they continue to work for his benefit a moment longer. Mr Deripaska
complains about that being his state.
There is nothing hypothetical, in our
respectful submission, about that at all.
He is now subject to those
disabilities. It is not a position such as a
Knight v Victoria
of case. It is not the case, for example, that Mr Deripaska might
hypothetically require a ministerial permit to be represented
Chapter III courts. That is the case already. He is already subject to
the requirement, and I am only here because he has acceded
to that requirement.
regulations 14
remarkable ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
Just in the case of your client, if the facts do change – so, let us
just say they bite even more – your point is unlike,
Mr Knight, if the facts had changed, he could go back to court to clarify
whether there really was a constitutional problem,
and you say you
Precisely. We are classically in a
disability. It is as if, for example, our visa had been revoked and we were
exposed to being
thrown out of the country. It would not be to the point to say
you have not been thrown out yet – we live under a disability.
in their operation, they completely shut out our client from legal
We are not aware of the Commonwealth ever having passed a law
with such draconian effects on legal representation of a person who
Commonwealth has chosen to subject to its laws. We submit that Parliament
cannot enact laws that have the impacts that we have
described. We submit that
these impacts are obnoxious to the traditional judicial processes upon which
Chapter III of the
Constitution
is premised. We have referred to
the relevant authorities in writing, and I will not take your Honours
through them.
The Commonwealth does not dispute that
regulations 14
have the practical impacts that we have just described. Nor does it
really mount any argument that those impacts are constitutionally
permissible.
Instead, the argument is these matters are hypothetical because the Minister
has, at least to this point, deigned to
permit our client’s lawyers to
provide him with legal services. We say that is simply not to the
Now, then a question arises: could you read down or partially
disapply the regulations – or
, to the extent that
that is the operative section – in the ways that have been
identified? We submit that they could not,
for the reasons which go beyond
those which we have already addressed. Take, for example, the operations of
regulations 14
to prevent a designated person from being
represented in a Chapter III court. How, one asks, could the regulations
be read down
not to have this impact? Lurking in the background of all legal
services is the possibility that a matter might turn litigious.
is very difficult to see how
regulations 14
could be contrasted
so as to remove their impermissible effect on legal representation or crafted in
a way which did not go well
beyond the constitutional limitation. The
Commonwealth certainly has not proposed any possible construction in writing,
that is for good reason: it simply cannot be done.
The constitutional limitation you are referring to here, is that
captured in the second sentence of your
paragraph 8?
Yes. It runs – I
will not repeat the effect.
But the only litigation
that is on the cards at the moment is this litigation.
I accept that, your Honour.
What would be
wrong with reading this down to permit making of assets available in connection
with this litigation, or the validity
of this regime?
Well, your Honour, that runs into what we have called our first
Which is your piecemeal
apologise ‑ ‑ ‑
that the piecemeal problem?
Yes, in effect,
that a piecemeal problem? Is that not just confining the matter to the real
issue between parties?
It is not a construction of
the legislation, in my respectful submission. It is, in effect, just saying,
ad hoc, the legislation
will not be invalid to the extent that it would
otherwise be invalid. That is not an exercise of construction, with respect.
would have to be an endogenous constitutional principle which has never
been identified by the courts and has vast
implications.
BEECH‑JONES J:
In all other cases with
limits, the assumption is you can come back to court when the facts change to
ascertain a limit. In this
legislation, your argument, as I understand it, is
if the facts change you cannot come back to ascertain the limit.
Quite. The problem is if the facts change, you have to get a
permit to find out whether the permit is required. That is the inevitable
reductio ad absurdum
, we say, brought about by the exorbitance of the
attempted prohibition.
As you say, in such a case,
seeking a permit without legal assistance.
And I made the point, you would have to get legal assistance to get the permit,
in practical terms. You do then run into
the problem, in this broader
construction, of the regulations themselves. If one – to remind
your Honours, it will not take
a moment, to remind oneself of
regulation 20(3)(b)(vii)
and (viii). The exception would, in effect,
neutralise the regulation – it would be totally contrary to the
GAGELER CJ:
Not really. The constitutional limitation
that you referred to as the second sentence of paragraph (8), as I
understand it, is not
as wide as these possible exemptions.
I accept that but, your Honour, the problem is whether one is getting
advice, whether one is getting legal services to end up in a
Chapter III
court is not necessarily determined before you get legal representation. Now,
often, one goes to seek legal representation
not knowing where you are going to
go. In fact, that is often the case.
Or whether or
not you have the cause of action that you seek to identify.
Precisely, your Honour. That is the problem.
That is your real complaint?
The real problem is
it achieves too much and, therefore, you have to get the approval to find out
whether you do not need the approval.
That is, a fortiori, the broader the
operation; any Chapter III court, the broader the problem. That is how we put
Unless I can be of further assistance, your Honours, those are
our submissions.
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Hutley. Mr
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honours, I propose to structure our
submissions in this way. First, to say something about the construction of
regulation 14
and the connected offence in
; second, to
address the factual context in which this appeal arises, which means much of
what you have heard this morning has no
effect at all on the rights of the
parties and that means, in our submission, that your Honours should
concentrate on the threshold
question only of whether it would be possible, if
facts made it necessary to do so, to partially disapply by reference to the
constitutional
limits; third, to identify the principles that govern partial
disapplication, including in particular what this Court in the leading
authority, which is the
Industrial Relations Act Case.
submit much of what your Honours have heard is irreconcilable with that
case. Your Honour the Chief Justice in
gave, if I might
respectfully say so, a very clear exposition of the principles, but you were not
breaking new ground. In my submission,
your Honour’s judgment in
that case was an application of the principles that come from the
Relations Act Case
. Third, we will apply those principles to the
regulations; and fourth, address the final argument concerning a wider
implication.
Can your Honours turn to regulation 14, and I am
here going to direct my submission to the hapless photocopier, whether the clerk
within the law firm or an external photocopying company who, we submit, is not
in the dire situation that has been suggested. So,
regulation 14 does not
itself create an offence, but once it is relevantly identified as a sanctions
law it engages the offence that
you see in section 16. As
your Honours know from the
Criminal Code
(Cth), with an offence, one
needs under the Code to identify the physical elements of the offence and then
the fault elements that
may be attached to those physical
Looking at regulation 14, the elements would appear to
be, one, making an asset available to a person – so, you have to do
the thing, make the asset available; it has to be “for the benefit
of” the person; and the person has to be a designated
person. So, the
first of those – making the asset available – is clearly a
conduct element, and in my submission, the
other two are circumstances under the
Code. Under the Code, where no fault element is specified for a circumstance,
the default
fault element, says section 5.6 of the Code, is recklessness.
So, in my submission, just
focusing ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
Was that for a circumstance?
MR DONAGHUE:
That is for a
circumstance.
BEECH-JONES J:
But is this not strict,
under ‑ ‑ ‑
MR DONAGHUE:
No – that is the point I am about to come to, your Honour. It
BEECH-JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
that is an error that underpins a great deal of what you heard about the
position of the photocopier.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, the three elements I have just identified
within (1)(a), none of them are strict. In (1)(b), making the asset
available where
it is not authorised by a permit, that is strict by reason of
14(1A). You then note the notes that appear under it:
Note 2: Strict liability is not imposed on an individual for any other
element of an offence under section 16 of the Act that relates
contravention of this regulation.
So that, if we consider the position of
the photocopying clerk, it is highly doubtful whether all that person is doing
when they go
and make photocopies for their principal is actually to make an
asset available at all. It is not clear what asset they are –
principal might be making an asset available – the photocopier they
own or the paper in the photocopier – but one
might doubt whether you
can even make good the conduct element.
But the photocopying
person – the clerk – does not commit an offence unless
they are reckless as to the status of the
person as a designated person, which
seems a highly unlikely state of affairs. So, the idea that all of these people
are committing
offences against this provision, we submit, is wrong. Now, I
should ask your Honours to look also at section 16 of the Act, because
there were some questions asked about the section. When your Honours have
section 16, if you could go to first to subsection (8),
you will see
it there provided that:
An offence against subsection (5) or (6) is an offence of strict
So, the whole offence there is an offence of strict liability,
but when you go back to subsections (5) or (6) you see they are offences
committed by bodies corporate. It is the fact that those offences are body
corporate offences that explains the question your Honour
Justice Gordon asked about subsection (7).
Subsection (7)
confines the reasonable precautions, due diligence defence to bodies corporate
because bodies corporate otherwise
are subject to strict liability by reason of
subsection (8) for the offences against subsections (5) and (6).
That is not the case
with 16(1), which is the offence relevant to the
individuals. There is nothing to exclude the ordinary operation of the fault
under the Code.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, is this right? For
the photocopy company, with regulation 14, it is strict liability but with
the addition of that defence
MR DONAGHUE:
that seems to be the position. But not so, at all, for the
individual.
BEECH-JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
the starting point, we submit, is that the ambit of what is being done under the
regulation is very much narrower than the
premise for the arguments that our
friends have developed. Having said that, though, we do accept that it is
possible, even properly
construed, for these regulations to impose limits that
would be capable of transgressing the limitation derived from 75(v) that we
have identified. We accepted that below and the Full Court disapplied by
reference to that limit.
Before I come to develop our arguments in
defence of that approach, we do emphasise that a lot of the debate so far has
what section 75(v) might actually protect, where exactly you
would draw the line as to the content of the limit under section 75(v).
some cases, that might be a very important question to answer. But, generally
speaking, one would expect the Court to answer
a question like that with
facts – there would be facts that would show that a person sought to
do something and your Honours
would decide, does the
Constitution
apply in relation to those facts?
Here, since November 2022, the
appellant has had the benefit of permits issued not just to him but to all
designated persons. Mr
Hutley took your Honours to the permit, but
can I ask your Honours briefly to go back to it. It is in the
appellant’s book
of further materials at page 13. So, you have,
here, the first permit, but as the Full Court recorded in paragraphs 29
and 31, there
was a second permit. My understanding is consistent with
Mr Hutley’s, that it was in the same terms as the permit you can
So this is a two‑year permit, as you can see on page 12
of the book. Then, on page 13, it applies in wide‑ranging terms
four different categories of permit holders: the Australian persons, including
bodies corporate, who might provide legal services;
designated persons or
entities; persons acting for or on behalf of designated persons or entities; or
any other person.
Then, in the “Authorised Actions” section
of the permit, it specifies different authorisations for the people in the
different classes by reference to the relevant paragraph numbers. But in each
relevant case – so if we take, for example,
Mr Deripaska
himself, that is paragraph 2 of the authorised actions:
Class (b) Permit Holders are authorised to undertake the following actions to
the extent doing so is
required to receive legal advice, legal
representation, and Ancillary Services –
defined back on the
previous page as:
services which are directly related to the provision of legal advice or legal
representation –
Ancillary Services, in relation to matters arising under or related to
Australian law –
So, you have an extremely wide permission
which, in practical terms, means that while this regulation, which applies to
every designated
person, exists, there is no one who is impeded by
regulations 14
from accessing Commonwealth courts or 75(v)
our submission,
completely a matter of speculation as to whether there will ever
be such a person or such a chilling effect.
BEECH-JONES J:
if it is revoked, what do they do then?
MR DONAGHUE:
challenge it under
section 75(v)
, the revocation of – because,
if we are right in the partial disapplication, the concern your Honour has
raised with my friend
will not bite, because they can go to
BEECH-JONES J:
On the Full Court’s construction,
they can go and challenge that under 75(v).
MR DONAGHUE:
BEECH-JONES J:
But what if he just wants to know what
the true level – what the true meaning of the restriction on him
MR DONAGHUE:
BEECH-JONES J:
does he do then?
MR DONAGHUE:
So, there is a little bit
packed up in that, in my submission, because the first question, in my
submission, is: what is the relevant
constitutional limitation? And
your Honour’s question has within it a premise, which is also within
our friends’ argument,
that there is a constitutional limitation that
protects the right of a person to seek legal representation. It might be that
BEECH-JONES J:
Not quite. It is more that you can approach a court to find out what is the
limit of a Commonwealth law applying to you.
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes. But I think, if I am understanding your Honour correctly, you are
positing a kind of action that is not within 75(v).
BEECH-JONES J:
Well, that might be an argument about whether it is 75(v) or
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, if it is within 75(v), it is
captured by the Full Court’s partial disapplication.
BEECH-JONES
I thought that was about challenging the validity of
MR DONAGHUE:
is the problem. I mean, its terms – it is
BEECH-JONES J:
I am not talking about challenging the
validity of a decision, I am asking about, simply, someone saying: what is the
scope of the
MR DONAGHUE:
The point that I am
seeking to develop, your Honours, is that I accept – and as I am
going to come to when I get to the
Industrial Relations Act Case
not unique to the question now confronting your Honours – that
there will be questions that can be raised about where
you draw the line as to
the boundary of a constitutional implication.
Relations Act Case
Melbourne Corporation
Corporation
is not a limitation where your Honours could ever define,
with specificity, all of the circumstances around the edge that may or
come. But that is a question not about whether it is possible to partially
disapply by reference to the limit; it is a question
the law after you have partially disapplied by reference to the
BEECH-JONES J:
But within the area of uncertainty, if the
facts later arise, you can come back to a court and have that ascertained. But
perhaps not.
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour, my submission is that if there is a constitutional limitation
that would be infringed by the regulation preventing
you from doing
that – and I am prepared to assume, for the purposes of argument,
that section 75(iii) might be interpreted
so widely as including an
entitlement to come to court to seek a declaration as to the limits of your
obligations under a Commonwealth
law – if the court were, one day, to
hold that that is what 75(iii) requires, you could partially disapply it by
to that limit.
I think one possible problem
here is the level of tolerance for where you draw the line. I think we all
accept that in these cases
it is sometimes hard to know when you do draw it, in
a given factual situation, and there is tolerance for that. But the possible
problem here is the presence of criminal sanctions if you get it
MR DONAGHUE:
I accept that that is part of the case that
is raised against us, but my answer to it is to say
Transparency
– some of the section 92
cases – are cases where there are criminal sanctions involved and it
has nevertheless been held
to be possible to partially disapply by reference to
a constitutional limit, including a limit identified by reference to
BEECH‑JONES J:
But not a crime for going to court
to find out what the limit is.
MR DONAGHUE:
that is so, but I am accepting, your Honour, that – that is a
question that, if it presents a constitutional
problem, in my submission, it
does not present a constitutional problem that has the consequence which is the
consequence the appellant
seeks, which is that regulations 14 and 15
are invalid not just in that effect but in their effect in restricting his use
assets across the board, in ways that have nothing to do with court
proceedings of any kind.
What our friends are doing, in our submission,
is the not unfamiliar technique in this Court of roaming over the statute for
that are not actually impeding their rights at the moment, because they
have the permits, but saying: assume I did not have a permit,
then you could
not disapply, and so the whole of the regulations are invalid and I come use my
assets as I will, notwithstanding
the autonomous sanction regime. We submit
they should not be; that argument should not be accepted. The question is about
the judicial
framing of the constitutional limit which would be crossed by
giving the full breadth of application to these provisions.
I put that to Mr Hutley. You have to start with what the limit is
first, and work out what it is. As I understand your submission,
that, on their face, these regulations infringe the constitutional limit
recognised by this Court under 75(v) and all
the cases that have been
MR DONAGHUE:
there is no dispute about that, so much. The question is whether you can
somehow find words which read it down in a way which
gives effect to the limit
but does not suffer from the defects, putting aside the questions of principle,
the defects identified
– to the extent that they are
relevant – by Mr Hutley’s client.
Your Honour, I mostly agree with that. I certainly agree
that one must start with the identification of the constitutional limit,
put to Mr Hutley, and I submit – and your Honour referred
to some of the cases,
and the others. The
expression of that limitation, in our submission, is quintessentially a judicial
task. It does not cross the
line into the legislative choice‑type
territory. Your Honours can say: this is what the limit is. We have
advanced an argument
as to how that limit can be framed. The Full Court in the
critical passage in paragraph 84 commenced by saying:
the limitation by which the Regulations are to be read down and rendered
valid is clear and does not involve a choice. The question
is how best to
express it.
There might be other ways of expressing it, but their Honours
expressed it in the way that we put it. But if your Honours are ultimately
against me as to the forms of expression that we have advanced, that does not
mean we lose, because your Honours should just express
the limit in the
terms – authoritatively express it in the terms that you consider to
be the correct explication of what 75(v)
requires, and whatever that formulation
is, the regulations operate by reference to disapplication.
Well, you have three problems at least, at the moment, I think, which
have to be addressed. They may not be hurdles you cannot
overcome. One that is
put against you is that there are so many forms of the potential drafting that
that, itself, goes to show
that it is too difficult. The second is that
whatever form that is come up with is vague, uncertain, inconsistent and gives
to difficulties of practical application. Then the third is that it is
actually a form of legislative drafting and it is not a judicial
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, your Honour, in my submission,
I can overcome all of those.
There may be more, but
they seem to be the three principal ones which are put against
MR DONAGHUE:
I said, your Honour, I mostly agreed
with what your Honour said, but the slight area of disagreement picks up a
point your Honour
Justice Edelman made about the difference between
reading down and partial disapplication, because our submission is one of
disapplication and in my submission, what that means is that
your Honours do not – are not required to – take on
task of working out a phrase or a set of precise words that are to be read
into this regulation and thereafter to apply in every
case as if the regulations
mean that in every case.
So, with reading down, you might have a
provision that talks about incitement and you might decide that incitement has a
meaning that it needs to have to narrow the provision so as not to
infringe the implied freedom, and then that is what the provision
means, as I
understand what your Honour Justice Edelman put to my friend, and we
respectfully ‑ ‑ ‑
But you still have an onus, do you not, of identifying at least a disapplication
that would cover the circumstances of the applicant
so that the applicant could
act in a constitutional manner?
MR DONAGHUE:
But the only
thing that – the only thing the applicant has actually done,
relevantly, is commence a proceeding under 75(v).
No, but as Justice Beech‑Jones put to you, the applicant may wish to
know if, for example, the condition is invoked so that
the permit lapses or the
permit is revoked, the applicant may then wish to know what the scope is of the
activities that they can
engage in. They may wish to get legal advice about the
extent of a declaration that they could obtain.
MR DONAGHUE:
They may wish to know that. That is true, but if there is a
constitutional – I come back to my answer to Justice Gordon,
which is that at the moment, all we have is some dicta from
your capacity to seek legal advice. That there is no decision ever that
Chapter III constitutionally entrenches your right
to seek legal advice.
But I can accept that it might, for the purposes of this argument, in a
I accept that it might, and then say: if it does,
could you disapply by reference to that? If the answer to that question is yes,
then your Honours do not need to decide the constitutional question of does
Chapter III confer that right or not? You say, if it
does, we could
disapply by reference to it. And, in my submission, there is no problem with
doing that in that case. If the
Constitution
does allow the applicant to
be entitled to come to Court to seek a declaration of the kinds your Honour
has put to me, there is no
reason you could not disapply
sections 14
to that extent.
But the applicant would need to know
that now. The applicant could not find that out
MR DONAGHUE:
But the applicant is asking you
to – seems to be asking you to decide it now.
GAGELER CJ:
Was this argument put to the primary judge, or not – this wider
MR DONAGHUE:
The wider argument that is –
well, as I understand it, not in the terms – the legal advice aspect
of it seems to be
coming in and out a little, so when your Honour asked my
friend this morning, well, what is the limit, the initial way that he framed
said nothing about legal advice. When your Honours look at
paragraph 8, the formulation of the constitutional limit you were
there was much reference to legal advice.
So, I think it was put below,
as I understand it, in that kind of way – not clearly or precisely,
never developed as a constitutional
limit that leads to the invalidation of
regulations 14
, but floating in the background. So, partly for
that reason, even now, in this Court, there is no developed argument in support
of Chapter III actually having that effect. But, as I say, for the
purposes of my argument, even if it does, this is
. This is a
situation where, even if Chapter III does have that effect,
your Honours could say, well,
BEECH-JONES J:
Knight’s Case
, if there had been a parole board constituted by a
judge, then he could come back and challenge, and find out the answer to that
question. But in this case, they cannot. It is a unique – to my
knowledge ‑ ‑ ‑
MR DONAGHUE:
But, your Honour, even assuming – if your Honour were
ultimately to form the view that that problem was a problem that could
the invalidity of the regulations, my submission to your Honour would be
that your judgment should record: the regulation
would be invalid if its effect
was that it would prevent someone coming back to court in order to challenge
what had occurred, and
then to hold it invalid to that extent. It would not be
to invalidate the whole of the regulation, because your Honour would have
identified as constitutional limit that, on this construction, the regulation
would be infringing, and ‑ ‑ ‑
But it has not been a constitutional limit that has
been the subject of argument.
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honour, I
accept that that is a problem, which is why I am assuming it, but
cannot assume it in our judgment for the purposes of giving an answer
MR DONAGHUE:
But, your Honours, nor, in my respectful
submission, can you invalidate these regulations in all of their operations
because they
might infringe a constitutional limitation that has not been put to
you and that does not arise on the facts, because there is a
permit that already
makes sure that they can come to court and that they can get legal advice. It
is a hypothesis on a hypothesis.
So, my primary answer would be,
your Honours, not having a developed argument that there is a
constitutional limitation of the kind
we are discussing – to seek
legal advice – your Honours should say, they have not made a
case that the regulation would
be invalid if it had that operation; they have
not made good the proposition that Chapter III does give rise to a right of
But if I am wrong about that, in my submission, really,
your Honours are confronted with a situation where the only actual fact you
have is that the applicant wanted to bring proceedings to challenge the
designation and declaration that related to him and to seek
an associated
declaration about the validity of the regulations. He was able to do that
because he had a permit, but even if he
did not have a permit, you have an
argument advanced by us and accepted by the Full Court that the
section 75(v)
limit is a clear constitutional limit – to use the
phrase from the
Industrial Relations Act
can guide the reading down.
In our submission, that is – as
the Chief Justice explained in your Honour’s judgment in
– the constructional imperative that arises from
section 15A is that if you can read down or partially disapply, you must.
In our submission, the only question that your Honours therefore need to
answer is: is there a constitutional limit arising from
75(v)? If the
answer to that is yes, how should that constitutional limit properly be
Do you agree with the way the Full Court expressed it,
or the alternative way that we have expressed it in the last sentence of our
paragraph 3, or do you think that we are all wrong and there is a better
way of expressing it? But however you express it, the question
then is: can
you disapply the general language of regulations 14 and 15 by
reference to that limit?
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Solicitor, you were
taking us to the permit earlier.
MR DONAGHUE:
GAGELER CJ:
I am not quite sure what the purpose of that
MR DONAGHUE:
The purpose, your Honours, was to
highlight the extent to which any question about whether particular attempts to
seek legal advice
or to get documents photocopied or any of that falls within or
out of the limit. It does not crystallise a dispute about the rights
parties in this Court, because it is all clearly permitted
GAGELER CJ:
But the bringing of these proceedings was
permitted by the permit.
MR DONAGHUE:
And yet you accept that in these proceedings there was capacity for
the plaintiff to raise the constitutional limit that was recognised
and earlier cases?
MR DONAGHUE:
But we did not
make a standing point about it, and the reason for that is that there was a
period of a couple of months between
the date of the designation decision and
the permit – there is no evidence that the applicant actually tried
to do anything,
but there was a period in time in which the regulations applied
to him without the benefit of the permit and the view was taken that
sufficient to enliven standing.
But in terms of what you actually need
to determine the rights of the parties, the only way that these regulations at
bite is in their applications outside the permit, and so, in their
applications that had nothing to do with legal advice or legal
proceedings.
That is the only way they currently affect Mr Deripaska’s
So, we submit that, provided your Honours find that the
regulations are not wholly invalid, you have decided the only thing that
matters, in terms of the rights. Sorry, I have put that badly – but
provided you decide the threshold question: would it
be possible to disapply
these regulations to preserve their operation unconnected to legal proceedings,
however you formulate the
limit, that is all you need to do. I feel like I have
put that badly, but it is
do not have any argument that regulation 14 or 15 should be
interpreted in a way that inserts particular words or confines the
particular words?
MR DONAGHUE:
I do not. It is a partial
disapplication argument, as your Honour has described it. Can
I – I am going to take your Honours
to some of the authorities,
because we ‑ ‑ ‑
Before you do that, can I just ask one factual question. You accept that
the permit goes broader than that which is sought to be
disapplied or read
MR DONAGHUE:
Mr Donaghue, I am just wondering whether the section 78B notice
extends to the question of obtaining legal advice. It refers to
legal representation”.
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honour, can I look at that over the luncheon adjournment? As I say,
it is part of the problem that I identified to the Chief
Justice that this
issue has never really clearly crystallised in this case, that there is an
applicable constitutional limitation.
But that is not a point against me,
because the regulations cannot be invalid for infringing a constitutional
limitation that has
not been pleaded or established.
GAGELER CJ:
My understanding is that Mr Hutley has his section 75(v) case and
his wider case is as articulated in the second sentence of paragraph
his outline.
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes – which does not
include legal advice. Your Honours, can I, in the period before the
luncheon adjournment ask your Honours
– I will see if I can deal
with two cases quickly. Can I start with the well‑known authority of
Pidoto v Victoria
[1943] HCA 37
(1943) 68 CLR 87
, which is in
volume 8, tab 50.
I am going to this really to highlight the
context in which the most famous observation was made. Once your Honours
have the report,
could you turn to page 108, in
Chief Justice Latham’s judgment. You see at about point 8
on the page, there is a line that
be illustrated by an example.
The part I am relying upon follows:
Let it be supposed that the Commonwealth Parliament passes a general
statute dealing with larceny which, according to its terms, is
plainly beyond
Commonwealth legislative power because the Parliament has no power to make
general criminal laws. Prima facie the
law is invalid. But the
Commonwealth has full powers of legislative control, e.g., in relation to all
the territories of the Commonwealth,
in relation to acts and defaults of postal,
customs and other Commonwealth officers, and in relation to acts which
constitute parts
of inter‑State and foreign trade and commerce.
Et cetera. So, a generally expressed law, lots of possible heads of
power that might have supported parts of the operation of that
law. Then, in
the middle of page 109, his Honour says you cannot use 15A to
give it all of those different operations:
One person A could be convicted under the statute because he committed
larceny in the Northern Territory, another person B because
customs officer, C for some other reason, while D, E and F, whose acts fell
within the precise words of the statute, could
not be convicted because the
could not think of a head of power that would validly
include them. Then, at about point 8, it is said:
it could not reasonably be supposed that it was the intention of
Parliament –
such a hotch-potch of irregularly and partially operating
Where the law itself indicates a standard or test which may be applied for
the purpose of limiting, and thereby preserving the validity
of, the law, the
case is different. Thus where a law is clearly made with the intention of
exercising the power to make laws with
respect to trade and commerce, it is not
difficult to read it down so –
that it only applies in that way. We, of course, agree with all of that.
We are not suggesting that you can create a “hotch‑potch”
reducing the law by reference to any applicable head of power.
context for that law itself indicating the standard or test is the context of
the generally expressed law which could be
reduced to validity in a variety of
different ways that produce quite different laws, depending on whether you make
it a law about
trade or commerce or a law in the Territory or a law about
Commonwealth officers.
That requirement tells you nothing about the
quite different situation where the law is being reduced to constitutional
by reference to a clear constitutional limit. It is in that context
Constitution
itself tells you what the test or standard is. You
do not have a choice about disapplying in different directions by reference to
trade or commerce or postal services.
The way that problem manifests is
very well illustrated, in my submission, by
Strickland v Rocla Concrete
(1971) 124 CLR 468 which I can deal with in the next two or
three minutes.
is volume 10 at tab 56. It was an
early attempt of the Commonwealth Parliament – which failed, quite
spectacularly –
to make restrictive trade practices
provisions.
Your Honours can see at page 481 the relevant
provision, which was
, which talks about “examinable
agreements”, which was agreements between – the relevant point
to note is four lines
section 35(1).
It was a prohibition that applied
two or more persons –
carrying on businesses that are competitive –
contained restrictive provisions of various kinds. The attempt to link to power
that generally‑expressed “persons”
was found in
section 7, which you can see quoted in full on page 483. It was an
early version of a constitutional application provision
– never to be
repeated, because it resulted in invalidity. You can see a number
of – where:
The restrictions referred to in
restrictions of various kinds, and they are intended to operate, and then there
is a list of various of heads of power. So,
7(1)(a), it occurs:
in the course of trade or commerce with other countries or among the
And (d) was the territories power, but focus
on 7(1)(a), trade and commerce, and 7(2), corporations. So, the
Commonwealth obviously
did have power to regulate restrictive or
anti‑competitive arrangements either in interstate trade or commerce or
corporations.
It tried to do so by reference to both, and it
failed because, as Chief Justice Barwick explained on
page 497 – from the bottom
of 497 to 498, it would
have been possible to reduce the law by reference to either one of those heads
of power, but when section
7 directed you to reduce the law by reference to
multiple heads of power that coexisted in the statute, the result was
incoherence.
So, I will not
It was legislating, was it not?
MR DONAGHUE:
have been legislating because the Court would have had to choose – is
this going to be a law about
corporations
‑ ‑ ‑ or is it
going to be a law about trade or commerce? So, it could not do it, even though
the Commonwealth
did have legislative power that would have enabled to have
supported some of those areas. That is the kind of situation where you
test or standard identified in the legislation to guide the reading down
process, but it does not, in my submission, tell
you anything at all about the
task that your Honours confront where you are reading down by reference to
a clear constitutional limitation.
That is the
Industrial Relations Act
that I will take your Honours to.
It is a pretty subtle problem, but the Chief Justice
identified in
the distributive operation that is normally
given in these sorts of provisions now has very little difference in
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, but they drafted it a
little differently, your Honour, with an eye on this. They create a series
of separate laws by reference
to each head of power, rather than a general
provision to be disapplied.
GAGELER CJ:
So, subtle, yes, but important, because the attempt to provide
this test or standard was not clear enough. But our friends put
against us, the
Act here does not tell you to disapply by reference to 75(v), and we say,
true, but irrelevant, for reasons I will
come to after lunch.
All right, we will take the luncheon adjournment now. Thank
AT 12.46 PM LUNCHEON
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 2.15
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honours, I
have arrived at paragraph 10 of our outline, which concerns
Victoria v The Commonwealth
, also known as the
Relations Act Case
(1996) 187 CLR 416. Can I ask
your Honours to take up that case, it is in volume 10 tab 59.
When your Honours have it, could you
turn to page 501, in the joint
reasons of five members of the Court. You will see from the top of that page
that their Honours turn
there to what they identify as:
The second argument with respect to –
certain provisions of the Act:
based on the holding in
Re Australian Education Union
Commonwealth may not legislate to prevent a State from determining the rights
and conditions of those employed at the higher
levels of government.
Picking up the next paragraph down, their Honours’ focus is
section 6 of the Act, which was a general provision, in familiar
that the Act binds the Crown in various capacities, including “in right
the State. Their Honours explain in the balance of that paragraph
that insofar as the generally expressed provisions in the Act were
expressed in
terms that were “wide enough” to include the States, the question
was not whether those provisions were
themselves invalid, but rather, as you see
at the end of the paragraph:
but whether s 6 is invalid in its specification that the Act and, thus,
those provisions bind the States.
So, we were concerned a question of disapplication of section 6 in
purporting to extend the Commonwealth Act in that way. In the
next paragraph it
is recognised that:
Section 6 . . . is not, in terms, subject to any
limitation or prohibition . . . it is not, in terms, made
subject to those matters
pertaining to State employees which were identified in
Re Australian Education Union
as falling within the scope and
content of the implied limitation recognised in the
Melbourne Corporation
Insofar as it is being said, well, you need to have, in the
terms of the statute, some recognition of the constitutional limitation,
not have it here. And:
The question –
identified in the balance of that paragraph
is therefore whether 15A of the Interpretation Act
section 6 to:
be read as not binding the States with respect to those matters –
So, that is the question that their Honours are then addressing in
the next two pages. After quoting 15A, it is acknowledged at the
next page that it can apply in two situations. One is basically to sever, blue
pencil, cross out particular words, provisions
or sections of an Act. The other
is, as you see in the middle of that paragraph, leading up to
footnote (276):
may also fall for application in relation to general words or
expressions.
That is the distributive effect idea, and it is acknowledged
in the next paragraph that:
Where a law is expressed in general terms, it may be more
difficult . . . there is an additional difficulty if it
“can be reduced
to validity by adopting . . . several possible
limitations”.
With a footnote to
and the concepts I have already taken
your Honours to, and that is the context in which it said you might need
the law itself to
guide the choice. And then, in the next paragraph, the final
The limitation by reference to which a law is to be read down may appear
from the terms of the law or from its subject matter. Thus,
a law which is
“clearly made . . . with respect to –
a head of power, it can be read down in that way, again footnoting
. And then the critical sentence:
Similarly –
so, this is a different application:
Similarly, where a law is intended to operate in an area where
Parliament’s legislative power is subject to a clear limitation,
read as subject to that limitation.
Now, I am going to come back to the balance of 503, but if one
pauses to ask what the clear limit to which the Court was there referring
the answer is the
Melbourne Corporation
principle. And can I ask
your Honours to go back a few pages to 497 to illustrate that. At the
bottom of 497 there is a heading
“Minimum wage provisions and
discrimination”:
The plaintiff States submit that the provisions of Div 1 of Pt VIA
of the Act offend against the implied constitutional prohibition
identified in
Melbourne Corporation v The Commonwealth
expounded in a number of cases.
, and the principle is there quoted as having two
limbs – so, it is an older‑fashioned formulation of the
principle –
but the second of the limbs is:
the prohibition against laws of general application which operate to destroy
or curtail the continued existence of the States or their
capacity to function
as governments.
And then the Court immediately says:
There are three matters to be noted with respect to the second
So, what their Honours are doing in the next
paragraph is drawing on
to explain or explicate the content
Melbourne Corporation
limit, the limit on the prohibition
laws of general application which operate to destroy or curtail the continued
existence of the States –
and it is explained that certain aspects of that limitation –
so, we can pass over the first limit – the second was that
things it does is:
it precludes laws which prevent a State from exercising its “right to
determine the number and identity of the persons whom
it wishes to
that is one of the things it does – that is the second matter.
The third matter:
Finally, in the case of those employed at the higher levels of government, it
precludes laws which prevent the State from determining
“the terms and
conditions on which those persons shall be engaged”.
which was a judgement of six Justices of the
Court, their Honours had identified those two aspects of the effects of the
Melbourne Corporation
limitation as an explanation of what was meant by
Melbourne Corporation
protecting functions critical to the functions of
government. The Court there had offered some examples of who might be these
level” officers, it included Ministers, ministerial
assistants, ministerial advisors, parliamentary officers, judges –
the court gave a number of examples.
So, in my submission, when one
asks, what is the clear constitutional limit that can guide a partial
disapplication under 15A, it
is not just
Melbourne Corporation
expressed by reference to a phrase of the kind that one can imagine being
inserted into the clause, although, as I have said, you
do not need to do that.
But it is not just the limit being:
the prohibition against laws of general application which operate to destroy
or curtail the . . . existence of the States –
includes a judicial explanation of what that clear constitutional limit actually
does, what it means, not in terms that are capable
of being inserted into the
provision as if they are legislative drafting; it is the Court’s
explanation of what the
Constitution
requires. Before I come back to
you – in the
Industrial Relations Case
, and I cannot quite
find the page, where the answers to the questions are given, was that not the
way it was done?
GAGELER CJ:
Page 574, thank you.
MR DONAGHUE:
The Commonwealth
GAGELER CJ:
In the formal
The formal answers is what I was asking
the proposition
you just put to us, which is understandably right at the level
of principle, is that you ask yourself first: what is the constitutional
and what are the content of it? That is a separate question from how you then
reflect it in the answer to the question or
in the answer to identification of
what the limit is going to be.
MR DONAGHUE:
I have not picked up
the page number your Honour is referring to.
BEECH-JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
Page 574, thank
GAGELER CJ:
It is answer (4), where I think it may be
that the answer does reflect the submission you were putting.
So my next question is – there are three questions: what is
the limit; is it properly explained and identified as to content;
and the third
is the form of the answer given, if you are going to use this
approach – whether it is reading down or disapplication,
does not matter for the moment. This is not what the Full Court did, or
Justice Kennett did, in the form that it is given.
In my submission, it is, because it is a simpler limit arising
from 75(v) than the
Melbourne Corporation
limit is. But the point I
have been trying to – or that I was building to, really, is that one
can say there is a clear constitutional
limit that arises from
Corporation
. No one is going to deny that, I think. How do you
identify that limit?
Well, at one level of generality, you say it is a
limit that prevents laws that would destroy or curtail the continued existence
of the States or their capacity to function. But then, in particular
cases – here, the
Court said, well, what does that limit mean in the context of a law that
involves restrictions on the employment of State
And the Court
explained what it means is two things: higher level officers and others, and
gives some examples of who those higher
level officers are. But there obviously
would have been room for debate about – and, in my submission, there
is room for debate
consistently with the answer given in answer (4), so,
section 6 is read down, and as your Honours are putting to me, I think
it reflects
explanation of
Corporation
But it does not, for example, tell us what “the
higher levels of government” means, and “the higher levels of
government”
pretty obviously means Ministers and judges, but does not
obviously mean ministerial advisers or ministerial assistants or other
that were explained in the reasoning.
That is a question that would need
to be answered in a case where it arose as a relevant matter, but it is not a
question that bears
on whether you can partially disapply it by reference to
Melbourne Corporation
, it is a reference – it is a question
that bears on the scope of the resulting statutory provision.
Your point is that for the purposes of the disapplication doctrine
there is probably always going to be a level of ambiguity, because
you have to
express it at a level of generality.
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour, and how it is expressed will differ from case to case
depending on the circumstances, but the very nature
of constitutional law is
that almost every constitutional principle is capable of being expressed in
different language, and sometimes
is expressed in different
language ‑ ‑ ‑
It is not an impediment to
MR DONAGHUE:
at all, to reading down by reference to the limit.
MR DONAGHUE:
But the fact that there is –
submission ‑ ‑ ‑
Then can I ask another question. Is it your submission that the limit that
was adopted by the courts below is consistent with that
which is the approach
adopted and set out at pages 574 and 575?
MR DONAGHUE:
It is, your Honour. So,
their Honours ‑ ‑ ‑
Just so I am clear, your submission is that the disapplication or
reading down that was adopted identifies the constitutional limit
MR DONAGHUE:
It is, as their Honours
acknowledged, the constitutional limit arising from 75(v) is there. It is a
part of the judicial function
to try to express that limit as accurately as it
can be expressed. And their Honours, accepting in paragraph 84 that
it might be
that there would be other ways of expressing it, said this is the
way that we choose, in the exercise of judicial power, to express
that limit.
My submission is they did not err by doing that.
But I also submit that
if your Honours think, for example, for the sake of argument, that the
alternative way that we expressed it,
as a possible different way of expressing
it, in the last sentence of paragraph 3 of our outline, by reference to
actions that are
reasonably necessary to invoke the jurisdiction, if you thought
that was a better expression of the 75(v) test, that would not say
regulations 14
can be disapplied
under 15A, it would just say something about how you describe the resulting
limit on the operation of those regulations.
BEECH-JONES J:
this cannot be divorced from what the purpose or limit you are identifying
MR DONAGHUE:
BEECH-JONES J:
case, unlike the
Industrial Relations Case
, there are two aspects:
if you have that inherent ambiguity and people are at risk of being punished and
going to gaol if they get
it wrong, that may be a strong factor why you either
cannot apply this or you do have to get rid of the ambiguity. The other thing
is, does that limit identified address – the limit in this case is
identified by reference to practical considerations. That
is, its practical
effect on litigants and lawyers seeking to invoke either 75(v) or
Chapter III.
MR DONAGHUE:
Two answers, your Honours.
I am going to come to, quite soon, some – with respect to the first
part of your Honour’s
question, this Court has not previously
regarded the fact that the provision in question is a criminal provision as
preventing disapplication
by reference to constitutional
limitations.
BEECH-JONES J:
What about: it is a criminal
provision if you go to court?
MR DONAGHUE:
Okay. So, with
respect to that question your Honour has put to me, I accept I need to deal
with that. Can I deal with that when
I come to the 75(iii) question at the
BEECH-JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
I do have some submissions to make to your Honour about
BEECH-JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
has not hitherto been regarded as inconsistent with partial disapplication that
the provision to be disapplied is a criminal
provision. And insofar as
your Honours, as some of the questions have suggested, might be concerned
that might go wider than the express
formulation that we have identified, methodologically, in my submission, one
comes back to the
question Justice Gordon has put to me, which is: what is
If the limit is a limit that extends so far as to invalidate
anything that, for example, discourages the invocation of 75(v)
– so, not just things that, as we have put it, in form
or substance prevent action being taken in an objective sense, but things
might discourage the invocation of the jurisdiction – if that is the
constitutional limit as you frame it, then the consequence
is a wider area of
disapplication. It is not that disapplication becomes impossible, it is that
you have expressed the limit in
wider terms than we have or that the
Full Court below did.
In a case where it is
accepted that or established by an appellant that disapplication is necessary,
who bears the onus – or
is there an onus – to establish
what the limits or the expression of that disapplication should be?
In my submission, it is not a question for onus. It is a
question of constitutional law answered by reference to constitutional
that neither side has to prove the facts. If one could come to Court in
Victoria v The Commonwealth
for the first time, before
had been decided, you still had the
Melbourne Corp
limitation there, you could have made the argument
for the first time in
Victoria v The Commonwealth
Melbourne Corporation
does impose restrictions on high level
officers and others.
If the Court had said: we think that is right,
Melbourne Corporation
does have this effect – it could have
answered the questions in the same way, having there simultaneously both
explained the
content of the
Melbourne Corporation
limit and then
disapplied by reference to the limit it had just explained. That what I am
inviting your Honours to do here. We
say the Full Court’s
disapplication is all that you need, but if we are wrong about that, then it
could be differently expressed.
You accept that it is
a question of degree. On the one hand, there is levels of generality; on the
other hand, there is levels of
confusion and ambiguity which are
intolerable.
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, my submission is that the fact
that there are questions of degree involved does
can be accepted, but it is a question of how far that goes.
Well, it is –
Because we know that if what is left is uncertain in operation, then it is
unlikely that you will disapply. There may be a level
of uncertainty which can
be tolerated, and then there may be a level of uncertainty that
MR DONAGHUE:
In my submission, with respect, the
difficulty that we perceive with that approach is that a provision like
regulations 14
will be valid unless it infringes a
constitutional limitation. So, it will just operate in accordance with its
terms unless a court
is persuaded that there is actually a limitation in place
that is being infringed.
Once the Court is satisfied that there is
actually a limitation that is being infringed, all that then remains to do is to
what that limitation is and to say that the provision does not operate
to infringe it. So, if the problem is too much uncertainty,
that probably means
the provision is not invalid at all, because the Court has not articulated or
identified a sharp enough limit
to cause any question of reading down to
It was not argued, I assume, below that the
presence of
regulation 18
in and of itself might have saved 14
MR DONAGHUE:
It was not argued below,
MR DONAGHUE:
presence of
regulation 18
certainly creates an air of artificiality about
much of the debate about being chilled or being unable to invoke the
of the Court, and it does, in my submission, create grounds for
caution about being taken into hypothetical examples of things that
these regulations might do which they have not actually done to anyone, because
everybody has the benefit of these permits.
Can I, just to make good one
of the points I made, ask your Honours to go to one passage in
The Commonwealth
(2003) 215 CLR 185
, which is volume 3,
tab 23. It is a passage at paragraph 124 in the joint reasons of
Justices Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne.
MR DONAGHUE:
Paragraph 124,
your Honour, yes. So, this is again explaining the
Corporation
principle, and in this case the principle was reformulated
somewhat from the two‑limb example your Honours just saw in the
Industrial Relations Act Case
Their Honours there explain:
There is, in our view, but one limitation, though the apparent expression of
it varies with the form of the legislation under consideration.
expression of the
Melbourne Corporation
varies with the form of the
legislation:
The question presented by the doctrine in any given case requires assessment
of the impact of particular laws by such criteria as
burden” and “curtailment” of “capacity” of the
States “to function as governments”.
These criteria are to be
applied by consideration not only of the form but also “the substance and
actual operation”
. . . Further, this inquiry
inevitably turns upon matters of evaluation and degree and of
“constitutional facts” which
are not readily established by
objective methods –
My point, your Honours, is that none
of that means that you cannot constitutionally disapply a law by reference to
Melbourne Corporation
limit, and the same is true of the implied
freedom, and we submit the same the same is true of the limitation derived by
Something does not cease to be a clear
constitutional limit for the purposes of the
Industrial Relations Act
principle because there are variable modes of expression or because the
application of the limit turns on matters of evaluation or
degree or factual
inquiries, and these are a lot of the points that Justice Gageler made in
, which I am about to come to.
an interesting point about the constitutional limit we have here. I keep going
the answer in one way. In a number
of the cases, they look at the limit both directly and as a matter of practical
operation. So,
a lot of the debate here has been about its practical operation
in a set of circumstances.
Do you go so far as to say that the limit or
the disapplication of regulations 14 and 15 could be crafted in a way
which addressed
it in terms that they do not, whether directly or by practical
effect, curtail, et cetera? In other words, is it possible –
because that is how the limit is framed, as a matter of legal analysis, picking
up the 124 kind of considerations, into the disapplication
or the form of a
disapplication?
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, your Honour. In my
submission, there is no difficulty with doing that. Indeed, that was an
exercise that I was attempting
last night in settling the oral outline in the
first sentence of paragraph 3. So, we there have tried to express the
law cannot, whether in form or substance, prevent the actions being
taken, and one could substitute the words your Honour
words that have been used in the context of this constitutional limit have been
directly or as a matter of practical
MR DONAGHUE:
Those are, in my submission, the very questions as to the judicial expression of
the limit that caused the Full Court to
be a bit hesitant, because it said you
could express it in other ways. I think your Honour is referring to
. I think that is where that formulation comes
Probably – that is where the
“curtail or limit” comes from.
MR DONAGHUE:
Partly, it is ‑ ‑ ‑
So that would be to:
curtail or limit the right or ability of –
to seek relief under section 75(v) –
which would
extend to include seeking advice about whether or not you had an action
for 75(v) relief.
MR DONAGHUE:
You could express it in
that way, yes. One of the problems is that the precise expression of the limit
has tended to vary depending
on what kind of legislative provision was
infringing the right, so ‑ ‑ ‑
That is the reason why I come back to – the passage 124
identifies two matters. It is the fact that you have to identify what
is in the context in which you are operating.
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes. I do not disagree with that at all, your Honour. My point, which is
sufficient for my purposes in this case, is to entirely
embrace what
your Honour has said, that if you are what, in my submission, is a clearly,
centrally judicial task, it is that the
legislative choices our friends are
referring to are a long way removed from this case. Your Honours have to
identify what is the
limit in the context of this legislation and, having done
that, which is a necessary precursor to invalidating the regulations for
infringing that limit, having identified what the limitation is, you then have
to ask: can I disapply by reference to that limit?
Relations Act Case
gives you very considerable leeway for doing so, indeed,
requires that you do so by reference to the limitation as expressed. So,
not shirking the task of trying to accurately express the limit as well as we
can, but ultimately, whether your Honours accept
our submissions or do not about
how the limit should be expressed, does not answer the question of whether you
can disapply by reference
to the limit, which is why I said
GAGELER CJ:
be so, but the limit must be express, to comply with section 15A, because
it says that the Act is to be read and construed.
So, you must be able to put
it in a way that is capable of legislative expression, I
MR DONAGHUE:
That, your Honour, with respect,
might be an area where there has been some disagreement within the Court as to
whether reading
down and partial disapplication are the same words for the same
thing or whether they are actually different concepts. Even accepting
premise of what your Honour the Chief Justice puts to me, that is a
wide – there is a fair degree of latitude because,
your Honours have taken me to in looking at the answers to
question (4), to say that it is capable of being put into a legislative
context. When one reads the answer to question (4), it means that there is
quite a lot of judicial exegesis that goes in. You would
not expect to find a
statutory provision that read like that.
GAGELER CJ:
MR DONAGHUE:
But even if you do need to do that, in my
submission, the Full Court’s formulation or the alternative we have
proffered are
both limits that meet that requirement. I think,
your Honours, I have said what I needed to say about the
Relations Act Case
. Can I take your Honours next to
[2014] HCA 35
(2014) 254 CLR 508
, which is in volume 10, tab 57, and I am
going, of course, to the Chief Justice’s
Your Honour was in dissent in
because the
majority held that the provision did not infringe the implied freedom. Because
the majority so held, they did not get
to the reading down partial
disapplication question. Your Honour did get to that question, and
your Honour’s analysis of that
question has since been approved by
six Justices in
and by the Court in
. So, while it
was dissenting reasons in this case, we submit that it has majority support by
way as an analysis. Can I ask
it is called “severance” in
, so we have yet another
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes. As your Honour has noted in a
number of judgments, there is terminological – different judges use
different terms to
describe different concepts, but the concept that we are
talking about here, in my submission, is partial disapplication, but I accept
is sometimes described differently. Can I show your Honours the provision
in question first. It is in paragraph 20 of the joint
section 93X of the
. Your Honours will see it is an
offence provision:
A person who:
(a) habitually consorts with convicted offenders, and
(b) consorts with those convicted offenders after having been given an official
warning in relation to each of those convicted offenders,
is guilty of an offence.
Maximum penalty: Imprisonment for 3 years –
contrary to our friends’ submission, evident that that is a prohibition
that is directed to limiting political communication.
On its face, it says
nothing about political communication, although it is obviously capable of
having an operation that might restrict
political communication in some
circumstances.
Our friends, in their outline in paragraph 7, say
this was a law that was “intended to regulate communication”. In
submission, that is not right. So, your Honour the Chief Justice
held that this provision was invalid insofar as it applied to association
the purpose of engaging in communication on governmental and political
The identified disapplication there, as by the Full Court here,
was tied to the purpose of the actor. The description of or the
analysis of the
partial disapplication, if I can call it that, commences relevantly under the
heading “Severance” at
paragraph 168, with a quote from the New
South Wales equivalent of 15A, and 15A is mentioned in 169, the
should be divisible –
unless there is a “positive
indication” that that was not intended. The key paragraph for present
purposes is 171, and
this paragraph, 171, is specifically cited in
by six of your Honours in footnote (109):
That a severance clause operates only as a rule of construction, however, is
no impediment to its application to read down a provision
expressed in general
words so as to have no application within an area in which legislative power is
subject to a clear constitutional
limitation.
Footnote to
Victoria v The Commonwealth
Such reading down can occur even if the constitutional limitation is
incapable of precise definition –
The Commonwealth
, so they are both
Corporation
and even if an inquiry of fact is required to determine whether the
constitutional limitation would or would not be engaged in so
far as the law
would apply to particular persons in particular circumstances.
relevantly,
. Your Honour the
Chief Justice had remarked in argument in that case when it was being put,
you could not read the provision down
by reference to the implied freedom, but
Industrial Relations Act Case
, the reading down was by reference
to what your Honour there called a “vague concept”. You see
that recorded in the
report at 516.
example. I will not take your Honours to
. It is one of the
defence discipline cases, you have it in volume 9, tab 54, but in the
passage that your Honour cited in footnote
Justices Brennan and Toohey relied on 15A to read down the general powers
of discipline under the Defence Discipline Act,
and the reading down was to the
extent that it was, quote:
exercised only for the purpose of maintaining and enforcing military
discipline.
So, you have a purpose of reading down both in
itself – sorry, I should not say purpose of reading down. You have a
reading down, the extent of which is defined by the purpose,
the concept of
purpose, in both
itself and in
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Solicitor, what was the paragraph in
MR DONAGHUE:
Sorry your Honour. It is
pre‑paragraph numbers, it is page 487, and it is volume 9,
BEECH‑JONES J:
The force of the observation about the need for inquiries of
fact, even of an extensive kind, not preventing disapplication is
borne out in a context well familiar to your Honours of late –
section 189 of the
Migration Act
– because, by reference
to two different constitutional limitations – the constitutional
limitation in
, and the constitutional limitation in
Commonwealth
– the generally expressed terms of section 189
are read as not applying to people where you either have go to through the
to work out whether or not the person falls
within the provision, or you have to go through is there are real prospect of
becoming practical in the foreseeable future, under
Both of those enquiries can be very complex factual
inquiries, but the provision is partially disapplied depending on the result
those potentially quite complex factual inquiries. At 172 in
, the Chief Justice notes the history of the application
of 15A in section 92 cases in the period prior to
Cole v Whitfeld
between the
Bank Nationalisation Case
Cole v Whitfeld
often, again, identified
what were potentially quite complicated inquiries, often that were conducted as
threshold questions so as
to prevent roaming over the statute. Then, at 178, a
few pages on, the conclusion is expressed that:
Section 93X is severable, and s 31 of the
Interpretation Act
therefore requires that it be severed. The requirement of s 31 is that
s 93X be read down so as not to apply in circumstances where
infringe the constitutional freedom by placing an undue burden on communication
on governmental or political matter. That
is achieved by reading the section as
having no application in so far as the section would apply to consorting which
is or forms
part of an association for a purpose of engaging in communication on
governmental or political matter.
That, we submit, is a conventional
application of the
Industrial Relations Act Case
, but that is not to say
that there might not be cases in which a person who faced a charge under 93X
might have some uncertainty
part of an association for a purpose of engaging in communication on
governmental or political matter.
There are a number of questions in
there that involve judgments and that involve judgments that might not be
obvious to the potential
offender, but one can disapply by reference to the
clear constitutional limit, and then there is a question as to the application
of the statute as disapplied, but not one that need limit the reading down
The final case I seek to take your Honours to is
, which is obviously a Chapter III reading down case.
[2017] HCA 33
(2017) 263 CLR 1
is at volume 7, tab 40. In
writing, the appellant has sought to distinguish this case in part by saying
that partial disapplication
was possible because the provision in question was a
law that regulated courts’ exercise of their jurisdiction, and so it
a clear standard for the reading down.
We dispute that reading
of what was occurring in
, and we do that because of the terms of
the provision, which you can see in paragraph 14 of the report. It
was 503A of the
Migration Act
and the relevant provision
was 501A(2)(c). So, it imposed restrictions on information:
communicated to an authorised migration officer by a gazetted agency on
condition that it be treated as confidential –
and where that
condition was met, (2)(c) provided that:
the Minister or officer must not be required to divulge or communicate the
information to a court, a tribunal, a parliament or parliamentary
committee or
any other body or person –
So, it was a provision that
obviously included within its ambit a purported restriction on courts, but it
was not just about that.
It applied much, much more widely than that. And the
Court held – the result of this case was not actually to strike out
the word “court”, but it was to confine the word “court”
so that the provision did not apply to a court to
the extent that it was
exercising 75(v) jurisdiction. So, it was a partial disapplication of the
provision by reference to a different
manifestation of the same – or
a different application, rather – of the same constitutional limit
that is now in play.
Can I ask your Honours to note paragraph 48 in
the joint reasons? This is an example of the kind of paragraph that
your Honour Justice
Gordon has been raising, that is found in some of
the other cases as well, where the Court has set out to explain the content of
the constitutional limit as it arose, relevantly, in this case. I will not read
that whole paragraph to you, but I do note in the
middle of the paragraph the
Court’s observation that:
The question whether or not a law transgresses that constitutional limitation
is one of substance, and therefore of degree.
So, I think that picks up some of the observations that your Honour
Justice Gordon has made to me. We do not cavil with the idea
that that is
part of the limit, and it could properly form part of the way – it
will undoubtedly affect the application of
the limit in some cases. There is an
obvious parallel between that paragraph and the passage in
have already shown to your Honours. The relevant result and reasoning are
at 65 and 66. So, their Honours found that:
It is not necessary . . . to further analyse matters of substance
and degree which may or may not result in the invalidity –
other situations. In effect, their Honours confined themselves to what
they needed to decide for the purpose of this actual case.
That reasoning
appears at 66 – the provision can:
be construed, which is to say read down, so as to save it from invalidity.
Section 503A(2)(c) is invalid to the extent that it operates
as described
above, but its invalid application is severable.
Footnote (109), which is to
The Commonwealth,
the pages I have been to; and to
specifically at 171, which I have read to your Honours:
Applying 15A . . . the reference in s 503A(2)(c) to
a “court” must be read to exclude this Court when exercising
under s 75(v) –
So, that is a very clear example of disapplication by reference to
the 75(v) limit, described as far as the Court thought it was necessary
describe it for the purposes of that case. The Full Court relied on
at paragraph 82 as furnishing:
an example, close to the present circumstances, of a reading down of the
we sought. In my submission,
Commonwealth
examples of the Court applying the constructional imperative in 15A to
confine generally expressed language by reference
to a clear constitutional
limitation as articulated in the relevant context by the Court to describe what
the limitation is, and
once the limitation has been accurately framed by the
Court, that tells you the extent to which the generally expressed words cannot
be valid and they are disapplied to that extent.
analysis – I have said there are cases where it is criminal:
is an example;
Farm Transparency
are two other examples of criminal provisions being partially
disapplied by reference to the implied freedom. There is a useful
that I will cite to your Honours without going to it in your Honour
the Chief Justice’s judgment, and also in Justice
Justice Edelman’s separate judgments, about the relationship between
a partial disapplication and the elements of
the offence, the substance of
which – in the Chief Justice’s reasons that is at 145
to 151, it is Justice Gordon at 346
Justice Edelman at 442.
BEECH‑JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
, I am sorry,
your Honour.
Clubb v Edwards
[2019] HCA 11
267 CLR 171
, volume 6,
Sorry, could you just repeat the
references to Justice Gordon?
MR DONAGHUE:
I am sorry,
your Honours – to Justice Gordon?
Yes, I have the others.
MR DONAGHUE:
Justice Gordon
was 346 to 348 and Justice Edelman
MR DONAGHUE:
The basic point was that partial disapplication or reading down does not change
the elements of the offence, it confines the circumstance
in which the offence
operates but it does not create a new thing that the prosecution is required to
prove. All that is being done
– so, your Honour the
Chief Justice said, in answer to this argument:
That is not how severance works at all.
the effect of severance would not be to alter the statement of the obligation
. . . but to take political communications outside the
the application. So, you answer the scope of the
disapplication as a matter of constitutional fact and then what remains operates
exactly as it would have before. I do not really think that – I
mention that really because it goes to the asserted inconsistency
appellant suggests between there being elements of the offence here that are
subjective elements and the disapplication,
which is objective. Our answer is
there is no inconsistency there because the disapplication occurs first, it
confines the scope
of the application, and you then apply the provision in
accordance with its terms and its normal elements.
The last thing,
your Honours, I seek to do is to address paragraph 8 of our
friends’ outline and the question that Justice
Beech‑Jones
asked me earlier that I promised to return to, which is the wider argument.
Here, I also pick up your Honour Justice
Gleeson’s question
Chief Justice, Mr Hutley confirmed that the limitation
for which the
appellant contends on this part of their case is the second sentence of
paragraph 8:
He is disabled from being represented in Chapter III courts and from
litigating in s 75(iii) jurisdiction, unless he obtains a ministerial
The 78B notice appears at page 129 of the core appeal
book. Can I ask your Honours to go that. It really, relevantly, spans
128 through to 129. But in paragraphs 3(b) and (c), you do
find expression of what is found in the second sentence of paragraph
expressed separately. So, paragraph (b) is about practically
preventing:
a person from being represented by a lawyer in a Chapter III court?
Paragraph (c), practically:
prevent a person from invoking the jurisdiction in
s 75(iii) –
So, the 78B notice is, we submit,
sufficient to capture the argument as expressed in paragraph 8, which does
not include the legal
advice questions but does include your Honour
Justice Beech‑Jones’ question, can you go to court to seek a
declaration
as to your rights or liabilities.
BEECH‑JONES
Yes, but maybe Mr Hutley might say, but the first step
of that whole process is wandering through the door and getting
MR DONAGHUE:
And that might mean that the
limitation – both the 75(v) limitation and the 75(iii)
limitation, if there is one – is
expressed in the way that
Justice Gordon put to me earlier, in a way that would pick up the necessary
precursor steps for the taking
of that action. I do not contend otherwise, it
is no part of my case to suggest that you can file a piece of paper in court but
you cannot talk to the lawyer to prepare the piece of paper that you want to
file in court – I am not saying that at
BEECH‑JONES J:
Or whether all you want to
do is to find out whether you can do it and whether you will.
And that may take us with in the 75(iii) situation. But,
in my submission, the way that we respond to this part of the case is
follows. The applicant has not actually sought to do anything other than
conduct a 75 (v) proceeding. That is the only thing
That is amply covered by the 75(v) restriction that we have
addressed, which is why that was the focus in the courts below, and the
would allow him to go wider, but we can put the permit aside for the moment.
Regulations 14 and 15 could be invalid by reference
to this different
constitutional limitation identified in the 78B notice only if
your Honours were satisfied that there is a constitutional
limit of the
kind identified in the 78B notice.
That would be a necessary
precondition to finding the regulations invalid on that basis. The argument
might fail at that point,
because you are being given very little to support the
existence of a limit of that kind. We submit that, in paragraph 8 of the
outline, the relationship between those two limbs is not entirely clear, whether
they are cumulative or separate. The paragraph
being represented by a lawyer in a Chapter III court?
wide. Depending on what you mean by a Chapter III court, that might be for
all purposes, in all kinds of litigations,
in any court in Australia, if we are
embracing State courts exercising federal
Your Honours, in my submission, do not need to go
there; it would be sufficient to focus on paragraph (c), if you reach this
of the case at all, and to focus on whether there is a practical
impediment, or practically preventing a person from invoking jurisdiction
under 75(iii). I say that partly because, of course, 75(iii) is the
constitutionally enshrined jurisdiction, whereas for all the
Chapter III courts it depends on an investment under
section 77.
But assuming, for the purpose of argument, that
your Honours were to be persuaded that there is a constitutional limit on
practically
preventing a person from invoking the jurisdiction in 75(iii),
then it would be possible for regulations 14 and 15 to be invalid
contravening that limit. But if your Honours have formed that view, the
question then is: well, can I partially disapply by
reference to that limit in
addition to the 75(v) limit?
In our submission, the answer to that
question is easy, perhaps easier than the 75(v) question, because whether
you are invoking
the jurisdiction of the Court under 75(iii) depends only
on the fact that you are seeking to sue the Commonwealth, and that is not
question, so that if your Honours find there is such a limit and if that
limit could invalidate regulations 14 and 15, you
should conclude, in
our submission: and therefore, to that extent, regulations 14 and 15
are invalid but can be disapplied in the
terms that you express the
So that, particularly if your Honours were concerned about
the points that Justice Beech‑Jones has raised about whether you
could, for example – if the permit were to be revoked – go
and obtain a statement as to the boundaries of your rights
or obligations under
this disapplied provisions, all the person would have to know is they are going
to court against the Commonwealth,
and they could. So that, in our submission,
even if your Honours reached that question, it does not provide any reason
why you should
hold regulations 14 and 15 to be invalid in their
GAGELER CJ:
I thought your primary argument here was a
Knight v Victoria
argument ‑ ‑ ‑
MR DONAGHUE:
GAGELER CJ:
‑ ‑ ‑ because
that would be the end‑point of any analysis. In the absence of a factual
scenario engaging
some other court or the possibility of going to some other
court, one would not determine the constitutional limitation in the first
MR DONAGHUE:
That is my primary argument. I had
understood Justice Beech‑Jones and, I think, Justice Edelman to ask
me questions, but
that would leave the applicant not knowing the answer to
the 75(iii)
question ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
is not an absolute limit.
has been recognised
now as a pragmatic approach that is taken, and one might readily see the need to
exercise some form of pragmatic
judgment in a case where the appellant is
subject to a condition that might be revoked.
MR DONAGHUE:
accept that that is so, and some members of the Court in
to decide the severance issue for that very reason in that case. The
Chief Justice has accurately summarised my primary
argument, but if
your Honours are against me on that, you have heard my
Unless your Honours have any questions, those are my
submissions.
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Solicitor.
Ms Keating.
MS KEATING:
If it please the Court, we rely on
our written submissions and do not seek to be heard otherwise.
MS KEATING:
Thank you very
GAGELER CJ:
your Honours please. Our learned friends commenced by, in effect, taking
your Honours to regulation 14 and dealing with questions
physical elements. There could be a debate as to how many physical elements
On one view, there is but one, but it does not matter because
however one interprets these provisions as to their mental elements,
the threats
of committing very serious criminal offences is palpable and obvious the moment
a person comes to seek advice who is
a person who is designated, because once
one knew that they were – the firm knew that it was designated per, I
an individual, just about any act thereafter would naturally
expose one to criminal offence.
So, in our respectful submission, that
does not mean that the photostatting person is unlikely to be exposed; he or she
to be photostatting matters relevant to a client who is likely to have
identified his or her status. We think that the threats produced
legislation are great and ongoing.
We are not advancing questions to
deal with unknown limits to section 75(v). The limits expressed at a
constitutional level can
be found essentially from the statements in
. The problem is, and it arises from some of the remarks falling
from your Honour Justice Gordon, that the expression
of 75(v) about
curtailing is expressed at a level of impermissibility.
That has a similar expression as the
Melbourne Corporation
effect broadly excessively interfering with the State.
None of the cases
have, as it were, taken the constitutional norm expressed in those terms and
merely transferred it into a construction,
because, in effect, one has really
told one nothing about the factual inquiry one has to undertake in a particular
case. That is
why, in relation to the
Industrial Relations Act Case
one goes to page 503, the last sentence expresses the constraint in terms
of matters of fact, which can be the subject of inquiry.
Now, the only
point seemed to be raised in relation to that case is that the words
“higher levels of government” might
not be pellucidly clear as to
where they begin and end, but that could be the subject of an appropriate
factual inquiry. Our learned
friends, in a sense, we think, were seeking to
embrace your Honour’s observation about finding the limit in the
your Honour expressed them. Let me assume for the moment that
those terms are the limit, and we submit that to merely append that
constitutional limit to a statute does not in effect set out terms of
construction which are appropriate to the exercise we have
Is another way of expressing that
submission that the disapplication is disapplication by reference to an
application to facts
not to law? So, in order to disapply by reference to
facts, one needs to identify what facts are operative.
Precisely. All one – and in effect is set
out a legal test, and in effect the legal test is not apposite to a statute of
the operation with which we have which addresses criminal conduct by reference
to factual circumstances.
Is that right? I
assume you have the same complaints about the current formulation by reference
to purpose. If the factual inquiry
is the right or ability for the person to
seek relief under 75(v), that is the factual inquiry.
But the problem comes in the “impermissibly
curtail”, in my respectful submission. That is why, as we understood,
attempt was tried at one stage to be “purpose”, then
“objective purpose”, then we got
“reasonably”
– I cannot remember what paragraph of our
learned friends’ it
“Reasonably necessary”.
“Reasonably necessary”, and all these in effect have in all but name
been abandoned in submission – well, not
abandoned ‑ ‑ ‑
not think they have been abandoned, Mr Hutley.
‑ ‑ ‑ but in effect not been defended as to
not suffering from the difficulty of indeterminacy and uncertainty.
That is why
one found my learned friend, and understandably, embracing
your Honour’s suggestion.
not know if it was a suggestion. I was trying to
identify ‑ ‑ ‑
I do apologise.
‑ ‑ ‑ the limit and
trying to work out whether the limit addressed some of your concerns that you
have raised
I am not suggesting you were making a suggestion. My
learned friend took it as a suggestion. In our respectful submission, it
suffers – it has merely expressed the legal test for “under the
Constitution
But the same is true in part in
Commonwealth
where the expression in the orders that are made is whether
would otherwise be protected action for the purposes of
section 170PG –
That is the expression of the legal test.
But I think if you go to the section, that sets up a
factual inquiry as to what is protection actions for the purpose, not another
legal inquiry. Therefore, it really has embodied another factual inquiry. That
is why we said the two elements of the test is one
– that it sets up
a determinative factual inquiry.
This we say is in accordance with
your Honour the Chief Justice’s remark, one is construing a
statute, and one therefore is
giving in effect a meaning, whether it is by
disapplication or reading down, which can then confront a person who is exposed
by an ability to say: are my acts within that provision? Not: do I need
a lawyer to tell me what this provision means about my
Does it matter at all that it is a criminal
provision? Are you getting anything from that?
say, your Honour, at one sense, analytically, it could be said: what is
the difference – because one is writing down.
I am saying that, I think.
your Honour is saying that, but what we do say is this indeterminacy
is – the acuteness of it is thrown up and must
be thrown up by the
fact that the indeterminacy confronts the individual with serious criminal
serious consequences. In other
BEECH-JONES J:
thought, Mr Hutley – I thought the problem with the
indeterminacy is not that it is a criminal provision, it is a criminal
engaged if you go to court so that the indeterminacy cannot be
There is that, but there is another point,
your Honour.
BEECH-JONES J:
You cannot go to a court to
figure it out because your lawyers will not touch because they are scared that
are going to get charged.
Quite. That is one, but
the second problem with indeterminacy – whether it is a criminal
conduct – is they will not even
take you on to consider whether you
will go to court because of the indeterminacy. So, that is why this question of
we do not run a case of advice per se – what
we say is, is the 75(v) exception position – which the
Full Court determined,
and our more extended position – means,
in practice, that one cannot approach lawyers to find out where you
That depends on the notion of impermissible
curtailment – impermissible limit.
Precisely, your Honour.
Your Honour ‑ ‑ ‑
As opposed to simply it cannot curtail, limit or restrict, because you say that
would go beyond the constitutional limitation and
therefore you cannot do that
one. You have to have a qualifying concept before
We say it has to be a qualifying concept
that gives you a factual inquiry which can be applied to be a construction. It
be, in effect, a form of words which merely shifts over to another
question of law and constitutional law to be determined in that
Otherwise, in effect, all one has done is repeated the constitutional norm. No
statute will be invalid; you could just
express it in terms of the
Corporation
. You do not need to take the step which was taken in the
. You just, in effect, attach the constitutional norm
stated in relation to
Melbourne Corporation
. You can do that for any
GAGELER CJ:
Well, in the
Industrial Relations Act
Melbourne Corporation
higher‑level principle was
translated to a level appropriate to the statutory provisions in that case, and
in being translated,
it was not stated in a purely factual inquiry sense that
you are propounding. There was an evaluative phrase, “higher levels
government”, which would be a question of characterisation, I
Your Honour, if it is that fine, you
cannot go much beyond it. That I would say – we would say that
essentially it would be
an inquiry of fact, and the fact might be a question of
fact where one needed expert evidence, as it were, as the structure of
and things like that, but characterisation would not be so much the
question, it would be a question of seeing what the structure
of government was
and making an evaluative judgment – whether your Honour calls it
that – of fact: is that a higher
But I do not need to
live or die on that element. Our learned friend, insofar as they said they
could take the step arising out
of your Honour’s identification of
the limits, we say, cannot be done, and that points up the problem of the
current candidates
beyond that. That is where we say the matter
Therefore, we submit that, in this particular case, the partial
disapplication principles simply cannot save this series of provisions.
are – to take up an observation of your Honour
Justice Steward – at a level of uncertainty, at a level of what
might be called instability, that they simply do not meet the norm of being a
construction in respect of which section 15A has operated.
with respect, tracking through all the cases which my learned friend did, the
questions of principle are not great in this
regard in the sense of –
I was about to say, that are between us. We submit that
your Honour’s judgment in
was a classic application of
the principles, and we do submit that the particular statute there of the
concept of communication was,
in essence, inherent in the act of consorting.
Very few people consort in silence.
In effect, to describe consorting as
being not involving communication is a somewhat curious thing, and thus we
thought the legislation
was dealing – and a part of its intended
operation was in the field of communication, a perfectly appropriate case for
application of the norm, and your Honour did it in precise language,
which of course would require factual inquiries.
We have no problem with
that, and they may be nuanced factual inquiries, but a person who saw the form
of your Honour’s disapplication
would know what he or she could not
do. Now, they may need a bit of advice as to what consorting is but, setting
that aside, the
rest of it they would be able to work out pretty quickly: am I
meeting to talk about prison reform or doing over the bank down the
That is the factual inquiry and that is why, with respect,
your Honour’s method was the appropriate method, because
your Honour was seeking to construct a meaning for the
What our learned friends invite your Honours to do is to
abjure that, not give a meaning to the statute, refer to a statutory norm
some formulation such as we have had which are almost, with respect, extremely
hard to understand what they mean, what their content
is and what factual
questions are thrown up. Because we have been given a permit, they can then
say: it does not operate upon us.
But the permit just allows us to point out
that they have not got a construction which is valid. That is all –
beyond that is irrelevant. That is the last point I wish to advise
The presence of
regulation 18, in my respectful submission, cannot assist in determining
this question because regulation 18 is in
the grace and favour of the
Executive and it cannot be that the Executive’s grace and favour
makes valid a provision which
seeks to take away and inform the ability to
challenge the Executive’s predicate decision. Namely, my client’s
designation.
Now, can I deal finally with our broader question. I have
said what I need to say about whether it is hypothetical. Now, I did
submissions take your Honours to the cases which we say justified the
broader construction question of constitutional inhibition
on applying to a
Chapter III court. They are set out in detail in our written submissions.
I have not been through them because
the Commonwealth has really not gainsaid
any of them in written submissions but merely rested on its hypothetical
character. We
submit – and I do not propose to read them through to
your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
So, Mr Hutley, is a
Chapter III court any court, or are you using it in a more confined
We submit any Chapter III –
yes, a Chapter III court, yes.
BEECH‑JONES J:
do you mean ‑ ‑ ‑
I do not think I can – I can cut it
BEECH‑JONES J:
Do you mean a State or a Territory
court that is invested with
federal ‑ ‑ ‑
A court – you cannot make a law to exclude the access to a
Chapter III court. You can change what a Chapter III court is any
time you want through statute, but once you have created one, that is a venue
for the exercise of federal jurisdiction. You cannot
then quoad a person, say
that they cannot appear there, because they may be sued
BEECH‑JONES J:
You just used the phrase
“created”, do you mean a court created by the Federal Parliament or
a State court invested with
federal jurisdiction?
The latter, your Honour, we put it that
BEECH‑JONES J:
All of them, right.
All. If it was a more limited one, we would address that, but our
position is any Chapter III court. You cannot pace a law just
cannot approach a Chapter III court in blame, as the way they had. The
last thing is,
was not a case of reading down, the word
“court” was read down to mean a court exercising 75(v) jurisdiction.
a classic case; it was not in any way operate –
Can I just give your Honours one last reference. We say
that the approach that we advocate is consistent with the statement of principle
of the plurality in
YBFZ v Minister
[2024] HCA 40
(2024) 99 ALJR 1
at paragraph
, which we have referred to in our written
submission, and I do not think it is necessary to go any further than
Those are our submissions, if your Honours
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Hutley. The Court will
consider its decision in this matter and will adjourn until 10.00 am
AT 3.30 PM THE MATTER WAS ADJOURNED
RTF format (1.64 MB)
Signed PDF/A format