Rana & Rana [2021] FamCA 634; (30 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Rana & Rana
[2021] FamCA 634
File number(s):
MLC 1515 of 2021
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– COSTS – ordered as
sought after relief was granted consistently with wife’s pre-action
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Coote Family Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Puckey QC
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Lander & Rogers
MLC 1515 of 2021
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Litigation Funding
1. That following the Husband spending the sum of $165,000 on his family law
legal fees (including disbursements), for each dollar
thereafter that the
Husband pays or causes to be paid to his solicitors, he pay or cause to be paid
an equal sum to the Wife's solicitors
such monies to be applied in payment of
the wife’s reasonable legal costs of these proceedings but not
2. That on the 1st of every month, the Husband cause his solicitors to
provide to the Wife's solicitors, trust and office account
statements of the
firm instructed by the Husband in support of all monies deposited by him, or on
his behalf, into his solicitors
trust account and invoices charged by his
solicitors.
3. That the Husband pay the Wife's costs of her Application in a Case filed
24 August 2021 in the sum of $7,018.
4. That in the event that it is necessary to permit the husband to make the
payments in paragraph 1 of this Order the husband forthwith
make application to
the Federal Court in proceedings number .../2021 seeking an order that:
For the purpose of paragraph 2d(ii) of the Order made
on 14 May 2021 by Beach J the “reasonable legal expenses” include
the reasonable legal expenses of the wife for which the husband is liable in
these proceedings pursuant to paragraph 1 of the Order
of Bennett J made on 30
August 2021 in the Family Law proceedings.
5. The monies applied by the parties towards payment of their legal costs be
the subject of characterisation by the learned trial
judge at the final
6. There be liberty to the husband and wife to apply on short notice in
relation to implementation of paragraph 1 of this Order.
AND IT IS NOTED
that paragraph 1 of this Order and the
husband’s liability pursuant to it is predicated on the husband being able
wife’s reasonable legal expenses in these proceedings from the
funds held within the accounts described in paragraph 1 of the
order made in the
Federal Court proceedings on 14 May 2021.
BY CONSENT IT IS
Sale of B Pty Ltd
7. That paragraph 5 of the Orders made 17 August 2021 be varied only to the
extent necessary to permit the Husband, on the Completion
date (1 September
2021) of the sale of B Pty Ltd to D Ltd, to cause the following payments to be
(a) The sum required to discharge the secured NAB loans
of approximately $6,170,000;
(b) The sum required to discharge the guarantee and supporting general security
agreement in respect of the loan advanced by C Pty
Ltd to the Husband of
approximately $2,481,000 PROVIDED ALWAYS, that this payment is permitted only on
the basis that the Husband
does all things required to procure the cooperation
of C Pty Ltd and F Pty Ltd necessary to cause all remaining monies owing by the
Husband to C Pty Ltd and by F Pty Ltd to the Rana Super Fund and/or B Pty Ltd in
the sum of approximately $2,081,000 plus interest
to be paid to the Rana Super
Fund contemporaneously with the discharge of the C Pty Ltd loan AND FURTHER, the
Husband and the Wife
be and are hereby restrained from re-investing, drawing or
otherwise dealing with funds held by the Rana Super Fund until further
(c) The balance is to be paid to the B Pty Ltd accounts the subject of the
Federal Court Orders.
AND the Husband provide to the Wife’s solicitors documentary evidence
of the quantum of each payment no less than 48 hours in
8. That within 7 days of these Orders, the Husband shall provide the Wife's
solicitors all documents not already provided in relation
to the sale of B Pty
Ltd, including but not limited to:
(a) A signed Contract of sale and any other documents
evidencing sale and terms of agreement including particulars of all entities
(b) particulars and source documents (including but not limited to contracts,
guarantees, loan account statements) in support of
asserted liabilities that the
Husband proposes to be paid from the sale of B Pty Ltd;
(c) proposed direction to pay for payment tranches to be received from sale of B
(d) details of how the Husband (including in his capacity as Director of B Pty
Ltd), proposes to apply and/or hold the funds received
from the sale; and
(e) The Deed of acknowledgment that the Husband proposes to enter into with C
Pty Ltd and F Pty Ltd so that the proceeds of the sale
of B Pty Ltd are paid
directly to the Rana Super Fund per paragraph 8. (b) xii of the Husband's
Affidavit filed 24 August 2021.
Interim Parenting Matters
9. That the child X born ... 2014
live with the Mother and spend time
with the Father as follows:
(a) during Term 3 and Term 4 in
(i) in week one, from the conclusion of
school (or 3.30pm if it is a non-school day) on Wednesday until the commencement
(or 9.00am if it is a non-school day) on Thursday, commencing
Wednesday 8 September 2021 in Term 3 and Wednesday 6 October 2021 in
(ii) in week two, from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if it is a non-school
day) on Friday until the commencement of school
(or 9.00am if it is a non-school
day) on Monday, commencing Friday 3 September 2021 in Term 3 and Friday 15
October 2021 in Term
(b) from 5.00pm on Friday 17
September 2021 to 5.00pm on Thursday 23 September 2021;
(c) on Father’s Day from 9.00am until 5.00pm;
(d) in the event that X is not already spending time with the Father, for the
paternal grandmother’s birthday celebration in
2021 from 3.00pm until
(e) from 4.00pm on Saturday, 25 December 2021 to 5.00pm on
30 December 2021;
(f) from 5.00pm on Saturday, 8 January 2022 to 5.00pm on 14 January 2022;
(g) From 5.00pm on 22 January 2022 to 5.00pm on 28 January 2022; and
(h) such further or other times as agreed between the parties in
10. Notwithstanding any other Order, X spend time with her parents on special
occasions as agreed in writing and in default of agreement
as follows:
(a) with the parent that X is not living with on her
(i) If it is a school day from the
conclusion of school until 7.30pm; and
(ii) If it is a non-school day from 4.00pm until
11. The parties do all things to facilitate X contacting (by telephone,
Facetime or Moochies) the parent with whom she is not spending
time with every
night at such time as agreed (or 5.00pm in default of agreement) or such other
reasonable times as requested by X
and the parties ensure that X be provided
with privacy whilst speaking with either parent.
12. In the event either parent is unable to care for X for a period exceeding
24 hours, the other parent be provided with the first
option to care for
13. The parties be in substantial attendance during X’s time with them
(excluding school time).
14. For the purpose of facilitating changeover that does not coincide with
the X’s attendance at school, changeover occur at
the Husband’s
office in G Street, H Town.
hours immediately prior to the commencement of any time spent with
X and during all such time spent, the parties each be restrained
by injunction
from being under the influence of alcohol to excess (or having a BAC above 0.05)
or illicit drugs.
16. During the time X is with either the mother or the father, that parent
(a) speak of the other parent respectfully; and
(b) not denigrate or insult the other parent in the presence or hearing of X and
use their best endeavours to ensure that others
do not denigrate or insult the
other parent in the presence or hearing of X.
17. Each parent notify the other parent of any medical emergency or serious
medical problem, hospitalisation or accident in relation
to X when she is in
their care as soon as is reasonably practicable.
18. Each party be at liberty to serve a copy of these Orders and any other
Orders made by this Honourable Court on X’s school.
19. The parents be entitled to obtain directly from any school attended by X
or any health or welfare professional or other professional
attended by X copies
of any reports, notices or other relevant verbal or written advice affecting her
education, health and welfare
and for this purpose the Mother and Father keep
the other parent informed of the names and contact details of any relevant
health or welfare professional.
20. The parties each be at liberty to attend all school and sporting and
extracurricular activities of X but the parties shall not
approach each other in
breach of any State Family Violence Order.
21. The Father be at liberty to attend J School for any purpose specified in
an Order of this Honourable Court.
22. In the event that either party considers X is unable to attend school due
to illness, the party will notify the other party by
the Family Wizard App and
each party will otherwise facilitate the child’s attendance at school
while X is in their care and
23. The parties use the Our Family Wizard App to communicate with each other
in relation to X with the Father to meet the cost of
the Our Family Wizard App.
24. The parties forthwith engage Mr K at joint cost for the purposes of
improving their co-parenting relationship with the Father
to meet the cost.
IT IS DIRECTED THAT:
25. The minute of Orders with tracked changes be marked Exhibit
“A” and remain on the Court file.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED THAT:
26. Pursuant to Sections 65DA(2) and 62B the particulars and the obligations
these orders create and the particulars of the consequences
that may follow if a
person contravenes these orders and details of who can assist parties adjust to
and comply with an order are
set out in the Fact Sheet attached hereto and those
particulars are included in these orders.
27. All extant interlocutory applications be dismissed and the matter be
allocated to the list of cases awaiting allocation to a judge’s
AND IT IS NOTED THAT
the father may bring a further
interlocutory application to increase time spent on an interim basis.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 17.02
Family Law Rules 2004
Section 121
Family Law Act
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in very limited circumstances, to
publish proceedings that identify persons, associated persons,
or witnesses
involved in family law proceedings.
IT IS NOTED
that publication
of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Rana & Rana
been approved by the Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
1 The parties have adjusted a number of interim matters in the terms of
orders sought at the commencement of these reasons. The wife
application that the husband pay her costs of today in the sum of $7,018. The
husband does not seek to be heard on quantum
but opposes an order being made
that he be liable for the wife’s costs as claimed in this instance.
2 The relief that has been obtained today and provided for in paragraphs
1,2,4,5 and 6, was clearly semaphored when the matter was
in court on the last
occasion even prior to the wife filing a formal application. The fact that the
husband would not agree to a
dollar for dollar order necessitated the wife
making a discrete application and she has succeeded on that application. To the
that the wife may receive money for costs in to the future, her costs of
making the application are not covered by the order. I am
satisfied that there
are circumstances in this case which justify a departure from the usual position
whereby each party pays his
or her own costs in family law proceedings.
3 Turning to what costs order that should be made, if any, I take into
account the matters set out in
section 117(2A)
Family Law Act
. I’m not going to take each matter not account, only those which
I think are relevant.
4 The first matter is the respective legal positions of the parties
(s.117(2A)(a)
of the Act. The wife’s legal position in my assessment is
relatively simple and straightforward. She doesn’t have a
generating funds through personal employment. She does not receive investment
income. She receives pretty much what the
husband and entities associated with
him pay her. I am satisfied that neither party has so much money that he/she
should have to
incur and pay costs incurred to pursue actions or proceedings
that should have been unnecessary. The husband is entitled to have
costs” paid from a fund as ordered by the Federal Court in ASIC’s
proceedings against him and B Pty Ltd.
The effect of the Order is to oblige the
husband to facilitate payment of the wife’s costs paid from that fund
5 Neither party are in receipt of Legal Aid. This is not a proceeding which
has been required because of noncompliance with an order.
6 It is, in some respects, a matter which falls within
section 117(2A)(c)
that the husband chooses to conduct these proceedings in a strategically
piecemeal way which, in my if acceded to, would have
the impact of putting the
wife under undue pressure. Any such pressure generally diminishes the ability
of the parties to consider
sensible resolutions of real issues in the
proceedings.
7 To the extent that Ms Renwick relies on a lack of understanding of the
wife’s financial circumstances, I am not satisfied
that that is a matter
which should have delayed the husband accepting the merit of the proposal as
contained in the correspondence
of 19 August 2021 from the wife’s
practitioners to the husband’s practitioners. Something that seems to not
to the surface in these proceedings, at least insofar as the husband
is concerned, is that every time these parties come to court
to argue over a
small matter a relatively large amount of costs is incurred. An incremented
approach is an expensive approach. To
suggest, as the husband does, that he be
able to “consider” a dollar for dollar costs order in favour of the
and when (but not before) she has depleted herself of funds is, in my
view, an unsatisfactory response to the wife’s claim.
Legal costs are one
of the great certainties of legal proceedings. Notably, the husband was not
saying that he would commit to
such an order when the wife was depleted of
funds, it was just that he would merely
his position at that
8 I would not characterise this as a proceeding in which the husband has been
wholly unsuccessful, but it does appear to be a proceeding
which, within the
section 117(2A)(g)
, the wife may be considered to have been
significantly successful.
9 I am satisfied that it is just that the husband pay the wife’s costs
as claimed and will order accordingly.
I certify that the preceding nine (9) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Justice
Dated: 30 August 2021
RTF format (343 KB)
Signed PDF/A format