SZRRH & Anor v Minister for Immigration & Anor [2013] FMCA 249 (3 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SZRRH & ANOR v
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & ANOR
[2013] FMCA 249
MIGRATION – Review of Refugee Review
Tribunal decision – whether Tribunal breached requirements of procedural
– whether Tribunal required to provide applicant with early
warning of its views for comment – whether Tribunal considered
material – whether Tribunal failed to take into account relevant
information – whether Tribunal required to
make inquiries – whether
Tribunal feel into jurisdictional error.
Migration Act 1958
SZIUD v Minister for Immigration & Anor
[2006] FCA 1555
SZAFJ v Minister for Immigration & Anor
Minister for Immigration & Anor v Le
[2007] FCA 1318
Prasad v Minister for Immigration & Anor
(1985) 66 FCR
SZHUH v Minister for Immigration & Anor
Minister for Immigration & Anor v SZIAI
[2009] HCA 39
First Applicant:
Second Applicant:
First Respondent:
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP
Second Respondent:
REFUGEE REVIEW TRIBUNAL
File Number:
SYG 1637 of 2012
Judgment of:
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Applicants:
Solicitors for the First Respondent:
Minter Ellison
(1) Application dismissed.
(2) Applicants to pay the First Respondent’s costs assessed in the sum of
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYG 1637 of 2012
First Applicant
Second Applicant
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
REFUGEE REVIEW TRIBUNAL
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
applicants in this matter are a husband and wife who arrived in Australia as
visitors on 14 August 2011 and who applied for protection
(Class XA) visas on 27
September 2011. The applications indicated that the substantive applicant was
the husband, the wife completing
a form in which she claimed to be a member of
his family unit and not making an independent claim for protection. A delegate
the Minister refused to grant them protection visas on 11 January 2012. The
applicants applied for review of that decision from
the Refugee Review Tribunal
which arranged for them to attend a hearing by video link from Griffith where
they were residing. On
29 June 2012 the Tribunal determined to affirm the
decision under review and a letter enclosing that decision was sent to the
on 2 July 2012.
ground upon which the first applicant claimed to be a person to whom Australia
owed protection obligations was based upon the
Convention reason of political
opinion. The applicant claimed that he was a member of the Congress Party. His
political allegiance
had been decided after he received importuning from both
the Congress and the BJP in about 2010. He determined to assist the Congress
Party and said that this was done through the travel business that he owned to
aid a Mr T in becoming a local representative in the
Congress interest.
applicant told that his candidate did not win the election, another Mr P won the
seat. Sometime later the applicant said his
office and furniture was ransacked
by the local BJP thugs and his staff was harassed. He claimed that the same
thing happened again
a few weeks later and there was a third attack three or
four days after the second. The applicant claimed that if he returned to
he would be the subject of further attacks from Mr P and his cohort and he
feared for his life and that of his wife.
the course of the hearing before the Tribunal the applicant also told that he
was suffering from a blood disease which required
continual medical treatment
and medication. He told that the cost of this medication in India was very
expensive although he also
said that he was receiving the medication direct from
India and not trying to obtain it through Medicare. He was concerned that
returned to India he would not be able to afford this medication.
applicant told the Tribunal that after the attacks had been made upon him he
moved away from his home and closed his business.
He seemed to have gone into
another business possibly connected with his father-in-law for whom he worked
until he left for Australia.
its findings and reasons commencing at [111] [CB 126] the Tribunal opined that
there were many inconsistencies in the applicant’s
evidence which led it
to conclude that such evidence was not reliable and that he was not a credible
witness. Details of the inconsistencies
are set out at [113] [CB 126] and some
further concerns that the Tribunal had which led it to its view about the
applicant’s
credibility were discussed at [115 – 119] [CB 127-128].
Tribunal also noted, from the evidence given to it by the applicant, that he had
expressed a wish to return to India, and that
in both an application to the US
authorities to attend a diamond trade fair and in his application for a visitors
visa to this country,
he had expressed the view that he wished to return to
India. Given those intentions, the Tribunal concluded at [121] [CB
fact that the main visa applicant was planning to return to India in accordance
with the visas he applied for and is contemplating
a trip to India, reinforces
the Tribunal’s view that the main visa applicant’s evidence about
fearing persecution in
India is not credible.”
Tribunal also considered the applicant’s claims based upon his illness
although it noted that it had no independent evidence
of the existence of this
condition. It concluded that the evidence indicated that the applicant was able
to obtain medication in
India and that his work history indicated he would be a
person who could afford to continue to purchase the medication if he returned.
The Tribunal was not satisfied on the material before it that the applicant
feared serious harm or persecution for any Convention
reason in respect of his
claimed medical condition.
Tribunal had set out under the heading “Complementary Protection
Criterion” at [16-17] [CB 116] the obligation upon
it to consider
complementary protection under
s.36(2)(aa)
Migration Act 1958
. It concluded
in relation to complementary protection that because it found that the applicant
was not a credible witness and did
not accept the claims which it had summarised
at [118] [CB 127] in relation to the political parties and Mr P, it was not
that there were substantial grounds for believing that as a necessary
and foreseeable consequence of him being removed from Australia
to India there
is a real risk that he would suffer significant harm in relation to those
claims. The Tribunal came to the same conclusion
in regard to any claims
arising out of his medical condition.
26 July 2012 the applicant filed an application with this court seeking review
of the Tribunal’s decision. There were four
grounds of application. The
Refugee Review Tribunal denied the applicant procedural fairness by reaching
adverse conclusions that certain aspects
of his claims were implausible, being
conclusions that were not obviously open on the known material without giving
the applicant
the opportunity to be heard in respect of those
Ms Given says in her helpful written submissions, this ground adopts the
language of procedural fairness obligations that arose
under the common law.
But in this particular case those obligations are superseded by those contained
of the Act which states that Division 4 of
is an exhaustive
statement of the requirements of procedural fairness in relation to matters it
deals with. Provided that the Tribunal
complies with the provisions of that
division it cannot be said to have breached the obligation to provide the
applicant with procedural
fairness. I have no evidence or no submissions made
by the applicant that refer directly to any of the subsections of the division
or how they may not have been complied with. It seems to me, from reading the
Tribunal’s decision, that it did comply so far
as it needed to with those
subsections. That ground of application cannot be sustained. To the extent
that the ground seems to
suggest that the Tribunal should give an applicant
early warning of its views so that he may respond to them, this has been
by the Federal Court;
SZIUD v Minister for Immigration &
[2006] FCA 1555
per Spender J;
SZAFJ v Minister for
Immigration & Anor
[2004] FCA 291
per Tamberlin J.
Given in her submissions goes on to consider whether or not ground 1 refers to a
of the Act, and explains why in this case no such claim could be
made, given the fact that the applicant received a hearing before
the Tribunal
and was given an opportunity to consider and respond to matters of concern
raised by the Tribunal at the hearing. As
the clear expressions of doubt made by the Tribunal at the hearing, and the
total rejection of the applicant’s
claims by the delegate, the Applicant
was on notice that the entirety of his claims were in issue in the sense posited
by the High
SZBEL v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs
[2006] HCA 63
(2006) 228 CLR 152
second ground of application was:
emphasised on some irrelevant questions at the oral evidence and ignored my
political profile that put my life in
risk. In doing so the Tribunal may be
said to have ignored relevant material, relied in part of irrelevant material
and/or findings
which were erroneous or mistaken.
The applicant does not assist the court by
providing details of the irrelevant questions, or the material that was ignored,
and without
this it is difficult to come to any conclusion about the ground
other than that it must have been dictated to him by a “friend”.
the absence of any particularisation the ground cannot succeed.
third ground of application was:
Tribunal had no jurisdiction to make the said decision because its
“reasonable satisfaction”
was not arrived in accordance with
the requirements of the
Migration Act
there are no particulars, but it does seem to me, having read the
Tribunal’s decision that there are no grounds for
complaint that the
Tribunal arrived at its decision outside the requirements of the Act. The
Tribunal considered the applicant’s
evidence, it tested it and concluded
that it did not meet the statutory requirement in
fourth and final ground was:
Tribunal’s decision was unjust and was made without taking into account
the full gravity of applicant’s circumstances
and the consequences of the
This strikes the court as being no more than
a request for merits review with which this court is unable to be concerned.
applicant appeared before me today with the assistance of an interpreter. He
told me that the Tribunal did not conduct any investigation
as to what happened
between him and the Congress Party and BJP. He told me that he had had problems
in India and that the Tribunal
did not make any inquiries or investigate what
happened to him. There is a common misunderstanding by persons who appear in
court that a Tribunal has a duty to make inquiries about the claims made by
applicants, if necessary in their country of origin,
and especially when the
Tribunal doubts the validity of a particular claim. This has never been the
Minister for Immigration & Anor v Le
[2007] FCA 1318.
gloss on that general statement was made by Wilcox J in
Prasad v Minister for
Immigration & Anor
(1985) 66 FCR 155
, although in
SZHUH v Minister
for Immigration & Anor
[2008] FCA 1893
Perram J said:
Sections 424
(1)(d) of the Act both permit the Tribunal in its discretion to make
further inquiries. However, it has been held that those provisions
impose, generally speaking, any duty upon the Tribunal to make such inquiries.
It may be that the decision of Wilcox J in
provides the basis for
an argument that in certain circumstances the existence of material which
clearly calls for explanation or
reconciliation may, as a matter of procedural
fairness, generate a duty upon a decision-maker to make further inquiries. It is
however whether the principle in
has survived the
enactment of
section 422B
of the Act.”
duty to inquire was considered by the High Court in
Minister for Immigration
& Anor v SZIAI
[2009] HCA 39
, where at [25] it was held
decisions in the Federal Court concerned with a failure to make obvious
inquiries have led to references to a “duty
to inquire”, that term
is apt to direct consideration away from the question whether the decision which
is under review is
vitiated by jurisdictional error. The duty imposed upon the
Tribunal by the
Migration Act
is a duty to review. It may be that a failure to
make an obvious inquiry about a critical fact, the existence of which is easily
ascertained, could, in some circumstances, supply a sufficient link to the
outcome to constitute a failure to review. If so, such
a failure could give rise
to jurisdictional error by constructive failure to exercise jurisdiction. It may
be that failure to make
such an inquiry results in a decision being affected in
some other way that manifests itself as a jurisdictional
This is the highest that the duty to inquire
now reaches and the type of inquiries that the applicant seeks that the Tribunal
have made do not fall within the definition found in that case.
applicant also told me that things had changed in India since the Tribunal
hearing. There was now a BJP government (I presume
he means either in his state
or in his locality). However, I do not understand this as any difference
because it is indicated in
the Tribunal’s decision record that Mr P, who
won the election, was a BJP candidate, and so far as I am aware the Congress
Party remains in power in India federally. In any event there is nothing this
court can do about a change of situation after a Tribunal
decision has been
made. The court is not reviewing the applicant’s claims but reviewing the
Tribunal decision and the manner
in which it was made.
all these circumstances I am unable to assist the applicant by providing review
of this decision. The application is dismissed.
The applicants must pay the
first respondent’s costs assessed in the sum of $5,625.00.
I certify that the preceding nineteen (19) paragraphs are a true
copy of the reasons for judgment of Raphael FM
Date: 11 April 2013
RTF format (131 KB)
Signed PDF/A format