Nuseed Pty Ltd and Norddeutsche Pflanzenzucht Hans Georg Lembke KG v Limagrain Europe [2025] APO 25 (8 August 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT
Nuseed Pty Ltd and Norddeutsche Pflanzenzucht Hans-Georg
Lembke KG v Limagrain Europe
[2025] APO 25
Patent Application: 2016307234
Title: Brassica plant with pod shattering tolerance
Patent Applicant: Limagrain Europe
Opponent: Nuseed Pty Ltd and Norddeutsche Pflanzenzucht Hans-Georg Lembke
Delegate: Felix White
Decision Date: 8 August 2025
Hearing Date: 8 May 2025, by Videoconference
Catchwords:
– opposition to grant under s59 –
canola plants characterised by the presence or absence of a number of single
polymorphisms, and methods of using those single nucleotide
polymorphisms for marker assisted selection – novelty ground successful
part – prior use –sale of plant seeds an enabling disclosure of the
plant – inventive step ground successful
in part - in view of common
general knowledge – application of Cripps Question to conventional plant
breeding – support
and sufficiency grounds successful – breadth of
claims – technical contribution – plausibility and undue
experimentation
– utility ground unsuccessful –opportunity to amend
– costs awarded
Representation: Solicitor for the applicant: Katrina Crooks
Patent attorney for the applicant: Spruson & Ferguson
Counsel for the opponent: Craig Smith SC
Patent attorney for the opponent: Phillips Ormonde Fitzpatrick
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Patent Application: 2016307234
Title: Brassica plant with pod shattering tolerance
Patent Applicant: Limagrain Europe
Date of Decision: 8 August 2025
The Opposition is successful. Claims 1, 6-8, 11 and 18-20
lack novelty in view of the prior use of Ogura restorer line CR51. Claims
and 18-20 lack inventive step in view of the common general knowledge. All
claims lack support and sufficiency due to the breadth
of their language.
Limagrain Europe has a period of two months to propose amendments to overcome
these issues. Costs according
to Schedule 8 are awarded against Limagrain
REASONS FOR DECISION
Patent Application 2016307234 (“
The Application
”) in the name
of Limagrain Europe (“
The Applicant
”) has been opposed under
Patents Act 1990
Application is the Australian national phase entry of PCT/EP2016/068612 and
claims a priority date of 11 August 2015.
Publication
of acceptance of the Application occurred on 18 August 2022, and a notice of
opposition was filed in the name of Nuseed
Pty Ltd and Norddeutsche
Pflanzenzucht Hans-Georg Lembke KG (“
The Opponents
November 2022.
were made during the evidentiary period under section 104, which had the effect
of adding a number of dependent claims
but did not otherwise affect the scope of
the Application. The amended claims, as allowed on 11 September 2024, form the
this decision.
originally cited in the Statement of Grounds and Particulars included the gamut
of available grounds for opposition. An amended
statement of grounds and
particulars was entered on 18 November 2024.
note but not great import, the period for filing evidence in support was
extended several times pursuant to Regulation 5.9, in
order for the Opponents to
access and analyse seeds that had been deposited under the Budapest Treaty.
This resulted in the Opponents’
evidence in support being spread out in a
succession of declarations and the evidentiary period ultimately not concluding
2024. The case was then set for hearing which was held by
videoconference on 8 May 2025.
pressed by the Opponents in the hearing were lack of support, sufficiency and
utility, lack of novelty and lack of inventive
step. At the hearing I made
further enquires to the parties about the clarity of the claims. The parties
sought additional time
to respond to my queries and hence an exchange of
supplementary submissions was received, which concluded on 25 June 2025.
on file consists of:
Two declarations
by Dr Jean-Pierre Despeghel made on 30 October 2023 (
July 2024 (
), accompanied by supporting exhibits JPD1-19
Two declarations
by Dr Amine Abbadi made on 16 October 2023 (
) and 29 October 2023
) accompanied by exhibits AA-1-2
declarations by Prof Jacqueline Batley made on 18 December 2023
), 12 February 2024 (
) and 16 July 2024
) accompanied by exhibits JB1-5
A declaration by
Dr Mark Wickham made on 12 February 2024 accompanied by exhibits MEW1-4
A declaration of
Dr Rale Gjuric made on 11 May 2024
) accompanied by exhibits
A declaration of
Mr Jean Baptiste Laffaire made on 13 May 2024 (
) accompanied by
exhibits JBL1-2
Applicant sought to bring further declarations from Gjuric and Laffaire into
evidence under the provisions of Regulation 5.23
with a letter of 12 September
2024. A preliminary opinion from the Commissioner’s delegate (issued 4
October 2024) was that
these provisions should not be invoked. If I were to
take this evidence into account I would, by the requirements of Reg. 5.23,
to provide the Opponents with a further opportunity to file evidence and
submissions in response. However, I am in agreement
with the earlier delegate -
the information in these declarations would not affect my decision and therefore
there is no reason to
introduce them into the
proceedings.
Applicable Law and Onus
present application is governed by the Act as amended by the
Intellectual
Property Laws Amendment (Raising the Bar) Act 2012
as the application was
filed after 15 April 2013. Thus, the standard of proof that applies in the
present case is the balance of
probabilities. I must accept the Application if
I am satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the Application complies
the Act. If I am not so satisfied, then I can refuse the application, but
not before giving the Applicant a reasonable opportunity
to amend (subsection
onus of proof lies with the Opponents. Nevertheless, I am able to take any
ground of invalidity into account as per subsection
Field of the invention
Application relates to the field of breeding oilseed rape (
), which is more commonly known in Australia as canola. I will use
these terms interchangeably in this decision.
is relatively young in breeding
, and is an allopolyploid
interspecific hybrid of
Brassica rapa
(10 pairs of chromosomes) with
Brassica oleracea
that each of these parental species encompass a wide range of commercial
cultivars, whereas canola is predominantly used
for oil production as well as
animal feed. Known problems with rapeseed oil include the presence of erucic
acid in oil and glucosinolates
in the seed, both of which can be harmful at high
Development and
maintenance of plants with low levels of these components has been a focus for
plant breeders.
relevant fact about the field of oilseed breeding is that these plants tend to
exhibit strong heterosis, or hybrid vigour,
with hybrid lines demonstrating
increased yield.
In order to
create uniform populations of seed, plant breeders typically employ pollination
control strategies that require male
sterile lines, which enable different lines
to be crossed without
self-pollination.
because oilseeds need to set seed in order to produce a harvestable crop, the
male sterility needs to be reversed in the
progeny plant. This can be achieved
by so-called “restorer” genes. A commonly used sterility system in
Brassicaceae
is the Ogura cytoplasmic male sterility system that is
derived from the radish
Raphanus sativus
. Prior to the present priority
date, this system had been successfully introgressed into canola lines, as had
the cognate restorer
gene (Rf) also from
unexpected benefit of the introgression of the Rf genetic material was a
reduction in the phenotype of “pod shatter”
in the oilseed. Pod
shatter refers to the natural ability of seed pods to dehisce or
“shatter” in order to release and
scatter the seed. While this
trait is valuable to a wild plant it is preferably reduced in commercial
varieties where the seed is
intended to be
the other hand, the same introgression was also associated with undesirable
characteristics including higher glucosinolate levels
and decreased
Furthermore,
and due at least in part to the complex allopolyploid nature of the canola
genome, the genetic basis for the phenotypes
associated with the
introgression were not well
understood.
this background, the present application provides a canola plant with a
shortened introgression which retains the fertility
restorer and pod shatter
resistance phenotype, while reducing the associated undesirable characteristics.
It also provides a set
of single nucleotide polymorphism genetic markers that
can be used to test for the presence or absence of the relevant parts of the
introgression.
The specification
construing the specification and claims it is worth restating the principles
under which this exercise is performed –
construction is a legal task and
is a job for the delegate to perform, but it is one that should be done from the
perspective of
the hypothetical skilled worker in the field – it should be
done from the perspective of one seeking to understand and make
the invention
work, and above all it should be done with a generous measure of common
specification of the Application includes 33 pages of description, 14 pages of
figures and ends with 27 claims. It is also accompanied
by a deposit, made
under the provision of the Budapest Treaty, of seeds of the
R42141F at the National Collections of Industrial, Food and Marine Bacteria in
Aberdeen, Scotland.
description includes a background section which sets out the background of
breeding along the lines mentioned above. This is followed by
statements setting out embodiments of the present invention at p.
particular, “one embodiment is to obtain a
plant comprising
a shortened
fragment including the pod shattering tolerance
Lower down that
page it states “The invention also relates to methods for identifying the
presence of said pod shattering
tolerance allele in
in particular, suitable markers associated (or not associated) to said new pod
shattering tolerance.”
this it would appear that the invention is primarily concerned with shortening
introgression while retaining pod shattering tolerance, and
while elimination of undesirable characteristics associated with the
fragment would no doubt be desirable, this does not appear to be
specification then goes on to describe a
plant which is
characterised by a
fragment in its genome which confers the pod
shattering tolerance phenotype POSH
and which lacks one of the
markers defined in SEQ ID Nos
It then goes on to
describe that the markers defined in SEQ ID Nos 19-21 are preferably present, as
is SEQ ID No 22 which is found
FRUITFULL allele which is
involved in pod shattering
specification defines pod shattering tolerance at p. 8 lines 9-10 as a pod with
a tension value of at least 2.3 N; a plant with
pods with tension values less
than 2.3 N are defined as not pod shattering tolerant. Somewhat ambiguously,
the same section defines
POSH+ as referring to the presence of the
POSH region in the genome. However, I think the skilled reader
would understand that POSH
refers to a phenotype – even in
places where the description refers to a “POSH+ allele” such as p.
10 line 5, I
consider that the skilled reader would understand that as the
allele asserted to confer the POSH
phenotype. The apparent
difference being the presence or absence of superscript.
specification defines the markers of SEQ ID Nos 4-22 in Tables 1 and 2, in terms
of the presence of an identified nucleotide at
a particular position. SEQ ID No
4-21 are defined as a string of 100 nucleotides, followed by the identified
marker nucleotide,
followed by a string of another 100 nucleotides. I
understand this way of defining a SNP to be not uncommon, as it is a way of
a unique nucleotide in its genomic context without the need to refer to
genomic coordinates e.g. when a publicly accepted reference
genome is not
available. I further understand that the flanking strings should be present in
ancestry but differ at the
underlined nucleotide. I note that these sequences are not completely precise
and some contain ambiguity
codes, which I understand to refer to other
polymorphic sites in the canola genome. The central nucleotide is defined as
SNP, which I understand to be an indication that the region
of the genome was derived from
and hence is part of the
introgression. A different nucleotide in the central position I understand to
indicate that the region
was derived from
and hence is not part
of the introgression – while the
SNP is not stated in
Tables 1 and 2, Table 3 gives reference primers which show the
SNP at their 3’ end. SEQ ID No 22 follows a different format – it
is only 107 nucleotides long and the SNP is defined
at position
at pages 5-6, and also later at pages 11-13, the specification further sets out
methods of identifying POSH+ plants by detecting
the presence or absence of
respective SNPs, and methods of crossing and backcrossing said plants. The
specification provides means
for detecting the respective SNPs, which are
“typically nucleic acid probes or
and sets out a
number of example primers at p. 6 lines 4-5 and Table
lines 14-28
explains that the exemplified primers are particularly suitable for the
KASP™ genotyping system which uses two
differently labelled forward
primers, one specific for each allelic form of a SNP, and a common reverse
primer. The presence of
each allele can be identified from the fluorescent
signal from the PCR reaction mixture.
description concludes with a series of examples. Example 1 describes the
inventors’ efforts to characterise the genetic
markers associated with
traits on the
introgression. According to this example, in 2011
the inventors crossed plants with the full introgression with plants having
or no introgression, carried out genotyping on the F2 generation with
telomeric and centromeric markers, and repeated this through
to 2015 using
selfed seed.
2 describes the process used to identify markers specific for the
introgression. This involved next-generation sequencing of 143 canola
lines, identification of over 200,000 simple or hemi-SNPs,
of which 169 were
said to fully distinguish male (restorer lines comprising the introgression)
from female (lacking the introgression)
parents. Later, 550 new markers were
said to be developed for the
introgression. The inventors
deduced from this that the introgression had replaced one arm of chromosome C09
genetic material. It would seem that SEQ ID Nos 4-22 are a
subset of these.
3 describes the results of genotypic and phenotypic testing of lines produced in
the 2013 and 2014 harvests. These results
show a correlation between higher pod
shatter tolerance and SNPs from the
introgression. In
particular, it can be inferred from Tables 4 and 5 that SEQ ID Nos 19-21 are
necessary for high pod shatter tolerance
whereas SEQ ID Nos 4-18 are not
sufficient for high pod shatter tolerance. I.e. the loss of SEQ ID NO 19-21
causes a reduction in
pod shatter tolerance.
second “Example 3” explains that the pod shatter phenotype is
partially dominant, with hybrid lines heterozygous for
having less pod shatter tolerance than lines homozygous for the long
introgression. Nevertheless all of the long introgression
hybrids in Figure 5
have pod stability at least 2.3 N which is the cutoff defined in the
description.
4 further identified the
FRUITFULL allele as being associated
with the POSH phenotype, and provided a set of further primers to identify the
presence of this
5 further describes how the F4 progeny of the plants of Example 1 were
systematically genotyped and phenotyped in the same
way as for Example 3. This
resulted in the identification of one plant with a shortened introgression where
the pod shatter coding
region was still present. The F5 progeny of this plant
was designated R42141F and was said to be pod shattering tolerant and had
note that this is the line (R42141F) from which seed was deposited under the
Budapest treaty.
6 sets forth that the line designated
R51542141-F
is at least
homozygous for SEQ ID Nos 19-22 (the “POSH region”) as well as the
FRUITFULL allele, while lacking
region corresponding to SEQ ID Nos 9 and 12-18. This line has similar pod
shatter tolerance to the full length introgression
but similar pod size to the
shorter introgression.
6 details another example of genotyping F2 plants generated in 2012 and
identifying plants having only SEQ ID Nos 19-21 from
introgression but lacking the Rf0 fertility restorer locus. These were then
used to create crosses which are fertile, with shortened
fragment and have pod shatter tolerance. One example of this genotype appears
to be the line “04013_22” in Figure 7,
although pod shatter
tolerance was not measured and this line was not deposited.
7 and Figure 3 shows the relationship between the size of the
introgression and pod size. In particular, the line R4513-CA with the full
length introgression has high pod shatter tolerance but
poor pod size, the
heterozygous hybrid line Arsenal has good pod size but poor pod shatter
tolerance, line RD153-101 with a shortened
introgression but no POSH locus has
good pod size but very poor pod shatter tolerance, and the deposited line
R51542141-F has good
pod size and good pod shatter tolerance.
is consistent with the inventors’ hypothesis that the POSH region marked
by SEQ ID Nos 19-21 is associated with pod shatter
tolerance while the remaining
regions of the introgression are responsible for undesirable characteristics, in
particular poor pod
8 and Figure 4 show the results of segregation in a double hybrid population,
which is consistent with the above hypothesis.
is worth noting at this point that although the numbering of SEQ ID Nos 4-21 as
well as the presentation of these markers in the
figures and tables of the
present application imply that the markers occur in order along the
introgression, there is no apparent evidence that this is
actually so. Although the inventors seemed to have performed a next generation
sequencing assembly during the work described in Example 2, the genomic
coordinates of the markers have not been disclosed.
specification ends with 27 claims, of which only claims 1 and 17 are
independent, in that they do not refer to or cross-reference
claims (which are annexed in full at the end of this decision) can broadly be
grouped into the following categories:
Claims 1-11 are
directed to POSH+
plants and plant parts characterised by the
presence and absence of specified
SNPs in their genome. In
particular, claim 1 specifies that at least one of SEQ ID Nos 19-21 (markers of
the POSH locus) must be
present and at least one of SEQ ID Nos 4-18 (markers of
the rest of the
introgression) are absent. I take this to mean
that the claimed plants have at least part of the
while lacking at least part of the remainder of the introgression. The metric
used to determine this is the presence
or absence of specific defined SNPs.
Claims 12-16 are
directed to methods of identifying POSH+
plants by detecting the
presence and absence of the specified
SNPs. I understand these
claims to refer to testing for the presence and absence of the respective SNPs
plant with the intention of differentiating POSH+ from
POSH- plants.
Claim 17 is
directed to a method of using one or more primers set out in SEQ ID NO: 52-54
and SEQ ID NO:64-117 for detecting one or
more of the
SEQ ID 4-22. I note that this is somewhat broader in scope than claim 12 in
that it only requires detection of one of the
furthermore includes detection of the FRUITFULL marker SEQ ID No 22 which is not
included in claim 12.
Claims 18-20 are
directed to conventional uses of the plants of claims 1-11 for oil, food, or
breeding purposes.
Claims 21-24
relate to marker-assisted selection of hybrids using a plant of claims 1-11 as a
Claims 25-27
relate to marker-assisted selection of hybrid plants according to claim 1-11,
starting with parental plants comprising
introgression.
the extent that any of the dependent claims add features which make a material
difference to the base claims I will address them
under the relevant statutory
basis. Although nothing ultimately turns on it, I note that only claim 24
specifically references the
deposited line R51542141-F (NCIMB 42444).
The expert evidence
Despeghel has worked in the field of oilseed rape for over 40 years, first at
Monsanto and more recently as an independent consultant.
His experience
includes being the Worldwide Oilseed Rape Breeding Manager at Monsanto for a
time, and he states he was recognised
as an oilseed rape
In his first
declaration, Dr Despeghel provides his opinion on what was known in the art in
the period up to the filing of the opposed
application, and subsequently
provided his opinion upon reading the application. His second declaration is
confined to comments
on the Declarations of Mr Laffaire and Dr Gjuric.
anything, Dr Despeghel’s level of expertise is such as to make him more
knowledgeable than the nominal skilled worker in
the art. However I can take
his evidence into account when inferring what that nominal skilled worker would
have known. Notably,
Dr Despeghel considers that the quadrennial International
Rapeseed Congress was the major conference in the field of oilseed rape
breeding, was widely attended and was his way of keeping abreast of activity in
the field. He considers that data and information
presented at the Congress to
be a good indication of the state of knowledge in the
Abaddi is a head of research and breeding innovation at NPZ Innovations
(apparently part of the same group of companies as the
second named Opponent).
Dr Abaddi’s evidence relates to SNP genotyping assays for the markers in
Tables 1-2 of the Application,
using the KASP genotyping system, on a number of
Dekalb canola hybrid that were said to have been available before August 2015.
His first declaration related to the hybrids DK Exception, DK Exstorm, DK
Explicit and DK Exocet. His second declaration related
to the hybrid DK
Excellium and the restorer line CR51 used to generate this hybrid.
Batley is a Professor of Biological Sciences at the University of Western
Australia. Her technical background relates to crop
genetics with particular
focus on disease resistance and crop improvement in
species, and
she has been directly involved with identifying genes related to
shatter tolerance.
first declaration relates to carrying out similar KASP assays as performed by Dr
Abaddi, but on the R42141F line deposited by
the Applicant under the Budapest
treaty. Her second declaration relates to commentary on Dr Despeghel’s
declaration (notably
she also stated she had attended the 2011 International
Rapeseed Congress and recalled particular presentations made there). Her
declaration responds to Dr Gjurics’s comments regarding her KASP
to Dr Despeghel, Prof Batley’s level of knowledge in the field is very
high but I can take her evidence into account
when inferring what the nominal
skilled worker would have known or done.
Wickham’s declaration related to the prosecution history of corresponding
patent applications in different jurisdictions.
This evidence was not relied on
in the Opponents’ case.
Gjuric has over 35 years of experience in the field of plant breeding. Most
notably he was responsible for the canola breeding
program for the Canadian
subsidiary of DSV from
Since 2009 he has
worked as an independent consultant in the same field, working on business and
technical aspects relating to
He has also been
involved in breeding canola varieties, particularly relating to herbicide
Dr Gjuric’s
declaration follows the same structure as Dr Despeghel’s, after which he
comments on the Despeghel, Batley
and Abaddi declarations.
like Dr Despeghel and Prof Batley, Dr Gjuric indicated that he attended major
conferences as a way of keeping up to date with
developments in the
I can take his evidence
into account when inferring what the nominal skilled worker would know or
Laffaire is the Rapeseed Markers Development Project Leader at the Applicant.
His expertise relates to molecular biology including
QTL mapping and has
extensive experience in the KASP assay. His declaration relates to a genotyping
exercise on commercial seeds
of DK Exocet and he provides comments relating to
Dr Abaddi’s analysis of DK Exocet.
Weighing of evidence
is the role of the Commissioner’s delegate to weigh evidence which also
involves reconciling conflicting evidence when necessary.
In the present case I
noted a number of apparent inconsistencies and contradictions in the efforts of
Dr Abaddi, Prof Batley and
Mr Laffaire to repeat the genotyping experiments
disclosed in the application, on either the deposited line or commercially
lines, although the parties’ submissions in the hearing had not
touched on that issue.
my letter of 12 May 2025, I raised the following points, and sought submissions
from the parties on the reliability of the KASP
assay for determining the SNPs
in whose terms the claimed invention is defined:
Abaddi, Prof Batley and Mr Laffaire all carried out KASP assays using the 18
primer sequences set out in the opposed application.
Abaddi amplified a different set of markers in Exocet (16/18) than in Exception,
Exstorm and Explicit (14/18)
did not appear to attempt to amplify SEQ ID 7.
Batley was not able to amplify SEQ ID 4, 7, 15 and 17 in the deposited
Laffaire did not attempt to amplify SEQ ID 7 and was not able to amplify SEQ ID
15 when retesting Exocet.
results of Dr Abaddi’s and Mr Laffaire’s testing of Exocet lines are
significantly different, and I note that in Mr
Laffaire’s second
declaration he characterises Dr Abaddi’s results as
“implausible”.
Batley further returned divergent results in 5 of the remaining 14 sites when
retesting the deposited strain i.e. only half (9/18)
of the alleles reported for
R5154241-F in Fig 6 of the Opposed application were reproduced by Prof
Gjuric criticised Prof Batley’s experimental
suggesting that she had
not used all appropriate homozygous, heterozygous and wild type controls. Prof
Batley responded that she
did not have said controls available, as they had not
been deposited.
main concern in raising this issue was the possibility that the SNPs claimed
could not be detected reliably, and if that were the
case the possibility that
there would be no workable standard for determining whether or not any plant
fell within the scope of the
claim, which could have led to a fatal lack of
have reviewed the Opponents’ submissions on this point (dated 4 and 25
June 2025) but I did not find them particularly helpful
- they pointed to the
same contradictions I identified above but did not go so far as to make the case
that the KASP assay was not
the other hand I found the Applicant’s reference to Federal Court Rule
34.50 in their submissions of 18 June 2025 to be quite
this to mean that in an infringement proceeding, both parties must have access
to the conduct of any experiment
used in evidence, which forms an adequate basis
for challenging the evidence, whereas no such provision is available before the
Commissioner.
balance of the evidence and submissions, I am not satisfied that detecting SNPs
with the KASP assay is so inherently unreliable
as to constitute a lack of
workable standard. The claims are therefore not unclear on this basis. I am
further comforted by the
fact that if a plant was alleged to infringe the
present claims, any inconsistencies in experimental results would be likely to
resolved in the evidentiary process as per the
Federal Court Rules
to say this does not resolve the contradictions in the experimental evidence but
I will weigh the evidence to the best of
my ability using the information
available to me, as required to decide on the grounds of invalidity which have
been pressed.
only novelty ground pressed by the Opponents is lack of novelty in view of prior
use. The Opponents did not point to any principles
of particular relevance for
assessing this flavour of novelty, beyond the well-worn ones of reverse
infringement and clear and unmistakable
“If the prior inventor’s publication contains a clear description
of, or clear instructions to do or make, something
that would infringe the
patentee’s claim if carried out after the grant of the patentee’s
patent, the patentee’s
claim will have been shown to lack the necessary
novelty, that is to say, it will have been
anticipated.”
Applicant’s submissions did provide some assistance with respect to prior
use by referring to the Full Federal Court’s
decision in
This included
the following principles:
“The onus lies on the party seeking to establish an enabling
disclosure”
“... in order to establish lack of novelty through doing a single act, it
is necessary to establish that the prior art information
was made publicly
available through the doing of that act”
“The act must have made the claimed invention publicly available. This
means that it is accessible to at least one member of
the public in
circumstances where that person would be free in law and equity to make use of
it as that person saw fit”
And finally
“The issue is whether what the skilled addressee
inspection is sufficient to enable him or her to comprehend the complete
have added emphasis to this last point because in my understanding the working
of inventions in the field of engineering, as in
somewhat from in the field of plant breeding which is the case here. To carry
out a mechanical invention, it is of course
necessary to observe all the
component parts in a manner that enables the observer to reproduce it (and hence
to satisfy the reverse
infringement test).
the context of plant breeding, however, my understanding is that to make a plant
all that the skilled worker needs to do is grow
it from seed, assuming that the
seed has the genetic information required to produce an infringing plant.
in the present case I think it is sufficient to ask whether seeds having the
claimed SNPs were available, free in law and equity,
to a member of the public
before the priority date.
note the Applicant’s argument at [60] of their written submission that
there could have been no public disclosure of the genotype
because the claimed
SNPs had not been characterised yet. This approach strikes me as approaching
parameteritis – as elegantly
stated by Beach J in
“Novelty of invention is not provided merely because information given as
part of the definition of the invention in a claim
is new information”
is, a plant bearing the claimed SNPs would have infringed the claim before the
priority date, whether its genotype was known
at the time or not.
nevertheless consider that there is a high burden on the Opponents to establish
that the same seeds in question, by necessity tested
well after the priority
date, had been available free in law and equity many years before.
Abaddi’s first declaration does not, in my view, discharge this onus for
the following reasons. At paragraph 3, he indicates
that he was asked in March
2023 to provide genotype data on hybrids “available before August
2015”. In the next paragraph
he states the seeds had been obtained (from
an unspecified source) on 17
April 2018 (after the priority date).
Confusing matters somewhat, Table 2 indicates the source of some of the
varieties (Monsanto)
but indicates different dates (2014 and 2011) but without
further context. Table 3, relating to DK Exocet, has neither of these
note that Dr Despeghel appears to corroborate that these Dekalb hybrids were
available prior to 2015,
do not have any evidence that these hybrids were genetically stable over time.
Mr Laffaire refers at paragraph 8 of his declaration
“mispollination” being quite common in the production of commercial
seed lots in order to explain inconsistencies
in the SNP analysis of the Exocet
variety. I infer from this that different lots of the same seed may have
different genetics.
Abaddi1 therefore does not satisfy me on the balance of
probabilities that the seeds tested were ones which were freely available
the priority date.
goes some way further in this regard by providing a paper trail for the DK
Excellium and CR51 seeds (Annexes AA-1 and AA2
respectively). I note that AA-1
indicates that the samples were for experimental purposes and were free of
charge. Typically, when
samples are provided in this fashion they are limited
to experimental purposes only. Therefore this does not satisfy me on the
of probabilities that the Excellium seeds tested were sold free in law
and equity.
AA-2, on the other hand, is a purchase order dated 1 November 2012 showing the
purchase of 396 kilograms of CR51 at 15 Euro
per kilogram. This I take to mean
that the seeds were freely available to purchase. I can therefore consider the
CR51 seeds tested
in Table 2 of Abaddi2 to be part of the prior art base for
seeds are homozygous for
at SEQ ID NO. 9 and are homozygous for
at all other loci tested. As these seeds, when grown, would
have inevitably made a plant with the properties of claim 1 this takes
novelty of claim 1 (but not 2-5) according to the reverse infringement text. I
consider it more likely than not that these
seeds also had the FRUITFULL locus
based on its presence in the
introgression, taking away the
novelty of claims 6-7. As per claim 8 the CR51 line is a restorer line and has
the Rf0 locus, but
not necessarily the Ogura cytoplasm of claim 9. Other
appended claims which I consider anticipated by the prior use of CR51 are
11 (seeds), and 18-20 (agricultural uses).
is no suggestion that any of the marker-assisted selection method claims lack
Inventive step
Opponents’ written submissions on inventive step were not particularly
structured and did not particularly differentiate
between the claims to plants
or the claims to methods of marker assisted selection.
Opponents advanced four bases for lack of inventive step – in view of
common general knowledge alone, as well as in view
of common general knowledge
supplemented by the disclosure of three different “plus one” prior
art documents as per s7(3)(a)
The Opponents’ core submission is that each of the claims involve nothing
more than the use of a standard marker-assisted
selection approach to a known
breeding problem. I will first consider inventive step in view of common
general knowledge (subsection
7(2)) and then consider if the “plus
one” documents materially supplement this.
most commonly used test for inventive step is the so-called “Cripps
question” – which is whether the skilled
worker would have been
directly led to try the claimed invention with a reasonable expectation of
success in solving the
note at this point that, analogous to the difference I discussed with respect to
and prior use information, the principles of plant breeding are
such that it is just not possible to “try” a particular
genotype. Rather, when carrying out conventional plant breeding, one must
simply repeatedly cross parent plants with a hope
of introgressing traits from
one into the other. There was no evidence presented relating to the state of
the art in terms of genetic
engineering, but my understanding of the state of
the art is that while insertion of foreign genetic material was possible
biolistics or
Agrobacterium
) this could not be done in a site
specific way. At the priority date CRISPR was not widely available and in any
event precision
editing required chromosome mapping which, as the evidence here
attests, had not been carried out or at least was not part of the
common general
knowledge. I might summarise my understanding as being that while engineering
for insertion of genetic material was
possible, removal or replacement of
genetic material required standard plant breeding techniques, which notably do
not require precise
knowledge of genomic structure (although marker assisted
selection certainly increases the efficiency of the breeding process).
Conveniently
in this case, all the experts agreed that the quadrennial International Rapeseed
Congresses were attended by everyone
with a substantial interest in the field
and were the primary means of information transfer in the field. I can infer
that information presented during these conferences can be considered,
if not common general knowledge per se, at least indicative
of what was common
knowledge to all in the relevant field. Prof Batley even stated that she could
remember specific posters from
more than a decade ago.
outlined earlier, it appears to be common ground that the
introgression, originally introduced into canola as a male fertility restorer,
was known before the priority date to additionally
confer beneficial (pod
shatter tolerance) as well as detrimental characteristics. Furthermore, the
experts agreed that there was
a desire before the priority date to reduce the
size of the
introgression.
corroborated by Annex JPD-5, a poster presented at the 2011 Congress (of which
Dr Despeghel is an author). Entitled “Breeding
for pod shattering
resistance in WOSR hybrids”, this is one of the posters which Prof Batley
said she remembered.
this poster discloses
Resistance sources to shattering in WOSR
Although there is quite large diversity for susceptibility to pod dehiscence
within the WOSR germplasm; the strongest source of resistance
to pod shattering
is to be found in Ogura-INRA hybrids. The introgressed DNA region from
Raphanus sativus
, which carries the restoration gene, brings to the
hybrids, through the restorer, some unwanted characteristics such as higher
glucosinolate
content and small pods, but also at the same time an unmatched
level of pod shattering resistance. We have been able to improve the
quality and
the pod size of our restorers without losing the shattering resistance by
systematically selecting for this character
in our restorer nurseries.
I mentioned I am satisfied that this document is representative of common
general knowledge in the art; even assuming this is not
the case it would
certainly be part of the prior art base as a “plus one” document.
This passage shows that it was known
in the art that the undesirable traits on
introgression could be separated from the desirable
shattering resistance. Furthermore the passage indicates that this was
from which I infer that the “person skilled in the art”
would have had an expectation of success in carrying it out.
first to the inventive step of the plant claims, I consider there was clear
motivation in the art to remove undesirable traits
introgression while maintaining pod shatter tolerance, and to select for same in
restorer lines, with a reasonable expectation of
success. It follows that in
seeking to do so, through conventional techniques, the skilled worker would have
inevitably selected
plants with shorter and shorter introgressions, even though
they may have been unaware of the precise genetic basis for these. I
consider on the balance of probabilities that the plants produced and selected
in this way would inevitably lose the markers
in the region of the introgression
unrelated to pod shattering and therefore be genetically indistinguishable from
the plants of
claims 1-11, regardless of whether the selection was done on the
basis of markers or not.
Applicant’s rebuttals were primarily focused on the non-obviousness of the
molecular markers
. While I accept this and find it persuasive for
the claims actually limited by the use of those markers, claims 1-11 are
regardless of how they were selected.
Furthermore, the use of these plants in conventional ways as set out in claims
18-20 are also
obvious in view of common general knowledge alone. For these
claims it is unnecessary to refer to the disclosure of the “plus
one” documents.
the second front, of the marker-assisted selection claims, the Opponents’
arguments presented during the oral hearing were
along the lines that the
identification of markers was an obvious and desirable thing to do, and that the
uninventive skilled worker
would have inevitably stumbled upon the claimed
markers and hence been able to utilise them for marker assisted selection.
Applicant’s very justified criticism of this is that there is no evidence
base for this whatsoever. Because genomic information
is required to establish
the identity of the SNP markers, the inventive step rationale used for the plant
claims cannot apply here.
There is nothing suggesting the identification of
these precise SNPs or the design of primers specific for their detection.
Prof Batley’s evidence is that before the priority date her own
group had carried out next generation sequencing and identified
over 16,000
polymorphic markers in
including a number associated with pod
there is no suggestion
from the Opponents that the specific markers claimed formed part of this data
“plus one” documents do not assist the Opponents in this regard
either. There is no suggestion in the Opponents’
submissions that the
precise SNPs had been disclosed in the plus one documents, or any rationale as
to how the skilled worker would
have been directly led to these sequences based
on the plus one documents. If anything, they only constitute a suggestion to
markers which falls well short of the requirement in the Cripps
Question of a motivation to try
any of the claimed markers
reasonable expectation of success in distinguishing
conclusion, there is no evidence suggesting that the skilled worker would have
been directly led to the particular claimed marker
sequences. The inventive
step argument for the marker-assisted selection claims therefore fails. However
I find that claims 1-11
and 18-20 lack inventive step in view of common general
Sufficiency and Support
I could broadly summarise the parties’ approach to support and
sufficiency, it would be to say that the Opponents focussed
on a literal reading
of the claims and sought to draw attention to various combinations and
permutations of features which they assert
do not correspond to the technical
contribution, or cannot be made without undue experimentation,
respectively.
respective tests for support
sufficiency
all start with
determining the scope of the claims.
support, the test requires a comparison of the technical contribution, as
determined with regard to the specification as a whole,
with the scope of the
claims. For sufficiency, the test requires firstly to determine whether it is
plausible that the invention
could work over the full scope of the claims, and
furthermore whether to do so would involve undue experimentation as in a
project. The meaning of “full scope” was clarified in
to refer to
variables that are relevant to the technical contribution.
broad terms, the Opponents viewed the claims as directed to plants simply
characterised by having (or lacking) any combination
of specified
SNPs, and also that the claims encompass SNPs that are not the
same as those underlined in Tables 1 and 2.
the other hand, the Applicant sought to highlight the inventors’
contribution in identifying markers for the parts of
introgression which are/are not responsible for the pod shattering tolerance
phenotype, and to parlay that into a “principle
application” which the skilled worker can then apply broadly.
Opponents identified three areas where they alleged the scope of the claims
exceeded the enabled subject matter: the species
identity of the
SNPs and the combination of
Range of Brassica species
specification defines “
” quite broadly as including
“a plant of
species, including
B. napus, B juncea
; preferably
”. The Opponents
that the technical
contribution in the application was limited to
and the claims
were necessarily broader than this. The Applicant’s response to this was
species were a principle of general application and no
evidence had been presented that plants could not be made across the full
of the claim.
seeking to understand whether the
species was in fact a relevant
variable in the sense of
and/or whether a principle of general
application existed across it, I was led to also consider the nature of the DNA
introgressed
, which is what provides the pod shatter
phenotype to the
Nature of the Raphanus DNA
claims specify that the
genomic fragment confers pod shattering
tolerance as well as having at least one of the SNPs in SEQ ID NO 19-21. From
the context
of the application as a whole, it is clear that the reference to the
DNA in claim 1 only makes sense when it refers to the
introgression found in Ogura restorer
lines, the kind which Dr
Gjuric states was well known to include half a chromosome of
That is, the technical
contribution appears to be limited to that genetic background.
is no evidence that the phenotype of pod shatter resistance would be achieved in
species other than
or with any different
introgression. The phenomenon of pod shatter resistance, and its genetic basis,
is clearly a relevant variable
(as defined in
) for the present
invention. However it has only been demonstrated in one particularly genetic
background. Although not precisely
analogous, this calls to mind the principles
set out by Sumption LJ in
“The proposition that a product is efficacious ... must be plausible. It
is not made plausible by a bare assertion to that
effect ... there must be
something that would cause the skilled person to think that there was a
reasonable prospect that the assertion
would prove to be true ... that
reasonable prospect must be based on ... a direct effect on a metabolic
such it is not sufficient to merely assert that the phenotype of pod shatter
resistance is generalisable beyond the one example
genetic background (Ogura
lines). Although there is a proposed genetic locus,
there is no metabolic mechanism suggested. For example it is not clear whether
the POSH locus from the
introgression represents a gain of
function (from
DNA) or a loss of function (from
DNA). In this case the lack of evidence counts against the Applicant.
am not therefore convinced by the Applicant’s invocation of a principle of
general application in terms of the combination
species and
the nature of the
Nature of the Raphanus SNPs
wording of the claims refers to
SNPs “within” the
respective oligonucleotide sequences. Dr Despeghel’s reading of this was
that it included potential
SNPs apart from the ones underlined in Tables 1-2,
and that to identify other
specific SNPs within those sequences
would require a new research
Dr Gjuric on the other
hand considered that he would have no difficulty in identifying
SNPs in the sequences based on the primers provided in Table
this regard I note that the primers shown in Table 3 only provides a comparator
nucleotide (
) for the underlined variant position.
Therefore it seems that the only SNPs that Dr Gjuric would be able to identify
were the ones
at the underlined positions.
Applicant’s submissions on this point included that there was no need to
find additional SNPs in each sequence as one had
already been provided; there
was no evidence that any additional SNPs even existed in the oligonucleotide
sequences; and that based
on the disclosure of the present application, the
skilled worker could identify nearby SNPs should they exist and use them equally
for marker assisted selection.
have to say that I find those arguments somewhat contradictory – if the
other markers are not needed or do not exist then
the technical contribution
must be just the disclosed marker. And even though the applicant asserts that
the scale of research to
validate additional
specific SNPs in
the 3000 positions is much less than a full research project, the lack of surety
as to whether such markers even
exist is to my mind indicative of a research
project. I consider on balance that the inventors’ technical contribution
respect to marker assisted selection is only the SNPs at the underlined
positions, and the evidence suggests that to identify new
specific SNPs in those sequences would require restarting the entire research
project which is undue experimentation.
Combinations of markers
Opponents also pointed to difficulties in making and using plants with any
combination of markers – for example they pointed
to a lack of direction
to make a plant lacking only
SNPs of SEQ ID NO 4 and
They also argued that not
all plants having combinations of SNPs within the scope of the claim would
achieve pod shatter tolerance
advantageous.
I do not find the
latter argument particularly persuasive because the product claims are limited
to plants with the POSH+ phenotype
and hence plants which lack that phenotype
are necessarily excluded. I also do not think there is any undue
experimentation involved
in making plants within the scope of the claim by
conventional breeding methods (cf my conclusion on inventive step) even if this
may be via a tedious process.
Technical contribution
canonical test for support as set out in
is to determine the
technical contribution of the specification and determine whether this
corresponds to the scope of the claims.
light of my reading of the specification as a whole and the expert evidence, my
understanding of what the Applicant has contributed
in the present application
is a set of SNP markers from the
introgression into
Ogura restorer lines, some of which are associated with pod shatter
tolerance and some which are not, and claimed plants that have
some of the
former and lack some of the latter. The Applicant also deposited one hybrid
line that had both satisfactory pod size and shatter resistance
(lacking some, but not all, of the claimed nonessential markers).
Conclusion on support and sufficiency
claims are broader than the technical contribution in three areas:
The nature of
species (all
as opposed to
The nature of
DNA as opposed to the Ogura
restorer half chromosome)
The identity of
SNPs (any SNPs within SEQ ID Nos 4-21 as opposed to the
underlined nucleotides)
come to an analogous conclusion in terms of sufficiency – I am not
convinced that any of the above three variables are principles
application. In particular I am not convinced it is plausible that the
prediction for pod shatter phenotype would be
relevant for plants other than
with the Ogura restorer
introgression on
chromosome 9. Further, while it is plausible that other SNPs could exist within
SEQ ID Nos 4-21 my conclusion is
that identifying the same would be undue
experimentation.
Opponents’ position on utility was that the invention as claimed does not
achieve its promised benefit, which the Opponents
identified as being both low
glucosinolate levels and good pod size, pointing to the passage on p. 4 of the
description that states
these are necessities for any commercialized plant. The
Opponents submitted that there was no evidence that as few as one missing
SNPs would confer these traits. I note that there is nothing in
the specification measuring glucosinolate levels at all.
note that the Opponents cited the 2018
ESCO v Ronneby Road
Full Federal
Court decision
to support the
proposition that the promised benefit or intended utility must be derived from
the whole of the specification. My
understanding of the outcome of that case is
that, contrary to the first instance that held that all of the benefits listed
specification needed to be met, the promises in that case were to be read
disjunctively.
Nevertheless,
from my reading of the specification as a whole, the utility of the claimed SNPs
is simply to act as markers for selecting
out unnecessary parts of the
introgression while maintaining pod shattering tolerance. There
is nothing in the evidence that is inconsistent with this. The
Application’s mention of the desire for low glucosinolates and good pod
size is not to be taken as a binding statement of utility.
I am not aware of
any precedent that commercial applicability is a prerequisite for the utility
requirement
ground of lack of utility has not been made out.
Opposition succeeds on the following grounds:
Claims 1, 6-8,
11 and 18-20 lack novelty in view of the prior use of the Ogura restorer line
CR51, which I am satisfied was available
free of law and equity before the
priority date and which was demonstrated to lack the
Claims 1-11 and
18-20 to plants
lack inventive step in view of the common general
knowledge, in that the skilled worker would have been directly led to reduce the
size of the
introgression through conventional breeding
techniques.
All claims lack
support and sufficiency over their full scope, to the extent that they encompass
plants other than
introgression on
chromosome 9, derived from the Ogura restorer line, and to the extent that they
encompass SNPs other than those
underlined in Figures 1 and 2.
there is a clear prospect that these grounds can be overcome by amendment, I
provide the applicant with a period of two months
from the date of this decision
to propose amendments under s104.
usually follow the event and there is no reason to deviate from that approach in
this case. I note that the claims were amended
under s104 during the opposition
but this amendment served only to add additional dependent claims and did not
obviate any of the
grounds of opposition. I therefore award costs according to
Schedule 8 against Limagrain Europe.
Felix White
Delegate of the Commissioner of Patents
Annex – Claims as amended
comprising a
genomic fragment within its genome, wherein said
fragment confers pod shattering tolerance phenotype POSH+ and said fragment is
characterized
- the absence of at least one
SNP within at least one of the
following markers: SEQ ID NOs 4-18, and
- the presence of at least one
SNP within at least one marker
SEQ ID NO 19, SEQ ID NO 20 or SEQ ID NO 21.
plant according to claim 1, wherein said absence of at
SNP is within a marker selected from the groups
consisting of: SEQ ID NOs: 4-8 and SEQ ID NOs: 10-18.
plant according to claim 1, wherein said absence of at
SNP is within at least two of the markers SEQ ID NOs:
plant according to Claim 1, wherein the
SNPs within said markers SEQ ID NO:9 and SEQ ID NOs: 12-18 are
plant according to any one of Claims 1 or 4, wherein
SNPs within said markers SEQ ID NOs:4-18 are absent.
plant according to any one of Claims 1-5, wherein the
plant further comprises a
FRUITFULL allele.
plant according to claim 6, wherein the
FRUITFULL allele comprises the
SNP within marker
of SEQ ID NO:22.
plant according to any one of claims 1 to 7, wherein
said plant further comprises the male fertility restoration locus Rf0 within
plant according to any one of the claims 1 to 8 wherein
plant comprises a CMS Ogura cytoplasm.
10. A hybrid
plant obtained by crossing a
plant having a
fragment conferring POSH+ phenotype according to
anyone of the claim 1 to 9, with another
plant which does not
fragment conferring POSH+ phenotype, wherein said
hybrid plant comprises the
genomic fragment which confers pod
shattering tolerance phenotype POSH+.
11. A seed, a part of a plant, or a progeny of the
according to any one of the claims 1 to 10.
12. A method of identifying a POSH+
plant according to any
one of claims 1 to 11, wherein said
plant is identified by
detecting the presence of at least one
SNP within at least one
of the following markers SEQ ID NO 19, SEQ ID NO 20 or SEQ ID NO 21 and
detecting the absence of at least
SNP within at least one of
the following markers SEQ ID NOs 4-18.
13. The method according to claim 12, wherein said absence of at least one
SNP is within a marker selected from the groups consisting of:
SEQ ID NOs: 4-8 and SEQ ID NOs: 10-18.
14. The method according to claim 12, wherein said absence of at least one
SNP is within at least two of the markers SEQ ID NOs: 4-18.
15. The method of any one of claims 12 to 14, wherein the POSH+ locus is
further identified by using a
FRUITFULL allele, and more
specifically the
marker SEQ ID NO 22.
16. Method according to any one of claims 12 to 15, wherein the Rf0 locus is
further identified.
17. A method of using one or more means for detecting one or more
SNP within one or more of the following markers: SEQID NOs 4-22,
said means consisting of one or more primers including any one of
52-54 and SEQ ID NO:64-117.
18. Use of the
plant or their seeds, according to any one of
the claims 1 to 11, for food applications, or for breeding applications.
19. Use of the
plant or their seeds, according to claim 18,
for oil production and
for feed applications.
20. Use of the
plant or their seeds, according to claim 18,
as a parent plant in breeding for improving agronomical value of a
plant, line, hybrid or variety.
21. Method of production of a POSH+
plant, wherein the method
comprises the following steps:
a. crossing a first
plant according to any one of claims 1 to
11 with a second POSH- or POSH+
plant; thereby obtaining a F1
hybrid plant;
b. selfing or backcrossing said F1 hybrid plant with said second POSH- or
c. selecting the POSH+
plant among the plant obtained in step
b), using at least one
SNP within at least one of the markers
SEQ ID NO 19, SEQ ID NO 20 or SEQ ID NO 21 and
d. further selecting said POSH+
plant for the absence of at
least one of the
SNPs within at least one of the markers of SEQ
ID NOs:4-18.
22. The method according to claim 21, wherein said absence of at least one
SNP is within a marker selected from the groups consisting of:
SEQ ID NOs: 4-8 and SEQ ID NOs: 10-18.
23. The method according to claim 21, wherein at step d, said absence of at
SNP is within at least two of the markers SEQ ID NOs
24. The method of any one of claims 21 to 23, wherein the first plant is a
plant obtained from a representative sample of the seeds
as deposited at NCIMB
collection under the number 42444.
25. The method of production of a POSH+
plant according to
any one of claim 1 to 11, wherein the method comprises the following steps:
a. providing a first POSH+
plant comprising a
introgression conferring the POSH+ trait, said
introgression
including at least one of the
SNP within one or more of the
following markers: SEQ ID NOs 4-18;
b. crossing said first POSH+
plant with a second POSH- or
plant, thereby obtaining a F1 hybrid plant;
c. selfing or backcrossing the F1 hybrid plant with said second plant POSH-
d. selecting the POSH+ plant among the plant obtained in step c), further
selecting for the presence of at least one
SNP within at least
one of the markers SEQ ID NO 19, SEQ ID NO 20 or SEQ ID NO 21 and further
selecting for the absence of at least
SNP within at least
one of the markers SEQ ID NOs: 4-18.
26. The method of any one of claims 21-25, wherein said first POSH+
plant comprises the Rf0 Ogura fertility restoration gene.
plant obtained by the method of any one of claims
Although I refer to Mr
Laffaire’s second declaration in footnote 28, ultimately nothing turns on
p. 20 line 12 of the
description, see also e.g. Exhibit
Despeghel1 at 21 –
I have referred to source material in Dr Despeghel’s evidence but I note
that this is broadly consistent
with the evidence of Dr Gjuric and indeed the
disclosure of the
specification.
Despeghel1 at
Despeghel1 at
Despeghel1 at
Despeghel1 at
Description at p. 3 lines
16-19, Despeghel1 at 34-35
Gjuric at 37
and Company Limited v Apotex Pty Ltd
[2013] FCA 214
I have italicised all
species names as per convention even though I note that the specification tends
not to do this
15-17 of the description
5 first paragraph of the
description
cf p.2 second
paragraph of the description
p. 6 line 3 of
the description
understand this to be the same line as R42141F, cf p. 30 line 20 of the
description
Despeghel1 at
Despeghel1 at
Abaddi1 at 7 and
Batley1 at 20 and
Laffaire2 at 8 –
although Laffaire2 was outside the regulated evidentiary period ultimately
nothing turned on this so
there was no need to invoke the Reg 5.23
provisions.
Minnesota Mining
& Manufacturing Co v Beiersdorf (Australia) Ltd
[1980] HCA 9
General Tire &
Rubber Co. v Firestone Tyre & Rubber Co Ltd
(1972) RPC 457
Damorgold Pty Ltd v
JAI Products Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC
Otsuka Pharmaceutical
Co. Ltd v Generic Health Pty Ltd (no 4)
(2015) FCA 634
see paragraphs 43 and 51
referencing exhibits JPD-8 and
Exhibits JPD-6, JB-4
Aktiebolaget
Hassle v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2002] HCA 59
(2002) 212 CLR 411
Despeghel1 at 34, Gjuric
Batley2 at 9, Annex
Originally set out in
CSR Building Products Limited v United States Gypsum Company
” and endorsed in subsequent Federal Court
Originally set out
[2017] APO 57
endorsed in subsequent Federal Court
Jusand Nominees
Pty Ltd v Rattlejack Innovations Pty Ltd
[2023] FCAFC
Warner-Lambert v
Generics [Mylan]
[2018] UKSC 56
Despeghel1 at 107 and
OS at D.4 and
RTF format (440 KB)
Signed PDF/A format