Education (Queensland)
[2025] ACopyT 2
File number(s):
CT 2 of 2021
Determination of:
(DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
applicant is a collecting society for the purposes of Pt IVA of the
(Cth) and the respondents are administering bodies for primary and
secondary schools in Australia which copy and communicate works
pursuant to
of the Act – where applicant commenced this proceeding seeking a
determination of “what is a suitable method of data
collection” for
electronic copying and hard copy use of works in schools – where there is
no evidence that there has
been, or presently is, any dispute between the
parties about the method of data collection requiring determination by the
– where proceeding is being used as a ‘backstop’ to
negotiations – where applicant sought coercive orders
against a respondent
without providing proper notice, evidence or submissions – orders refused
– whether proceedings
should be dismissed on the basis that they lack
Legislation:
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr N Murray SC with Mr B Mee
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Banki Haddock Fiora
Counsel for the Respondents:
Ms A Campbell
Solicitor for the Respondents:
Minter Ellison
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
CT 2 of 2021
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION (QUEENSLAND)
others named in the Schedule)
Respondents
O'BRYAN J (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL NOTES THAT:
orders of the Tribunal made on 21 March 2024, the parties were to conduct survey
pilots as described in Annexures A, B, C and D
to those orders in accordance
with the steps outlined in those Annexures.
parties have conducted the survey pilots described in Annexures A and B, which
involve methodologies proposed by the Respondents.
parties are yet to conduct the survey pilots described in Annexures C and D,
which involve methodologies proposed by the Applicant
Applicant’s
Schools NSW Limited, a respondent to this proceeding, undertakes to the
Applicant to use its reasonable endeavours to notify
the Applicant by 12
September 2025 of:
(a) the names and addresses of the schools at which the Applicant may attempt to
conduct the Applicant’s Pilots (
Selected Schools
(b) the date and time at which the Applicant may attempt to commence the
Applicant’s Pilots in the Selected Schools.
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
application by the Applicant for further orders in this proceeding is to be made
on not less than 14 days’ notice to the
Respondents supported by, as
appropriate, evidence and outline submissions.
proceeding be listed for case management on 21 August 2026.
Applicant is to notify the Tribunal promptly if the matter is resolved by the
REASONS FOR
DETERMINATION
O’BRYAN J (DEPUTY PRESIDENT):
proceeding came before the Tribunal for case management on 22 August 2025.
in the afternoon on 21 August 2025, the applicant, Copyright Agency Limited,
sent to the Tribunal proposed orders to be sought
at the case management hearing
the following morning. The first order required one of the respondents, Catholic
Schools NSW Limited,
to nominate schools (governed by Catholic Schools NSW
Limited) at which the applicant’s survey pilots could be conducted and
date and time at which the applicant may commence the survey pilots in the
selected schools.
proposed orders were not foreshadowed by any application to the Tribunal, and
were not accompanied by any submissions or supporting
evidence. Counsel for the
respondents informed the Tribunal that the respondents only received the
proposed orders from the applicant
a few days before the proposed orders were
sent to the Tribunal.
applicant’s conduct in the foregoing respect was unsatisfactory. Any
application for coercive orders to be made by the Tribunal
affecting one of the
parties should be made on reasonable notice to the affected party and, if the
order is opposed, the application
should be supported by evidence and outline
submissions.
proceeding as a whole has questionable utility. The proceeding was commenced by
an application to the Tribunal on 18 May 2021,
more than 4 years ago. It is a
proceeding brought under s 113P(4)(b), within Div 4 of Pt IVA, of the
). The application states
that the applicant applies under
sections 113P(4)(b)
to determine “the question of what is a suitable method of data
collection” for electronic copying and communication,
and reprographic
reproduction (hard copy use), of copyright works in primary and secondary
schools in Australia. In the more than
4 years since the proceeding was
commenced, the applicant has not brought forward any specific question to be
determined by the Tribunal
with respect to data collection for electronic
copying and hard copy use of works in schools, and there is no evidence that
has been any dispute between the parties with respect to any such question
requiring determination by the Tribunal.
way of background, the applicant is a collecting society within the meaning of
Its members include creators and publishers of literary,
dramatic, musical and artistic works, and their agents. The applicant has
than 30,000 author, publisher, and artist members. The respondents are the
representative and administering bodies of government,
Catholic and independent
primary and secondary schools in Australia. Collectively, the respondents
representing the majority of schools
in Australia, being more than 9,500
schools. Each of the respondents has issued to the applicant a remuneration
notice (taking effect
by which each respondent
undertakes:
(a) to pay to the applicant equitable remuneration for licensed copying or
communicating (being copying or communicating of works
permitted under
(b) to give to the applicant reasonable assistance to enable it to collect and
distribute that equitable remuneration.
application to the Tribunal records that the applicant and the respondents have
been parties to agreements relating to the payment
of equitable remuneration by
the respondents and the collection of data in relation to the copying and
communication of works by
schools for around thirty years. On around 14 January
2020, the applicant and each of the respondents entered into agreements (dated
September 2019) that set out the rate of equitable remuneration to be paid by
the respondents until 31 December 2022. At the case
management hearing, I was
informed that the respondents continue to pay equitable remuneration under
agreements entered into with
the applicant.
application to the Tribunal also records that the 2019 agreements contained
provisions with respect to the design and implementation
of a new system to
record electronic reproductions and communications of works and the formulation
and trial of an automatic data
capture system for hard copy use of works. The
agreements required the respondents to work in good faith and collaboratively
the applicant to that end. However, the agreements also provided that if
new systems were not agreed by 30 September 2020, either
party could apply to
the Tribunal for a determination.
applicant and the respondents had not agreed on new systems by the time the
application was made to the Tribunal. However, it
has never been suggested that
the respondents had failed to collaborate in good faith or were being
obstructive in any manner.
the proceeding was commenced in the Tribunal, the parties have continued to work
on the design and implementation of new systems
to record electronic
reproductions and communications of works and data collection for hard copy use
of works, and to conduct pilots
of such systems. This has occurred largely
without the involvement of the Tribunal. On 16 March 2023, I made orders by
of the parties by which:
(a) the respondents would provide to the applicant a summary of the design of
each of the automated data capture system and digital
teaching environment
solutions they proposed to pilot;
(b) the applicant would provide to the respondents a summary of any
modifications to the respondents’ pilot proposed by the
applicant; and
(c) the applicant would provide to the respondents a summary of the design of
any alternative solution that it proposed the respondents
should pilot.
year later, on 21 March 2024, I made further orders by agreement of the parties
to conduct survey pilots as specified in annexures
to those orders in a number
of schools to be selected by the respondents in consultation with the applicant.
Two of the pilots (specified
in annexures A and B of the orders) were designed
by the respondents. Those pilots have been completed. Two of the pilots
in annexures A and B of the orders) were designed by the applicant.
Those pilots have not been completed.
21 August 2025, the respondents filed an affidavit from their solicitor, Zeina
Milicevic. The affidavit explained the difficulties
encountered by the applicant
and the respondents in seeking to implement the pilots designed by the
applicant. Ms Milicevic deposed
that there have been delays in implementing the
applicant’s pilots and expressed the opinion that the majority of the
are attributable to delays by the applicant, and the third parties it has
engaged, in providing information and documents to the
respondents. Ms Milicevic
illustrated the delays by reference to a letter sent by the respondents to the
applicant on 24 October
2024 seeking information required for the implementation
of the applicant’s pilots, which was not responded to until 9 April
On the morning of the case management hearing on 22 August 2025, the applicant
filed a responsive affidavit from its solicitor,
Katherine Haddock. Ms
Haddock’s affidavit explained the steps taken by the applicant between 24
October 2024 and 9 April 2025.
It is unnecessary to make any findings about the
causes of delay, save to conclude that I do not consider that the respondents
responsible for the slow implementation of the applicant’s pilots.
the case management hearing, the respondents informed the Tribunal that, while
they opposed the coercive order sought by the applicant
(set out earlier in
these reasons), Catholic Schools NSW Limited was willing to given an undertaking
to the applicant to use its
reasonable endeavours to notify the applicant by 12
September 2025 of the names and addresses of the schools at which the applicant
may attempt to conduct the applicant’s pilots and the date and time at
which the applicant may attempt to commence the applicant’s
those schools. The undertaking reflects the ongoing cooperation of the
respondents with the pilot program and obviates
the need for the
applicant’s coercive order. I note that I would not have made the
applicant’s coercive order in any
event, given the failure of the
applicant to afford the respondents proper notice that it would seek the order,
and the absence of
evidence or submissions in support of the order. A question
also arises concerning the Tribunal’s power to make an order in
sought by the applicant, but the Tribunal has not had the benefit of submissions
on that issue and it is unnecessary to
address it.
further question arises whether the proceeding should be dismissed on the ground
that, after more than 4 years, there is no question
before the Tribunal that
requires determination. There is no evidence that the parties disagree about a
suitable method of data collection
for electronic copying and communication and
hard copy use of copyright works in schools. The respondents have conducted
methods proposed by them and the applicant wishes to conduct pilots of
alternative methods. It is unclear how long the applicant’s
pilots will
take as questions remain about practical issues. Nevertheless, if a question
arises in the future with respect to methods
of data collection, a proceeding
could be instituted in the Tribunal at that time to resolve the question.
the case management hearing, the applicant opposed the dismissal of the
proceeding and submitted that the proceeding provided a
to the negotiations between the parties by giving the parties ready access to
the Tribunal if negotiations
break down. The applicant submitted that it is more
efficient for disputes between the parties to be resolved under a single
proceeding,
rather than the parties having to commence a separate proceeding
each time a dispute arises. I am far from convinced that the manner
in which the
applicant is seeking to use this proceeding, whereby the Tribunal is seen as a
form of mediator or umpire for the parties’
negotiations, is within the
contemplation of the statutory scheme comprising
and VI of the
I have strong reservations about the utility of this proceeding, I have
determined that the appropriate course is not to
dismiss it at this time.
However, I can see no benefit in scheduling further case management hearings in
the short term when the
parties are dealing with each other cooperatively with
respect to data collection pilots. I will therefore make orders under which
either party may apply to the Tribunal for further orders on reasonable notice
to the other party and schedule a further case management
hearing in 12
months’ time.
I certify that the preceding sixteen (16)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 26 August 2025
SCHEDULE OF PARTIES
Department of Education (New South Wales)
ACT Education
Directorate
Department of Education and Training (Victoria)
Department of
Education Tasmania
Department for Education (South Australia)
Territory of Australia (Department of Education)
Department of Education
(Western Australia)
Catholic Schools NSW Limited
Catholic Education
Commission of Victoria Limited
Trustees for Catholic Education Office
Archdiocese of Canberra & Goulburn
Catholic Education Centre (Catholic
Education Office Tasmania)
Catholic Education Office (South
Catholic Education Western Australia Limited
Catholic Education
Office (Northern Territory)
The Corporation of the Roman Catholic Bishops of
Queensland (Queensland Catholic Education, Commission)
The Association of
Independent Schools of New South Wales Limited
Independent Schools Queensland
Association of Independent Schools of the A.C.T.
Independent
Schools Victoria Incorporated
Independent Schools Tasmania
Incorporated
Association of Independent Schools of South
Association of lndependent Schools of the Northern
Association of Independent Schools of WA
Incorporated
Seventh-Day Adventist Church (Australian Union Conference)
Limited (Adventist Schools Australia)
Christian Schools Australia Limited
RTF format (327 KB)
Signed PDF/A format