James Cook University v Ridd [2020] FCAFC 123 (22 July 2020)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
James Cook University v Ridd
[2020] FCAFC
Appeal from:
Ridd v James Cook University
[2019] FCCA
Ridd v James Cook University (No 2)
[2019] FCCA 2489
File number:
QUD 567 of 2019
GRIFFITHS, RANGIAH AND
SC DERRINGTON
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
INDUSTRIAL LAW –
interpretation of
Enterprise Agreement – whether Code of Conduct incorporated
whether disciplinary action taken for breaches of Code of Conduct
contravened Enterprise Agreement – meaning and effect of cl
Enterprise Agreement relating to Intellectual Freedom – relationship
between cl 14 and Code of Conduct
INDUSTRIAL LAW –
interpretation of Enterprise Agreement
extent of obligations
of confidentiality on parties involved in disciplinary processes
whether directions given pursuant to Enterprise Agreement and/or
employer’s common law right breached Enterprise
INDUSTRIAL LAW
appeal from penalty
Fair Work Act 2009
whether primary judge erred in rejecting contention there was a single
course of conduct
assessment of general
error shown in trial judge’s
whether compensation order under
can include
component for shock, distress, hurt or humiliation
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
whether proceedings should be
remitted to Federal Circuit Court for new hearing – where issue not in
dispute at trial
where party bound by way matter conducted at
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
interveners –
whether leave should be granted
Legislation:
Constitution
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Australian National University Act 1946
Australian National University Act 1991
Fair Work Act 2009
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
ss 24(1)(d)
Legislation Act 2003
Fair Work Regulations 2009
(Cth) reg 1.07
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) rr 36.32, 36.57
Crime and Misconduct Act 2001
(Qld) ss 15, 38
James Cook University Act 1997
Public Sector Ethics Act 1994
Cases cited:
Accident Towing & Advisory Committee v
Combined Motor Industries Pty Ltd
[1987] VicRp 48
[1987] VR 529
Ah Toy v Registrar of Companies
[1985] FCA 291
(1985) 10 FCR 280
Aldi Foods Pty Ltd v Morrocanoil Israel Ltd
[2018] FCAFC 93
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
203 CLR 172
Amcor Limited v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2005] HCA 10
222 CLR 241
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner v Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2018] HCA 3
262 CLR 157
Australian Industry Group v Fair Work Australia
[2012] FCAFC 108
205 FCR 339
Australian Licensed Aircraft Engineers Association v International
Aviation Service Assistance Pty Ltd
[2011] FCA 333
193 FCR 526
Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union v
Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Australia
[1998] FCA 249
Australian National University v Burns
[1982] FCA 191
(1982) 64 FLR 166
Australian Rail, Tram & Bus Industry Union v KDR Victoria Pty Ltd
t/a Yarra Trams
[2014] FCAFC 24
Bailey v Nominal Defendant
[2004] QCA 344
Banque Commercial SA v Akhil Holdings Ltd
[1990] HCA 11
Burns v Australian National University
(1982) 61 FCR 76
Byrne v Australian Airlines Ltd
[1995] HCA 24
; 185 CLR 410
City of Wanneroo v Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and
Services Union
[2006] FCA 813
; 153 IR 426
City of Wanneroo v Holmes
[1989] FCA 553
; 30 IR 362
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
Commissioner of Taxation v Scone Race Club Ltd
[2019] FCAFC 225
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Cahill
Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Hay Point
Services Pty Ltd
[2018] FCAFC 182
Coulton v Holcombe
[1986] HCA 33
D’Orta-Ekenaike v Victoria Legal Aid
[2005] HCA 12
Director of Prosecutions (Nauru) v Fowler
[1984] HCA 48
Dynamic Hearing Pty Ltd v Polaris Communications Pty Ltd
273 ALR 696
Ex parte McLean
[1930] HCA 12
Fair Work Ombudsman v Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and
Energy Union (the Hutchison Ports Appeal)
[2019] FCAFC 69
Geo A Bond and Co Ltd (in liq) v McKenzie
[1929] AR 499
George A Bond & Co Ltd (in liq) v McKenzie
[1929] AR(NSW)
Hancock Prospecting Pty Ltd v Reinhart
[2017] FCAFC 170
Harmer v Oracle Corporation Australia Pty Limited
[2013] FCAFC 63
299 ALR 236
Holdway v Arcuri Lawyers (A Firm)
[2008] QCA 218
[2009] 2 Qd R
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
Jemena Asset Management (3) Pty Ltd v Coinvest Ltd
[2011] HCA 3
Kucks v CSR Limited
[1996] IRCA 166
[1996] 66 IR 182
Kuru v State of New South Wales
[2008] HCA 26
National Tertiary Education Union v La Trobe University
[2015] FCAFC
; 254 IR 238
O’Brien v Komesaroff
[1982] HCA 33
150 CLR 310
Optical 88 Ltd v Optical 88 Pty Ltd
[2011] FCAFC 130
Parker v Australian Building and Construction Commissioner
Patrick Stevedores Holdings Pty Ltd v Construction, Forestry, Maritime
and Energy Union
[2019] FCA 1647
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
; 194 CLR 355
R v The Darling Island Stevedoring and Lighterage Co Ltd; Ex parte
Halliday; Ex parte Sullivan
[1938] HCA 44
Richardson v Oracle Corporation Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC 82
223 FCR 334
Ridd v James Cook University (No 2)
[2019] FCCA 2489
Ridd v James Cook University
[2019] FCCA 997
Roadshow Films Pty Ltd v iiNet Ltd
[2011] HCA 54
Robinson Helicopter Company Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
Sharma v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] FCAFC
Shop Distributive and Allied Employees’ Association v Woolworths
[2011] FCAFC 67
Short v FW Hercus Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 51
; 40 FCR 511
Soliman v University of Technology, Sydney
[2009] FCAFC 159
Stewart v Biodiesel Producers Limited
[2008] FCAFC 66
SZRPT v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Ltd v Marmara
[2014] FCAFC 84
222 FCR 152
Transport Workers’ Union of Australia, New South Wales Branch v No
Fuss Liquid Waste Pty Ltd
[2011] FCA 982
University of Wollongong v Metwally (No 2)
[1985] HCA 28
Wentworth v Woollahra Municipal Council (No 2)
[1982] HCA 41
WorkPac Pty Ltd v Skene
[2018] FCAFC 131
264 FCR 536
Date of hearing:
26 and 27 May 2020
Fair Work Division
National Practice Area:
Employment & Industrial Relations
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr B Walker SC with Mr Y Shariff and Ms V
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Clayton Utz
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr S Wood QC with Mr B Kidston and Mr B Jellis
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Mahoneys Lawyers
Counsel for the Intervener:
Solicitor for the Intervener:
National Tertiary Education Union
QUD 567 of 2019
JAMES COOK UNIVERSITY
PETER VINCENT RIDD
GRIFFITHS, RANGIAH AND SC DERRINGTON JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appeal be allowed.
orders made by the Federal Circuit Court of Australia on 6 September 2019 be set
lieu thereof the second further amended application dated 3 August 2018 be
appellant should within 7 days hereof file and serve any further amended notice
of appeal seeking to set aside order 1 of the
orders made by the Federal Circuit
Court of Australia on 16 April 2019.
the respondent opposes any such amendment, he should within 14 days hereof file
and serve a brief outline of submissions, not exceeding
3 pages in length.
appellant should within 21 days hereof file and serve a brief outline of
submissions in response, not exceeding 3 pages in length.
necessary, the issue concerning order 1 of the orders dated 16 April 2019 will
be determined on the papers and without an oral
be no order as to costs.
Note: Entry of orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR
GRIFFITHS AND SC DERRINGTON JJ:
is an appeal from a decision of the Federal Circuit Court declaring that James
Cook University (
) contravened
Fair Work Act 2009
) by making 17 findings against Professor Ridd of breach of
the JCU Code of Conduct (
Code of Conduct
), and by giving him two speech
directions, five confidentiality directions, a ‘no satire’
direction, two censures, and
terminating his employment in contravention of cl
14 of the JCU Enterprise Agreement 2013-2016 (
Enterprise Agreement
question for decision is whether, as the primary judge held, properly construed,
the Enterprise Agreement provided Professor
Ridd with the untrammelled right
(provided his conduct did not harass, vilify, bully or intimidate) to express
his professional opinions
in whatever manner he chose, unconstrained by the
behavioural standards imposed by the Code of Conduct. For the reasons that
it did not, and the termination of Professor Ridd’s employment
with JCU did not contravene s 50 of the FWA.
Ridd was employed by JCU for a period of twenty-seven years. Curiously, no copy
of any written contract of employment between
JCU and Professor Ridd was
included in the Appeal Books and it is unclear whether any such copy was put
before the primary judge.
2 May 2018, JCU terminated Professor Ridd’s employment for serious
misconduct. The termination followed two prior censures,
one on 29 April 2016,
and one, described as the
Final Censure
, on 21 November 2017. The
censures related to findings by JCU that Professor Ridd had engaged in
misconduct contrary to the Code
of Conduct in that he had not expressed a
professional opinion in a manner consistent with his obligations under the Code
of Conduct.
This included by failing to act “in the collegial and academic
spirit” but had denigrated a colleague (including by failing
fellow staff member “with respect and courtesy”), the ARC Centre of
Excellence in Coral Reef Studies (
ARC Centre of Excellence
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority (
), that he had denigrated
the University in a manner inconsistent with his obligations under the Code of
Conduct, and that he had
breached directions to maintain confidentiality. JCU
considered that Professor Ridd’s conduct subsequent to the Final Censure
amounted to serious misconduct, demonstrating a pattern of conduct intentionally
designed to damage the University’s reputation
and destructive of the
necessary trust and confidence for the continuation of the employment
relationship.
pattern of conduct to which JCU referred in its decision to terminate Professor
Ridd’s employment commenced on 16 December
2015 when Professor Ridd sent
an email to a journalist suggesting that reports produced by GBRMPA and the ARC
Centre of Excellence
were unreliable. Professor Ridd stated in the email that
those two organisations should “check their facts before they spin
story” and that if the organisations were asked about the issue, his
“guess is that they will both wiggle and squirm
because they actually know
that these pictures are likely to be telling a misleading story – and they
will smell a trap”.
JCU found that, in using the language he did in the
relevant email, Professor Ridd’s conduct amounted to
“Misconduct”
as defined in the Enterprise Agreement in that he did
not act in a collegial way, did not respect the right of others, did not display
responsibility in respecting his colleagues’ reputations, in breach of the
Code of Conduct (the
First Finding
). On 29 April 2016, Professor
Ridd was issued with a formal censure (the
2016 Censure
told that, “In future it is an expectation that in maintaining your right
to make public comment in a professional
capacity in an academic field in which
you are recognised, it must be in a collegial manner that upholds the University
and individuals
(sic) respect” (the
First Speech
the publication of an essay in a book entitled
Climate Change – The
, Professor Ridd was invited to appear on the television show
“Jones & Co” to participate in an interview with Alan
Peta Credlin (the
Sky Interview
). This he did on 1 August 2017. Following
the Sky Interview, a complaint was made by another professor at JCU to the
effect that
Professor Ridd was “trashing JCU’s relationship with
ARC, GBRMPA and AIMS again”, those organisations being the
ones mentioned
in the email the subject of the
First Finding
and referred to in the Sky
Interview (the reference to “AIMS” is a reference to the Australian
Institute of Marine Science).
24 August 2017, Professor Ridd was notified by JCU that it considered the Sky
Interview to be a
prima facie
case of serious misconduct and wrote,
“[a]s per clause 54.1.5 the confidentiality for all parties in the
management of this
process is highly important, and I trust that you will
consider your obligations professionally” (the
First Confidentiality
27 August 2017, JCU again wrote to Professor Ridd, after he had sought
clarification of the
First Confidentiality Direction
in the following
terms: “[y]ou should not discuss any aspect of the serious misconduct
process whilst it is ongoing –
except with an appropriate
representative” and “you are expected to maintain your
confidentiality obligations to the
University” (the
Confidentiality Direction
19 September 2017, JCU wrote to Professor Ridd informing him that it had made a
prima facie
finding of misconduct in relation to the Sky Interview. The
letter directed Professor Ridd to keep the details of the allegations,
matters relating thereto (including the fact of the 2016 Censure) strictly
confidential. He was instructed not to disclose
or discuss the matter with the
media or in in any other public forum, including social media. He was told that
he was permitted to
discuss the matter with his immediate family, a support
person, his union, professional advisors or JCU’s Employee Assistance
Provider – provided he could assure himself that they would maintain the
same confidentiality (the
Third Confidentiality Direction
an internal search of Professor Ridd’s University email account, JCU wrote
to Professor Ridd on 23 October 2017 requesting
a response to allegations that
he had breached the Code of Conduct by denigrating JCU and a particular
colleague, being insubordinate,
interfering in the disciplinary process in
relation to the
First Finding
, and breaching the
Second Confidentiality Directions
Ridd commenced the proceedings in the Federal Circuit Court on 20 November
21 November 2017, Professor Ridd was informed by letter that JCU considered that
he had engaged in serious misconduct and that
the appropriate disciplinary
action was the
. The conduct found to amount to
serious breach of the Code of Conduct and therefore serious misconduct was:
failing to act
“in the collegial and academic spirit of the search for knowledge,
understanding and truth” and failing
to “treat fellow staff members,
students and members of the public with honesty, respect and courtesy”
when commenting
during the Sky Interview to the effect that we can “no
longer trust” scientific research published by AIMS or the ARC
Excellence, and implying or insinuating that scientists who work for those
organisations are “emotionally attached”
to the reef and their
scientific research is “not objective” (the
“behave in a way that upholds the integrity and good reputation of the
University” and in breaching the Information
Communication Technology
Acceptable Use Policy of the University when expressing views in emails from his
University email account
to external recipients, including recipients at other
universities, that:
(i) “I am not sure I have any
influence on the outcome”, being whether he was likely to be terminated
Third Finding
(ii) “As usual, I have offended some powerful organisations who
don’t like being challenged, and rather than debate the
case, they just
resort to threats and complaints” (the
Fourth Finding
(iii) “Needless to say I have certainly offended some sensitive but
powerful and ruthless egos” (the
Sixth Finding
(iv) “In my view our whole university system pretends to value free
debate, but in fact it crushes it whenever the “wrong”
spoken. They are truly an (sic) Orwellian in nature” (the
failing to treat
a colleague “with respect and courtesy” by denigrating that
colleague and communicating about him in
a disrespectful manner when responding
to a student by email about that colleague’s participation in a conference
as a keynote
speaker in terms, “You wonder why he is there. It is not like
he has any clue about the weather. He will give the normal doom
science about
the GBR” (the
Eighth Finding
engaging in
conduct designed to interfere with the disciplinary process and in breach of the
Third Confidentiality Directions
by soliciting a letter
of support to the Vice Chancellor through a group email to more than 30 people
letter also expressed the “expectation” that the disciplinary
process and all matters relating thereto (including
Final Censure
would remain strictly confidential and directed Professor Ridd not to discuss or
disclose the matter with or to any person, including
the media or in any public
forum, with the same exceptions identified in previous directions as to
confidentiality (the
Fourth Confidentiality Direction
letter of 21 November 2017 contained two further directions. The first was that
Professor Ridd would refrain “from criticising
other persons or
organisations in a manner that is inconsistent with the collegial and academic
spirit of the search for knowledge,
understanding and truth” (the
Second Speech Direction
). The second directed him to “not
make any comment or engage in any conduct that directly or indirectly
trivialises, satirises
or parodies the University taking disciplinary action
against you” (the
No Satire Direction
22 November 2017, an article was published in
The Australian
detailing the application that had been filed in the Federal Circuit Court by
Professor Ridd. Subsequently, Professor Ridd
published a suite of confidential
documents relating to the two disciplinary processes on a
website which included republication of the comments found to be denigrating of
his colleague. He also set up a
website. On 23 November 2017,
Professor Ridd sent a copy of the article in
The Australian
to a student
with the subject line “For your amusement”. JCU held this to be a
breach of the
No Satire Direction
8 February 2018, JCU wrote to Professor Ridd to express concerns about the
apparent breaches of confidentiality directions evidenced
by the media article,
the websites and a flyer that had been distributed on the JCU campus. JCU
directed Professor Ridd to maintain
strict confidentiality in relation to all
matters relating to the disciplinary process, drawing his attention to cl 54.1.5
Enterprise Agreement (the
Fifth Confidentiality
13 April 2018, JCU informed Professor Ridd that it had determined that he had
engaged in serious misconduct, including serious
breaches of the Code of Conduct
and behaviour that was contrary to the interests of the University. JCU found
that in making a series
of comments to
The Australian
, and on the
websites, and in a flyer distributed on
campus, Professor Ridd promoted discussion and perpetrated the view, within and
to the University, that the University took disciplinary action against
him because he had a different scientific view to the University
stakeholders. It found that, contrary to the Code of Conduct, there was no
proper basis for the comments, the comments were
likely to have damaged, and had
the potential to further damage, the reputation of the University, and his
actions were in deliberate
disregard of his obligations to the University (the
Twelfth Finding
). The disclosure of documents to
and the publication of the documents on the
website were found to be in breach of the four previous
Confidentiality
and, in relation to the latter, republication of the denigrating
comments about his colleague (the
JCU found that Professor Ridd had no proper basis for making comments to the
effect that he was denied procedural fairness
and the comments had damaged the
reputation of the University and were in deliberate disregard of the obligations
owed to the University
Thirteenth Finding
found further that Professor Ridd had published comments regarding the
disciplinary process that were untrue, misleading, and/or
not full and frank and
in so doing, failed to act with honesty and integrity in breach of the Code of
Conduct. Professor Ridd had
made the comment that he had been instructed not to
talk anybody about the allegations, even to his wife. The statement was true,
that he had been refused permission to mention the allegations to his wife in an
email dated 27 August 2017. He was, however,
subsequently given permission to do
so on 19 September 2017. This was not mentioned in the published comments (the
Fifteenth Finding
Ridd was also found to have breached to Code of Conduct by failing to
“treat fellow staff members... with honesty,
respect and courtesy”
when replying to an email from his Dean in a manner that was said to be
“threatening, insubordinate,
and disrespectful”. The email included
comments that, “I think you should consider your actions in all this and
side you want to be remembered as being part of. So far it does not look
encouraging but I live in hope” and described the
Dean’s email as
“offensive” and as “[not living] up to public expectations of
decent behaviour” (the
Sixteenth Finding
Ridd was also found to have breached the Code of Conduct by preferring his own
interests and those of the Institute of Public
) above the
interest of the University in failing to disclose that the IPA had paid for
various travel expenses and was providing
assistance with his legal costs to
challenge the 2017 disciplinary processes in circumstances where the IPA
endorses, and has promoted,
Professor Ridd’s comments (the
Seventeenth Finding
Ridd was also found to have deliberately and repeatedly breached
Confidentiality Directions
by: providing a folder of confidential
documents to another Professor (who did not look at them); disclosing
information to the author
of an article in the
Cairns News
; and causing a
flyer to be distributed on JCU’s campus which disclosed the outcome of the
2017 disciplinary process and said,
, that he had “no
intention of accepting the final censure or complying with the order to remain
silent and would rather be
fired than accept the situation” (the
Eleventh Finding
2 May 2018, Professor Ridd’s employment with JCU was terminated.
THE CASE AT TRIAL
inexplicably, Professor Ridd did not dispute that he had engaged in any of the
conduct that formed the basis of the findings
by JCU that related to breach of
the behavioural standards prescribed by the Code of Conduct (being the
– Fourth, Sixth – Eighth, Twelfth, Thirteenth,
– Seventeenth Findings
). Nor did he dispute that his conduct should
not be characterised as breaching those standards of behaviour such that it
could fairly
be characterised as misconduct or serious misconduct — some
instances of the conduct charged were undoubtedly trivial. In particular,
Professor Ridd did not ask the Court below to review JCU’s findings as to
whether or not his conduct in fact breached the standards
of behaviour
prescribed by the Code of Conduct. Senior counsel for Professor Ridd said
explicitly, “...we haven’t run
a case that [JCU] contravened the
code of conduct, that the findings aren’t supported by the evidence, that
constitute misconduct. We haven’t run any of those
– that case” [Transcript, 26.03.19, P-65].
Ridd also did not dispute that he had discussed or disclosed information
contrary to directions he was given and which formed
the basis of the
Ninth – Eleventh Findings
. Nor did he dispute
sending the email the subject of the
Fourteenth Finding
Ridd pleaded below, and maintained the position in this Court, that in respect
of each of the findings of misconduct and
serious misconduct, he was exercising
his right to intellectual freedom in accordance with cl 14 of the Enterprise
Agreement and,
that as none of his conduct harassed, vilified, bullied, or
intimidated those who disagreed with his views (which was conceded by
conduct was protected by cl 14. It was therefore a contravention of the
Enterprise Agreement by JCU to discipline him for
any of the conduct that formed
the basis of those findings.
primary judge agreed and held that
First – Fourth, Sixth –
Eighth, Twelfth, Thirteenth,
Fifteenth – Seventeenth
were unlawful because they breached the rights that Professor Ridd
had pursuant to cl 14.
respect of the findings of breach of the
Confidentiality Directions
Professor Ridd pleaded that, in so far as they were made in purported reliance
on cl 54.1.5 of the Enterprise Agreement, that clause
imposed no obligation of
confidence on Professor Ridd and so no direction could be made pursuant to that
clause. Alternatively, it
was pleaded that Professor Ridd had consented to the
disclosure, was not prohibited from disclosing the information, any disclosure
was not of information “collected or recorded” by JCU and, in any
event, was not serious misconduct within the definition
of that expression in
the Enterprise Agreement.
Ridd also pleaded that cl 54.1.5 is subject to cl 14 of the Enterprise
Agreement. Thus, as the
Confidentiality Directions
had the effect of
prohibiting or limiting the future exercise of his right to intellectual freedom
under cl 14 of the Enterprise
Agreement, by giving those directions, JCU had
contravened the Enterprise Agreement and so the directions were neither
nor lawful.
Consequently,
on either basis, the
Ninth – Eleventh Findings
could not lawfully have been made.
primary judge agreed and held that none of the
Confidentiality Directions
was lawful because JCU had no power to give the directions, and even if it did
have the power, any such direction contravened the
rights Professor Ridd had
pursuant to cl 14. The
Ninth – Eleventh Findings
were therefore unlawful because they each related to the breach of a direction
which was of itself unlawful.
Ridd pleaded similarly that the
Second Speech
No Satire Direction
, had the effect of
prohibiting or limiting his future exercise of his right to intellectual freedom
under cl 14 of the Enterprise
Agreement. By giving those directions, JCU had
contravened the Enterprise Agreement and so the directions were neither
nor lawful. Consequently, the
Fourteenth Finding
related to the
No Satire Direction
, could not lawfully have been
primary judge agreed. His Honour held that each of the
Speech Directions
No Satire Direction
sought to interfere with the rights that
Professor Ridd had pursuant to cl 14. The
Fourteenth Finding
therefore unlawful because it related to the breach of a direction which was of
itself unlawful.
primary judge reasoned that it followed that the censures were also in
contravention of cl 14 and were therefore unlawful, as
was the termination of
Professor Ridd’s employment, because it punished him for conduct that was
protected by cl 14 of the
Enterprise Agreement.
primary judge held that JCU has assumed that the Code of Conduct takes
precedence over cl 14 and, in making that assumption, made
a “fundamental
Ridd v James Cook University
[2019] FCCA 997
[294]-[295]).
He found that the Code of Conduct is subordinate to cl 14 of the Enterprise
(Ridd v James Cook University
[2019] FCCA 997
[299]) and that
it is “only when behaviour is not covered by cl.14 that the Code of
Conduct can apply. Clause 14 means that
it is the right of Professor Ridd to say
what he has said in any manner he likes so long as he does not contravene the
embedded in cl.14” (
Ridd v James Cook University
a consequence of the approach taken by Professor Ridd in his claim against JCU,
the primary outcome of this appeal is limited solely
to the question of whether,
properly construed, the Enterprise Agreement provided Professor Ridd with the
untrammelled right (provided
only that he did not harass, vilify, bully or
intimidate) to express his opinions in whatever manner he chose, unconstrained
behavioural standards imposed by the Code of Conduct, with which he was
bound to comply.
Ridd submitted that the Court should view the video recording of the Sky
Interview, the written transcript of which was
in evidence before the primary
judge (but not the video recording itself). No application pursuant to r 36.57
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) to receive further evidence on
appeal had been filed or foreshadowed. The Court declined to view the video
recording in the
course of the appeal. Even if an application had been made in
the proper form, the limited compass of the appeal made it unnecessary
receive the further evidence. There was no challenge to any finding of fact
relating to the Sky Interview, nor was there any relevant
issue of credibility.
National Tertiary Education Union (
) sought leave to intervene,
pursuant to r 36.32 of the
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth), on the
question of the proper construction of the Enterprise Agreement and it filed
draft written submissions. The NTEU was
permitted to make oral submissions at
the hearing of the appeal, contingent upon whether the Court granted it leave to
(which the Court said it would determine in its reasons for judgment).
regard to the principles relevant to an application to intervene as set out in
Roadshow Films Pty Ltd v iiNet Ltd
[2011] HCA 54
Hancock Prospecting Pty Ltd v Reinhart
[2017] FCAFC 170
257 FCR 442
Court has concluded that leave should be refused. First, the construction of
JCU’s Enterprise Agreement does not involve
consideration of matters of
general relevance to the members of the NTEU; the Enterprise Agreement is
peculiar to one university
only, JCU. Secondly, there was no suggestion that the
parties to the proceedings may not present fully the submissions on a particular
issue, being submissions which the Court should have to assist it to reach a
correct determination. Thirdly, the submissions of the
NTEU largely involved
repetition of the submissions made on behalf of Professor Ridd and so were
unnecessary.
question of liability for costs arises within the Fair Work jurisdiction.
JAMES COOK UNIVERSITY
is a university established by the
James Cook University Act 1997
establishes the University as a body corporate.
the University’s functions to be:
(a) to provide education at university standard; and
(b) to provide facilities for study and research generally and, in particular,
in subjects of special importance to the people of
the tropics; and
(c) to encourage study and research generally and, in particular, in subjects of
special importance to the people of the tropics;
(d) to provide courses of study or instruction (at the levels of achievement the
council considers appropriate) to meet the needs
of the community; and
(e) to confer higher education awards; and
(ea) to disseminate knowledge and promote scholarship;
(eb) to provide facilities and resources for the wellbeing of the
university’s staff, students and other persons undertaking
courses at the
university; and
(f) to exploit commercially, for the university’s benefit, a facility or
resource of the university, including for example,
study, research or knowledge,
belonging to the university, whether alone or with someone else; and
(g) to perform other functions given to the university under this or another
7 establishes the Council of the University which, by virtue of s 8, is the
governing body of the University.
THE ENTERPRISE AGREEMENT
enterprise agreement is a statutory artefact made by persons specifically
empowered in that regard, and under conditions specifically
set down by the
Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Ltd v Marmara
[2014] FCAFC
222 FCR 152
[90]). The Full Court explained the effect of an enterprise
agreement made under the FWA
[T]he Act does more than merely impose conditions upon,
and give additional legal effect to, an agreement made between private parties.
The effect of the legislation is to empower the employer and the relevant
majority of its employees to specify terms which will apply
to the employment of
all employees in the area of work concerned. The legal efficacy of those terms
will arise under statute, not
contract, and ... will be felt also by those who
did not agree to them. Someone such as an employee subsequently taken on, who
nothing to do with the choice of the terms or the making of the agreement,
will be exposed to penal consequences under s 50 if he
or she should happen to
contravene one of the terms. When viewed in this way, it is not difficult to
share in the perception that
an enterprise agreement approved under the FW Act
has a legislative character.
relevant Enterprise Agreement came into effect in 2013. It is expressed to
“cover James Cook University and its staff”
(cl 4.1). It therefore
applies to JCU and Professor Ridd (FWA ss 52 and 53), although the FWA
does not identify the employer, nor any employee, as a “party”
to an enterprise agreement.
8 of the Enterprise Agreement defines the “Parties to the Agreement”
to be “James Cook University and those
staff unions listed at Clause 4,
, of this Agreement”. Those staff unions as listed in cl 4
are: National Tertiary Education Union; United Voice; Together Queensland,
Industrial Union of Employees; Australian Municipal, Administration, Clerical
and Services Union; and Communications, Electrical,
Electronic, Energy,
Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union of Australia.
B of the Enterprise Agreement is headed “University Commitments”.
The terms “JCU” and “the University”
are used variously
throughout Part B and indeed throughout the Enterprise Agreement. The drafting
obscures the intent of the document.
Part B describes “the
University[’s]” commitments in relation to the employment of
Australian Aboriginal and/or
Torres Strait Islander People, “JCU and its
staff[‘s]” responsibility in respect of workplace health and safety,
“JCU[‘s]” recognition of the need for staff support and
representation, “JCU[‘s]” commitment
to maintaining a Joint
Consultative Committee (
), the agreement of “[t]he parties to
this Agreement” to supporting the Code of Conduct,
“JCU[‘s]” commitment
to intellectual freedom, and “the
University[’s]” commitment to providing support to staff who
experience domestic
violence. It is not clear whether, throughout the Enterprise
Agreement, either term is to be read to mean the body corporate as established
James Cook University Act 1997
(Qld), or whether either term is
used collectively, as referring to its constituent elements, including its
13 relates to the Code of Conduct. It provides:
parties to this Agreement support the Code of Conduct as it establishes the
standard by which staff and volunteers conduct themselves
towards others and
perform their professional duties on behalf of JCU.
13.1. The parties agree that the Code of
Conduct will only be changed following consultation with the JCC.
13.2. JCU is committed to achieving and maintaining the highest standards of
ethical conduct and through the Code of Conduct will
ensure that staff:
Seek excellence as a part of a learning community;
Act with integrity;
Behave with respect for others; and
Embrace sustainability and social responsibility.
13.3. The parties note that the Code of
not intended to detract from Clause 14,
Intellectual
(emphasis added)
14 of the Enterprise Agreement provides:
14.1. JCU is committed to act in a manner
consistent with the protection and promotion of intellectual freedom within the
and in accordance with JCU’s Code of Conduct.
14.2. Intellectual freedom includes the rights of staff to:
Pursue critical and open inquiry;
Participate in public debate and express opinions about issues and ideas
related to their respective fields of competence;
Express opinions about the operations of JCU and higher education policy
more generally;
Be eligible to participate in established decision making structures and
processes within JCU, subject to established selection procedures
Participate in professional and representative bodies, including unions and
other representative bodies.
14.3. All staff have the right to express
unpopular or controversial views. However, this comes with a responsibility to
the rights of others and they do not have the right to harass, vilify,
bully or intimidate those who disagree with their views. These
rights are linked
to the responsibilities of staff to support JCU as a place of independent
learning and thought where ideas may
be put forward and opinion expressed
14.4. JCU acknowledges the rights of staff to express disagreement with
University decisions and with the processes used to make
those decisions. Staff
should seek to raise their concerns through applicable processes and give
reasonable opportunity for such
processes to be followed.
14.5. Staff, as leaders and role models to students and the wider
community, must adhere to the highest standards of propriety
and truthfulness in
scholarship, research and professional practice.
14.6. Staff members commenting publicly in a professional or expert
capacity may identify themselves using their University appointment
qualifications, but must not represent their opinions as those of JCU. The
University expects that staff will maintain professional
standards when they
intentionally associate themselves with its name in public statements and/or
14.7. Staff who contribute to public debate as individuals and not in a
professional or expert capacity, must not intentionally
identify themselves in
association with their University appointment.
term “intellectual freedom” is not otherwise defined in the
Enterprise Agreement.
8 of the Enterprise Agreement defines “serious misconduct” to
Serious misconduct as defined by the
Fair Work Regulations 2009
(Cth); as amended from time to time; or
Any serious breach of the James Cook University Code of
; (emphasis added) or
Official Misconduct as defined by the Crime and Misconduct Act 2001, as
amended form time to time.
principles and procedures for dealing with misconduct and serious misconduct are
detailed in Part G of the Enterprise Agreement,
in particular cl 54.
THE CODE OF CONDUCT
a university established by the
James Cook University Act 1997
is a “public sector entity” within the definition contained in the
Schedule to the
Public Sector Ethics Act 1994
subject to the relevant provisions of that Act.
there is any inconsistency between the provisions of the Enterprise Agreement
and the PSEA, the Enterprise Agreement prevails to
the extent of any
inconsistency (FWA s 29). The parties did not contend that there was any
relevant inconsistency.
10 of the PSEA provides:
(1) In recognition of the ethics principles and values
for public service agencies, public sector entities and public officials, codes
of conduct are to apply to those agencies, entities and officials in performing
their function.
(2) The purpose of the code is to provide standards of conduct for public
service agencies, public sector entities and public officials
consistent with
the ethics principles and values.
“public official”, for the purposes of a public sector entity means,
, an employee of the entity. There was no dispute that
Professor Ridd was a “public official” for the purposes of the
Subdivision
1 of Division 3 of Part 4 of the PSEA provides for the content of codes of
conduct for a public sector entity. Section
15 requires the chief executive
officer to ensure that a code of conduct is prepared for the entity and,
relevantly, s 16 provides
that reasonable steps must be taken to consult about
the code with the public officials to whom the code is to apply, industrial
organisations representing the interests of any of the officials, and any other
appropriate entities representing any of the officials.
17 provides that the responsible authority for a public sector entity may
approve a code of conduct prepared under s 15. The
responsible authority for a
university established under an Act is the council of the university (PSEA,
was no dispute that the Code of Conduct was promulgated after consultation with
the JCC, as referred to in cl 13 of the Enterprise
Agreement, nor that the Code
of Conduct was validly approved by the Council of the University on 12 April
2012 and was implemented
from 10 May 2012.
Code of Conduct describes the standards of behaviour expected of all staff of
JCU in respect of four fundamental ethical principles
“to guide the
actions” of staff when acting in their official capacity. Those principles
are to: seek excellence as part
of a learning community; to act with integrity;
to behave with respect for others; and to embrace sustainability and social
responsibility.
Code of Conduct states that it “must be read in conjunction with the
Explanatory Statement for the Code of Conduct which
provides further detail
regarding the required standards of conduct”. There was also no dispute
that the Explanatory Statement
was validly approved by the Council of the
University on 12 April 2012 and was implemented from 10 May 2012.
Code of Conduct provides that failure to comply with it “may lead to
disciplinary action, and in serious cases, may lead
to termination of employment
and/or criminal prosecution”.
apart from that statement in the Code of Conduct, s 18 of the PSEA provides that
a public official of a public service entity
must comply with the standards of
conduct stated in the entity’s code of conduct that apply to the official.
Section 24(c)
provides that if the public official is not a public service
officer or a local government employee, but there are disciplinary processes
applying to the official, action for a contravention of an approved code of
conduct should be dealt with under those disciplinary
processes applying to the
this case, the disciplinary processes that applied to Professor Ridd are those
set out in Part G of the Enterprise Agreement.
THE INTERACTION BETWEEN THE ENTERPRISE AGREEMENT AND THE CODE
primary judge held that the Code of Conduct is not part of the Enterprise
Agreement. He acknowledged, however, that the Enterprise
Agreement envisages
that there will be a Code of Conduct
Ridd v James Cook University
[2019] FCCA 997
gravamen of the findings of the primary judge is that the Code of Conduct is
subordinate to cl 14 of the Enterprise Agreement.
Consequently, according to the
primary judge, “If the whole of what is said objectively is an exercise of
intellectual freedom,
then the protections of cl.14 apply ... It is only when
behaviour is not covered by cl.14, that the Code of Conduct can apply”
Ridd v James Cook University
[2019] FCCA 997
[299]-[301]).
relevant principles applicable to the interpretation of an enterprise agreement
may be stated as follows:
(i) The starting point is the ordinary meaning of the
words, read as a whole and in context (
City of Wanneroo v Holmes
; 30 IR 362, 378;
City of Wanneroo v Australian Municipal,
Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
[2006] FCA 813
; 153 IR 426 [53];
WorkPac Pty Ltd v Skene
[2018] FCAFC 131
264 FCR 536
(ii) A purposive approach is preferred to a narrow or pedantic approach —
the framers of such documents were likely to be of
a “practical bent of
Kucks v CSR Limited
[1996] IRCA 166
[1996] 66 IR 182
Distributive and Allied Employees’ Association v Woolworths SA Pty Ltd
[2011] FCAFC 67
WorkPac Pty Ltd v Skene
[2018] FCAFC 131
[197]). The interpretation “turns upon the language of the particular
agreement, understood in the light of its industrial
context and purpose”
Amcor Limited v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
222 CLR 241
(iii) Context is not confined to the words of the instrument surrounding the
expression to be construed (
City of Wanneroo v Australian Municipal,
Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
[2006] FCA 813
; 153 IR 426
[53]). It may extend to “... the entire document of which it is a part, or
to other documents with which there
is an association” (
Hercus Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 51
; 40 FCR 511, 518;
Australian Municipal,
Administrative, Clerical and Services Union v Treasurer of the Commonwealth of
[1998] FCA 249
(iv) Context may include “... ideas that gave rise to an expression in a
document from which it has been taken” (
Short v FW Hercus Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 51
; 40 FCR 511, 518).
(v) Recourse may be had to the history of a particular clause “Where the
circumstances allow the court to conclude that a clause
in an award is the
product of a history, out of which it grew to be adopted in its present
Short v FW Hercus Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 51
; 40 FCR 511,
(vi) A generous construction is preferred over a strictly literal approach
Geo A Bond and Co Ltd (in liq) v McKenzie
[1929] AR 499
of Wanneroo v Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
[2006] FCA 813
; 153 IR 426 [57]), but “Awards, whether made by consent
or otherwise, should make sense according to the basic conventions
English language. They bind the parties on pain of pecuniary penalties”
City of Wanneroo v Holmes
[1989] FCA 553
; 30 IR 362, 380).
(vii) Words are not to be interpreted in a vacuum divorced from industrial
realities but in the light of the customs and working
conditions of the
particular industry (
City of Wanneroo v Holmes
[1989] FCA 553
; 30 IR 362,
WorkPac Pty Ltd v Skene
[2018] FCAFC 131
264 FCR 536
first then to the language of the Enterprise Agreement and cognizant of the
overarching purpose of an enterprise agreement
— to empower the employer
and the relevant majority of its employees to specify terms which will apply to
the employment of
all employees. As has been described above, cl 14.1 contains
an expression of the University’s commitment “to act in
consistent with the protection and promotion of intellectual freedom within the
University and in accordance with JCU’s
Code of Conduct”. It is
pertinent to note that the Code is described as “JCU’s Code of
Conduct”, not the
“University’s Code of Conduct”
recalling that it is explicitly stated in cl 13.1 that “The parties
Agreement support the Code of Conduct”. That necessarily suggests
that the Code of Conduct is not simply an artefact of the
body corporate but
rather of all those persons whose interests were represented in the making of
the Enterprise Agreement.
described in cl 14.1, JCU’s commitment is not one simply to act
consistently with the protection and promotion of intellectual
freedom; the use
of the conjunctive in that provision requires also that JCU act in accordance
with the Code of Conduct. Employees
therefore have the right to expect that JCU
will honour that commitment both as between JCU and an employee, and as between
The mechanism for so doing is the Code of Conduct.
has also been observed above, the Enterprise Agreement does not provide a
definition of “intellectual freedom”. Clause
14.2 does, however,
provide an inclusive list of rights that are said to be embodied within the
concept of intellectual freedom and
which one might expect to be exercised
within a university context. The first two, to “[p]ursue critical and open
and to “express opinions about issues and ideas related to
their respective fields of competence”, relate most directly
to activities
that would be expected to be undertaken by academic members of staff and which
are embodied in the broadly understood
concept of “academic
freedom”— referred to in the Code of Conduct but not in the
Enterprise Agreement. The remaining
three relate to activities that could be
undertaken both by academic and non-academic staff within a university. It does
could not, seek to give full expression to the concept of intellectual
freedom and the myriad circumstances in which the right to
intellectual freedom
might be exercised, either intra or extramurally.
scope of the definitional examples of the exercise of intellectual freedom in cl
14.2 is explained in the subsequent sub-clauses.
Clause 14.3 acknowledges that
the views that might be expressed by staff in the exercise of intellectual
freedom might be unpopular
or controversial and that all staff have the right to
express such views. This right is, however, necessarily constrained by the
correlative responsibility to respect the rights of others and the proscribing
of the harassment, vilification, bullying or intimidation
of those who disagree
with such views. Once more, the use of the conjunctive constrains the exercise
of the right to express unpopular
or controversial views both by reference to
respect for the rights of others and by the proscription of harassment,
vilification,
bullying or intimidation.
cl 14.4 constrains the acknowledged right, encompassed within the exercise
intellectual freedom, to express negative opinions
and higher education policy generally, by stipulating an expectation that staff
should raise their concerns
through applicable processes.
14.5-14.7 articulate obligations attaching to staff, and thereby place some
parameters around the rights of staff in pursuing
critical and open inquiry, and
in participating in public debate and expressing opinions. Staff “must
adhere to the highest
standards of propriety and truthfulness in scholarship,
research and professional practice”; “must not represent their
opinions as those of JCU”; and, where contributing to public debate as
individuals, “must not intentionally identify
themselves in association
with their University appointment”.
Ridd urged a construction of cl 14 whereby the only constraint on the exercise
by staff of whatever can be properly described
as an exercise of intellectual
freedom is the proscription of harassment, vilification, bullying or
intimidation. Such a construction
does not flow naturally from a plain reading
of cl 14 in its entirety. First, it would leave the words “this comes with
a responsibility
to respect the rights of others” in cl 14.3 without any
work to do. One has a right not to be defamed. If the only prohibition
however, harassment, vilification, bullying or intimidation, defamatory
statements concerning other staff would be protected.
Secondly, it ignores the
express constraints in cll 14.4-14.7. Thirdly, it ignores the express reference
to the Code of Conduct in
question then is whether the Code of Conduct is incorporated into the Enterprise
Agreement. Section 257 of the FWA provides that,
Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth), an enterprise agreement may incorporate
material contained in an instrument or other writing. An example of
incorporation
of a document by reference is cl 23 of the Yarra Trams Enterprise
Bargaining Agreement 2009, considered in
Australian Rail, Tram & Bus
Industry Union v KDR Victoria Pty Ltd t/a Yarra Trams
[2014] FCAFC 24
provided (see [5]):
Staff discipline will continue to be conducted in
accordance with the Yarra Trams Disciplinary Counselling Policy and Procedures,
as contained in MSM document c400im0001.
considering the question of whether the policy was incorporated into the Yarra
Trams Enterprise Bargaining Agreement, the Full
Court held at [9] that it
“is unnecessary to rely on custom and practice to perceive that the clause
required, in terms, that
staff discipline be conducted in accordance with a
clearly identified document, the disciplinary policy”.
6.2 and 6.3 of the Enterprise Agreement are relied upon by Professor Ridd in
support of the contention that an instrument
such as the Code of Conduct cannot
detract from the terms of the Enterprise Agreement. It is asserted that the Code
of Conduct falls
within the ambit of “all other policies, procedures and
guidelines” within the meaning of those sub-clauses. Clause 6
6.1 The parties agree that the Supported Wage System for
People with Disabilities Policy will form part of this agreement.
6.2 All other policies, procedures and guidelines which support the operation of
this Agreement or provide staff benefits, conditions
of employment or
entitlements are not incorporated into nor form part of this Agreement and may
be made or varied from time to time,
following consultation with the Joint
Consultative Committee (JCC).
6.3 If there is any inconsistency between the guidelines and policies and the
express terms of this Agreement, this Agreement will
is to be noted that the clause refers to “policies, procedures and
guidelines” and it expressly incorporates one particular
policy. Numerous
other references to various policies are made throughout the Enterprise
Agreement, including to the Human Resources
Policy and Procedures, the
Recruitment, Selection and Appointment Policy, the Special Studies Program
policy, and the Grievance Resolution
Policy and Procedure. Similarly, there is
reference throughout the Enterprise Agreement to various guidelines, including
to the Travel
Guidelines, guidelines for Marketing and Casual staff, and the
Special Studies Program guidelines. The Code of Conduct is not referred
anywhere in the Enterprise Agreement in terms that suggest it is a mere policy,
procedure or guideline. Quite the contrary. It
is expressly referred to in cl 13
as one of JCU’s commitments under the Enterprise Agreement.
6 does not operate to preclude the incorporation by reference of the Code of
Conduct into the Enterprise Agreement.
commitment in cl 14.1 to act
in accordance with
the Code of Conduct
is consistent with the statement in cl 13.3 that the Code of Conduct is
“not intended to detract from Clause
14”. In this context it is
accepted that the word “detract” should be given its ordinary
grammatical meaning and
usage. Clause 13.3 is no more than a statement of intent
by JCU not to diminish its commitment to promote and protect intellectual
freedom by means of the Code of Conduct. The Code of Conduct does not do so. If
the Code of Conduct were to proscribe any of the
matters listed in cl 14.2 (for
example the right of staff to pursue critical and open inquiry or to participate
in public debate
and express opinions about issues and ideas related to their
respective fields of competence), those provisions of the Code of Conduct
indeed detract from cl 14.
the appeal, Professor Ridd placed considerable emphasis on the terms of
cl 13.3. He submitted that this provision made clear that
cl 14 is the
primary provision and that cl 13 is subordinate to it. There are several
reasons why that submission should be rejected.
First, it is important to note
that cl 13 reflects and records various statements by the
the Enterprise Agreement (being JCU and the specified unions, as opposed to JCU
staff). Those statements include the statement
in the chapeau to cl 13 of
the parties’ mutual support for the Code of Conduct as establishing the
standards by which staff
and volunteers conduct themselves towards others and
perform their professional duties on behalf of JCU. There are no
as such to the Code of Conduct. Rather, it is an
instrument which is made by the CEO and approved by the Council of the
University,
as required by the PSEA. Compliance with the Code of Conduct is,
however, part of the terms and conditions of employment of all
JCU staff (both
academic and non-academic) as well as volunteers and contractors.
the statement in cl 13.3 to the “parties” noting that the Code
is not intended to detract from cl 14,
Intellectual Freedom
records a note to that effect by the parties to the Enterprise Agreement.
As the University pointed out in argument, cl 13.3 is an
interpretive
provision which assists in the proper construction of cl 14.
it is critical to note that cl 14.1 records the commitment of JCU to act in
a manner consistent with the protection and promotion
of intellectual freedom
within the University
in accordance with the Code of Conduct. Part
of that commitment is an implicit commitment on the part of the University to
all staff to comply with the Code of Conduct as part of their employment
relationship. That is confirmed by the terms of both the
Code of Conduct and
the Explanatory Statement, which state that the Code applies to
of JCU while acting in their official capacity.
having regard to the explicit statement in cl 14.1 concerning acting
“in accordance with the Code Conduct”,
cl 13.3 should not be
construed so as to produce a construction of cl 14 which has the effect of
carving out from the content of
that clause the standards imposed by the Code of
Conduct. Clause 13.3 and cl 14 should be read together harmoniously.
Having regard
to their terms, there is no inconsistency between the two
provisions which warrants one being characterised as primary and the other
subordinate. They should be read together.
is the Code of Conduct “an attempt to rewrite the Intellectual Freedom
clause”, as was held by the primary judge (
Ridd v James Cook
[2019] FCCA 997
[244]). Rather, the function of the Code of
Conduct is to set the standards of behaviour for the exercise of the range of
in which staff bound by the Code of Conduct might engage in their
official capacity. This includes the expectations as to standards
of behaviour
in undertaking basic research, in teaching and supervising students, in the use
of resources, in decision-making, and
in general human interactions.
Code of Conduct describes the expectations as to how the rights of staff, as
outlined in the Enterprise Agreement, are to be exercised
commensurately with
the ethical principles prescribed in the PSEA and enshrined in the approved Code
of Conduct.
being bound by the Code of Conduct, including through their contract of
employment, the following rights and duties of staff arise
to, relevantly
(drawing on parts of Principles 1 to 3 of the Code):
value academic
freedom, and enquire, examine, criticise, and challenge in the collegial and
academic spirit of the search for knowledge,
understanding and truth;
behave with intellectual honesty;
have the right to make public comment in a professional, expert or
individual capacity, provided that we do not represent our opinions
as those of
the University unless authorised to do so;
have the right to freedom of expression, provided that our speech is lawful
and respects the rights of others;
maintain appropriate confidentiality regarding University business;
behave in a way that upholds the integrity and good reputation of the
University;
take reasonable steps to avoid, or disclose and manage, any conflict of
interest (actual, potential or perceived) in the course of
employment;
comply with any lawful and reasonable direction given by someone who has
authority to give that direction;
treat fellow staff members, students and members of the public with honesty,
respect and courtesy, and have regard for the dignity
and needs of others;
refrain from and not accept vilification, bullying, harassment or sexual
harassment.
may be observed that many of these standards are couched in vague and imprecise
language. They do not readily provide clear guidance
to staff as to whether
particular conduct might breach the obligations outlined in the Code of Conduct
so as to amount to misconduct,
or indeed serious misconduct. Reasonable minds
may differ about whether particular conduct in fact breaches the obligations on
given occasion. This is an unfortunate consequence of the drafting,
particularly given the very serious consequences that may flow
from a decision
by JCU that conduct has breached the standards. However, as has already been
emphasised, Professor Ridd did not challenge
the conclusions reached by JCU that
his conduct breached the standards of behaviour required by the Code of
obligation of staff, including Professor Ridd, to comply with the Code of
Conduct is enshrined in the Enterprise Agreement (and
in his employment
relationship with JCU, as contemplated by the PSEA) and the consequences of
breach are prescribed by the Enterprise
Ridd pressed the consideration of a number of contextual factors which were said
to support the proposition that cl 14 alone
sets out the rights of employees
with respect to the exercise of intellectual freedom, constrained only by the
limits in cl 14 itself.
The most significant contextual element that is said to
inform the proper construction of the Enterprise Agreement is the fact that
is concerned with a university and that the concept of academic freedom is an
ancient principle foundational to a university context
Burns v Australian
National University
(1982) 61 FCR 76
primary judge considered that “the University has not understood the whole
concept of intellectual freedom”. He held
that, “In the search for
truth, it is an unfortunate consequence that some people may feel denigrated,
offended, hurt or upset.
It may not always be possible to act collegiately (sic)
when diametrically opposed views clash in the search for truth” (
James Cook University
[2019] FCCA 997
is important, however, that the terms “intellectual freedom” and
“academic freedom” not be conflated. As
has already been observed,
the former is used in the Enterprise Agreement, the latter in the Code of
Conduct, together also with
the terms “intellectual honesty” and
“freedom of expression”. The former Chief Justice of the High Court
of Australia, the Hon Robert S French AC observed in his
Independent Review
of Freedom of Speech in Australian Higher Education Providers
(March 2019)
French Review
) p 18 (emphasis added):
‘[F]ree intellectual inquiry’...appears in
the HE [Higher Education] standards. It is a term of uncertain meaning but
to cover some elements of academic freedom. Freedom of speech is an aspect of
academic freedom although used in a sense which
is not congruent with the
general freedom of expression applicable on and off campus. It is a freedom
which, in this context, reflects
the distinctive relationship of academic staff
and universities, a relationship not able to be defined by reference to the
law of employer and employee relationships. Academic freedom has a
complex history and apparently no settled definition. It is nevertheless
a defining characteristic of universities and similar institutions.
Institutional autonomy is a further dimension of academic freedom. It is the
capacity of the institution to discharge, in the way
it thinks fit, its mission
of transmitting and generating human knowledge and conferring on students the
skills and abilities which
the community is entitled to expect. It covers
autonomy in the formulation and application of domestic rules and policies
relating to the conduct of students and staff
and visitors to the
institutions. The extent and limits of such autonomy is ultimately a matter of
public policy informed by the
history, tradition and purposes of higher
education as well as by contemporary needs.
historical context in which the ideal of academic freedom developed is
important. As Mr French notes, it can be traced back to
defence in Plato’s Apology. Even then though, his teaching was constrained
by, and served, his belief in God
(French Review p 114). As university education
became increasingly secular, recognition of the principle that “[s]cience
its teachings shall be free” became common throughout Europe (French
Review p 114-115). Mr French refers to the writings of
American scholar, E
E Brown, at the end of the 19
century in which he rejected the
proposition that academic freedom stood for “mere independence of all
constraint” (French
Review p 115).
time, academic freedom provided the foundation for the concept of tenure for
professorial staff (see Jim Jackson, “Express
Rights to Academic Freedom
in Australian Public University Employment”
[2005] SCULawRw 5
Southern Cross
University Law Review
From the establishment of the first university
in Australia in 1850, the University of Sydney, a professor could expect to be
tenure of office during good behaviour, subject only to becoming
incapacitated for performing the duties of his office, attaining
the age of 60,
or misconduct. Lecturers had no such tenure and their positions were terminable
on six months’ notice. The
first award covering all universities was the
Australian Universities Academic Staff (Conditions of Employment) Award
. It defined academic duties, including obligations to teach and
research, introduced a standardised dismissal procedure, and defined
misconduct.
There was no reference to “academic freedom” and, perhaps more
significantly, the word “tenure”
was not used. Rather, academics of
all levels were to be offered “continuing appointments” subject to
probationary periods.
Gradually, specific references to the appointment of
professorial staff disappeared from university statutes.
observations in
Burns v Australian National University
(1982) 61 FCR 76
are therefore of little more than historical interest. The statute governing the
Australian National University in force at the time
of Professor Burns’
appointment had certain rights conferred on him under that Act. The Act entitled
a professor to be a member
of the Professorial Board which advised the
University Council on matters relating to education. A professor was eligible
for election
to the Council and entitled to vote for the election to the Council
of a professor in the Institute of Advanced Studies. It was in
that context
Ellicott J observed that, “The notion that in the involuntary termination
of a professor’s appointment it
is merely acting under the terms of
appointment and not under its basic statute as well, in my view, debases the
very principle upon
which the University is founded – academic
freedom” ((1982)
Australian National University Act
(Cth) differs from its predecessor. The appointment of the
professoriate is no longer a matter of specific provision in the Act and
is no special entitlement for professors to be elected to the Council; all
members of the academic staff are eligible. In any
event, it was held on appeal
that the rights and duties of the parties to the contract of engagement arose
from that contract and
not from the
Australian National University Act
Australian National University v Burns
[1982] FCA 191
(1982) 64 FLR
is little to be gained in resorting to historical concepts and definitions of
academic freedom. Whatever the concept once meant,
it has evolved to take into
account contemporary circumstances which present a challenge to it, including
the internet, social media
and trolling, none of which informed the view of
persons such as J S Mill, John Locke, Isaiah Berlin and others who
have written
on the topic. As noted by Professor Jennifer Lackey in the
introduction to her book,
Academic Freedom
(Oxford University Press,
2018, 11), although “the protection provided by academic freedom is at
least primarily from institutional
censorship or retaliation, particularly that
of the State and the administration”, a big question today “is
whether this
protection is sufficient, especially against the background of the
underlying rationale of academic freedom and the ever-changing
challenges posed
by online activity”. Professor Lackey says further
Academic freedom plays an indispensable role in
fulfilling the mission of the university. Many of the issues facing
institutions
of higher learning are familiar and timeless ones, such as how to
understand the rationale for academic freedom and whether its aims
compatible with campus protests and no platforming.
But a host of new
challenges have arisen in recent years in response to the changing norms and
expectations of the university. With
the increasing role of the Internet in
research, the rise of social media in both professional and extramural
exchanges, and student
demands for accommodations such as content warnings and
safe spaces, the parameters of, and challenges to, academic freedom often
us in unchartered territory.
(emphasis added)
considering the industrial realities of the modern university system and, in the
light of the customs and working conditions of
this particular industry (
of Wanneroo v Holmes
[1989] FCA 553
; 30 IR 362, 378-9;
WorkPac Pty Ltd v
[2018] FCAFC 131
264 FCR 536
[197]), it must be understood that all
public Australian universities now have enterprise agreements which, to a
greater or lesser
degree, contain clauses referring to intellectual freedom or
to academic freedom (French Review, Ch 21). A survey of these clauses
that greater or lesser degrees of freedom are to be found across the university
sector, no doubt as a consequence of the
relative weight the parties have given
to such freedom in the course of the industrial bargaining process. One
university’s
enterprise agreement states that, “The University
promotes and protects Academic Freedom of Expression, as set out separately
University Policy”. That Policy describes a core value of the university
being “to preserve, defend and promote the
traditional principles of
academic freedom ... so that all scholars at the University are free to engage
in critical enquiry, scholarly
endeavour and public discourse without fear or
favour”. The Policy expressly recognises that scholars are entitled to
their ideas and opinions even when doing so may cause offence. The right
to exercise academic freedom of expression is subject to
two principles: that
all discourse must be undertaken reasonably and in good faith; and all discourse
should accord with principles
of academic and research ethics.
quite different approach is taken by another university whose enterprise
agreement provides, “Without derogating from or limiting
the employment
and other legal obligations of Academic Employees, including the obligations to
comply with reasonable and lawful
directions and requests, the parties to the
Agreement are committed to the principles of promoting and protecting academic
Those principles are said to include the rights of all Academic
Employees to,
, “express unpopular or controversial
views, but this does not mean the right to harass, bully, vilify, defame or
intimidate”.
The definition of both misconduct and serious misconduct
within this particular enterprise agreement includes the refusal to carry
lawful and reasonable instruction.
two examples, from amongst the 44 referred to in the French Review (Appendix 8),
illustrate that there is no common understanding
across the university sector as
to the content of any principle of academic freedom or of intellectual freedom,
nor any unanimity
as to where the bounds of any such freedoms should be set.
is also important to recognise that the provisions of the Enterprise Agreement
and the Code of Conduct apply to
staff of the University, not simply
to academic staff. That may explain why the phrase “intellectual
freedom”, rather
than “academic freedom” is used in cl 14. The
phrase “academic freedom” is used in the Code of Conduct. The
Explanatory Statement says in relation to “academic freedom” that
“Staff are free within their respective fields
of competence to pursue
academic endeavour in accord with appropriate standards of scholarly inquiry.
Staff have an implicit right
to inquire, to examine, to criticise and to
challenge in the collegial and academic spirit of the search for knowledge and
understanding”.
The notion of academic freedom is applicable only to
members of the academic staff. This follows from the distinction drawn in the
Code of Conduct between “academic freedom” and “freedom of
expression”. The latter expression is also elucidated
in the Explanatory
Statement: “All staff, regardless of involvement in academic duties, have
the right to freedom of expression.
However, this comes with a responsibility to
respect the rights and reputations of others. Academic or constructive criticism
encouraged, but staff must not engage in hate speech as this conflicts
directly with the universal value of respect for individuals”.
commitment of JCU in cl 14.1 of the Enterprise Agreement – to promote
intellectual freedom in accordance with the Code of
Conduct – finds scope
and substance in the Code, which is consistent with the promise. The scope and
substance of the commitment
is necessarily different as between academic staff
members and non-academic members of staff. Academic staff members have the
rights described in the Enterprise Agreement and which are given
additional content in the Code of Conduct. The standards by which
these rights
are to be exercised are prescribed in the Code of Conduct.
construction of the Enterprise Agreement for which Professor Ridd contends would
elide any distinction between intellectual freedom
and academic freedom. If cl
14 provides for the right of all staff to express their views in any manner they
so choose, subject only
to the constraint directed at harassment, vilification,
bullying or intimidation, there would be no distinction between academic
and intellectual freedom. In the context of a university, it cannot be supposed
that such a consequence would have been intended
by the drafters and that the
particular privileges and obligations that attend academic discourse would be
irrelevant.
is also necessary to construe the Enterprise Agreement as a whole. The
interaction between cll 13 and 14 and the provisions relating
to misconduct and
serious misconduct in cl 54 are significant. Clause 54 provides the mechanism,
to which the parties to the Enterprise
Agreement have agreed, for JCU to
discipline staff for misconduct and serious misconduct. The Enterprise Agreement
is the sole source
of the grounds for the termination of employment. The
Enterprise Agreement provides that “Termination of employment can only
used in the event of proven unsatisfactory performance or Serious
Misconduct” (cl 8). There is no power in cl 54 for JCU
disciplinary action against an employee for serious misconduct unless that
conduct falls within the definition in cl 8 —
being any serious breach of
the Code of Conduct (or as defined by the
Fair Work Regulations 2009
(Cth) or the
Crime and Misconduct Act 2001
14 purports to place explicit prohibitions on particular conduct, including
harassment, vilification, bullying or intimidation
of others, failing to adhere
to the highest standards of propriety and truthfulness in scholarship research
and professional practice,
representing opinions as those of JCU, and
intentionally identifying themselves in association with their university
appointment
when contributing to public debate in their individual capacity. The
Enterprise Agreement does not provide a mechanism for JCU to
discipline a staff
member for serious misconduct in breach of any of the prohibitions of cl 14.
That is because the definition of
“serious misconduct”, which
triggers the disciplinary processes in cl 54.3, does not include a breach of the
Agreement. The fact that cl 14 commits JCU to act “in
accordance with” the Code of Conduct is consistent with the overall
framework of the Enterprise Agreement which provides for JCU’s commitment
to protect and promote intellectual freedom, appropriately
for different
categories of staff within the University, and in a manner consistent with the
ethical principles which guide the actions
of staff as articulated in the Code
of Conduct.
13 and the Code of Conduct are consistent and compatible with the Enterprise
Agreement. The latter informs the content of the
exercise of intellectual
freedom; the former regulates the manner in which that freedom may be exercised
within the framework of
this particular Enterprise Agreement (which, it should
be noted, has now been superseded by an enterprise agreement in different
and this particular Code of Conduct.
did not contravene cl 14 of the Enterprise Agreement in taking disciplinary
action against Professor Ridd on the basis of the
breaches by him of the Code of
Conduct, which were not contested in the Court below, nor in requiring him to
comply with the standards
of behaviour prescribed in the Code of Conduct.
Contrary to the conclusion reached by the primary judge, none of the
– Fourth, Sixth – Eighth, Twelfth – Seventeenth Findings
Second Speech Direction
was unlawful.
THE CONSTRUCTION OF CL 54.1.5
54.1 sets out the general principles relating to misconduct and serious
misconduct. Clause 54.1.5 was relied on by JCU as one
source of its power to
direct Professor Ridd to keep the disciplinary processes confidential.
Importantly, however, JCU also relied
on a separate source of power to give such
directions, namely that arising under the common law relating to an
employee’s legal
obligation to obey any reasonable and lawful direction
given to the employee by the employer.
drafting of cl 54.1.5 suffers from the same difficulties that attend the
Enterprise Agreement as a whole. Its drafting confounds
a straightforward
construction. Clause 54.1.5 (which appears in Part G of the Enterprise
Agreement, “Conduct and Disputes”)
54.1 General principles
54.1.5 The confidentiality of all parties involved in the management of
Misconduct and Serious Misconduct processes will be respected
information gathered and recorded will remain confidential, subject to
JCU’s obligations:
(a) to discharge its responsibilities under an Act or University policy;
(b) for a proceeding in a court or tribunal; or
(c) unless the person to whom the confidential information relates, consents in
writing to the disclosure of the information or record;
or if no consent is
obtainable and such disclosure is unlikely to harm the interests of the person
affected; or
(d) unless information is already in the public domain.
54.2 and 54.3 describe the procedures and processes applying to concerns that a
staff member has engaged in misconduct or
serious misconduct. The processes
contemplate the possible involvement of a broad range of persons in any such
process, not limited
to the person who is the subject of concern or any
complainant. As will shortly emerge, the range of persons extends from the
member’s line manager up to the Vice-Chancellor.
primary judge held that the purpose of the cl 54.1.5 is to benefit and
protect the employee (
Ridd v James Cook University
[2019] FCCA 997
[269]). He said that, “If it were the case that a staff member had
confidentiality obligations, the clause would have been
written to reflect that,
which reinforces the conclusion that cl 54.1.5 did not mandate confidentiality
obligations on a staff member”
Ridd v James Cook University
language used in cl 54.5.1 does not, in its express terms, impose an obligation
on Professor Ridd to maintain confidentiality.
On one view, the language used
might be considered to denote the expression of an aspiration that something
will occur, namely that
the confidentiality of all parties will be respected.
Alternatively, the use of the passive voice might be considered to bind all
parties to a regime set out in the Enterprise Agreement. The context is
critical. What matters (in accordance with the principles
referred to in [
] above) is what the language used means
in the context of the Enterprise Agreement as a whole.
Clause 54.1.5
is clumsily drafted, as is evident from the following matters. The chapeau
deals with two arguably separate but related
matters, namely the confidentiality
of all parties involved in the management of misconduct and serious misconduct
processes (whose
confidentiality will be respected)
a commitment that
all information gathered and recorded will remain confidential, both matters
which are then subject to JCU’s
obligations. The reference to the
“confidentiality of all parties involved
in the management of
Misconduct and Serious Misconduct
” (emphasis added) does
not simply refer to the confidentiality of all parties
the misconduct
and serious misconduct processes. If the latter wording had been employed, it
might more readily have been discerned
that the clause was directed to
protecting the confidentiality of, for example, the complainant and the staff
member the subject
of the disciplinary process. The parties involved
management of
misconduct and serious misconduct
range of parties in addition to JCU and the relevant staff member. Those
parties, as referred to in the procedures detailed
in cll 54.2 and 54.3,
potentially include a line manager, a supervisor, the Director of Human
Resources Management, an Investigator,
the Senior Deputy Vice-Chancellor and the
Vice-Chancellor. On one view, if attention is focussed only on the first part of
the chapeau,
cl 54 seems directed to respecting the confidentiality of
those parties.
noted above, however, the second part of the chapeau to cl 54.1.5 also
refers to “all information gathered and recorded will
confidential”. This appears to go beyond respecting the confidentiality of
all parties involved in the management of
the processes, which is the subject of
the first part of the chapeau. The second part of the chapeau is sufficiently
wide to include
information relating
to any complainant and
the staff member who is the subject of the disciplinary processes. Such a
construction is consistent with
the evident purpose of the clause, which is to
cast a cloak of confidentiality over the entirety of the disciplinary process,
to some express exceptions listed therein. It is unlikely that the
parties to the Enterprise Agreement were concerned only to protect
confidentiality of managers involved in administering the relevant processes and
not also any complainant and the staff member
who is subject to those processes.
This broader construction of cl 54.1.5 sits more comfortably with the
evident purpose of the provision
than the construction adopted by the primary
our respectful view, the primary judge gave too much emphasis in the chapeau to
cl 54.1.5 to the phrase “subject to JCU’s
obligations”,
which is then followed by four sub-paragraphs. This further highlights the
clumsiness of the drafting of the
clause. Although there are four separate
sub-paragraphs which one would reasonably expect identify the obligations of
JCU, in fact
only sub-paragraph (a) squarely fits that description. The syntax
of sub-paragraph (b) (i.e. starting with “
proceeding...”) does not flow naturally from the term
“obligations”.
it is notable that the disjunctive “or” does not appear at the end
of sub-paragraph (a), yet it does appear
at the end of both sub-paragraphs
(b) and (c). Further, sub-paragraphs (c) and (d) do not truly identify the
JCU’s obligations.
Rather, they create exceptions, as is reflected in the
use of the term “unless” at the beginning of each sub-paragraph.
we consider that the matters referred to in sub-paragraphs (c) and (d) provide
some limited support for the broader construction
of cl 54.1.5 which we
favour. The drafting of both those provisions is sufficiently broad to encompass
confidential information relating
not only to persons involved in managing the
disciplinary process, but also any complainant or staff member who is involved
process (i.e. being persons “to whom the confidential information
relates” or who give consent). Additionally, where
the relevant
confidential information is already in the public domain, it would not make
sense to impose a confidentiality obligation
in respect of that information on
any person, including in this case, Professor Ridd.
54.1.5 is properly construed as imposing an obligation on all parties involved
in the management of the disciplinary processes,
as well as any complainant or
relevant staff member and the University itself, to respect the confidentiality
of all persons involved
and to keep information gathered and recorded
confidential. The clause then provides specifically for two sets of
circumstances in
which the confidentiality does not enure. First, the clause
provides that JCU can be relieved of its obligation of confidentiality
required to discharge its responsibilities under an Act or University policy
(for example, in compliance with its duty to
notify of a complaint that does or
may involve official misconduct pursuant to s 38 of the
Crime and Misconduct
(Qld)) (cl 54.1.5 (a)), or for (sic) a proceeding in a court or
tribunal (54.5.1(b)). Secondly, as indicated by the use of the disjunctive
“or” after sub-cl (b), there is no obligation of confidentiality on
any party involved in the management of misconduct
or serious misconduct
processes, in circumstances consistent with the principles of the duty of
confidence at law and in equity.
Thus, an exception exists when the person to
whom the confidential information relates consents in writing to the disclosure
information or record; or if no consent is obtainable and such disclosure
is unlikely to harm the interests of the person affected
(cl 54.5.1(c)), and
when the information is already in the public domain (cl 54.5.1(d)).
construing the Enterprise Agreement as a whole, it would be a surprising result
if the parties to the Agreement had intended
that any staff member, who was the
subject of any allegation of misconduct or serious misconduct, could disclose at
will any information
complainant and the parties involved in managing the proceedings.
primary judge’s conclusion that cl 54.1.5 did not impose confidentiality
obligations on a staff member was erroneous.
THE ALTERNATIVE SOURCE OF POWER TO GIVE THE CONFIDENTIALITY
trial and in the appeal, JCU relied not only on cl 54.1.5 as a source of
power to give the
Confidentiality Directions
, but also on its powers at
common law as an employer to give a lawful and reasonable direction to an
employee. Even if we are wrong
in our construction of cl 54.1.5, we
consider that this alternative source of power is available to sustain the
lawfulness of the
Confidentiality Directions
primary judge found (
Ridd v James Cook University
[2019] FCCA 997
and see also [289]) that JCU did not rely on its common law rights as
employer. That is plainly wrong. The University expressly
relied on that
alternative source of power in its written submissions below (at [140]-[143])
which it reaffirmed in the course of
oral address below. Moreover, it was made
clear to Professor Ridd in two letters he received from the University that it
separately on those common law powers (see the letters dated
6 October 2017 and 17 October 2017).
this Court, JCU continued to rely on its common law powers in the alternative to
its submissions on cl 54. In the appeal, Professor
Ridd submitted that in the
Court below he challenged the
Confidentiality Directions
on the ground
that they were unreasonable and unlawful, but he then added that this was
“beside the point because the confidentiality
obligations infringed on the
intellectual freedom ground” [Ridd submissions [46]]. Professor Ridd
did not contend that the
alternative source of power argument was not pressed
Confidentiality Directions
were given in reliance on a term in the
Enterprise Agreement, or pursuant to the common law right of an employer to give
and lawful directions, none of the directions impinged upon the
respondent’s right to intellectual freedom as provided for
Clause 14 does not confer on a member of staff the freedom to disregard an
obligation imposed on that staff member by virtue
of a term of the Enterprise
Agreement, breach of which could have penal consequences pursuant to s 50 of the
FWA, or alternatively
by virtue of an employer’s common law right to give
a reasonable and lawful direction.
five directions were justified by reference to cl 54.1.5 of the Enterprise
Agreement (and/or, if necessary, JCU’s common
law right to give reasonable
and lawful directions, having regard to Professor Ridd’s limited response
to this aspect of JCU’s
case below as we explain later at [172] to [180]),
including directions with respect to confidentiality, in its capacity as
JCU did not breach cl 14 of the Enterprise Agreement in giving such
directions, nor in making the
Ninth – Eleventh
, and did not contravene s 50 of the FWA.
follows that, contrary to the conclusion of the primary judge, neither of the
censures nor the termination of Professor Ridd’s
employment contravened cl
14 of the Enterprise Agreement. The declaration that JCU contravened s 50 of the
FWA must be set aside.
is sufficient to dispose of the appeal. Nevertheless, an alternative ground of
appeal was agitated and JCU also challenged the
amount of compensation and
imposition of the pecuniary penalty. These matters arise only if we are wrong
in our construction of
cl 14 of the Enterprise Agreement. Noting, however,
the observations of the High Court in
Kuru v State of New South Wales
[2008] HCA 26
regarding the importance of intermediate
courts of appeal considering whether to deal with all grounds of appeal and not
decisive ground, we will now address those other matters.
THE ALTERNATIVE GROUND OF APPEAL
submitted that, if it were wrong about the proper construction of the Enterprise
Agreement and its interaction with the Code of
Conduct, the primary judge
nevertheless erred in characterising each act engaged in by Professor Ridd as an
exercise of “intellectual
freedom”, such that each decision taken
and each direction issued by JCU infringed that right. The primary judge
that JCU breached the rights that Professor Ridd had under cl 14 by
pursuing allegations of misconduct and by giving directions to
keep matters
confidential. In so doing, it is said that JCU itself breached cl 14. Professor
Ridd submitted that, if each circumstance
of conduct charged against him falls
within the scope of conducted permitted by cl 14, the primary judge was right to
hold that JCU
acted in contravention of cl 14, and therefore contravened s 50 of
a construction is not without difficulty. On a plain reading, cl 14.1 does not
impose an obligation on JCU, a breach of which
could be considered a
contravention of the Enterprise Agreement. Rather, it is an expression of a
commitment to act in a particular
way and, significantly, in accordance with the
Code of Conduct. Although there was no attempt to articulate what was meant by
phrase “protection and promotion”, it is not insignificant in
the context of an enterprise agreement that the phrase
appears to have been
picked up from its use in the context of the definition of “industrial
association” in s 12 of the
FWA, and its predecessor, where the
purpose of such an association is defined variously according to the type of
association as “the
protection and promotion of their [employees’,
independent contractors’, or employers’] interests” in matters
concerning employment”. Within that statutory definition, there is some
recognition of reciprocity in the need for the interests
of both employees and
employers to be protected and promoted. Similar reciprocity is evidenced in cl
14.1 where JCU’s commitment
is to the protection and promotion of
intellectual freedom
within the University
, an entity that is concerned
with the interests of staff, both academic and non-academic, JCU as an employer,
students, and “work
units”, which includes Institutes and Centres
(such as AIMS and the ARC Centre of Excellence). JCU’s commitment must
viewed in the context of the whole of cl 14, from which it can be seen that the
obligation to protect and promote must be tempered
by the expectations and
boundaries it sets in relation to respecting the rights of others, proscribing
harassment, vilification,
bullying and intimidation, supporting JCU as a place
of independent learning and thought, and the maintenance by staff of
professional
standards. It is a multi-dimensional commitment to the protection
and promotion of intellectual freedom.
language of “commitment” is also used in cl 12.1, which expresses
JCU’s commitment to “communicating and
consulting with staff on
workplace matters” and in cl 9.1, which expresses the University’s
commitment “to achieving
the long term goal of at least 7.4% of JCU
staff” being Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander peoples. None of these
is couched in such sufficiently clear language as to suggest the
possibility of penal consequences flowing from an alleged breach.
primary judge found that, in respect of each element of conduct the subject of
findings made by JCU, Professor Ridd had been exercising
his rights to
intellectual freedom: in relation to the
First Finding
under cll 14.2 and
Second Finding
Seventeenth Finding
under cl 14; the
Third, Fourth, Sixth, Seventh, Twelfth, Thirteenth, Fifteenth, Sixteenth
under cll 14.2 and 14.4; and the
Eighth Finding
primary judge held further that JCU had breached cl 14 in giving the
Confidentiality Directions
and in making the
Fifth, Ninth, Tenth
with respect to their breach, the two
Speech Directions
No Satire Direction
and in making the
Fourteenth Finding
in respect of the breach of the latter, because each
of the directions contravened Professor Ridd’s rights pursuant to cl 14.
primary judge erred in holding that, in each case the subject of the findings by
JCU, Professor Ridd had been exercising a right
under cl 14, which right could
be breached by JCU in bringing disciplinary proceedings or issuing
directions.
has already been observed, the rights listed in cl 14.2 are descriptive (or
definitional) of the rights that are encompassed within
the concept of
“intellectual freedom”. The scope of the definitional examples of
the exercise of intellectual freedom
in cl 14.2 is explained in the subsequent
sub-clauses. Specifically, intellectual freedom includes the rights of staff
unpopular or controversial views — subject to the responsibility to
respect the rights of others and the prohibition
on harassment, vilification,
bullying or intimidation (14.3);
disagreement with University decisions and with the processes used to make those
decisions — subject to the requirement
that staff should seek to raise
their concerns through applicable processes (14.4).
Ridd submitted that cl 14 was a shield, not a sword. If each element of the
conduct the subject of the findings could properly
be said to be the expression
of unpopular or controversial views (that nevertheless respected the rights of
others) or the expression
of disagreement with University decisions and the
processes used to make those decisions, then a decision to discipline Professor
Ridd for that conduct would be inconsistent with JCU’s commitment to act
in a manner consistent with the protection and promotion
of intellectual freedom
within the University. Such a matter should then have been raised as a defence
to the disciplinary proceedings.
is clear that some of the elements of Professor Ridd’s conduct,
particularly in expressing his opinions to the journalist
in the email of 16
December 2015 and in the Sky Interview (the subjects of the
Second Findings
prima facie
, fall within the scope of the
acknowledged right in 14.3. If JCU had disciplined Professor Ridd simply for
expressing those opinions,
JCU’s apparent failure to act in a manner
consistent with the protection and promotion of intellectual freedom might have
used as a defence to the charges of misconduct and serious misconduct
— but would not of itself amount to breach of a term
of the Enterprise
Agreement by JCU. In any event, JCU did not discipline him on that basis. It was
concerned about the correlative
duty Professor Ridd owed to his colleagues, and
also to those academics associated with the institutions he criticised. There
no suggestion that he harassed, vilified, bullied or intimidated those who
disagreed with his view.
14.3 imposes the additional constraint that a staff member has a responsibility
to respect the rights of others. Those rights
are not limited to the right not
to be harassed, vilified, bullied or intimidated but include such other rights
as may be encroached
on by the expression of unpopular or controversial views,
such as the right not to be defamed. The issue of whether Professor Hughes
in fact defamed by Professor Ridd was not in issue at the trial of the action,
no doubt because Professor Ridd was not disciplined
by JCU for breach of cl 14.3
of the Enterprise Agreement — it is neither misconduct nor serious
misconduct to breach cl 14
of the Enterprise Agreement. Similarly, the
Enterprise Agreement does not ground a claim against JCU for breach of cl 14 in
circumstances
where it does not create an obligation or a duty on the part of
is also clear that some of the elements of Professor Ridd’s conduct are
unable to be characterised as an exercise of intellectual
freedom in the sense
described in cl 14, being no more than expressions of personal opinion and
frustration (unrelated to issues
or ideas related to his respective field of
competence), and general criticism of JCU or the university sector more broadly
particular disagreement with University decisions or processes). Examples
include the emails to students the subject of the
Third, Fourth, Sixth,
Eighth, Twelfth, Thirteenth, Fifteenth
. These are examples of what the primary judge seemed to have had in
mind when he said, “If a person were exercising “intellectual
freedom” which went beyond what was permitted in cl.14, then
, they would not be exercising intellectual freedom under cl 14”
Ridd v James Cook University
[2019] FCCA 997
[264]). The primary judge
erred in mischaracterising these elements of Professor Ridd’s conduct as
an exercise of intellectual
freedom within cl 14.
Ridd’s conduct subsequent to the
Final Censure
, and on which his
termination was grounded, had nothing to do with the exercise of intellectual
freedom pursuant to cl 14. Subsequent
Final Censure
, Professor
Ridd was found to have deliberately disclosed confidential information about the
2017 disciplinary process to
The Australian
, to another person, on a
website, and by causing or allowing a flyer to be distributed on campus
disclosing the outcome of the disciplinary
proceedings and stating that he had
no intention of complying with the
Final Censure
. JCU considered that
such breaches demonstrated a willingness to disobey lawful and reasonable
directions given to him by his employer
and were destructive of the necessary
trust and confidence for the continuance of the employment relationship. The
primary judge
held that the termination was unlawful because it punished
Professor Ridd for conduct that was protected by cl 14. The primary judge
reasoned that JCU was unable to rely on the
Final Censure
because JCU had
no power to make the five
Confidentiality Directions
given to Professor
primary judge erred in holding that each of the
Confidentiality
issued by JCU was an infringement of Professor’s Ridd
future exercise of intellectual freedom properly so characterised and
contravened cl 14 of the Enterprise Agreement. If necessary, the alternative
ground of appeal would also have been upheld.
THE PENALTY JUDGMENT
4 and 5 of the Amended Notice of Appeal only arise if, contrary to the
conclusions reached above, the appeal were otherwise
dismissed. If the appeal
had otherwise been dismissed, grounds 4 and 5 would have been allowed in part.
The primary judge awarded
Professor Ridd the sum of $1,094,214.47 by way of
compensation for the contraventions of cl 14 of the Enterprise Agreement and the
sum of $125,000 by way of pecuniary penalty (
Ridd v James Cook University (No
[2019] FCCA 2489).
to the delivery of the judgment on liability, but prior to the hearing on the
financial consequences of that judgment,
the Vice Chancellor of JCU, Professor
Sandra Harding, issued a statement by group email to all persons on the JCU
mailing list, which
email was reproduced in a media release (the
There was also a link to the statement on the JCU Twitter feed. The Email was
highly critical of the decision of the primary judge.
It was also critical of
Professor Ridd. The primary judge said of this Email, “I have been at
pains to ensure that the Court
does not “punish” JCU for publishing
the statement. Any issue of repercussions on JCU by a Court or other authority,
because of this publication, are not issues that have arisen in the assessment
of this matter. However ... the email, the press release
and tweet are not
insignificant matters when the assessment of compensation and pecuniary
penalties are considered” (
Ridd v James Cook University (No 2)
[2019] FCCA 2489
4 challenges the award of $1,094,214.47 by way of compensation for the loss
suffered by Professor Ridd on four bases:
error as to the date on which Professor Ridd had pleaded that he would have
continued to work which increased the sum awarded;
erroneous finding that JCU had failed to prove that Professor Ridd had not
mitigated his losses;
erroneously
finding that the compensation for future economic loss should be discounted at a
rate of 5%; and
error in finding that Professor Ridd was entitled to compensation for general
damages of $90,000 in circumstances where Professor
Ridd suffered no psychiatric
or diagnosed medical condition.
was uncontroversial that the Court’s power to award compensation derives
from ss 545(1) and (2) of the FWA, which include:
Orders that can be made by particular courts
Federal Court and Federal Circuit Court
(1) The Federal Court or the Federal Circuit Court may make any order the court
considers appropriate if the court is satisfied that
a person has contravened,
or proposes to contravene, a civil remedy provision.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), orders the Federal Court or the Federal
Circuit Court may make include the following:
(a) an order granting an injunction, or
interim injunction, to prevent, stop or remedy the effects of a
contravention;
(b) an order awarding compensation for loss that a person has suffered because
of the contravention;
(c) an order for reinstatement of a
was also no dispute about the relevant principles to be applied by an appellate
court when reviewing a primary judge’s
conclusions which are evaluative in
Robinson Helicopter Company Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
Aldi Foods Pty Ltd v Morrocanoil Israel Ltd
[2018] FCAFC
261 FCR 301
Optical 88 Ltd v Optical 88 Pty Ltd
[2011] FCAFC
[33]. As Griffiths J stated in
Commissioner of Taxation v
Scone Race Club Ltd
[2019] FCAFC 225
374 ALR 189
[50] (in dissent and
noting that an application for special leave to appeal has been filed in the
High Court):
...the relevant question is not whether [the appellate
court] disagrees with those conclusions but is rather whether it detects error.
Where error is found this indicates not merely that the appellate court has a
different view from the primary judge, but that the
primary judge’s view
is wrong even having regard to the advantages enjoyed by the primary judge and
even taking into account
the subject matter. The extent of the perceived
advantages of the primary judge in any particular case is relevant to how
the difference of opinion must be to warrant appellate court
intervention.
primary judge found Professor Ridd “to be scrupulously honest”
Ridd v James Cook University (No 2)
[2019] FCCA 2489
Ridd pleaded that he would have continued to work on a full time basis until the
age of 60 and on a part time basis until
the age of 63. The tables in the
pleading which set out the calculation of loss and damage for economic loss
calculated Professor
Ridd’s loss of full time income until the age of 61
and his loss of part time income until the age of 64.
Ridd gave evidence at trial that he intended to work until the age of 65.
JCU’s counsel objected to this evidence
and said expressly
“I’m going to hold my friend to his pleaded case” [Transcript,
19.07.19, P-107]. The primary
judge accepted that Professor Ridd was being
truthful when he gave his evidence but that he “is estopped from claiming
period other than that which he has specifically pleaded” (
James Cook University (No 2)
[2019] FCCA 2489
is not a case where “the parties have chosen some issue different from
that disclosed in the pleadings as the basis for
the determination of their
respective rights and liabilities” (cf
Banque Commercial SA v Akhil
Holdings Ltd
[1990] HCA 11
169 CLR 279
[18]), nor was there any admission
from which one party sought to resile (cf
Holdway v Arcuri Lawyers (A
[2008] QCA 218
[2009] 2 Qd R 18).
It is evident from the transcript
of the hearing that counsel for both Professor Ridd and for JCU, and also the
primary judge, were
agreed that damages for economic loss were to be calculated
until he turned 63 on Christmas Day 2023.
primary judge erred in awarding Professor Ridd damages on the basis that he
would have continued to work full time until the age
of 61 and part time until
the age of 64. Damages should have been calculated on the basis that Professor
Ridd would have continued
to work full time until the age of 60 and part time
until the age of 63.
to the issue of mitigation, JCU adduced no evidence as to possible sources of
alternative employment that might be available to
Professor Ridd. The primary
judge accepted Professor Ridd’s evidence that he was seen as
“damaged goods” and would
find it difficult to obtain alternative
employment in the field (
Ridd v James Cook University (No 2)
[2019] FCCA
[83]-[84]). The primary judge also rejected the proposition that Professor
Ridd had failed to mitigate his loss in failing to enter
into reasonable
undertakings with JCU. Those undertakings would have permitted Professor Ridd to
continue to work at JCU but would
have required him to maintain confidentiality
to raise funds for his legal proceedings. The primary judge reasoned
that as he had held the
Confidentiality Directions
to be unlawful, it was
not unreasonable for Professor Ridd to refuse to give the requested undertakings
([98]). The primary judge
also accepted Professor Ridd’s unchallenged
evidence that he did not trust JCU to “keep up its end of the
and held that such misgivings “were certainly not misplaced
or over-stated” in light of the Email ([99]).
appealable error has been established in relation to the primary judge’s
finding that JCU failed to prove that Professor
Ridd had not mitigated his
primary judge found that the compensation for future economic loss (which was
for a period of approximately 5 years and 7 months)
ought be discounted at a
rate of 5% on the basis of the vicissitudes of life or human contingencies. JCU
submitted that the primary
judge failed to take into account the possibility and
probability of changes in Professor Ridd’s planned retirement dates,
including due to illness, death or resignation and additionally, failed to have
regard to the possibility that Professor Ridd’s
employment may have been
terminated by JCU for other reasons, including for misleading JCU regarding the
provision of documents and
materials to
The Australian
, a matter which
emerged during cross-examination. JCU submitted that this failure amounted to
error within the first limb of
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
and contended that a discount of 20-25% was more appropriate.
to the possibility of termination of employment on other grounds, Professor
Ridd’s evidence in cross-examination contradicted
a letter that had been
written by his solicitors to the solicitors for JCU. The primary judge rejected
that any inference could
be drawn that Professor Ridd had instructed his
solicitors to lie. No such suggestion was put to Professor Ridd. As to the
vicissitudes, the primary judge accepted as truthful Professor
Ridd’s evidence that, had there been no disciplinary processes,
have worked until the age of 65; he refuted any suggestion that he planned to
retire at 60. There was no evidence to suggest
that Professor Ridd suffered from
any medical condition that might shorten his working life (
Ridd v James Cook
University (No 2)
[2019] FCCA 2489
[63]-[73]).
appealable error has been established in relation to the primary judge’s
finding that a 5% discount for the vicissitudes
of life was appropriate.
primary judge awarded $90,000 for general damages. The primary judge accepted
Professor Ridd’s evidence that the actions
of JCU caused him stress,
anxiety and humiliation. The primary judge acknowledged, however, that
“Professor Ridd has no psychiatric
injury or any lasting or significant
medical condition that can be attributed to the actions of JCU” (
James Cook University (No 2)
[2019] FCCA 2489
interference with an award of general damages made by the primary judge can be
made unless the Court considers “either that
the trial judge acted on an
error of principle, misapprehended the facts, allowed extraneous matters to
affect the assessment, failed
to take account of a material consideration or
that the judge has made a wholly erroneous estimate of the damages”
Richardson v Oracle Corporation Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC 82
[76]). JCU contends that, given this acknowledgement, the primary judge
erred in awarding general damages. It submitted that an award
of general damages
is, in the main, referable to pain and suffering and loss of enjoyment of life.
JCU also submitted that, in referring
to s 3(e) of the FWA, which sets out as an
object of the Act “protecting against unfair treatment”, the primary
applied an incorrect principle of law.
express terms of s 545(1) of the FWA permit the Court to make orders which it
considers to be “appropriate” in the
circumstances where it is
satisfied that a person has contravened or proposes to contravene a civil remedy
provision. It is not,
however, boundless. The terms of s 545(2), by its opening
words “[w]ithout limiting subsection (1)”, go no further than
ensure that s 545(1) is not read down in light of the specific orders set out in
s 545(2) as examples of what orders may be made
under s 545(1) (
Building and Construction Commissioner v Construction, Forestry, Mining and
Energy Union
[2018] HCA 3
262 CLR 157
[23]-[25]). The section should not be
read down so as to prevent an award for general damages, unconnected to personal
include an amount representing “hurt and humiliation”
suffered by reason of the contravention. In
Australian Licensed Aircraft
Engineers Association v International Aviation Service Assistance Pty Ltd
[2011] FCA 333
193 FCR 526
[441]-[442], Barker J said:
The question arises, however, whether the court may
order compensation, that is to say, the payment of a pecuniary sum on account
hurt and humiliation found to be a direct consequence of contravention of ss 340
and 346 of the FW Act. There is no direct authority
under the FW Act concerning
this question. However, approaching the question as a matter of first principle,
it is plain that s 545(1)
is intended to provide the court with a very broad
power to make appropriate orders where contravention is established. In this s
545(2) provides confirmation that certain types of orders – for example,
an order awarding compensation for the loss a person
has suffered because of a
contravention – may be made. But s 545(2), in this regard, expressly
states that is has effect “without
limiting subs (1)”.
As a matter of principle it is difficult to see why a compensatory financial
order cannot be made in respect of hurt and humiliation
... shown to be a direct
consequence of the contravention.
reasoning was relied on by Flick J in
Transport Workers’ Union of
Australia, New South Wales Branch v No Fuss Liquid Waste Pty Ltd
in making an award for compensation with an amount representing “hurt
and humiliation” for contraventions of the proscriptions
freedom of association in ss 340 and 346 of the FWA.
is no obvious policy consideration that militates against a conclusion that a
compensation order under s 545(2) for contravention
of s 50 of the FWA should
not include a component for shock, distress, hurt or humiliation. Indeed, the
express exclusion of such
a component in respect of a claim for unfair dismissal
in s 392(4) suggests a contrary conclusion (
Australian Licensed Aircraft
Engineers Association v International Aviation Service Assistance Pty Ltd
[2011] FCA 333
193 FCR 526
primary judge accepted that the actions of JCU caused Professor Ridd stress,
anxiety and humiliation and that he suffered shock
and embarrassment. This
evidence was not challenged. The extent to which the primary judge took account
of the Email when assessing
general damages is not clear from his Honour’s
reasons, although it is clear that it had some effect on his reasoning. The
Email was not causative of the loss for which the primary judge was required to
assess compensation under s 545(2). It could, however,
be considered to have
exacerbated the loss that had been directly caused by the contraventions.
all the circumstances, we are not persuaded that any error of principle has been
shown by the primary judge to warrant interference
with the assessment of
general damages.
respect of the imposition of the pecuniary penalty, JCU contends that the
primary judge erred in failing to identify that either
under s 557 of the FWA
and/or at common law, the course of conduct principle required that JCU not be
punished twice for the same
culpability where there is an interrelationship
between legal and factual elements of two or more contraventions. The approach
an appellate court to a trial judge’s characterisation and assessment
of the contraventions in the course of assessing a pecuniary
penalty is subject
to the principles in
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
Fair Work Ombudsman v Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy
Union (the Hutchison Ports Appeal)
[2019] FCAFC 69
Flick, Ross and Rangiah JJ). It is therefore necessary that some error of
principle be shown, not just that the appellate court
would have imposed a
different penalty.
557(1) provides:
For the purposes of this Part, 2 or more contraventions
of a civil remedy provision referred to in subsection 2 [which includes the
contravention of enterprise agreements, s 50] are, subject to subsection (3),
taken to constitute a single contravention if:
(a) the contraventions are committed by the same person; and
(b) the contraventions arose out of a course of conduct by the
submitted that the primary judge failed to have regard to the incontrovertible
fact that all the findings and declarations made
related to a single breach of
cl 14 such that, upon the correct application of the legal principle, the
primary judge should have
found that there was a single course of conduct
reflecting the common legal and factual element that JCU relied on the Code of
in a way it considered compatible with cl 14.
was observed in
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Cahill
[2010] FCAFC 39
[39] and reiterated in
Parker v Australian
Building and Construction Commissioner
[2019] FCAFC 56
(emphasis in original):
...a “course of conduct” or the “one
transaction principle” is not a concept peculiar to the industrial
It is a concept which arises in the criminal context generally and one
which may be relevant to the proper exercise of the sentencing
discretion. The
principle recognises that where there is an interrelationship between the
legal and factual elements of two or more offences
for which an offender
has been charged, care must be taken to ensure that the offender is not punished
twice for what is essentially
the same criminality. That requires careful
identification of what is “the same criminality” and that is
necessarily
a factually specific enquiry. Bare identity of motive for the
commission of separate offences will seldom suffice to establish the
criminality in separate and distinct offending acts or
primary judge held that a course of conduct is not founded upon the underlying
reason for the conduct, but upon the behaviour
that constitutes the conduct
Ridd v James Cook University (No 2)
[2019] FCCA 2489
identified that behaviour as: first, the behaviour that stems from the making of
the first censure; secondly, the behaviour
that stems from the making of the
second censure; thirdly, the behaviour that stems from the making of the
confidentiality and other
similar directions; fourthly, the behaviour that stems
from the termination of Professor Ridd’s employment. In this respect,
primary judge has misconceived the test for ascertaining whether there was a
single course of conduct and has not considered
the interrelationship between
the common legal and factual elements.
of the contraventions involved the common legal and factual element that JCU
understood that the Code of Conduct applied to Professor
Ridd’s actions
such that it was entitled, at law, to make the various confidentiality and
similar directions, to censure Professor
Ridd and, ultimately, to terminate his
employment. All of the contraventions were held by the primary judge to be of a
single term
in the Enterprise Agreement, cl 14.
primary judge erred in finding there were four courses of conduct. It is
therefore appropriate for the discretion to be re-exercised
in circumstances
where the Court is in as good a position as the primary judge to determine the
appropriate pecuniary penalty. His
Honour should have found that there was only
a single course of conduct which reflected the common legal and factual element
the University relied upon the Code of Conduct in a way that it considered
was compatible with cl 14.
of the principles to be applied in imposing a pecuniary penalty were set out by
Patrick Stevedores Holdings Pty Ltd v Construction, Forestry,
Maritime and Energy Union
[2019] FCA 1647
[29]-[30] (citations
First, a primary purpose in imposing penalties is
deterrence:
Commonwealth v Director, Fair Work Building Industry
Inspectorate
[2015] HCA 46
258 CLR 482
[55]. See also:
Building and Construction Commissioner v Construction, Forestry, Mining and
Energy Union
[2017] FCAFC 113
Second, the process of quantifying an appropriate penalty is not an
exact science
” but rather a process of “
instinctive
Australian Ophthalmic Supplies Pty Ltd v
McAlary-Smith
[2008] FCAFC 8
165 FCR 560
[27]-[28], [55] and [78]
It nevertheless remains a process guided by a consideration of a number of
well-accepted factors. In
Kelly v Fitzpatrick
[2007] FCA 1080
, 166 IR 14
[14], Tracey J was called upon to quantify penalties for admitted contraventions
of the Transport Workers Award 1998 and
in doing so adopted the following as a
non-exhaustive range of considerations
” to be taken into
the nature and extent of the conduct which led to the breaches;
the circumstances in which that conduct took place;
the nature and extent of any loss or damage sustained as a result of the
whether there had been similar previous conduct by the respondent;
whether the breaches were properly distinct or arose out of the one course
of conduct;
the size of the business enterprise involved;
whether or not the breaches were deliberate;
whether senior management was involved in the breaches;
whether the party committing the breach had exhibited contrition;
whether the party committing the breach had taken corrective action;
whether the party committing the breach had cooperated with the enforcement
authorities;
the need to ensure compliance with minimum standards by provision of an
effective means for investigation and enforcement of employee
entitlements; and
the need for specific and general deterrence.
following matters are significant in the present case. The contraventions took
place over a period of almost two and a half years
but arose from the one course
of action embarked upon by Professor Ridd in December 2015 from which all
subsequent matters flowed.
JCU considered that Professor Ridd had breached the
Code of Conduct, and that he continued to do so in a variety of ways over the
next two years. The parties had competing legal advice as to whether the Code of
Conduct or the Enterprise Agreement prevailed. The
lawfulness, or otherwise, of
JCU’s contraventions could not be predicted with certainty. There was no
suggestion that the contraventions
were deliberate. Indeed, JCU did not believe
them to be contraventions, nor that similar contraventions had previously
JCU did not act in contumelious disregard of its obligations under the
FWA. In the circumstances, this is not a case where the need
for specific or
general deterrence is a significant factor. It is to be presumed that a
university, and its legal advisors, would
take heed of the construction of its
Enterprise Agreement by a court.
Nevertheless,
the contraventions that were found to have occurred took place within a
university and against the background of JCU
having committed, through the
Enterprise Agreement, to achieve and maintain the highest standards of ethical
conduct (cl 13.2). Its
maintenance of disciplinary action in several instances
of what can only be regarded as trivial breaches of the Code of Conduct did
reflect the highest standards of ethical conduct. Nor did JCU’s conduct in
in order to uncover additional
breaches of the Code of Conduct. The unethical approach to the matter was
compounded by the direction
to Professor Ridd that he was not to speak to his
wife about the disciplinary matter, albeit that the direction was revoked almost
one month later. When found to have contravened the Enterprise Agreement, JCU
did not exhibit contrition. As the Email demonstrated,
its attitude, and that of
senior management, was quite to the contrary.
maximum penalty for a single contravention is $63,000. Having regard to all the
circumstances, if it had been necessary to determine
a pecuniary penalty it
would have been in the amount of $15,000. There was no challenge to the order
that the pecuniary penalty should
be paid to Professor Ridd and that component
of the order would not have been disturbed.
SHOULD PROFESSOR RIDD’S PROCEEDING NOW BE
have had the opportunity to review Rangiah J’s draft reasons for
judgment. We shall now explain why we respectfully disagree
Honour’s conclusion that the proceeding should not be dismissed but
instead should be remitted to the Federal Circuit
Court for a new hearing upon
the same evidence with particular reference to the issue whether JCU’s
common law right as an
employer to give lawful and reasonable directions to an
employee concerning confidentiality provided an alternative basis to
Confidentiality Directions
Significantly,
nowhere in either the second further amended application or the further amended
statement of claim did Professor Ridd
raise the reasonableness or lawfulness of
Confidentiality Directions
other than in respect of his
central claim that they were not reasonable and/or lawful because they had the
effect of prohibiting
or limiting the future exercise of his Intellectual
Freedom Rights and, therefore, contravened cl 14 of the Enterprise
(see [23A] of the further amended statement of claim and contrast [24]
of the amended statement of claim which was deleted by Professor
replaced by [23A]).
the further amended defence, JCU denied [23A] of the FASOC and claimed that the
Confidentiality Directions
did not breach cl 14 because,
, the “confidentiality
directions were lawful and reasonable, and valid and effective”.
Professor Ridd filed a reply to the further amended defence, he was content to
join issue with many of the paragraphs therein,
including JCU’s defence to
is also evident from the outlines of written submissions filed below that
Professor Ridd did not challenge the reasonableness of
Confidentiality
at common law. His submissions may be summarised as follows. At
[120] of his outline of written submissions below, in challenging
determination that Professor Ridd had breached “his obligations with
respect of confidentiality” (when making
what he described as the
“Second Decision”), Professor Ridd submitted at [120] that
“JCU appears to have
principally
relied on cl 54.1 of the
Enterprise Agreement” in making that determination (emphasis added).
Professor Ridd’s written
submissions then focussed principally upon the
proper construction of cl 54.1 of the EA. Nowhere in his outline of written
submissions
did Professor Ridd question the reasonableness at common law of
JCU’s directions regarding confidentiality. The closest he
came to that
subject was in [135] where, in the alternative to his contentions regarding the
proper construction of cl 54.1, he submitted
that “in the
circumstances of this case a
confidentiality obligation could not
arise in any event” (emphasis added). This was because he claimed that
the disciplinary
processes against him (and the related decisions) “were
unlawful because JCU did not comply with the Code of Conduct and contravened
Intellectual Freedom Right”. This is a different issue to JCU’s
power at common law to give a reasonable and lawful
direction to an employee
concerning confidentiality.
is abundantly clear from JCU’s outline of written submissions below that
it relied upon an employer’s right to issue
lawful and reasonable
directions at common law regarding the confidentiality of information gathered
and recorded during disciplinary
processes as an alternative source of power to
Confidentiality Directions
(see [140]-[143] of that outline).
in his outline of written submissions in reply did Professor Ridd respond to
JCU’s alternative reliance upon its common
law rights as an employer.
Instead, Professor Ridd effectively confined his response to the separate
question of the proper construction
of cl 54.1 of the Enterprise Agreement,
with reference to cl 14.4 (see [66]-[75]).
transcript of the hearing below confirms that the University made plain to the
trial judge that it relied upon that aspect of
its outline of written
submissions concerning the right of an employer at common law to issue a
direction to an employee in respect
of confidentiality (see T 126-127).
There is no record in the transcript below of any oral response by Professor
Ridd on that subject.
as has been emphasised, Senior Counsel for Professor Ridd explicitly stated
below that Professor Ridd did not dispute that
his conduct (which must have
included his conduct in respect of the
Confidentiality Directions
not be characterised as breaching the standards in the Code of Conduct (see [23]
the light of these matters, JCU’s submission in the appeal that Professor
challenge the University’s claims regarding its common
law rights as an employer to issue the
Confidentiality Directions
accepted. Professor Ridd’s challenge to the
Confidentiality
was confined to his claims that they infringed his right to
intellectual freedom under cl 14 and that cl 54.1.5 of the EA did not
bind him to confidentiality (see [32] of the University’s submissions in
the appeal).
these circumstances, we see no basis for remitting for a new hearing the issue
of whether the
Confidentiality Directions
were “reasonable”
at common law. That particular issue was never contested below by Professor
Ridd. It is well settled
that a party is bound by the way in which the party
conducts its case at trial. As the High Court stated in
University of
Wollongong v Metwally (No 2)
[1985] HCA 28
; 59 ALJR 481 at 483, with
respect to the related question whether a party should be permitted to raise a
point on appeal which was
not run below:
Except in the most exceptional circumstances, it would
be contrary to all principle to allow a party, after a case had been decided
against him, to raise a new argument which, whether deliberately or by
inadvertence, he fails to put during the hearing when he had
an opportunity to
Essentially
the same general principle was described by Mason J in
[1982] HCA 33
150 CLR 310
and [22] (emphasis
some cases when a question of law is raised for the first time in an ultimate
court of appeal, as for example upon the construction
of a document, or upon
facts either admitted or proved beyond controversy, it is expedient in the
interests of justice that the question
should be argued and decided
Connecticut
Fire Insurance Co. v. Kavanagh
[1892] UKLawRpAC 39
(1892) AC 473
Suttor v. Gundowda Pty. Ltd
[1950] HCA 35
(1950) 81 CLR 418
, at p 438;
v. Sommerville
[1979] HCA 60
(1979) 141 CLR 594
, at pp 607-608). However, this is not such
a case. The facts are not admitted nor are they beyond controversy.
consequence is that the appellants’ case fails at the threshold.
argue this point on appeal
it was not pleaded by them nor
was it made an issue by the conduct of the parties at the trial
Coulton v Holcombe
[1986] HCA 33
Gibbs CJ, Wilson, Brennan and Dawson JJ;
Bailey v Nominal Defendant
[2004] QCA 344
) per Chesterman J;
Stewart v Biodiesel
Producers Limited
[2008] FCAFC 66
per Ryan, Moore and
Tamberlin JJ and
Soliman v University of Technology, Sydney
per Graham, Logan and Flick JJ).
the circumstances of the present case do not fit squarely within the
observations referred to at [181] and [182] above, we
consider that the general
principles relating to the finality of litigation which underlie those
observations and the cases referred
to immediately above apply to the issue in
the present matter as to whether or not the issue of the reasonableness at
Confidentiality Directions
should be remitted. As was
D’Orta-Ekenaike v Victoria Legal Aid
[2005] HCA 12
per Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ (footnotes
A central and pervading tenet of the judicial system is
that controversies, once resolved, are not to be reopened except in a few,
narrowly defined, circumstances. That tenet finds reflection in the restriction
upon the reopening of final orders after entry and
in the rules concerning the
bringing of an action to set aside a final judgment on the ground that it was
procured by fraud. The
tenet also finds reflection in the doctrines of res
judicata and issue estoppel. Those doctrines prevent a party to a proceeding
raising, in a new proceeding against a party to the original proceeding, a cause
of action or issue that was finally decided in the
original proceeding. It is a
tenet that underpins the extension of principles of preclusion to some
circumstances where the issues
raised in the later proceeding could have been
raised in an earlier proceeding.
we have emphasised, JCU’s alternative reliance upon its power at common
law to give a reasonable and lawful direction to
an employee was not contested
by Professor Ridd save for the limited manner set out above.
Accordingly,
independently of the primary judge’s error in stating that the issue was
not pressed by the University, it would
be inconsistent with the way the case
was conducted below to now require this issue to be heard and determined at a
fresh trial.
Furthermore, it is notable that Professor Ridd did not make any
submission in the appeal that any aspect of the matter should be
is appropriate that Professor Ridd’s proceeding be dismissed, together
with the other orders set out below.
THE ORDERS BELOW DATED 16 APRIL 2019
is noted that on 16 April 2019, the following orders were made in the Court
(1) The Court rules that the 17 findings made by the
University, the two speech directions, the five confidentiality directions, the
no satire direction, the censure and the final censure given by the University
and the termination of employment of Professor Ridd
by the University were all
(2) The issue of the making of declarations and penalty are adjourned to a date
to be fixed.
its amended notice of appeal, JCU did not challenge order 1 made on 16 April
2019 (see the definition of “Orders” in
the amended notice of
appeal, which is confined to the orders dated 6 September 2019). The legal
status of order 1 made on 16 April
2019 is not entirely clear having regard to
its terms, but JCU presumably wishes to have it also set aside. If so, it should
7 days hereof file and serve a further amended notice of appeal seeking
that additional relief. If Professor Ridd opposes any such
amendment he should
within 14 days hereof file and serve a brief outline of submissions, not
exceeding 3 pages in length. JCU should
within 21 days hereof file and serve a
brief outline of submissions in response, not exceeding 3 pages in length. The
then be determined on the papers and without a further oral
all these reasons, the following orders are appropriate:
1. The appeal be allowed.
orders made by the Federal Circuit Court of Australia on 6 September 2019 be set
lieu thereof the second further amended application dated 3 August 2018 be
appellant should within 7 days hereof file and serve any further amended notice
of appeal seeking to set aside order 1 of the
orders made by the Federal Circuit
Court of Australia on 16 April 2019.
the respondent opposes any such amendment, he should within 14 days hereof file
and serve a brief outline of submissions, not exceeding
3 pages in length.
appellant should within 21 days hereof file and serve a brief outline of
submissions in response, not exceeding 3 pages in length.
necessary, the issue concerning order 1 of the orders dated 16 April 2019 will
be determined on the papers and without an oral
8. There be no order as to costs.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and eighty nine (189) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment herein
of the Honourable
Justices Griffiths and SC Derrington.
Dated: 22 July 2020
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
have had the benefit of reading the judgment of Griffiths and SC Derrington JJ
in draft. I respectfully dissent.
I agree that the reasons of the primary judge contained material errors and the
appeal should be allowed, I consider that the
proceeding should not be dismissed
but should be remitted for a further hearing.
disposition of the appeal begins, but does not end, with the question of whether
the primary judge erred in the construction of
the Enterprise Agreement.
Section 24(1)(d)
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
) confers jurisdiction on the Federal Court to hear and determine
an appeal from a judgment of the Federal Circuit Court. Such an
appeal is by
way of rehearing:
Sharma v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] FCAFC 227
SZRPT v Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection
[2014] FCA 24
. In an appeal by way of rehearing,
the powers of the appellate court are only exercisable where the appellant
demonstrates that the
judgment is the result of error:
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
203 CLR 172
. The “judgment” is a formal
order by which the court disposes of the matter before it: see, for example,
Ah Toy v Registrar of Companies
[1985] FCA 291
(1985) 10 FCR 280
at 285-286;
Oracle Corporation Australia Pty Limited
[2013] FCAFC 63
299 ALR 236
and [33]. Where an error in the primary judge’s reasons is not
shown to have affected the orders made, the appeal is dismissed.
appeal is allowed, it is necessary for the appellate court to consider what
further orders are, under s 28(1) of the FCA
Act, appropriate to make. In
Dynamic Hearing Pty Ltd v Polaris Communications Pty Ltd
[2010] FCAFC
273 ALR 696
, Besanko J observed at [74] that, “The powers of the
Court include the power to affirm, reverse or vary the judgment appealed
and to give such judgment, or make such order, as, in all the circumstances, it
thinks fit, or refuse to make an order”.
Where the judgment of the
primary judge is set aside, it is necessary to consider how the proceeding in
the court below should be
dealt with, including whether there should be a
further hearing, or whether the proceeding should be dismissed.
is necessary to consider each of these issues in the present appeal. In
particular, it is necessary to decide:
(1) Whether the primary judge erred in construing the
relevant clauses of the Enterprise Agreement.
(2) If so, how the Enterprise Agreement should correctly be construed.
(3) Having regard to the correct construction:
(a) whether the orders of the primary judge
should be set aside; and
(b) whether the proceeding commenced in the Federal Circuit Court should be
dismissed, or whether there should be a further
is controversy between the parties as to whether an argument adopted by
Professor Ridd in the appeal was run before the primary
judge, and,
consequently, there is a dispute about whether the second and third issues may
or should be considered. To demonstrate
why it is necessary and appropriate to
decide these issues, consideration must be given to the facts of the case, the
relevant terms
of the Enterprise Agreement and the issues the primary judge was
asked to determine by the parties.
THE FACTS AND ISSUES BEFORE THE PRIMARY JUDGE
majority judges have described the relevant facts and the primary judge’s
findings in some detail, and I respectfully adopt
that description. I will
merely highlight some matters of particular relevance. I will adopt their
Honours’ abbreviations.
29 April 2016, the Senior Deputy Vice-Chancellor found that Professor Ridd had
engaged in conduct which breached JCU’s Code
of Conduct in various ways,
which amounted to “Misconduct” as defined in the Enterprise
Agreement. Those findings, and
the consequent decision to issue Professor Ridd
with a formal censure, were made under the power vested in the Senior Deputy
Vice-Chancellor
under cl 54.2.2.5 of the Enterprise Agreement.
21 November 2017, the Senior Deputy Vice-Chancellor found that Professor Ridd
had engaged in serious breaches of the Code of Conduct
in various ways,
including failing to comply with confidentiality directions, which amounted to
“Serious Misconduct”
as defined in the Enterprise Agreement. Those
findings, and the consequent decision to issue Professor Ridd with a final
were made under powers vested in the Senior Deputy Vice-Chancellor
under cl 54.3.6 of the Enterprise Agreement.
13 April 2018, a delegate of the Senior Deputy Vice-Chancellor made findings
that Professor Ridd had, inter alia, failed to comply
with lawful and reasonable
directions, including confidentiality directions, made misleading and untrue
comments about the disciplinary
process, and failed to manage or avoid a
conflict of interest. The delegate found that this conduct amounted to Serious
and decided that Professor Ridd’s employment should be
terminated. The findings and the decision were made under powers vested
Senior Deputy Vice-Chancellor under cl 54.3.6 of the Enterprise Agreement.
On 2 May 2018, the Vice-Chancellor made a final
determination that Professor
Ridd’s employment would be terminated. That determination was made under
cl 54.5 of the Enterprise
the Federal Circuit Court, Professor Ridd challenged each of the three sets of
findings of Misconduct and Serious Misconduct
and the disciplinary actions taken
against him. In his Further Amended Statement of Claim (
alleged expressly that his conduct did not constitute “Misconduct”
or “Serious Misconduct” within the
meaning of that term in the
Enterprise Agreement.
his FASOC, Professor Ridd alleged, inter alia:
8AB On the proper construction of the EA, the effect of
clause 6 and/or clause 13.3 and/or clause 14.1 is that conduct by JCU staff
would otherwise be permissible as an exercise of the Intellectual Freedom Right
conferred by clause 14:
d. is subject to clause 14, not the Code of
e. is not prohibited or limited (to any extent) by the Code of
constitute a breach of the Code of Conduct for the purpose of a disciplinary
process by JCU under clause 54;
constitute misconduct or serious misconduct within the meaning of s 8 of the
constitute misconduct or serious misconduct for the purpose of a disciplinary
process by JCU under clause 54
lawfully be prohibited or limited (to any extent) at the direction of
response, JCU pleaded in its Further Amended Defence that:
8AB. The Respondent denies paragraph 8AB of the Further
Amended Statement of Claim, on the basis that the rights and obligations
the EA and the Code of Conduct are contained in the terms of each of those
instruments, and further says:
response to paragraphs 8AB(d), (e) and (f), on the proper construction of
clauses 14.1 and 13 of the EA, the exercise of intellectual
freedom is subject
to the Code of Conduct and can only be exercised in a manner that is consistent
with the Code of Conduct;
response to paragraphs 8AB (g) and (h), on a proper construction of the EA, a
breach of the Code of Conduct when purporting to
exercise intellectual freedom
is capable of constituting misconduct or serious misconduct, having regard
8 of the EA which defines misconduct to be “
conduct that is not serious
misconduct but is nonetheless conduct which is improper or inconsistent with the
staff member’s
duties or responsibilities
8 of the EA which defines serious misconduct to be, amongst other things,
serious misconduct as defined in the
Fair Work Regulations 2009
serious breaches of the Code of Conduct;
54.2 of the EA, which prescribes the steps to be taken by the University to
address allegations of misconduct;
54.3, which prescribes the steps to be taken by the University to address
allegations of serious misconduct.
relation to the findings and decision made on 29 April 2016, the FASOC
8OC In the premises, in making the First Decision and
First Censure JCU contravened cl 14 of the EA (as construed in paragraphs
8AB and 8AC above) because JCU:
the Code of Conduct to the conduct instead of clause 14;
the Code of Conduct in a manner that limited or prohibited conduct in the
exercise of the Intellectual Freedom Right;
that the conduct was misconduct, even though it was protected by clause
8OC was denied in the Further Amended Defence. There were similar pleadings in
relation to the findings and decisions of
21 November 2017 and 13 April
the course of the hearing before the primary judge, senior counsel for Professor
Ridd expressly limited the extent and nature of
the case being pressed, saying,
“...we haven’t run a case that [JCU] contravened the Code of
Conduct, that the findings
aren’t supported by the evidence, that it
doesn’t constitute misconduct”. Senior counsel must be understood
having conceded that it was not any part of Professor Ridd’s case that
he had not breached the Code of Conduct, nor was it
any part of his case that
those breaches of the Code of Conduct did not fall factually within the
definitions of “Misconduct”
or “Serious Misconduct”
under the Enterprise Agreement. As the majority judges have commented, the
making of these concessions
has not been explained, and appears inexplicable.
it is apparent that Professor Ridd did not resile from his pleaded case that it
was impermissible for JCU to apply the Code
of Conduct to limit his right to
intellectual freedom under cl 14 of the Enterprise Agreement. Professor
Ridd maintained that JCU’s
findings of Misconduct and Serious Misconduct,
and the consequent disciplinary actions, were in contravention of cl 14 of
the Enterprise
Agreement and s 50 of the FWA. On the other hand, JCU
contended that the exercise of intellectual freedom was subject to the Code
Conduct and that a breach of the Code of Conduct was capable of constituting
Misconduct and Serious Misconduct. The issues before
the Federal Circuit Court
were defined by those competing positions.
THE PRIMARY JUDGE’S REASONS FOR FINDING THAT
CLAUSE 14 OF THE ENTERPRISE AGREEMENT HAD BEEN CONTRAVENED
primary judge’s construction of cll 13.3 and 14 of the Enterprise
Agreement was encapsulated in the following passages of
his Honour’s
reasons for judgment:
if a person were objectively to breach the Code of Conduct but the action was
one that was done in the proper exercise of
the rights under cl.14, then there
could be no breach of the Code of Conduct. That is because the Code of Conduct
cannot detract
from cl.14.
is only when behaviour is not covered by cl.14, that the Code of Conduct can
apply. Clause 14 means that it is the right of Professor
Ridd to say what he has
said in any manner that he likes so long as he does not contravene the sanctions
embedded in cl.14. That
is at the heart of intellectual freedom.
Honour had said earlier:
University submits that the right to exercise intellectual freedom provided by
cl.14 is subject to the other terms of the EA,
which must be read together with
cl.14, as part of the context of the clause. This includes cl.13 (which talks of
the Code of Conduct),
cl.8 (which defines misconduct and serious misconduct) and
cl.54 (which prescribes the steps to be taken by the University to address
allegations of misconduct or serious misconduct).
do requires one to limit the concept of intellectual freedom and make it
subservient to clauses that relate to behaviour.
wording of cl.14 does not show that there is any such limitation on its power or
applicability.
cl.14.1 speaks of the commitment of
to act in accordance with the
Code of Conduct, it does not, in that clause, bind anyone other than the
university itself with the
Code of Conduct.
clause puts its own limitations on intellectual freedom. The clause speaks of a
responsibility to respect the rights of others
”. As referred
to earlier in these reasons, there is no right to harass, vilify, bully or
intimidate those who disagree with
the views espoused.
clause links the rights to intellectual freedom to the responsibilities of staff
to support the University as a place of independent
learning and thought where
ideas may be put forward an opinion expressed freely. The clause speaks of what
do and what they
the clause already has sufficient limitations on the right to intellectual
freedom, it seems incongruous to then impose other
limitations that have not
been expressly identified.
the clause is truly meant to be subject to compliance with the Code of Conduct,
such a limitation would have been spelt out in
(Emphasis in original.)
is apparent that the primary judge accepted a submission made on behalf of
Professor Ridd that cl 14 of the Enterprise Agreement
protects the exercise
of intellectual freedom, subject only to the constraints upon its exercise found
within cl 14 itself, and that
the Code of Conduct cannot be applied to
restrict the exercise of that freedom. His Honour did not expressly state, but
reasoned, that where intellectual freedom is exercised, JCU cannot
take disciplinary proceedings for Misconduct or Serious Misconduct
based upon a
breach of the Code of Conduct. His Honour rejected JCU’s submission that
the exercise of intellectual freedom
is subject to, and can only be exercised in
a manner consistent with, the Code of Conduct.
WHETHER THE PRIMARY JUDGE ERRED IN CONSTRUING CLAUSE 14 OF
THE ENTERPRISE AGREEMENT
concur with the majority judges that the primary judge erred in construing
cl 14 of the Enterprise Agreement such that where a staff
member is engaged
in an exercise of intellectual freedom, the Code of Conduct has no application,
and that they can say what they
like as long as they do not contravene the
restrictions embedded in cl 14 itself. My reasons for so concluding are,
to some extent,
different from those of the majority. I place particular
emphasis on the following aspects of the language, context and purpose of
his Honour’s construction ignores the express reference to the Code of
Conduct in cl 14.1 of the Enterprise Agreement.
14.1. JCU is committed to act in a manner consistent
with the protection and promotion of intellectual freedom within the University
and in accordance with JCU’s Code of Conduct.
14.1 indicates that JCU’s commitment is not merely to act in a manner
consistent with the protection of intellectual
freedom, but also, “to
act...in accordance with JCU’s Code of Conduct”. To construe
cl 14 as meaning that the
Code of Conduct can have no application where a
staff member exercises intellectual freedom, pays no attention to JCU’s
commitment to act also in accordance with the Code of Conduct.
I will discuss later in these reasons, JCU’s commitment to,
“act...in accordance with the Code of Conduct”, must
be a commitment
to enforce the Code of Conduct. JCU’s enforcement of the Code of Conduct
occurs through the disciplinary processes
for Misconduct and Serious Misconduct
provided under the Enterprise Agreement.
some cases inconsistency may arise between JCU’s commitment under
cl 14.1 to act in a manner consistent with the protection
and promotion of
intellectual freedom and its commitment to enforce the Code of Conduct. However,
inconsistency is not inevitable.
In some cases, taking disciplinary proceedings
against one staff member may protect the intellectual freedom of another. So,
example, where an academic who criticises the work of another academic is
victimised or threatened in breach of the Code of Conduct
by the second
academic, the taking of disciplinary proceedings against the second may protect
the intellectual freedom of the first.
In that case, there may be no conflict
between JCU’s commitment to act in a manner that protects and promotes
intellectual
freedom and at the same time to act in accordance with the Code of
express commitment to “act...in accordance with the Code of Conduct”
is given no content under the construction
given to cl 14 by the primary
judge. That construction should not be accepted.
under the primary judge’s construction, when a staff member exercises
intellectual freedom, disciplinary action is
precluded, except where,
relevantly, the conduct comes within cl 14.3, which states that staff,
“do not have the right to harass,
vilify, bully or intimidate those who
disagree with their views”. The expression “Serious
Misconduct” is defined
in cl 8 of the Enterprise Agreement to mean,
not only a serious breach of the Code of Conduct, but also “serious
misconduct”
as defined by the
Fair Work Regulations 2009
) and “official misconduct” as defined by the
Misconduct Act 2001
). Under reg 1.07 of the FWR,
“serious misconduct” includes fraud, assault and intoxication at
work. Under s 15 of the
CMA, “official misconduct” includes a
criminal offence. Under the primary judge’s construction, JCU could not
disciplinary action in such circumstances. The foothold found by his Honour
for the exclusion of the Code of Conduct where there
is an exercise of
intellectual freedom is cl 13.3, which provides that, “the Code of
Conduct is not intended to detract from
Intellectual
”. However, there is no clause which suggests that intellectual
freedom trumps the other two integers of “Serious Misconduct”.
Clause 14 cannot be construed to mean that disciplinary action may not be taken
against a staff member who engages in “official
misconduct” contrary
to the CMA, or “serious misconduct” contrary to the FWR, merely
because he or she is engaged
in an exercise of intellectual freedom.
the consequences of construing cl 14 as completely excluding the Code of
Conduct when a staff member is engaged in an exercise
of intellectual freedom
make such a construction improbable. It cannot be supposed that it was intended
that a staff member should
be free, for example, to make improper use of IT
systems or engage in sexual harassment, merely because they are at the same time
exercising intellectual freedom by, for example, participating in a professional
or representative body.
in the next section of these reasons I will indicate what I consider to be the
correct construction of cll 13 and 14. There
can only be one correct
construction. As the construction I favour is different to that of the primary
judge, I respectfully consider
his Honour’s construction to be
WHETHER CLAUSES 13 AND 14 OF THE ENTERPRISE AGREEMENT MAY
BE CONSTRUED IN A MANNER DIFFERENT TO THE WAY CONTENDED FOR BY PROFESSOR
FIRST INSTANCE
primary judge construed cl 14 of the Enterprise Agreement in the manner
urged by Professor Ridd’s lawyers, namely that where
a staff member is
engaged in an exercise of intellectual freedom, the Code of Conduct has no
application and the only restrictions
upon that exercise are those contained in
cl 14 itself. In the appeal, Professor Ridd, while primarily contending
that the construction
adopted by the primary judge was correct, also advanced,
or at least adopted, an alternative construction to the effect that where
is inconsistency between the exercise of intellectual freedom and the Code of
Conduct, the former prevails, such that there
can be no finding of Misconduct or
Serious Misconduct.
submits that as the alternative argument was not argued before the primary judge
by Professor Ridd, it is not open on appeal for
the Court to adopt that
construction. Professor Ridd asserts that he did. JCU asserts that he did not.
Neither side descended to
the detail of the arguments run before the primary
judge. I am left uncertain as to the parameters of the submissions made at
instance. In the end, I do not think that it matters.
submission that it is not open to construe the relevant clauses in a manner
different from that argued below implies that
the primary judge’s role was
not necessarily to decide the correct construction of the relevant terms of the
Enterprise Agreement,
but to merely choose between the competing constructions
contended for by the parties. I do not accept that to be so. To explain
it is necessary to consider the nature and legal status of enterprise
agreements.
172(1) and (2) of the FWA provide that an enterprise agreement may be made
between an employer and its employees about, inter
alia, matters that pertain to
their relationship. Section 186 provides for enterprise agreements to be
approved by the Fair Work
Commission. The effect of s 50, taken together with ss
51, 53 and 54, is that an employer, employee or employee organisation covered
an approved enterprise agreement that is in operation is bound to comply with
agreements are not contracts: cf
Byrne v Australian Airlines Ltd
; 185 CLR 410 at 421–422, 452–453. Neither are enterprise
agreements legislative instruments within
Legislation Act 2003
(Cth). Although enterprise agreements have been described as having a
“legislative character” and “statutory force”
being “a creature of statute”, they are not laws.
Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Ltd v Marmara
[2014] FCAFC 84
, the Full Court observed at [89]:
In his reasons, the primary judge said that
“Toyota contended and it was not disputed, that an enterprise agreement
the FW Act is a form of delegated legislation”. It appears that
that contention was made in the context of Toyota’s submission
46 of the [Acts Interpretation] Act to which we have referred. However, although
the FW Act provides that an enterprise
agreement is “made” otherwise
than by the Commission, the Act does more than merely impose conditions upon,
additional legal effect to, an agreement made between private parties.
The effect of the legislation is to empower the employer and
the relevant
majority of its employees to specify terms which will apply to the employment of
all employees in the area of work concerned.
The legal efficacy of those terms
will arise under statute, not contract, and, as mentioned above, will be felt
also by those who
did not agree to them. Someone, such as an employee
subsequently taken on, who had nothing to do with the choice of the terms or
making of the agreement, will be exposed to penal consequences under s 50 if he
or she should happen to contravene one of the
terms. When viewed in this way, it
is not difficult to share in the perception that an enterprise agreement
approved under the FW
Act has a legislative character.
It may be noted that the Full Court, while accepting that an enterprise
agreement may be perceived as having “a legislative
character”, was
careful to refrain from suggesting that it is a law.
Australian Industry Group v Fair Work Australia
[2012] FCAFC 108
, the Full Court held at [72]:
The Agreement has statutory force. It is neither a
contract, arrangement or understanding within the meaning of the [Competition
Consumer] Act, but a creature of statute.
Although the Full Court described an enterprise agreement as having
“statutory force” and as “a creature of statute”,
not hold that an enterprise agreement is itself a law.
parte McLean
[1930] HCA 12
; CLR 472, Isaacs CJ and Starke J considered the
nature of awards at 479:
It is to be noted
that not only the
obligation to
the agreement, but the obligation to
it, is prescribed by the award. The award itself is, of course, not law, it is a
merely. But once it is completely made, its provisions are by the
terms of the Act itself brought into force as part of the law of
Commonwealth. In effect, the statute enacts by the prescribed constitutional
method the provisions contained in the award.
Byrne v Australian Airlines
, Brennan CJ, Dawson and Toohey JJ observed at
425 that, “an award is not a statute”, but is enforceable under
In the same case, McHugh and Gummow JJ held at 455, “Of
itself, the Award could not answer the description of a law of the
Commonwealth” and, “the Award is made part of the law, not by its
own force but by force of its adoption by the statute”.
City of Wanneroo v Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and
Services Union
[2006] FCA 813
; 153 IR 426, French J (as his Honour was then)
held at [51]:
An award made under the Act is not a law but, when made,
its provisions are given the force of a law of the
Commonwealth
as an award made by the Fair Work Commission is not a law, an enterprise
agreement approved by the Commission is not a law. However,
as the Full Court
observed in
Australian Industry Group
, s 50 of the
FWA operates to give an approved enterprise agreement the force of a law.
question of whether a person has contravened s 50 of the FWA depends on whether
a term of an enterprise agreement has been contravened;
and whether a term has
been contravened depends on its construction. The meaning attributed by a court
to a clause of an enterprise
agreement has consequences, not only for the legal
rights and obligations of the parties to the litigation, but also for the legal
rights and obligations of others covered by the enterprise agreement who have
had no opportunity to contend for any different meaning.
In that way, the
interpretation of an enterprise agreement by a court is analogous to the
interpretation of a statute.
addition, s 29(1) of the FWA provides that an enterprise agreement prevails over
a law of a State or Territory to the extent of
any inconsistency. Under s 18 of
the PSEA, a public official of a public sector entity must comply with relevant
standards of conduct
stated in the entity’s code of conduct. An issue in
the present case is whether, on the correct interpretation of the Enterprise
Agreement, Professor Ridd could be required to comply with the Code of Conduct
when engaged in the exercise of intellectual freedom.
Accordingly, the
interpretation of the Enterprise Agreement may affect the operation of a
statutory provision, there being an obvious
public interest in enforcement of
the provision.
role of a court in interpreting a statute was described by Brennan CJ in
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
194 CLR 355, at [13]:
However, the interests of persons concerned in the
litigation and the assumptions made in the rival submissions cannot divert the
Court from its duty to construe the statute. “Judges are more than mere
selectors between rival views”, said Lord Wilberforce
Sydney Mitchell & Co
, “they are entitled to and do think for
themselves”.
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
, Kirby J observed at
Subject to considerations of procedural fairness, this
Court may adopt a construction of legislation that has not been argued by the
parties, and a fortiori it is not restricted to the interpretive principles
argued by their representatives.
Accident Towing & Advisory Committee v Combined Motor Industries Pty
[1987] VicRp 48
[1987] VR 529
, McGarvie J held at 548:
Having reached a firm conclusion that the common
assumption on which the parties proceeded is wrong in law, I consider I should
decide the appeal on the basis of that erroneous assumption: cf.
[1982] AC 546
, at p. 547.
The questions of construction arising in these appeals are not of importance
only to the present parties or in the present disputes.
The decision of this
Court will in a number of respects establish the legal effect of provisions of
the legislation which will apply
in future to the Authority, tow truck owners
and the public.
primary judge was called upon to construe the Enterprise Agreement. It is not a
law. Yet it has the force of a law. The question
of its interpretation is
inextricable from the question of whether s 50 of the FWA had been contravened.
An incorrect interpretation
of the Enterprise Agreement would affect not only
the legal rights and obligations of the parties, but those of the employees of
JCU who were not parties to the litigation. In my opinion, by analogy with the
interpretation of a statute, his Honour was required
to determine the correct
construction, not merely which of the rival constructions advanced by the
parties was preferable.
alternative construction adopted in the appeal by Professor Ridd is that the
application of the Code of Conduct is subject to
the exercise of intellectual
freedom, so that the latter prevails to the extent of any inconsistency. In the
appeal, JCU had the
opportunity to advance substantive argument against this
alternative construction, but did not take that opportunity, submitting
is not open to the Court to consider a construction that was not argued before
the primary judge. I disagree. The task of
the appellate court is also to
construe the Enterprise Agreement for itself in the course of considering the
appropriate orders to
make, including whether the proceeding should be dismissed
or whether there should be a further hearing.
should add that even if the precise argument now adopted on behalf of Professor
Ridd was not made before the primary judge, an argument
something like it was
made. The premise of Professor Ridd’s case was always that under
cl 14 of the Enterprise Agreement,
it was impermissible for JCU to apply
the Code of Conduct in a manner that limited his right to intellectual freedom.
He consistently
argued that the Code of Conduct was subordinate to intellectual
freedom. The alternative argument now adopted expresses the same
construes cl 14 as operating in a somewhat different way to that originally
contended for. The difference may be described
as a matter of nuance, rather
than a wholly different argument.
HOW CLAUSES 13 AND 14 OF THE ENTERPRISE AGREEMENT SHOULD
BE CONSTRUED
ultimate issue raised in the proceeding before the Federal Circuit Court was
whether JCU contravened s 50 of the FWA by contravening
the Enterprise
Agreement. In
WorkPac Pty Ltd v Skene
[2018] FCAFC 131
264 FCR 536
, the Full Court described the principles relevant to the interpretation of
an enterprise agreement as follows:
The starting point for interpretation of an enterprise
agreement is the ordinary meaning of the words, read as a whole and in context.
The interpretation “turns on the language of the particular agreement,
understood in the light of its industrial context and
purpose”. The words
are not to be interpreted in a vacuum divorced from industrial realities;
rather, industrial agreements
are made for various industries in the light of
the customs and working conditions of each, and they are frequently couched in
intelligible to the parties but without the careful attention to form and
draftsmanship that one expects to find in an Act of Parliament.
effect, it has been said that the framers of such documents were likely of a
“practical bent of mind” and
may well have been more concerned with
expressing an intention in a way likely to be understood in the relevant
industry rather than
with legal niceties and jargon, so that a purposive
approach to interpretation is appropriate and a narrow or pedantic approach is
(Citations omitted.)
issue is how the Code of Conduct interacts with the clauses dealing with the
exercise of intellectual freedom and disciplinary
proceedings for Misconduct and
Serious Misconduct under the Enterprise Agreement.
Code of Conduct was prepared under s 15 of the PSEA and approved under
s 17(1). Section 18 of the PSEA requires public
officials to comply with
relevant standards of conduct stated in an applicable code of conduct. Section
24(c) of the PSEA provides
that any disciplinary action for a contravention of a
code of conduct should be dealt with under the disciplinary processes applying
to the relevant public official.
first direct reference in the Enterprise Agreement to the Code of Conduct is in
cl 8, which provides, relevantly, that, “Serious
is...[a]ny serious breach of the James Cook University Code of Conduct”.
There is also an implicit reference to
the Code of Conduct in the definition of
“Misconduct”, as, “conduct which is not Serious Misconduct but
is nonetheless
conduct which is improper or inconsistent with the staff
member’s duties or responsibilities”.
Code of Conduct is then dealt with expressly in cl 13. The chapeau
commences, “The parties to this agreement support the
Conduct...”. The reference to the “parties” is to JCU and the
five staff unions named in cl 4. It is unsurprising
that the parties would
support the Code of Conduct, given that s 16(2)(b) of the PSEA required
consultation with relevant industrial
organisations before the Code of Conduct
could be approved.
13.3 of the Enterprise Agreement then provides:
13.3 The parties note that the Code of Conduct is not
intended to detract from Clause 14,
Intellectual
Code of Conduct is referred to again in cl 14.1. It is convenient to
reproduce cl 14 in full at this stage:
14. INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM
14.1. JCU is committed to act in a manner consistent with the protection
and promotion of intellectual freedom within the University
and in accordance
with JCU’s Code of Conduct.
14.2. Intellectual freedom includes the rights of staff to:
Pursue critical and open inquiry;
Participate in public debate and express opinions about issues and ideas
related to their respective fields of competence;
Express opinions about the operations of JCU and higher education policy
more generally;
Be eligible to participate in established decision making structures and
processes within JCU, subject to established selection procedures
Participate in professional and representative bodies, including unions and
other representative bodies.
14.3. All staff have the right to express
unpopular or controversial views. However, this comes with a responsibility to
the rights of others and they do not have the right to harass, vilify,
bully or intimidate those who disagree with their views. These
rights are linked
to the responsibilities of staff to support JCU as a place of independent
learning and thought where ideas may
be put forward and opinion expressed
14.4. JCU acknowledges the rights of staff to express disagreement with
University decisions and with the processes used to make
those decisions. Staff
should seek to raise their concerns through applicable processes and give
reasonable opportunity for such
processes to be followed.
14.5. Staff, as leaders and role models to students and the wider
community, must adhere to the highest standards of propriety
and truthfulness in
scholarship, research and professional practice.
14.6. Staff members commenting publicly in a professional or expert
capacity may identify themselves using their University appointment
qualifications, but must not represent their opinions as those of JCU. The
University expects that staff will maintain professional
standards when they
intentionally associate themselves with its name in public statements and/or
14.7 Staff who contribute to public debate as individuals and not in an expert
or professional capacity, must not intentionally identify
themselves in
association with their University appointment.
54 has the heading, “Misconduct/Serious Misconduct”. Clause 54.1
sets out, “General Principles”.
54.2 deals with allegations of Misconduct. Clause 54.2.2 provides for formal
investigation and resolution of allegations of
Misconduct which cannot be
informally resolved. Under cl 54.2.2.5, the Senior Deputy Vice-Chancellor
will make a decision as to whether
there has been any Misconduct and any
disciplinary measures.
54.3 deals with allegations of Serious Misconduct. Under cl 54.3.6, the
Senior Deputy Vice-Chancellor will notify the staff
member of his or her
determination as to whether there has been any Serious Misconduct and any
disciplinary action, which may include
termination of employment. Under
cl 54.5, the Vice-Chancellor will make a final determination.
findings of Misconduct and Serious Misconduct against Professor Ridd were made
on the basis that he had breached the Code of Conduct.
He did not dispute that
he breached the Code of Conduct as alleged. Instead the issue was whether
cll 13.3 and 14 operated to preclude
JCU from taking proceedings for
Misconduct or Serious Misconduct based on breach of the Code of Conduct in
circumstances where he
alleged he was exercising his entitlement to intellectual
will deal first with the competing submissions as to whether the Code of Conduct
is part of, or incorporated into, the Enterprise
Agreement. JCU submits that it
is. Professor Ridd submits it is not.
Ridd relies on cl 6. Clause 6.1 refers to one of the policies specifically
mentioned in the Enterprise Agreement and states
that it will form part of the
Enterprise Agreement. Clause 6.2 then provides that, “All other
policies, procedures and guidelines
which support the operation of this
Agreement or provide staff benefits, conditions of employment or entitlements
are not incorporated
into nor form part of this Agreement...”.
purpose, or at least a purpose, of cl 6.2 appears to be to ensure or
clarify that, apart from the single specific exception, a
breach of a policy,
procedure or guideline referred to in the Enterprise Agreement will not itself
amount to a breach of the Enterprise
Agreement. I consider the Code of Conduct
to be a policy or guideline which, “support[s] the operation of the
Agreement”.
The Code of Conduct “supports” the Enterprise
Agreement in the sense that the operation of various clauses is founded
existence. Further, the Code of Conduct “provide[s]...conditions of
employment”, since failure to comply with
it can lead to disciplinary
action under cl 54, which may result in termination of employment. I
accept that the effect of cl 6.2
is that the Code of Conduct is not
incorporated into, and does not form part of, the Enterprise Agreement.
I consider that cl 6.2 makes no difference to the interpretation of the
relevant clauses. That is because cll 13, 14 and
54 acknowledge and operate
upon the existence of the Code of Conduct. They are intended to be interpreted
and applied in light of
the Code of Conduct. This view is consistent with
Australian Rail, Tram & Bus Industry Union v KDR Victoria Pty Ltd (t/as
Yarra Trams)
[2014] FCAFC 24
, where it was held at [9] that a term of an
enterprise agreement which provided that, “discipline will continue to be
in accordance with [a named policy]”, meant that if a staff
member were disciplined otherwise than in accordance with that
policy, there
would be a contravention of the term, even though the policy did not form part
of the agreement.
cl 6.3, which provides that the express terms of the Enterprise Agreement
apply where there is inconsistency with the guidelines
and policies, does not
affect the issues, given that cll 13 and 14 expressly deal with their
interaction with the Code of Conduct.
brings me to the interaction of the relevant clauses. Clause 13 commences by
stating that the parties, “support the Code
of Conduct”, but, under
cl 13.3, the parties note that the Code of Conduct is not intended to
“detract from” cl
14. Accordingly, cl 13.3 provides a
limitation upon the support the parties express for the Code of Conduct. The
phrase “detract
from”, is used in the context of interaction of a
clause and another instrument which may be contradictory in their operation.
The context in which the phrase is used has some analogy with
Constitution
, a test of validity of a State law is
whether it would “alter, impair or detract from” the Commonwealth
law; and each
of these elements refers to the “undermining” of a
Commonwealth law:
Jemena Asset Management (3) Pty Ltd v Coinvest Ltd
[2011] HCA 33
244 CLR 508
. In this case, the use of the phrase
“detract from” means that the Code of Conduct is not intended to
undermine the scope,
operation and effect of cl 14. It suggests, to the
contrary, that cl 14 is intended to undermine the Code of Conduct. Clause
is expressed in the negative, but could equally have been expressed as,
“Clause 14 is intended to detract from the Code of
14 has the heading, “Intellectual Freedom”. Clause 14.1 provides
that, “JCU is committed to act in a manner
consistent with the protection
and promotion of intellectual freedom within the University and in accordance
with JCU’s Code
of Conduct”. The commitment is given by JCU, not its
staff. JCU’s commitment is in relation to its own actions.
commitment is that its own actions will be consistent with the protection and
promotion of intellectual freedom within
JCU and that its own actions will be in
accordance with the Code of Conduct. However, the Code of Conduct applies only
to the conduct
of “staff of James Cook University”, not JCU itself.
The only obligation of JCU under the Code of Conduct is to provide
access to education and training about the Code of Conduct, which seems most
unlikely to have been intended to provide
the sole content of JCU’s
commitment to, “act...in accordance with JCU’s Code of
Conduct”. The question
is what, then, is meant by JCU’s commitment
to act “in accordance with JCU’s Code of Conduct”? In my
JCU’s commitment must be to
the Code of Conduct,
while at the same time complying with its conjunctive commitment to act to
protect and promote intellectual freedom
within JCU.
National Tertiary Education Union v La Trobe University
[2015] FCAFC 142
254 IR 238, the Full Court considered a clause of an enterprise agreement which
commenced, “The University is committed to
job security. Wherever possible
redundancies are to be avoided and compulsory retrenchment used as a last
resort”. The majority
held that the clause imposed a binding obligation
upon the employer. Justice White observed at [108]:
Although it may be a statement of the obvious, it is
appropriate to keep in mind that the document which the Court is asked to
is an enterprise agreement made pursuant to the regime in
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) (the FW Act). It is in the very nature of these
agreements that they are intended to establish binding obligations. The manner
of making such agreements is subject to detailed prescription and their
operation is contingent upon approval by the Fair Work Commission,
the obtaining
of which is itself a matter of detailed prescription. In my opinion, it is
natural to suppose that parties engaging
in this detailed process intend that
the result should be a binding and enforceable agreement. To my mind, that is an
important matter
of context when approaching the construction of [the
my opinion the use of the phrase “is committed to act” in the
Enterprise Agreement indicates that cl 14.1 is intended
to impose a binding
and enforceable obligation upon JCU.
I have explained, in some cases, there may be no inconsistency between
JCU’s twin commitments under cl 14.1, such as where
disciplinary
proceedings are taken for Misconduct or Serious Misconduct against one staff
member in order to protect the intellectual
freedom of another. However,
cll 14.2 to 14.7 recognise that conflict may arise between JCU’s
commitment to the protection
and promotion of intellectual freedom and its
commitment to enforce the Code of Conduct.
14.2 defines “intellectual freedom” inclusively. The five matters it
specifically includes are described as “rights”.
The concept of
intellectual freedom appears to be derived from, or to be a variant of, the
principle of academic freedom. The concept
is adapted so as to take into account
that the Enterprise Agreement covers, under cl 4.1, not only academic
staff, but all staff
of JCU other than catering staff. However, given that
JCU’s functions under
James Cook University Act 1997
(Qld) include providing education at university standard, encouraging study
and research, and disseminating knowledge and promoting
scholarship, the
principle of academic freedom cannot be ignored and, in fact, provides important
contextual background for the construction
Independent Review of Freedom of Speech in Australian Higher Education
(March 2019) (the
French Review
), the Hon Robert French AC
observed at p 18:
Academic freedom has a complex history and apparently no
settled definition. It is nevertheless seen as a defining characteristic
universities and similar institutions.
academic freedom has no settled definition, it is not devoid of meaning. One
definition of “academic freedom”, contained
in a 1997 UNESCO report,
was considered and described in the French Review at p 119 as
The elements of academic freedom thus defined, have been
summarised as freedom of teaching, freedom of research, freedom of intra-mural
expression and freedom of extra-mural expression.
French Review also described ongoing debate about the limits and protection of
academic freedom. It is against the background
of such debate that cl 14
must be understood. In my opinion, each of the five matters set out as examples
of intellectual freedom
in cl 14.2 is capable of being described as an
aspect of academic freedom, although the last three also extend to non-academic
specific inclusion of cl 14 in the Enterprise Agreement recognises the
importance of intellectual freedom, including academic
freedom, to the fabric of
JCU as a university and to the work of its staff. That is why JCU committed
under cl 14.1 to acting in
a manner consistent with protecting and
promoting intellectual freedom. At the same time, cl 14 recognises that
intellectual freedom
is not absolute, and there must be a balance between the
exercise of that freedom and the standards of conduct required under the
Conduct. Accordingly, cll 14.3 to 14.7 describe limits upon the exercise of
intellectual freedom.
the limits in cll 14.3 to 14.7 have no force of themselves. Those limits
tend to be expressed as expectations, rather than
obligations which may found a
breach of the Enterprise Agreement by staff members. For example, the language
used includes, “responsibility
to respect the rights of others”,
“should seek to raise their concerns”, “must adhere to the
highest standards
of propriety and truthfulness”, and “expects that
staff will maintain professional standards”. The Enterprise
envisages that limits of the kinds described in cll 14.3 to 14.7 will be
enforced through disciplinary action taken under
cl 54 for Misconduct or
Serious Misconduct. In order to constitute Misconduct or Serious Misconduct,
conduct will usually, although
not inevitably, require a breach of the Code of
Conduct. Such an approach is consistent with JCU’s commitment under
to enforce the Code of Conduct.
will be a conflict between JCU’s twin commitments under cl 14.1 where
a staff member exercises intellectual freedom and,
at the same time, is alleged
to have breached the standards set out in the Code of Conduct. In some
circumstances this may be inevitable.
Principle 1 of the Code of Conduct
requires staff to, “criticise and challenge in the collegial and academic
spirit of the
Principle 2 requires staff to, “behave in a way that upholds the...good
reputation of the University”, and Principle 3 requires staff to
“treat fellow staff members...with...respect and courtesy”.
is difficult to see, for example, how an academic could make a genuine
allegation that a colleague has engaged in academic
fraud without being
uncollegial, disrespectful and discourteous and adversely affecting JCU’s
good reputation.
issue is how the Enterprise Agreement resolves conflicts between JCU’s
commitment under cl 14.1 to enforce the Code of Conduct
and its conjunctive
commitment to protect and promote intellectual freedom. The answer is found in
cl 13.3, which indicates that
cl 14 limits the scope, operation and
effect of the Code of Conduct. Clause 14 does so by giving primacy to
JCU’s commitment
to protect and promote intellectual freedom over its
commitment to enforce the Code of Conduct. Where there is conflict, the former
prevails to the extent of the inconsistency. In such a case, JCU cannot proceed
with disciplinary proceedings for Misconduct or Serious
Misconduct based on a
breach of the Code of Conduct.
this construction, where a staff member claims that he or she is protected
under cl 14, it is necessary for the JCU decision-maker,
or a court,
considering an allegation of Misconduct or Serious Misconduct based on a breach
of the Code of Conduct to engage in a
three-step process. First, it must be
determined whether the staff member was genuinely engaged in an exercise of
intellectual freedom,
which will require identification of how that freedom is
said to have been exercised. Second, it must be determined whether the staff
member may have breached the Code of Conduct, and in what manner. Third, it must
be determined whether there is a conflict between
the particular exercise of
intellectual freedom identified and the particular requirement of the Code of
Conduct that is alleged
to have been breached, such that prosecuting the
disciplinary proceedings will be inconsistent with JCU’s obligation to
and promote intellectual freedom within the University. The conflict
must be a “real conflict”: cf
Jemena Asset Management (3) Pty Ltd
v Coinvest Ltd
at [41]–[42]. If it is, the exercise of intellectual
freedom prevails and JCU cannot complete disciplinary proceedings for
or Serious Misconduct. In the absence of such conflict, the staff member may be
proceeded against for Misconduct or Serious
Misconduct. Seen in this way,
cll 14.3 to 14.7 provide examples of breaches of the Code of Conduct which
might result in a staff
member being guilty of Misconduct or Serious Misconduct
despite the exercise of intellectual freedom, or at least describe expectations
of appropriate behaviour. It may be acknowledged that there will be a degree of
subjectivity involved in the assessment, but the
broad description of
intellectual freedom and the vaguely expressed requirements of the Code of
Conduct mean that an evaluative judgment
will often be required.
may be noted that under this construction, the exercise of intellectual freedom
does not stand in the way of disciplinary action
for Serious Misconduct
constituted by “official misconduct” within
of the CMA, or
“serious misconduct” within reg 1.07 of the FWR.
will later consider the consequences for the appeal of the construction that I
accept to be the correct construction of cll 13,
THE PRIMARY JUDGE’S REASONS FOR FINDING THAT
CLAUSE 54.1.5 OF THE ENTERPRISE AGREEMENT DID NOT IMPOSE AN OBLIGATION OF
CONFIDENTIALITY
ON PROFESSOR RIDD
54 describes the procedural and substantive steps for investigating and dealing
with allegations of Misconduct and Serious
Misconduct. Clause 54.1.5 deals with
confidentiality in the management of allegations of Misconduct and Serious
Misconduct in the
following terms:
54.1.5 The confidentiality of all parties involved in
the management of Misconduct and Serious Misconduct processes will be respected
and all information gathered and recorded will remain confidential, subject to
JCU’s obligations:
(a) to discharge its responsibilities under
an Act or University policy;
(b) for a proceeding in a court or tribunal; or
(c) unless the person to whom the confidential information relates, consents in
writing to the disclosure of the information or record;
or if no consent is
obtainable and such disclosure is unlikely to harm the interests of the person
affected; or
(d) unless information is already in the public domain.
issued Professor Ridd with a number of directions requiring him to maintain the
confidentiality of the disciplinary processes.
For example, by letter dated 8
February 2018, Professor Ridd was directed to keep, “all matters relating
to this disciplinary
process strictly confidential, including the existence of
the disciplinary process, details of the allegations, this letter, your
and any further correspondence between yourself and the University in relation
to this matter”. The letter asserted
that the source of the power to give
such directions was cl 54.1.5 of the Enterprise Agreement.
findings of Serious Misconduct made against Professor Ridd included that he had
breached the Code of Conduct by failing to comply
with lawful and reasonable
directions to keep information relating to the disciplinary processes
confidential.
primary judge held that cl 54.1.5 of the Enterprise Agreement did not give
JCU power to issue the confidentiality directions.
His Honour decided, firstly,
that the clause exists solely for the protection of the staff member against
whom the allegations of
Misconduct or Serious Misconduct are made. Secondly, his
Honour considered that the requirement is only that the confidentiality
parties, “will be respected”, and that does not create any
obligation of confidentiality. Thirdly, his Honour
held that any obligation of
confidentiality is limited to “all information gathered and
recorded”, whereas the confidentiality
directions went further by
requiring the disciplinary process itself to be confidential. Further, his
Honour held that taking disciplinary
action for non-compliance with the
directions contravened the protection of intellectual freedom requirement under
will first consider the primary judge’s construction of cl 54.1.5. I
think it is well understood that confidentiality obligations
in respect of
disciplinary processes generally exist to protect, not only the person against
whom the allegation is made, but also
others involved in the process. Such
persons include complainants and witnesses who might otherwise be exposed to
embarrassment or
opprobrium by others. That may readily be understood, for
example, in the context of sexual or other harassment. Unless the
confidentiality
of such persons is protected, they may be discouraged from
coming forward or cooperating. It is in the interests of any organisation
misconduct be exposed and dealt with.
54.1.5 expressly provides that, “confidentiality of
all parties
involved in the management of Misconduct and Serious Misconduct processes will
be respected” (emphasis added). That indicates
that the clause applies not
only to the staff member against whom the allegation is made, but also to other
people involved, including
the complainant and witnesses. Therefore, I do not
agree with the primary judge’s characterisation of the clause as existing
only for the protection of the staff member who is the subject of the
allegation.
is true, as the primary judge noted, that the language used at the commencement
of the chapeau to cl 54.1.5 is that, “confidentiality...will
respected”, and does not expressly impose an obligation to maintain
confidentiality. However, the next part of the chapeau
reads, “all
information gathered and recorded will remain confidential”, which clearly
imposes an obligation of confidentiality.
It would be inconsistent for there to
be an obligation of confidentiality in respect of “information gathered
and recorded”,
but otherwise no obligation, and only an expectation, in
respect of the “confidentiality of all parties”. The chapeau
be understood as having a consistent meaning, such that there is also an
obligation to maintain the confidentiality of all
parties involved.
I agree with the primary judge that the obligation of confidentiality under
cl 54.1.5 does not extend to a requirement for
the person who is the
subject of the disciplinary process to not disclose the fact or existence of the
process. The clause is expressly
directed to the confidentiality of “all
parties” and “all information gathered and recorded”. It
understood as imposing an obligation on the person accused of
Misconduct or Serious Misconduct to “respect” his or her
entitlement to confidentiality. In my opinion, the clause does not prevent the
person accused from disclosing the existence of
the process, so long as he or
she does not disclose any matter that would allow, for example, the identity of
the complainant to
reasonably be ascertained. To construe the clause otherwise
would reveal a Kafkaesque scenario of a person secretly accused and secretly
found guilty of a disciplinary offence but unable to reveal, under threat of
further secret charges being brought, that he or she
had ever been charged and
found guilty.
majority judges have observed that cl 54.1.5, particularly the words and
syntax commencing with the words “subject to JCU’s
obligations”, is clumsy. It is arguable that the drafting is not merely
clumsy, but contains an obvious and unintended typographical
and syntactical
the majority judges observe, although the clause reads as if paras (a) to (d)
should each identify an obligation imposed upon JCU,
only para (a) does so
squarely. The clause may have been intended to read as follows:
54.1.5 The confidentiality of all parties involved in
the management of Misconduct and Serious Misconduct processes will be respected
and all information gathered and recorded will remain confidential, subject to
JCU’s obligations
JCU’s obligations
discharge its responsibilities under an Act or University policy;
(b) for a proceeding in a court or tribunal; or
(c) unless the person to whom the confidential information relates, consents in
writing to the disclosure of the information or record;
or if no consent is
obtainable and such disclosure is unlikely to harm the interests of the person
affected; or
(d) unless information is already in the public domain.
Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Hay Point
Services Pty Ltd
[2018] FCAFC 182
, the Full Court held at [20], “It
ought also be presumed that [the relevant clause] was intended to be effective
and produce
a sensible industrial outcome”. A reading of cl 54.1.5
in the manner suggested would operate to produce a sensible industrial
although perhaps a less grammatical one, whereas there does not appear to be any
sensible reason for the existing drafting
of the clause. This construction would
mean that the exceptions to the requirement of confidentiality in paras (b), (c)
and (d) would
not merely apply to JCU, but also to the person the subject of
disciplinary proceedings. Otherwise, for example, where a person to
confidential information relates consents to disclosure of information, or the
information is in the public domain, JCU
is entitled to disclose it, but a staff
member who discloses the same information would breach the Enterprise Agreement
and may also
be found to have engaged in Serious Misconduct. It seems unlikely
that the clause could have been intended to operate in such an
construction would require rewriting of the clause. However, that may not be
fatal if it is clear that the original drafting
was the product of a
typographical or syntactical error. Even in a statute, that may sometimes be
permitted: see
Director of Prosecutions (Nauru) v Fowler
[1984] HCA 48
154 CLR 627
at 630. It may be more readily done in an enterprise agreement. In
George A Bond & Co Ltd (in liq) v McKenzie
[1929] AR(NSW) 498
J held at 503:
...it must be remembered that awards are made for the
various industries in the light of the customs and working conditions of each
industry, and they frequently result...from an agreement between the parties,
couched in terms intelligible to themselves but often
framed without that
careful attention to form and draughtsmanship which one expects to find in an
Act of Parliament. I think, therefore
in construing an award, one must always be
careful to avoid a too literal adherence to the strict technical meaning of
must view the matter broadly, and after giving consideration and
weight to every part of the award, endeavour to give it a meaning
with the general intention of the parties to be gathered from the whole
City of Wanneroo v Holmes
[1989] FCA 369
(1989) 30 IR 362
Kucks v CSR Ltd
[1996] IRCA 166
(1996) 66 IR 182
, Madgwick J observed at
It is trite that narrow or pedantic approaches to the
interpretation of an award are misplaced. The search is for the meaning intended
by the framer(s) of the document, bearing in mind that such framer(s) were
likely of a practical bent of mind: they may well have
been more concerned with
expressing an intention in ways likely to have been understood in the context of
the relevant industry and
industrial relations environment than with legal
niceties or jargon. Thus, for example, it is justifiable to read the award to
effect to its evident purposes, having regard to such context, despite mere
inconsistencies or infelicities of expression which might
tend to some other
reading. And meanings which avoid inconvenience or injustice may reasonably be
strained for. For reasons such
as these, expressions which have been held in the
case of other instruments to have been used to mean particular things may
and properly be held to mean something else in the document at
But the task remains one of interpreting a document produced by another or
others. A court is not free to give effect to some anteriorly
derived notion of
what would be fair or just, regardless of what has been written into the award.
Deciding what an existing award
means is a process quite different from
deciding, as an arbitral body does, what might fairly be put into an award. So,
for example,
ordinary or well-understood words are in general to be accorded
their ordinary or usual meaning.
recognise that this possible construction of cl 54.1.5 was not argued by
the parties, nor did they have an opportunity to address
that construction.
Therefore, I will not decide whether or not it is the correct construction. This
approach does not affect the
orders I propose, since the validity of
disciplinary action taken for a breach of the Code of Conduct by failing to
comply with the
confidentiality directions depends upon the application of
cl 14 under its proper construction, and that matter should, in any event,
be remitted.
raised an argument before the primary judge that it was entitled to give
Professor Ridd the confidentiality directions under the
common law right of an
employer to give lawful and reasonable directions to an employee. The primary
judge stated that the argument
was not pressed and decided that, in any event,
the common law right was overridden by cl 14 of the Enterprise Agreement on
construction of that clause. His Honour’s construction of
cl 14 has not been upheld in the appeal, and it is apparent JCU had
continued to rely upon its common law entitlement.
common law obligation of an employee to comply with a direction given by his or
her employer depends upon the reasonableness of
the direction. In
Darling Island Stevedoring and Lighterage Co Ltd; Ex parte Halliday; Ex parte
[1938] HCA 44
, Dixon J (as his Honour was then) said at
Naturally enough the award adopted the standard or test
by which the common law determines the lawfulness of a command or direction
given by a master to a servant. If a command relates to the subject matter of
the employment and involves no illegality, the obligation
of the servant to obey
it depends at common law upon its being reasonable. In other words, the lawful
commands of an employer which
an employee must obey are those which fall within
the scope of the contract of service and are reasonable.
But what is reasonable is not to be determined, so to speak,
The nature of the employment, the established usages affecting it, the common
practices which exist and the general provisions of
the instrument, in this case
an award, governing the relationship, supply considerations by which the
determination of what is reasonable
must be controlled
primary judge did not determine whether the confidentiality directions given
were reasonable, even though that was an issue in
dispute on the pleadings.
Further, the question of what is reasonable must be determined in light of the
requirements of the Enterprise
Agreement, including cll 14 and 54.1.5,
properly construed. These are issues that require full argument, which was not
in the appeal.
addition, there is a question of whether the common law obligation was modified
by the provisions of the Enterprise Agreement,
including cll 14 and 54.1.5, upon
their proper construction.
OTHER MATTERS
agree with the reasons of the majority judges concerning damages.
to penalty, I agree with the majority judges that the primary judge erred in
imposing a penalty of $125,000. However, upon the
assumption of JCU’s
conduct involving the unlawful termination of the employment of a long-standing
employee because he was
exercising intellectual freedom of the very type which
JCU had agreed to protect, I do not agree that $15,000 would be adequate to
reflect the seriousness of the conduct.
THE APPROPRIATE ORDERS
have accepted that the primary judge wrongly construed cll 13 and 14 of the
Enterprise Agreement. His Honour ought to have instead
construed the clauses to
mean that where there is conflict between a genuine exercise of intellectual
freedom and a requirement of
the Code of Conduct, the former prevails to the
extent of the inconsistency. This means that where disciplinary action for
of the Code of Conduct is inconsistent with JCU’s obligation to
protect and promote intellectual freedom, JCU cannot take or
complete such
disciplinary action.
primary judge examined whether Professor Ridd was engaged in exercising
intellectual freedom in respect of each relevant allegation.
However, once that
question was answered in favour of Professor Ridd, his Honour concluded there
could be no breach of the Code of
Conduct and he could not be guilty of
Misconduct or Serious Misconduct. Instead, his Honour should have made a
comparison between
each particular exercise of intellectual freedom and each
corresponding admitted breach of the Code of Conduct and decided whether
was conflict which required JCU not to take disciplinary proceedings for
Misconduct or Serious Misconduct. That exercise was
not done. I should add that
I do not agree with the view of the majority judges that it is
“clear” that some aspects
of Professor Ridd’s conduct cannot
be characterised as the exercise of intellectual freedom — that issue
becomes less
clear when his conduct is examined in the context of the course of
events as a whole.
primary judge also misconstrued some aspects of cl 54.1.5 of the Enterprise
Agreement when considering the findings of Serious
Misconduct based on Professor
Ridd’s failure to comply with the confidentiality directions. However, his
Honour was correct
to find that Professor Ridd was not prevented from disclosing
the existence of the disciplinary process. In addition, the breaches
of the Code
of Conduct constituted by failing to comply with the confidentiality directions
fall to be examined in light of cl 14
under its correct construction.
question of whether Professor Ridd was required to comply with the
confidentiality directions under JCU’s common law right
to give lawful and
reasonable directions also falls to be determined in light of the correct
construction of cll 14 and 54.1.5.
ultimate determination to terminate Professor Ridd’s employment was the
product of a cumulative assessment, in the sense
that the reasons of the
delegate of the Senior Deputy Vice-Chancellor relied upon the initial formal
censure and then the final censure
having been issued to conclude that
termination was warranted. I do not think that it is appropriate to finally
determine only some
of the factual issues in the appeal, when they are all
interlinked with the proper application of the Enterprise Agreement upon its
proper construction.
appeal should be allowed and the orders of the primary judge should be set
aside. In my respectful opinion, the proceeding should
not be dismissed, but the
matter should be remitted to the Federal Circuit Court for a new hearing upon
the same evidence.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
five (105) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment
the Honourable Justice
Dated: 22 July 2020
RTF format (779 KB)
Signed PDF/A format