Fairfield & Hoffman [2021] FamCAFC 151 (19 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Fairfield & Hoffman
[2021] FamCAFC
Appeal from:
Hoffman & Fairfield
[2020] FamCA 193
Appeal number(s):
EAA 45 of 2020
File number(s):
SYC 962 of 2016
Judgment of:
AINSLIE-WALLACE, RYAN & ALDRIDGE
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – PARENTING – International
relocation refused – Duration of time with the other parent –
Adequacy of reasons – Reasons quell controversies – Appellant and
ICL bound by the conduct of their case at trial –
Application of
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) to psychiatric report – Relevant
considerations – Attribution of weight –Whether findings in relation
family violence adequate – Appellant and ICL did not seek findings with
greater particularity than those made – Failure
to consider single expert
opinion as to time – Appeal allowed in part – Orders regarding the
child’s time with
the father during school term be remitted for rehearing
– Interim orders made for the child’s time with the father in
accordance with the opinion of the single expert – Orders amended by
consent – Costs certificates issued for the appeal
and rehearing.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
Family Law Rules 2004
, rr 15.41, 15.42
Cases cited:
Adamson & Adamson
(2014) FLC 93–622;
[2014] FamCAFC
Amador & Amador
(2009) 43 Fam LR 268
[2009] FamCAFC 196
(1999) 199 CLR 160;
[1999] HCA 26
A v A: Relocation Approach
(2000) FLC 93-035
[2000] FamCA 751
Baghti & Baghti and Ors
[2015] FamCAFC 71
Bennett and Bennett
(1991) FLC 92-191
[1990] FamCA 148
Chapman v Palmer
(1978) FLC 90-510
[1978] FamCA 86
Flanagan v Handcock
(2001) FLC 93-074
[2000] FamCA 150
Gronow v Gronow
(1979) 144 CLR 513
[1979] HCA 63
Hall and Hall
(1979) FLC 90-713
[1979] FamCA 73
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
Mellick & Mellick
[2014] FamCAFC 236
Metwally v University of Wollongong
(1985) 60 ALR 68;
(2010) 240 CLR 461
[2010] HCA 4
Muldoon & Carlyle
(2012) FLC 93-513
[2012] FamCAFC 135
Sahrawi & Hadrami
(2018) FLC 93–857 ;
[2018] FamCAFC
(2002) 211 CLR 238
[2002] HCA 36
Whisprun Pty Ltd v Dixon
(2003) 200 ALR 447
[2003] HCA 48
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
The Appellant:
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Horton Rhodes Legal
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Delaney Lawyers
SYC 962 of 2016
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
MS FAIRFIELD
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN’S LAWYER
ORDER MADE BY:
AINSLIE-WALLACE, RYAN & ALDRIDGE JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The appeal be allowed in part.
2. Order 5.2 of the orders dated 19 March 2020 be set aside.
3. The question of the child’s time with the father during school term
be remitted for rehearing before a judge other than the
primary judge.
4. Other than as provided for above, the appeal be dismissed.
5. Pending further order, that X, born in 2014 (“the child”), in
addition to the time provided for in Order 5.1 and Order
5.3 of the orders dated
19 March 2020, spend time with the father from the conclusion of school on
Friday until the commencement
of school on Monday in week 2.
6. There be no order as to costs.
7. The Court grants to the mother a costs certificate pursuant to the
provisions of
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
being a certificate that in the opinion of the Court it would be appropriate for
the Attorney-General to authorise a payment
under that Act to the mother in
respect of the costs incurred by the mother in relation to this appeal.
8. The Court grants to the father a costs certificate pursuant to the
provisions of
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
being a certificate that in the opinion of the Court it would be appropriate for
the Attorney-General to authorise a payment
under that Act to the father in
respect of the costs incurred by the father in relation to this appeal.
9. The Court grants to the Independent Children’s Lawyer a costs
certificate pursuant to the provisions of
Federal Proceedings
(Costs) Act 1981
(Cth) being a certificate that, in the opinion of the
Court, it would be appropriate for the Attorney- General to authorise a
under that Act to the Independent Children’s Lawyer in respect of
the costs incurred by the Independent Children’s Lawyer
in relation to the
10. The Court grants to each party and the Independent Children’s
Lawyer a costs certificate pursuant to the provisions of
Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
(Cth), being a certificate that in the opinion
of the Court, it would be appropriate for the Attorney-General to authorise a
under that Act to each party and the Independent Children’s Lawyer
in respect of such part as the Attorney-General considers
appropriate of any
costs incurred by each party and the Independent Children’s Lawyer in
relation to the rehearing of these
proceedings.
BY CONSENT, THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
11. Order 1 of the orders dated 19 March 2020 is varied by adding at its
commencement “Excluding Order 2 of the orders dated
23 September
2019” so that Order 1 becomes “Excluding Order 2 of the orders dated
23 September 2019, all existing parenting
orders in relation to X, born in 2014
are discharged.”
12. Order 9 of the orders dated 19 March 2020 is varied by deleting the words
“is at liberty to travel” and inserting
immediately after the words
“the mother” the words “is permitted to travel with the
IT IS NOTED THAT:
reason of the amendment referred to in Order 12 (above), Order 9 of the orders
dated 19 March 2020 provides:
(a) The mother is permitted to travel with the child
outside the Commonwealth of Australia for a total of four weeks per calendar
year on the following conditions:
(i) provision of no less than 30 days
written notice except in the case of an emergency
(ii) provision of copies of return airline tickets, an itinerary, accommodation
details and travel insurance certificate
(iii) travel to non-Hague Convention countries is not permitted without the
written consent of the father.
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), the particulars
of the obligations these orders create and the particulars of the consequences
that may follow if a person
contravenes these orders are set out in Annexure A
and those particulars are included in these orders.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Fairfield & Hoffman
has been approved by
the Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
AINSLIE-WALLACE, RYAN & ALDRIDGE JJ:
INTRODUCTION
1 On 19 March 2020, parenting orders were made
pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the
Act”) in relation to the parties’ daughter, X (“the
child”). The effect of the orders was
to confer Mr Hoffman (“the
father”) and Ms Fairfield (“the mother”) with equal shared
parental responsibility
for the child, for the child to live with the mother and
to spend regular and increasing amounts of time with the father. As to the
child’s time with the father during school term, this culminated in the
child spending time with him five nights each fortnight
in two periods of four
nights and one night respectively (Order 5). This arrangement commenced in
Term 3 2020 and roughly coincided
with the child turning six years of age. From
the commencement of the school year in 2021, school holidays were effectively
equally between the parents.
2 The mother sought orders which would enable her to take the child to live
in the United Kingdom. Her relocation application was
not granted and an
order was made which enabled her to travel abroad for up to four weeks annually
(Order 9). The father may do so
as well, albeit it is not until 2024 that he can
travel with the child abroad for a consecutive four week period (Order 10).
the orders provide logistics which are designed to address potential
difficulties arising from the poor parental relationship.
3 The child was 17 months of age when the parties separated. By agreement,
she lived with the mother and spent time with the father.
Over time, the amount
of time the child spent with the father increased and by the time of trial, the
child spent time with the father
two nights in each fortnight and one day each
week. Lest it be thought that these arrangements were easily agreed, nothing
be further from the truth and the parties have needed an array of
therapists to help them design their parenting arrangements. Indeed,
commenced proceedings in relation to the child five days after the parties
stopped living together. Since then, the parties
have been in constant dispute,
particularly in relation to the amount of time that the child should spend with
the father. Basically
the father pressed for more time with the child than the
mother believed was developmentally appropriate for the child and for longer
periods than she thought he could manage without him becoming frustrated and
possibly angry.
4 By late 2017, the mother sought orders which would enable her to relocate
with the child, which the father opposed. Whether it be
in Australia or the
United Kingdom, there was no dispute that the child would continue to live with
the mother. Even if the child
moved to the United Kingdom, the father, who
was born and worked in Australia, would not follow. If the mother was not able
the child to live in the United Kingdom, she would stay in Australia.
Thus, the central controversy was whether it would be in the
best interests of
the child for her to leave Australia where she had always lived and to establish
her permanent residence in the
United Kingdom. In order to answer that question,
the issues raised in the case required consideration of the impact on the mother
if her desire to take the child to live in the United Kingdom was thwarted
and, if the child moved to the United Kingdom, whether
she would be able to
enjoy and maintain a meaningful relationship with the father and the potential
impact on him.
5 It is helpful to note at this juncture that both parties carry some
vulnerabilities and receive ongoing psychiatric care. The mother
adjustment disorder attributed to her dealings with the father and presently
takes anti-depressant medication. The primary
judge accepted that the
mother’s mental health would benefit if she returned to live in the United
Kingdom and where the mother
believed she would no longer require medication. On
the other hand, the father’s treating psychiatrist gave evidence that the
father also has an adjustment disorder with mild narcissistic traits, but not a
personality disorder, and he could be perceived as
narcissistic and controlling.
However, if the child moved to live in the United Kingdom, the father’s
mental health would be
adversely affected and there was a real risk that he
would develop severe depression. As to the child, she was loved, attached to
both her parents and doing well. Fortunately, there were no signs of her being
affected by her parents’ poor relationship.
6 The primary judge was satisfied that the mother’s proposal for
relocation was not in the best interests of the child and,
contrary to the
mother’s position that the child should have four nights per fortnight
with the father, and his proposal that
he should have six, five nights was in
the best interests of the child. The primary judge explained the conclusions in
the following
69. Mr F gave clear and cogent evidence that the father
would be at real risk of severe depression in the event of a relocation.
view it is reasonable to infer that his parenting capacity would be compromised
if he developed such a degree of depression.
In that event, both distance and
his mental health would compromise the child's opportunity for a meaningful
relationship with her
70. On the basis of the evidence of Dr H, I consider it likely that the mother
would seek appropriate professional assistance and
support if she and the child
remain in Australia. I take into account the evidence of Dr H that the mother
possesses “mature
psychological defences” and in the past “has
made sensible lifestyle choices”. The mother gave evidence that she
increase her hours of employment if she remains in Australia. I regard that plan
as evidence of the personality strengths which
Dr H identified in the
73. I agree with counsel for the ICL that “there are upsides and
downsides to both outcomes” of these proceedings. It
seems to me that the
outcome which offers to the child the best prospects of a meaningful
relationship with each of her parents is
that she remains in Australia.
74. I appreciate that the mother probably will not function optimally on that
scenario, at least until she puts in place appropriate
professional and personal
support mechanisms. I accept that evidence of Dr H as to her personality
strengths and “mature psychological
defences”. It seems to me to be
more probable than not that the mother will adapt to an ongoing life in
Australia with the
child. On the other hand, the evidence indicated that the
father would not be likely to adjust to a relocation and continue to fulfil
role as a supportive parent to the child.
7 From these passages it will be apparent that an Independent
Children’s Lawyer (“ICL”) was appointed to represent
child’s interests and subject to one matter, that the ICL did not favour
one outcome over the other. The ICL supported
an order that the parties have
equal shared parental responsibility for the child (contra the mother’s
proposal that she have
sole parental responsibility).
8 By Notice of Appeal filed on 16 April 2020, the mother appeals the orders
in their entirety and, if the appeal is allowed, she seeks
a remitted rehearing.
However, there is agreement that a number of errors in the orders should be
addressed and amendments will be
made to Orders 2 and 9 accordingly.
9 Subject to the agreed amendments, the father opposes the appeal and seeks
that the orders be upheld.
10 The ICL submits that the appeal should be allowed, the orders be set aside
and the proceedings remitted for rehearing. The ICL’s
position on the
appeal is tidily summarised as follows:
22) It is submitted that the primary judge has failed to
provide adequate reasons for the orders made. Whilst the orders themselves
made within jurisdiction (subject to the apparent oversight in the drafting of
Order 9) and are not so illogical as to demonstrate
that discretion has
miscarried, neither this Honourable Court nor the parties themselves can
properly understand:
factual findings have actually been made; and
those findings have then been factored into the reasoning process of the primary
(ICL’s Summary of Argument filed 26 February 2021,
11 So that it is clear, the ICL did not appeal from the orders and one of the
pivotal issues in the appeal is whether the grounds
of appeal presented by the
mother raise the issues which concern the ICL. If they were not raised, a
question arises as to the extent
to which the ICL should be permitted to impugn
the judgment absent an appeal. Related to this is the approach adopted by the
at trial and, the effect of the ICL not submitting in favour of the orders
which the mother says the primary judge erred in failing
BACKGROUND FACTS
12 The parties met in July 2012 and formed a
relationship not long thereafter. They differed about when they commenced living
and when their relationship ended. Those differences were not resolved
however there was no dispute that the parties were living
together at least from
November 2013 and, even if they had already separated under one roof, they
ceased to cohabit in February 2016
when the mother and the child left.
13 The mother was born in the United Kingdom in 1976 and at the time of trial
was 43 years of age. The mother moved to Australia in
February 2010 and she was
granted permanent residence in December 2013. The mother is an allied health
worker and at the time of
trial, she worked two days per week, which she planned
to increase.
14 The father was born in 1970 in Australia and at the time of trial was 49
years of age. He is a health professional who works in
private practice and the
public sector.
15 With the father’s agreement, following the parties’ separation
the mother has taken the child to the United Kingdom
in July/August 2016,
December 2018/January 2019 and July/August 2019. On each occasion the father
made a small contribution to the
travel costs.
16 An order was made appointing Dr C (“the single expert”)
as a single expert to investigate and report upon various matters
concerning the
child and the parties. The single expert is a psychiatrist. Relevantly, he
interviewed the parties and the child (together
with observation sessions) in
late April 2018. In his report dated 16 May 2018, the single expert
recommended:
154. Unless the Court determines that [the child] has
been exposed to abusive parenting by the father as alleged by the mother, I
respectfully recommend to the Court the following:
1. Joint shared parental responsibility.
2. For [the child] to remain in her mother's primary care with the gradual
increase in [the child’s] time in her father's care
to enable significant
and substantive contact. This could be achieved by six-monthly increments in
overnight contact from the age
of four. This will enable [the child] to enjoy
every second weekend in her father's care with handovers on Friday afternoon
school, with return to school on Monday morning and a mid-week night in
the father's care on the off week with half the school holidays
by the time she
is aged seven.
3. I support the current intervention with Mr M. It should be recognised that
this is a slow process, which will require an ongoing
commitment from both
parents. This will support [the child’s] evolving relationship with her
father and the mother's capacity
to allow [the child] to spend increasing
periods of time in her father's care.
4. Attendance at a single general practitioner who will provide ongoing
recommendations for any further psychological and medical
5. Both parents should make an undertaking to the Court to not denigrate the
other parent. They should undertake not to drink to
excess or use substances of
abuse whilst [the child] is in their care. They should undertake not to utilize
corporal punishment in
their parenting.
6. Both parents should continue their attendance for psychological and
psychiatric intervention as per the instruction of their treating
therapist and
psychiatrist.
17 The single expert was cross-examined at some length but at the conclusion
of his evidence, his opinions and recommendations had
not changed.
18 The proceedings were listed for trial in July 2019 but the case was not
ready and the hearing was vacated. It was then listed for
hearing to commence in
late September 2019. However, the mother failed to file her trial affidavit and
that hearing too was vacated.
The case went to trial in late November 2019 over
five days. All parties, including the ICL, were represented by counsel, in the
mother’s case through the pro bono scheme operated by the NSW Bar
Association.
19 After the evidence was closed, the mother agreed to increase the
child’s time with the father and for contact during the
forthcoming
Christmas holidays. Interim orders were made on 22 November 2019 per their
agreement. By those orders, the child would
spend time with the father as
1. from 11.00 am on 25 December 2019 until 11.00 am on
2. from 10.00 am on 24 January 2020 until 10.00 am on 27 January 2020
3. from 4.30 pm on 31 December 2019 until 6.30 pm on 1 January 2020
4. from 5.00 pm on 3 January 2020 until 9.00 am on 6 January 2020
5. between 6 January 2020 and the commencement of the school term, from
3.30 pm on Tuesday until 6.00 pm on Wednesday in week 1 and
from 9.00 am
until 6.00 pm on Wednesday and from 5.00 pm Friday until 9.00 am Monday in week
6. from the commencement of the school term, from Tuesday afternoon until
Wednesday morning in week 1 and from Friday afternoon until
Monday morning in
20 The primary judge was satisfied that the parties have a dysfunctional
co-parenting relationship [39]. In accordance with the evidence
the single expert, the parental relationship involved a prominent
approach-avoidance couple dynamic which highlighted the
incompatibility of the
parents’ personality styles.
21 The mother gave evidence that the father had been violent towards her and
he engaged in “abusive parenting” [16]. The
primary judge said that
the mother’s evidence of his violence included shouting, verbal abuse,
derogatory comments and throwing
objects at her, which the father largely
denied. She gave evidence that the father shouted at the child, which was also
denied. Over
the father’s objection, three audio recordings made in 2015
and 2016, and were received into evidence which established that
the father had
directed obscene and abusive language at the mother [27]. However, these
incidents occurred in close proximity to
the parties’ final separation and
in a situation of heightened stress. The primary judge was not willing to assume
reflected the parties’ current style of interaction [28].
22 The primary judge was satisfied that the child was not at risk of physical
or psychological harm while in the care of either party
or that she needed to be
protected from exposure to family violence [38]. Furthermore, the primary judge
was satisfied that each
of the parties is devoted to the child [58] and that the
child enjoyed “positive and loving connections with each of her
[42]. Indeed, the child’s interactions with each of her
parents were “delightful” as described by the single expert
The single expert’s opinion that the easy interaction he observed between
the child and each of her parents was inconsistent
with the father’s
allegation that the mother was excessively anxious in her parenting, and did not
support the mother’s
assertion that the child has been exposed to angry
and neglectful parenting from the father [37] was accepted.
THE ICL’S CASE AT TRIAL
23 The somewhat unusual position adopted in the
appeal by the ICL makes it necessary to record their stance in closing
For just as a party is bound by their conduct of a case at trial, so
is the ICL. Of course, there are exceptions to the general proposition
party, or an ICL, cannot raise a matter on appeal that was not raised in the
court below, but this case is not concerned with
the exceptions (
University of Wollongong
(1985) 60 ALR 68;
Whisprun Pty Ltd v Dixon
[2003] HCA 48
(2003) 200 ALR 447).
24 Counsel who then appeared for the ICL made the following closing
[COUNSEL FOR THE ICL]: ...Your Honour, the independent
children’s lawyer and I are at severe quandary about just what we could
submit to your Honour as being the most satisfactory outcome for this child.
It’s, of course, the major problem is, does the
court enable [the child]
to travel to the UK and live in County O, or does she stay here and, therefore,
the mother stay here as
well because both have upsides, and both have downsides,
but for different people.
Of course, if the mother is allowed to relocate to, what your Honour could take
traditional (sic) notice of is a very beautiful part
of the world, she would be
much happier and, ergo, [the child] would be much happier. The downside of that,
of course, is that the
father will be very much unhappier. And it’s not
just the father, of course, that’s of concern, but we can’t
[the single expert’s] evidence yesterday, that there will be
some loss of the father/daughter relationship. And the relationship
change from being one of father/daughter to being one of being distant and very
friendly uncle.
But, of course, [the father] has access to financial – to a financial
position where he could quite easily and, compared with
his income, quite
cheaply fly to the UK whenever he wished, within a parameter of a maximum number
of times per year, of course,
but they would be normally restricted by his
necessary work commitments to probably two, maybe three, a year. And it
be a big hindrance to him to have to travel. He travels to Japan
for regular skiing trips. And the mother has given evidence that
objection to the father taking [the child] to Paris, or to France, or
presumably, to places in Europe where skiing is
freely – not freely
– but where it is available. And he could spend, no doubt, depending on
your Honour’s ruling,
a suitable amount of time for him to restore,
hopefully, the father/daughter relationship.
Now, the other difficulty that we have is, of course, whether one or both
parents share in the parental responsibility for [the child].
If the court rules
that [the child] can relocate to the United Kingdom, then it would be, I think,
obvious that it is the mother
who should have sole parental responsibility. If
she has to remain in Australia, then, unless one has a crystal ball, one
see what the future of these two people trying to agree on something
when, I suppose, the reality is that they would not agree on
anything even if
they had the same view. But the primary considerations that one has to take into
account as being important in these
people’s lives is there is no mention
of any religious difference. And it seems, at least for the present time, that
and the near future, that schooling has ceased to be a problem, although
one can perhaps sniff the future fires of contention with
the father wanting to
change the child’s school to P School in Suburb R, which of course,
is very convenient for him working
in T Street and living in Suburb U – or
Suburb S – than it is for the mother, who lives at Suburb W.
But one has to be concerned about giving one party, either the mother or the
father, sole parental responsibility because of the
possibility of misuse of
that power. And it might well be that these parties, even if they don’t
speak to each other, and one
would suggest that one way to avoid them coming
into contact with each other is for pick up on a Thursday or a Friday, if
of course if [the child] is staying in Sydney, from the school and drop
her back at school and, therefore, obviating any need for
the parents to come
together. And this couple isn’t the only warring couple whose children go
to private schools, and private
schools are quite used to coping with any
difficulties that might arise from things like parent/teacher night, or awards
that sort of thing, which is a regular event at private schools. And
one of the parties, well, it would be the father, presumably,
should not be
excluded from these events in his daughter’s life by the fact that he and
his ex-wife can’t agree on anything,
and don’t like each other.
And it’s patently
obvious, from the evidence that’s been before the court, both in the
affidavits of the mother and her
witnesses, the ones particularly who
weren’t called to give evidence, but their affidavits were admitted
without objection,
give a better picture, along with the tape recordings –
or the recordings – that we have of conversations between the
witnesses and the tapes and the evidence from the affidavits of the mother give
a picture which is far different than it
seems the one that they used to put on
when they were out and about, where they could put on a front – as
it’s called
– to make people believe that theirs was a happy
relationship, but when the father became frustrated, he became denigrating
shouting and swearing, and not being very pleasant company at all. And the
mother, whether it’s because of that, or because
she can see it going on
for the next 20 years, or because of some problem that she had in her childhood
with her father who, it would
seem, was distant from the rest of the family,
well, it’s impossible to know. But whatever the diagnosis is, it’s
a psychiatric disorder, but it will certainly, hopefully, disappear if
she’s allowed to – and [the child], to relocate
to the United
I wish, your Honour, that we could offer your Honour a better opinion, that is,
one that was more solid, but not having the ability
to look into the future,
this – there is no answer. There isn’t – we could pick an
answer, but whether that is
the right answer for these people, of course, is
anyone’s guess. But unless your Honour would like me to address you on any
particular issue, that’s where the independent children’s lawyer
HER HONOUR: Okay...
(Transcript 15 November 2019, p.258 line 38 to p.260 line 27) (As per the
25 It can be seen that the ICL was concerned about the parties’
inability to communicate in relation to the child but foresaw
few issues which
would suggest that an order for equal shared parental responsibility would be
impractical. Furthermore, the ICL
was concerned about the power imbalance that
would arise if an order was made that the mother have sole parental
responsibility for
the child. If the mother was able to take the child to live
in the United Kingdom, the practical reality of the child’s life
would mean that such an order would be appropriate.
26 However, the decision as to relocation was so finely balanced that the ICL
was unable to articulate a preferred outcome. The inference
being that the
primary judge could appropriately exercise discretion either way. Although the
mother would be happier and her mental
health improved if she was able to return
to the United Kingdom, the costs to the child would be significant
vis-à-vis the
damage to her relationship with the father. In this
setting, the father’s happiness would suffer. However, he could afford
travel to the United Kingdom reasonably often and the child’s relationship
with him could hopefully be restored. Nothing
was said about the evidence given
by the single expert recommending against relocation, including why that opinion
might be rejected.
27 The ICL considered that the evidence established that the father had been
demeaning towards the mother and shouted and swore at
her. However, the primary
judge could not be satisfied that this is why the mother wants to return to the
United Kingdom. Notably
the primary judge was not invited to make findings as to
physical violence and nothing was said about the frequency of the child’s
time with the father. For example, the father’s proposal for contact if
the child moved to the United Kingdom was not adopted.
If the child continued to
live in Australia, the ICL had nothing to say about the different proposals as
to time. The inference being
that without resolving any of the factual
controversies, the primary judge could appropriately exercise discretion in
favour of either
proposal. Nothing was said about the approach that should be
taken to the single expert’s evidence, in particular the recommendation
that during school term the child have no more than four nights a fortnight with
the father.
THE GROUNDS OF APPEAL
28 It needs to be understood that this is an appeal
against the exercise of discretion to be determined in accordance with the
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
). A different view by an appellate court only on
matters of weight by no means justifies a reversal of a decision of the primary
Gronow v Gronow
[1979] HCA 63
(1979) 144 CLR 513
at 519). The authorities with
respect to adequacy of reasons are well known and settled (
Bennett and
[1990] FamCA 148
(1991) FLC 92-191).
The question as to adequacy depends upon the
circumstance of the case. However, a judge’s reasons will be inadequate if
Court is unable to discern from those reasons the foundation for the
ultimate decision or if it appears that justice has not been
29 Other than in one respect, no challenge is made to the statement of the
principles by which the decision was reached, and it is
to the application of
those principles and asserted errors of fact that the appeal is addressed.
30 The mother presented 14 grounds of appeal which were refined in her
Summary of Argument filed on 27 November 2020. This distilled
the challenges
raised against the orders to assertions that the primary judge erred:
by excluding
most of the report of Dr H, in the attribution of weight to those portions of Dr
H’s report that were admitted
and giving inadequate reasons in relation
thereto (originally Grounds 1, 2 and 3, now Ground 1);
in giving little
or no weight to evidence by Ms G and Ms J (who were not cross- examined)
and evidence by the mother in relation to
family violence (originally Ground 4,
now Ground 2);
insufficient weight to the impact on the mother’s mental health of her
being unable to relocate with the child to
the United Kingdom and the effect
this would have on the mother’s parenting capacity (Grounds 5 and 6);
in failing to
properly consider the father’s previous offending behaviour towards women
(Ground 7);
in failing to
properly consider the mother’s right to decide where she lives and the
effect on her being denied that right (Grounds
in failing to
give adequate reasons for orders as to the child’s time with the father in
excess of the recommendations by the
single expert witness (Ground 10);
inadequate reasons for refusing the mother’s application to add her
surname to the child’s surname (Ground 11);
through giving
excessive weight to the father’s opposition to the orders, such that it
amounts to an improper exercise of discretion
(Ground 12);
in making orders
which are confusing and failing to address matters, for example in failing to
make any orders for the September and
December 2020 school holidays (Ground 13);
in discharging
orders as to financial support for the child and not making alternate orders
(Ground 14).
31 As already indicated, the complaints about the omissions in the orders and
the confusion identified by Grounds 13 and 14 were resolved
by agreement and
those grounds need not be considered further.
The mother’s therapist (Ground 1)
32 Dr H is a psychiatrist. After the parties
separated, they retained Dr H to assist them with their co-parenting
relationship, parenting
and negotiating parenting arrangements. Between April
2016 and February 2017, Dr H saw the parties together and separately and the
child with each of them before the father terminated his involvement.
Nevertheless, the mother continued therapy with Dr H which
was designed to
assist her with parenting and her co-parenting relationship with the father. The
mother saw Dr H monthly and generally
alone. Dr H saw the child on a few
occasions with the focus of those consultations being on the child’s
wellbeing and to assist
Dr H in his ongoing therapeutic work with the mother.
33 Dr H viewed the mother as his patient and explained:
I have not taken on the role of [the mother’s]
treating psychiatrist in terms of her own mental health, nor has [the mother]
asked me to do so. [The mother] has continued to consult with her own treating
general practitioner and psychiatrist, in that regard.
We have discussed how
parenting, coparenting and the past and current relationship with [the father]
impact the mother's mental health
and wellbeing, and also the importance of the
mother maintaining her mental health and wellbeing in order to fulfil her
and coparenting roles in an effective and enduring way. We have
discussed strategies to address such issues.
(Report of Dr H filed 8 October 2019, paragraph 10)
34 In response to a written request from the mother (dated 24 September
2019), Dr H provided a report which answered the questions
from the mother. That
report was attached to an affidavit by Dr H which was filed in the
mother’s case on 8 October 2019. However,
the father objected to the
report being received into evidence, most particularly because it offended
Family Law Rules 2004
35 The purpose of
is found in r 15.42, which explains that the
rationale for the Part is:
(c) to ensure that, if practicable and without compromising the interests of
justice, expert evidence is given on an issue by a single
expert witness;
(d) to avoid unnecessary costs arising from the appointment of more than one
expert witness; and
(e) to enable a party to apply for permission to tender a report or adduce
evidence from an expert witness appointed by that party,
if necessary in the
interests of justice.
36 However,
is not an absolute embargo on calling evidence other than
through a single expert or by leave, and r 15.41 identifies circumstances
which the restrictions on calling expert evidence arising from this Part do not
apply. According to the father, none of the exceptions
listed in r 15.41 applied
and thus the mother required leave to adduce evidence from Dr H. The ICL agreed
that the report did not
come within the exceptions in r 15.41. Counsel for
the mother did not challenge the application of
or identify how Dr
H’s evidence was protected by one of the exceptions. Rather, the
submissions by the mother were to the effect
that as these were parenting
proceedings, it was better for the Court to have all relevant information
“no matter how flawed
that evidence was” (Transcript 11 November
2019, p.6 lines 18–19). Furthermore, because the single expert received
H’s report and adopted portions of it, it would be better to have
Dr H give his firsthand account of his consultations with
the mother (Transcript
11 November 2019, p.6 lines 3–19).
37 The primary judge ruled in favour of the father as follows:
23. Dr H stated in his report:
10. I have not taken on the role of [the
mother’s] treating psychiatrist in terms of her own mental health, nor has
[the mother]
asked me to do so. [The mother] has continued to consult with her
own treating general practitioner and psychiatrist, in that regard
24. In my view, this statement alone was sufficient to
place the evidence of Dr H beyond the scope of material permissible
Rule 15.41.
It was abundantly clear from the body of the report that
the opinions expressed by Dr H well exceeded the range permitted by
For example, Dr H expressed a view as to “the benefits of the
proposed relocation to the United Kingdom”.
25. For these reasons I admitted into evidence only paragraphs 141, 142, 143
and 144 of the report of Dr H. These paragraphs appeared
under the heading
“clinical observations of [the mother’s] personality
functioning” and contained no reference
to any material obtained by Dr H
during therapy sessions which included the father.
38 In terms of the application of r 15.41, the mother contends that the
primary judge erred by failing to appreciate that Dr H worked
on psychological
interventions and as such he is a treating psychiatrist. This is consistent with
Dr H’s evidence as to the
nature of his work with the mother and also the
single expert’s opinion cited at [48] of the trial reasons. Although we
that the primary judge should have concluded accordingly, this is not the
end of the matter and the question to be answered is whether
as a treating
medical practitioner, Dr H’s evidence went beyond the scope permitted by r
15.41(1)(a).
Rule 15.41(1)(a)
(1) This Part (other than
rule 15.55)
does not apply to
any of the following:
(a) evidence from a medical practitioner or
other person who has provided, or is providing, treatment for a party or child
evidence relates only to any or all of the
(i) the results of an
examination, investigation or observation made;
(ii) a description of any treatment carried out or recommended;
(iii) expressions of opinion limited to the reasons for carrying out or
recommending treatment and the consequences of the treatment,
including a
40 In this respect, we agree with the primary judge that Dr H’s report
went beyond the scope of this exception, particularly
in relation to his view of
the father’s conduct towards the mother. Furthermore, the fact that Dr H
had previously been jointly
retained in seemingly confidential arrangements was
properly taken into account as a reason why the report should be excluded. This
is sufficient to reject the mother’s contention that the trial reasons on
this issue were inadequate.
41 But even if the primary judge erred in the application of
not understand how Dr H’s evidence might possibly have affected the
outcome. This is because the mother gave evidence
father and, the single expert’s opinion about the effect of relocation on
the mother and the nature
of the parental relationship accorded with the opinion
by Dr H. In this regard, the primary judge accepted the single expert’s
evidence that:
39. Regrettably, the child has been exposed to a
dysfunctional co-parenting relationship, which [the single expert] described in
following terms:
129. Both their first couple therapist, Ms
K, and the current therapist, Mr M, identified a prominent
approach-avoidance couple dynamic.
It was thus probable that this had been
intractable, despite assertive therapeutic intervention for the parents
individually and
as a couple. This was most concerning. The intransigence of
this dynamic highlighted the incompatibility between the parents' personality
styles. Dr H's detailed correspondence highlighted the longstanding adversarial
nature of the parental interaction, which had been
further exacerbated by the
current adversarial Family Court proceedings. This had fuelled the mother's
desire to return to the UK,
which in turn amplified the father's anxiety that he
would be excluded from his much-loved daughter's life. When the mother minimised
his role, he responded in a defensive and critical manner which in turn
amplified her reactivity as she perceived him to be angry
and controlling. The
father magnified the importance of his engagement in shared activities, such as
swimming, given the emotional
deprivation experienced as a
48. [The single
expert] expressed these opinions in his report:
131. The importance of [the child’s] relationship with both her parents
was clearly identified in this assessment. Dr H had
previously opined that the
mother's mental health would improve in the context of her proposed relocation
to the UK. I concur with
this view. She readily identified the longstanding
conflictual nature of her relationship with the father as the source of ongoing
stress. She had the opportunity to source social support from family and
longstanding friendships in the UK. Despite assertive psychological
psychiatric intervention, the stress associated with remaining in Australia
against her wishes was likely to persist. Dr H had
considered that this would
impact upon [the child] psychological and emotional development. Although this
may be the case, [the child]
was currently progressing well and had been
protected from her mother's emotional vulnerability and the chronic parental
The proposed relocation to the UK would necessarily result in the
breakdown of the close and loving relationship which [the child]
shared with her
father. This would be a source of distress and may impact on her subsequent
emotional and personality development.
There is no doubt that the father would
be acutely distressed by the breakdown of this loving relationship. His early
developmental
exposure to separation and loss rendered him vulnerable to
adjustment issues.
132. Thus, the proposed relocation was likely to improve the mother's mental
health and diminish that of her father. [The child]
was identified to be
competent and resilient child who was likely to cope with the disruption of
relocating to the UK. She was likely
to have her developmental needs adequately
met by her mother and her social network in the UK. That said, the loss of her
role in her life would remain a significant loss into the future.
42 To the extent that the mother complains that the admitted paragraphs
needed to be considered in the context of the entire report,
a forensic decision
was taken that even with the balance of the report having been rejected she
relied on those remaining paragraphs.
In other words, these paragraphs were
received into evidence at her behest. In this respect, the mother is bound by
the conduct of
her case and cannot complain about that course now.
43 These challenges have not been established.
Family Violence (Grounds 2 and 7)
44 One of the central controversies in the trial was
the mother’s contention that the father was a perpetrator of family
and the effect this had and the potential to have on her and the child.
For example, relocation would protect her from his continued
hostility and abuse
which might result in her being able to cease antidepressant medication and
alleviate the stress she lived under
through her close dealings with him.
However, the risk was not sufficiently serious that the child should not have
unsupervised time
with the father and, as mentioned earlier, it was at a level
where the mother said frequent overnight time, including longer periods
school holidays, was appropriate and beneficial to the child. As the mother
explained in the appeal, her proposals offered
a nuanced response to the
child’s need for an ongoing relationship with her father taking into
account the risks arising from
his propensity to frustrated and aggressive
45 The mother’s affidavit evidence on this topic was comprehensive (see
paragraphs 83-171 of the mother’s affidavit filed
18 September 2019)
albeit a deal of the behaviour that concerned her (for example his philandering)
could not be viewed as violence.
On the other hand, the father made a blanket
denial of having ever verbally abused or shouted at the mother, of controlling
that on 27 December 2015 he slapped her across the shoulder while she was
holding the child (father’s affidavit filed 21 August
2019, paragraphs
209, 210, 217). He admitted that in 1997 he was charged with common assault and
trespass and that he scaled a drainpipe
and entered a former partner’s
caused distress
[17]. Counsel for the ICL cross-examined the father in relation
to the audio recordings of him using aggressive and abusive language
towards the
mother, including in the child’s presence. With obvious reluctance, the
father eventually said his actions were
inappropriate but should be evaluated as
arising from the stress of a failing relationship.
46 In addition to her evidence, the mother called evidence from Ms G, who was
a former live in au pair and Ms J, who lived with the
parties for a few months.
Both gave evidence of seeing and hearing the father scream at the mother, of him
using demeaning and belittling
language towards her and each gave examples of
him using coercion to control her. They were not cross- examined. Counsel
mother did not ask the father any questions arising from their evidence
although, counsel for the ICL who cross-examined next, did.
cross- examination by counsel for the ICL, the father rejected much of this
evidence and minimised the effect of what he conceded.
Unsurprisingly, the
witness’s evidence was accepted.
47 However, because the events about which they gave evidence occurred
towards the end of the parties’ relationship, the primary
judge did not
consider that these matters were of ongoing relevance [64]. Nor, was this
unchallenged evidence taken into account
in the evaluation of the reliability of
the mother’s evidence as to the father’s behaviour towards her and
and her capacity to deal with him.
48 According to the mother, this had the effect of the primary judge
misapplying s 60CC(2)(b) and s 60CC(2A) of the Act through the
failure to give
greater weight to the need to protect the child from psychological harm from
being exposed or subjected to family
violence than was given to the benefit to
the child of having a meaningful relationship with, relevantly the father. As
the challenge
suggests, it was the importance to the child of being able to
continue to enjoy her meaningful relationship with the father that
outcome of the relocation application and the extent of the child’s time
with him. The ICL agrees with the mother
and says the primary judge failed to
make relevant findings, including why some of the evidence relied on by the
mother was rejected
– either by way of a failure to refer to the evidence
or to address the mother’s argument about the way in which the
demonstrated the ongoing impact of family violence. This is said to be a failure
to give adequate reasons, but we think
the better view is that, if established,
it is a failure to take into account relevant considerations in the
49 Turning then to the trial reasons, in relation to the questions around
family violence it is apparent that the primary judge was
concerned to
understand how evidence of past family violence informed the assessment of
future family violence, including the risk
of verbally abusive behaviour towards
the mother and child. In order to make that prediction, the primary judge was
particularly
interested in the situation that existed in 2019 and looked for
evidence in the mother’s case of more recent (post 2016) violent
abusive behaviour from the father. None was identified.
50 Because of the seriousness of this issue, we took considerable time with
the mother to have her identify evidence concerning the
father’s behaviour
which post-dated that of the two witnesses and demonstrated his current style of
communication. We were
taken to evidence that on 6 December 2017 the child
returned from time with the father very irritable and told the mother that he
shouted at her. Otherwise the mother relied on a large bundle of emails and text
messages which she ultimately agreed were not tendered
into evidence. As counsel
for the ICL pointed out, there was very little evidence (we were given none and
have been unable to identify
any for ourselves) as to the father behaving in a
demeaning or abusive manner towards the mother or child in more recent times;
we understood to mean in 2017, 2018 or 2019.
51 A high level summary of the mother’s evidence concerning family
violence was undertaken at [16]. Notwithstanding the father’s
denials, the audio recordings provided some corroboration for the mother’s
evidence. The father’s assault and trespass
against a former partner was
identified [17]. The primary judge continued and was satisfied that the father
used obscene and abusive
language in the audio recordings [27], had behaved in
an arrogant and demeaning manner towards the mother on occasions [60]–[62]
and that at least in relation to the father’s text messages of 12 November
2016, his regret may well have been tactical [63].
In other words, it was not
genuine and was expressed to dispel the support this evidence might lend to the
mother’s case. The
two witnesses’ evidence was referenced at [64]
but contextualised as related to the end of the parties’ relationship.
Although not expressly stated as such, this would seem to acknowledge evidence
by the single expert of the father’s sense of
entitlement which leads to
frustration and can lead to outbursts of anger, particularly at times of
“additional stress”
52 The primary judge made numerous references to the effect of the
father’s behaviour towards the mother and, for example, incorporated
information from the mother’s therapist about the mother’s account
of the father’s constant criticism and undermining
behaviour [55]. Also
that the mother regarded the long standing conflictual nature of her
relationship with the father as a source
of ongoing stress [48].
53 Although we agree with the ICL that these, what might be termed high level
findings of the evidence concerning family violence,
lack the specificity that
is generally necessary, we do not agree that in this case the lack of detailed
findings sounds in error.
This is because the reasons provide more detail than
either the mother or the ICL asked of the primary judge. The task of a judge
the position of the primary judge is to quell relevant factual controversies.
Not every factual dispute must be resolved (
Baghti & Baghti and Ors
[2015] FamCAFC 71
–[64]) and in this respect the trial reasons will
respond to the case presented at the end of a trial. For it is at this stage
that issues will have been clarified and something that might have been regarded
as relevant and/or controversial at the start of
the trial might have been
neutralised and faded into insignificance by the end. Closing addresses are
where pivotal issues of fact
and law are highlighted and the findings sought are
identified.
54 The ICL’s submissions have already been set out and it is apparent
that the primary judge was not asked to make any findings
either as to the facts or the mother’s evidence of what she termed the
father’s parental abuse.
55 Counsel for the mother provided written closing submissions and, although
the opportunity was given for these to be supplemented
by oral addresses,
including in response to those made by the father and ICL, nothing further was
said. The mother submitted that
the primary judge would accept her evidence of
“abusive parenting”, the evidence given by the two witnesses and
that the audio recordings showed the father behaving in a manner that was
dismissive and demeaning and which took place in the presence
of the child.
Nothing was said about the slap in 2015, probably because the father was not
questioned about it, and the primary judge
was not asked to make findings with
any greater degree of specificity than was done.
56 Considered in the light of the closing addresses it can be seen that the
trial reasons respond to the identified issues in greater
detail than the ICL
suggested was required and in relation to family violence, consistent with the
case put by the mother. Before
us, the ICL was concerned that the primary judge
said nothing about the slap and failed to say how the incident in 1997 was
into the decision. Although we agree with the ICL that these matters
were not taken into account as supporting the mother’s
case of parental
abuse and the effect on her well- being, the plain answer is that no-one
submitted that findings to this effect
should be made.
57 Finally, it needs to be understood that the mother’s evidence
concerning the father’s behaviour towards her and the
child, including the
audio tapes and the two witnesses was examined by the single expert whose
opinion that the father did not present
a risk to the child was accepted. As to
the effect of the father’s behaviour on the mother, that too was accepted
the single expert and the primary judge were of the view that this was
not at such a level that her parenting was affected and that
she had the
strength of personality and assistance to cope with its adverse effects.
58 It is important that the violence and abuse of which the mother and her
witnesses gave evidence was not at the upper level of seriousness
circumstances of how the case was run (including that the findings accord with
the expert evidence), the approach taken
by the primary judge was adequate. The
effect of this is that the submission that s 60CC(2)(b) and s 60CC(2A) were
misapplied should
be rejected. However, we think it is appropriate to
acknowledge that if the case concerned abuse and violence higher in the scale
seriousness, it would be incumbent on a trial judge to engage s 69ZN of the Act
and require more targeted and detailed submissions
in relation to that issue
than the mother and ICL proffered in this case and having done so, to make
detailed findings as to the
facts and their significance (
[2009] FamCAFC 196
(2009) 43 Fam LR 268
Sahrawi & Hadrami
FLC 93–857).
59 Ground 2 has not been made out. Given that Ground 7 is concerned with the
failure to take the incident in 1997 into account against
the father, for the
reasons we have given on this issue under the rubric of Ground 2 that challenge
must also fail.
The mother’s health and her right to live where she wants
(Grounds 5, 6, 8 and 9)
60 The mother understands that she has the right to
live and work where she likes. Cases such as
(1999) 199 CLR 160
[2002] HCA 36
(2002) 211 CLR 238
establish that in parenting
proceedings there is no requirement for a parent to demonstrate
“compelling reasons” to live
where the parent proposes to live. As
this Court said in
Adamson & Adamson
(2014) FLC 93–622
65. ...The Court must be sensitive to the wishes and
rights of parents to live and work wherever they desire. (
66. These rights, and the right of freedom of mobility of a parent, only defer
to the paramount consideration of a child’s
best interests where those
interests would be so adversely affected as to justify such interference; and
then the interference is
legitimate only to the extent that it is necessary to
avoid such adverse effects.
61 No-one involved in this case doubted the mother’s freedom of
movement which is so well understood it did not require comment.
No doubt this
explains why there is no discussion of these principles in the trial reasons.
Nor is anything said which might suggest
that the primary judge thought
otherwise and the reasons for judgment proceed on the shared understanding that
the mother was entitled
to move to the United Kingdom and whether or not she did
was her choice. Whether or not the child moved was to be determined with
child’s best interests as the paramount consideration and in accordance
of the Act. In support of this unremarkable proposition, the primary
judge cited
(2010) 240 CLR 461.
Thus, although we agree with the
mother’s submission that the primary judge did not discuss the
mother’s freedom of movement,
for the mother to establish error it was
necessary to establish that the primary judge acted inconsistently with this
This did not happen.
62 In support of the balance of these grounds, the mother submitted that the
primary judge:
gave little
weight to the mother’s emotional and psychological wellbeing and therefore
that of the child if relocation was refused;
consider the mother’s mental health diagnosis or prognosis; and
consider the mother’s lack of support in Australia and the general quality
of her life if she stayed with the child
(mother’s Summary of Argument
filed 27 November 2020, paragraphs 4.1–4.3).
63 Contrary to the mother’s submissions and, as has already been amply
demonstrated, the evidence concerning the mother’s
mental health diagnosis
and prognosis was heavily referenced in the trial reasons. Moreover, the expert
evidence about the benefits
for the mother’s mental health if she returned
to the United Kingdom was accepted, as was the impact on the mother’s
health (prognosis) if she remained living in Australia. Through the single
expert, the primary judge acknowledged the opinion given
by Ms L, who is a
clinical psychologist and the mother’s therapist, as to the mother’s
struggle to cope with the father’s
criticisms and undermining behaviour
and the mother’s difficult financial circumstances [55].
64 Reference has already been made to Dr H’s opinion which was
accepted by the single expert and in turn adopted by the primary
judge [48].
This includes an acknowledgement of the family and social supports which the
mother had available in the United Kingdom.
Simply put, the mother’s case
as to the benefits for her in returning to the United Kingdom was well
recognised in the trial
reasons. So too was the prospect that the stress for the
mother if she remained in Australia might adversely impact her parenting
capacity and thus the child’s psychological and emotional development.
However, no challenge is made to the single expert’s
opinion as to the
child’s functioning, that the child was progressing well and there was no
evidence that the child had been
affected by the “chronic parental
conflict” [48] (citing the report of the single expert at paragraph 131).
65 As to the potential impact on the child living with the mother in this
situation, the primary judge accepted the single expert’s
48. [The single expert]
expressed these opinions in his report:
132. Thus, the proposed relocation was likely to
improve the mother's mental health and diminish that of her father. [The child]
identified to be competent and resilient child who was likely to cope with
the disruption of relocating to the UK. She was likely
to have her developmental
needs adequately met by her mother and her social network in the UK. That said,
the loss of her father's
role in her life would remain a significant loss into
the future.
66 Furthermore, both the single expert and Dr H commented favourably on the
mother’s coping mechanisms and her willingness and
ability to access
support (in Australia). As noted in the trial reasons, the single expert agreed
with Dr H’s opinion:
57. [The single expert] here
referred to the four paragraphs of the report of Dr H which survived objection
on behalf of the father.
Dr H reported as follows:
have observed [the mother] to have strong personality functioning. I have
outlined above [the mother’s] demonstrated
strong reflective functioning,
self/other boundaries, maintenance of parenting and occupational roles, and
adaptive coping during
very trying circumstances in recent years.
142. [The mother] uses mature psychological defences such as sublimation,
suppression, anticipation, altruism and humour. I have
not observed her to make
recurrent use of immature defences such as externalising, projecting, splitting
or idealising/devaluing.
Where [the mother] is tempted towards a more immature
response, she shows an ironic awareness of the same, and mostly corrects
as in the example above where she is tempted to say "no" to [the
father] in a context where he has done the same to her in the past.
144. Whilst our focus in therapy has been in the domain of parenting, I observe
that in other domains of functioning, [the mother]
has considered and has made
sensible lifestyle choices in keeping with her own values and circumstances.
Examples in recent years
her decision to change workplaces/work arrangements,
and her decision to move [the child’s] day care close to home so that
could utilise the same more flexibly. I observe that where [the mother] has had
vulnerabilities, she has sought professional
assistance, for example in domains
such as her depression and ADHD, and appears to have made good use of that
professional assistance.
67 We have already set out the primary judge’s conclusion at [70]
(above at [6]) where reference is again made to this evidence
mother’s plan to increase her hours of employment and improve her personal
circumstances if she remains in Australia.
The mother’s contention that
these matters were overlooked or given insufficient weight, cannot be sustained.
It is unarguable
that they were weighed heavily in favour of relocation but,
ultimately, were outweighed by other relevant and compelling factors.
68 Although the issue does not arise from the grounds of appeal, it is
appropriate to address the mother’s submission that the
primary judge
should have crafted a set of arrangements which would have allowed the child to
live in the United Kingdom and spend
more time with the father than the mother
proposed would occur. Returning to
at [67], the mother’s
proposition engages the following principle:
67. Consequently, whilst the Court is not bound by the
proposals advanced by parents and can, subject to natural justice
considerations,
adopt modified proposals, the justification for that is the same
and the extent of modification legitimately can only be as far as
is necessary
to avoid adverse effects upon best interests. As Callinan J observed in
(cited with approval by Gummow and Callinan JJ in
whom Gleeson CJ, McHugh and Hayne JJ agreed)):
It will generally not be possible for a
trial judge to construct a framework and environment for the upbringing of a
child. What happens
in practice is that those competing for the care and custody
of a child will present proposals to the Court to advance the welfare
child. Judges frequently will be able to mould or adopt such proposals in making
orders but rarely will they be able to invent
or construct substantially
different arrangements for children from those proposed by the
(Footnote omitted)
69 Thus, while it was open to the primary judge to adopt the father’s
evidence about the amount of contact he might be able
to have if the child lived
in the United Kingdom, it would have been quite wrong to treat this alternate
proposal as the relief sought
by him. Moreover, it was open to the mother to
adopt the father’s evidence and advance her relocation application on the
that the child would spend time with him four times annually. But this did
not happen. Having herself rejected this possibility the
mother cannot complain
on appeal that the primary judge should have adopted it (
[2014] FamCAFC 236).
70 These grounds have not been established.
The father’s opposition to relocation (Ground 12)
71 By Ground 12, the mother contends that the
primary judge gave excessive weight to the father’s opposition to the
that it amounts to an improper exercise of discretion. Nothing was
said in support of this challenge and it need not be discussed
Suffice to say the primary judge was required to engage with the alternate
proposals and the evidence called in the father’s
case as to why
relocation would not be in the best interests of the child (
A v A: Relocation
[2000] FamCA 751
(2000) FLC 93-035).
Simply put, it was the effect on the child on
granting or refusing relocation which was the ultimate determinate.
72 This challenge has not been made out.
The child’s time with the father (Ground 10)
73 The single expert’s recommendation as to
the child’s time with the father during school term is set out at the
commencement
of these reasons. To recap, it was his opinion that the child
should not have more than four nights each fortnight with the father.
Essentially the single expert explained that for more extensive shared care to
work from the child’s perspective, it was necessary
for her parents to be
able to show respectful communication, trust, good will and the capacity for
effective problem solving, which
was not the case. The father sought to have six
nights per fortnight commencing in Term 3 2020, whereas the mother proposed
in accordance with the single expert’s opinion. It may be that the
primary judge overlooked this aspect of the evidence and,
there is no mention of
it in the trial reasons. Having agreed that the child should have substantial
and significant time with the
father, the controversy as to time was dealt with
as follows:
78. In terms of arrangements
for the child to spend time with the father, I am not bound by the proposals of
either party. Accordingly,
I will make orders which appear to me to best to
serve the interests of the child
74 The mother contends that these reasons are inadequate. The ICL adopts the
mother’s submission. The father avoided this assertion
and simply said
that it was open to the primary judge to make these orders. Although he
attempted to demonstrate that the single
expert had embraced this as a possible
outcome, when taken to the trial transcript, it was conceded that he had not.
75 Consistent with authority, it is not suggested that the primary judge was
bound by the evidence and opinion given by the single
(Hall and Hall
[1979] FamCA 73
(1979) FLC 90-713).
As to the approach to expert opinion, it is as set out
Muldoon & Carlyle
[2012] FamCAFC 135
(2012) FLC 93-513
It is not in doubt that the evidence of an expert,
suitably qualified and based on an appropriate foundation, will carry
substantial
weight. Departure from it in such circumstances requires careful
consideration; however the ultimate decision must be that of the
trial judge:
Friscioni & Friscioni
[2010] FamCAFC 108
Hall and Hall
[1979] FamCA 73
[2006] FamCA 170
[2009] FamCAFC 182
Hannigan & Sorraw
[2010] FamCAFC
76 The effect of this, is that if the primary judge determined that for
whatever reason the single expert’s evidence should
not be accepted, it
was necessary to explain why not. Alternatively, to show that it was accepted
but to explain why other more pressing
aspects of the child’s welfare
pointed to a different outcome. The somewhat laissez-faire approach adopted in
closing addresses,
particularly by the ICL, did not enable the primary judge to,
as the ICL put it, merely choose the mid-point between the different
Consideration of the expert evidence was required and some, albeit brief,
explanation given for what was, after all, an
order that would continue for many
77 This ground has been established.
The child’s surname (Ground 11)
78 In mid-2019, the mother asked the father to agree
to change the child’s surname by adding her surname. Thus, the child would
be have a hyphenated surname which recognised both her parents. The primary
judge declined to order a hyphenated surname and noted
that the request was made
five years after the child was born and named. Without expressly saying so, it
can be seen that the primary
judge was mindful of the regard generally given to
potential confusion and embarrassment that might arise if a child is required
change their name (
Flanagan v Handcock
[2000] FamCA 150
(2001) FLC 93-074
[1978] FamCA 86
(1978) FLC 90-510).
The primary judge continued:
77. ... The child has now commenced her formal education
and, presumably, was enrolled with the name which appears on her birth
certificate.
It may well be confusing for her, if her name suddenly is changed
within her school community and friendship group.
79 These reasons are succinct but adequate. They are
founded on factors relevant to the child and stand above the wishes of the
Other than to question the decision, the mother did not identify a
proper basis for appellate intervention. This was a quintessential
exercise of
discretion and it has not been demonstrated that the decision was plainly wrong.
80 This ground has not been established.
CONCLUSION AND COSTS
81 Other than in relation to the child’s time
with the father during school term, the mother has failed to establish error.
Thus the appeal will be allowed in part and the controversial aspect of the
orders concerning time during school term will be set
aside. Other than the
orders that are to be made by consent, the appeal against the remaining orders
will be dismissed.
82 In closing addresses, the parties were invited to give brief submissions
as to what should happen if the school term orders were
set aside. It was common
ground that interim orders should be made to at least provide a platform for the
child’s ongoing contact
with the father and to minimise the prospect of
further disagreement pending the remitted rehearing. The father pressed for
orders identical to those set aside. Although the mother agreed that
this could be done, we are not satisfied that this was a considered
given, as it was, quickly and in the final moments of a complex hearing.
83 It is understood that the child has spent time with the father, five
nights in each fortnight, in accordance with the orders. However,
we do not have
evidence about the operation of the orders and do not know whether they have
worked well or created difficulties.
The better course is therefore for there to
be interim orders consistent with the expert evidence and the question of an
night to be considered at first instance and with more recent
evidence than is available to us.
84 Each of the parties has achieved a measure of success and an order for
costs would not be appropriate. However, the conditions
for the issue of costs
certificates pursuant to the
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
are established and the parties and ICL will be granted certificates for the
appeal and the remitted rehearing.
I certify that the preceding eighty-four (84)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justices
Ainslie-Wallace, Ryan &
Dated: 19 August 2021
RTF format (568 KB)
Signed PDF/A format