Dixon & Dixon [2025] FedCFamC2F 1082 (8 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Dixon & Dixon
[2025] FedCFamC2F
File number(s):
DUC 510 of 2024
Judgment of:
JUDGE DUNKLEY
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
- Parenting - interlocutory
application - subpoena objection - protected confidence considered - costs
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
Woods & Holmes (No 3)
FedCFamC1F 463
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Heard in Dubbo, delivered in Parramatta
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Ms Zujic of Paul Maginn Lawyers
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Ms Millar of MCW Lawyers
DUC 510 of 2024
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
JUDGE DUNKLEY
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Notice of Objection to Subpoena filed 4 July 2025 relevant to the subpoena
issued to the Proper Officer, B Authority, is dismissed.
Notice of Objection to Subpoena filed 4 July 2025 relevant to the subpoena
issued to the Proper Officer, C Authority, is dismissed.
the legal representatives of the applicant and respondent are allowed to inspect
and to photocopy documents produced in answer
to subpoena by C Authority and
B Authority.
copies in any form of documents produced by C Authority or B Authority are to be
provided to Ms Dixon.
party shall pay their own costs relevant to the hearing of the subpoena
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE DUNKLEY
Dixon (the father) and Ms Dixon (the mother) are involved in parenting
litigation pursuant to
Family Law Act
as a consequence of the
filing by the father of an Initiating Application on 20 December 2024 and the
filing by the mother of a Response
on 29 January 2025.
father and mother were married in 2011, separated on 29 May 2022, and were
divorced in late 2023.
have two children, X, aged 11, who was born in 2014, and Y, aged 7, who was born
their parenting litigation, the father seeks in general terms orders for joint
decision making, proposes that there be an order
that the children live with
their mother, and spend time with him.
mother, for her part, seeks in general terms orders that she have sole decision
making responsibility, that the children live
with the mother, and leave to
later file a document setting out her more general time with proposals but
saying that the children
at least spend time with the father for overnight
periods at Christmas, Easter and for day time periods on their birthdays and on
Father's Day.
seems abundantly clear that in managing the case along the central practice
direction pathway, that the docket judicial registrar
has identified one of the
central issues in this case is the mental health of the father and the mother
with another issue relating
to the mental/psychological health of X.
above is apparent from orders 1, 5, 12, 13, 15, 16 and 17 made on 29 April
27, 28, 29 and 41 of the Child Impact Report dated 10 April 2025 provide a
useful summary of the mental and psychological
health at issue in this
Senior Judicial Registrar acting in accordance with the central practice
direction, and in consideration of recommendations in
the Child Impact Report,
has made orders for the provision of a single expert report relevant to the
mental health of the mother
and father.
ensure the single expert has all relevant information to enable the preparation
of his or her report, the Senior Judicial Registrar
made order 18 on 29 April
2025. Order 18 provides:
be granted to the parties to provide the mental health assessor appointed in
accordance with Order 16 of these Orders with the
18.1 A copy of these Orders;
18.2 The Child Impact Report dated 10 April 2025;
18.3 The father’s Affidavit filed 20 December 2024;
18.4 The father’s Notice of Family Violence, Child Abuse or Risk filed 20
December 2024;
18.5 The mother’s Affidavit filed 25 February 2025; and
18.6 The mother’s Notice of Family Violence, Child Abuse or Risk filed 29
January 2025; and
18.7 A jointly prepared tender bundle, and for the purposes of this Order, that
leave is granted to allow the parties’ legal
representatives to photocopy
any documents produced pursuant to the subpoenas issued in these proceedings and
provide a copy of same
to the mental health assessor within the joint tender
mental health reports order become extremely important in this case because the
Senior Judicial Registrar ordered (leave the obvious
numerical numbering errors
in the orders) on 29 April 2025 that the children spend time with the
father but the progression of that
time is conditional upon:
disclosing information to the mother about his mental health treaters
attending on
three sessions of a men’s behaviour change program
father’s compliance with the obtaining of the single expert report
relevant to his mental health; and
attendance for two sessions on his mental health treater.
was submitted the following has occurred relevant to compliance with the orders
made on 29 April 2025:
that a mental
health plan has issued for X who is engaged with that professional; and
the obtaining of
a single expert report relevant to the father and mother’s mental health
has been stalled by this subpoena
objection process.
9 April 2025, the mother caused to be issued two subpoena:
(a) to the Proper Officer, B Authority; and
(b) to the Proper Officer, C Authority
did not require leave to do so because there was on foot, and still unheard, an
interim orders hearing.
are now produced by both B Authority and C Authority, and the father has inspect
the produced material but the mother has
not because of the subpoena
4 July 2024, the father caused to be filed a Notice of Objection to inspect
relevant to the above subpoenae citing a protected
confidence existed of the
mother sought dismissal of the Notice of Objections submitting lack of
functus officio
because of order 18 made on 29 April 2025.
argument can be swiftly dismissed due to application of the Rules relevant to
subpoena objection and because of the Court’s
inherent power to control
its own process. Therefore, the Court has power to hear and determine the
father’s objection to
objection falls to be determined by application of the test in s 102BE
which at its heart requires a decision to balance the notions
of probative value
v prejudice, a concept subject to substantive jurisprudence both in the family
law jurisprudence and more generally.
am satisfied the father’s disclosures to his treaters meets the definition
of a protected confidence.
Honour Justice Gill has dealt with a similar issue in
Woods & Holmes (No
[2025] FedCFamC1F 463
, being a very recent judgment delivered on 16 July
2025. Starting at paragraph 39 and continuing, his Honour analyses the
application
of s 102BE to the specific evidence in the case he was
whilst there are general principles, it is the evidence in each specific case
that will be relevant to its determination.
is a discretionary decision subject to the guidance set out in s 102BE as
to the exercise of that discretion.
father was given the opportunity to file an affidavit relevant to the
considerations contained in s 102BE but chose not to do
solicitor submits not all the disclosures and information in the produced
documents is subject to the objection. For the main
part, it is information
relating to the father’s personal relationships that he seeks to be
declared a protected disclosure.
is submitted in written submissions filed on 24 July 2025, expanded/reaffirmed
by oral submissions on 25 July 2025, that inspection
of produced documents in
part where they relate to disclosures he has made about his private life and
personal relationships is likely
to cause him mental distress and psychological
harm or oppression as referenced in s 102BE(2)(b) and (c).
material produced on subpoena likely has high probative value and high
importance dealing as it does with a very relevant issue
central to the decision
is no evidence other documentation might help.
the documents are produced and inspected, I accept the father would be
embarrassed but that is the extent of the psychological
harm and mental distress
he would experience.
Court can limit the harm by only allowing inspection by the parties’
lawyers not the parties themselves. The copy of the
documents to be included in
the ordered tender bundle can similarly be done by lawyers only.
documents can then be considered by the single expert in preparation of the
nature of the father’s personal relationships is relevant potentially
under s 60CC(3)(e) and (f).
issue of public interest in preserving confidentiality arises herein.
considered the above and the central importance of the father’s mental
health in the decision making process in this
case, the documents produced are
not to be redacted before being provided to the single expert. The documents
are to be inspected
and copied only by a party’s legal representative and
copies are not to be provided to nor shown to the wife herself.
single expert report to be prepared goes to the heart of the time that the
children are to spend with their father, and thus these
directions have regard
to the best interest of the children because the single expert report will be
important in deciding what time
and what periods of time it is best for the
children to spend with their father.
reasons fulfil the obligation placed on the court by s 102BE as a whole
including s 102BE(6).
so little jurisprudence exists relevant to ss 1BA to 102BE, there is little
guidance available to litigants and so the provisions
of s 114UB apply to
this decision.
is no circumstance justifying any other outcome relevant to costs.
I certify that the preceding thirty-eight (38)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 8 August 2025
RTF format (319 KB)
Signed PDF/A format