Eghlima and another v Winco Systems Pty Ltd [2012] FWA 10836 (21 December 2012)
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Act 2009
- Application for unfair dismissal remedy
David Eghlima and Hamid Eghlima
Winco Systems Pty Ltd
(U2011/14390, U2011/14391)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT SAMS
SYDNEY, 21 DECEMBER 2012
Applications for unfair dismissal remedies - jurisdictional objection - whether applicants resigned or were dismissed - disputed conversations
- resolution of evidentiary conflict assisted by surrounding circumstances - whether dismissals were harsh, unreasonable or unjust
- post employment discovery of discrepancies with timesheets - applicants resigned - FWA has no jurisdiction - applications for
unfair dismissal remedies dismissed.
Brothers David and Hamid Eghlima (the ‘applicants’) had been employed as Electricians/Technicians by Winco Systems Pty
Ltd (the ‘respondent’ or ‘Winco’) since 8 January 2007 and 1 June 2007 respectively. The applicants were
required to install and repair electric window systems on a variety of commercial and domestic building projects. These projects
included the Universities of Sydney and New South Wales, King Street Wharf, NIB Building Newcastle, Warragamba Dam, Star City Casino
and Charles Sturt University in Orange. This being the case, they were required to travel to various work sites in the metropolitan
area, in regional locations and interstate, while at all times being under the direct control and supervision of Mr Peter Behrens,
the respondent’s owner.
The applicants had both been working on a job in Canberra at the Florey Primary School on 30 November 2011, having driven to the
job together that morning. While driving back to Sydney that day, the applicants received two mobile phone calls from Mr Behrens.
It was said by the applicants that in the second phone call, Mr Behrens dismissed both of them without warning. The respondent’s
version of the conversation was that the applicants had refused to carry out their duties and had effectively resigned their employment,
without notice. Unsurprisingly, there is a contest about what was said in these conversations, and in later conversations. I shall
return shortly to the evidence adduced as to these conversations and subsequent relevant events.
On 7 December 2011, the applicants filed applications pursuant to
Fair Work Act 2009
(‘the Act’) for relief from unfair dismissal. They do not seek reinstatement, but rather compensation under various
heads of claim as pressed by their legal representative, Mr
on the first day of the hearing of the applications.
It is clear that the first issue which must be resolved by Fair Work Australia (FWA) is whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction to
determine the applicants’ unfair dismissal claims. This is a specific requirement of
of the Act which is as follows:
Initial matters to be considered before merits
FWA must decide the following matters relating to an application for an order under Division 4 before considering the merits of the
application:
(a) whether the application was made within the period required in
subsection 394(2)
(b) whether the person was protected from unfair dismissal;
(c) whether the dismissal was consistent with the Small Business Fair Dismissal Code;
(d) whether the dismissal was a case of genuine redundancy.’
In this case, the question is whether the applicants were persons protected from unfair dismissal (subsection (b) of s 396). The preliminary
issue arises in the context of the respondent’s insistence that the applicants were not dismissed - a jurisdictional prerequisite
under s 386(1) of the Act. That sub section is expressed as follows:
‘(1) A person has been
(a) the person’s employment with his or her employer has been terminated on the employer’s initiative; or
(b) the person has resigned from his or her employment, but was forced to do so because of conduct, or a course of conduct, engaged
in by his or her employer.’
If the applicants were not dismissed, then axiomatically, they cannot have been unfairly dismissed in accordance with s 385 of the
Act. In this respect, all four subsections in 385 must be satisfied, being: (a) the person has been dismissed; (b) the dismissal
harsh, unjust or unreasonable
’; (c) the dismissal was not consistent with the Small Business Fair Dismissal Code; (d) the dismissal was not a case of genuine
redundancy. I would observe that subsection (c) was not argued in this case. For completeness, I note there was some last minute
attention given by Mr
to a suggestion that the respondents may have purported to have made the applicants redundant, but that their redundancies were not
genuine. I do not consider that this suggestion has any merit (although it was not put with much vigour or surety). In any event,
from the uncontested evidence of the respondent, I do not see how it was possible to advance such a proposition, particularly as
it was made at the ‘heel of the hunt’ without any notice to either the Tribunal or the respondent. The applicant’s
primary argument is that their dismissals were ‘
harsh, unjust or unreasonable
’. However, this question will only fall for consideration if subsection (a) is satisfied. It is to that question which I now
THE EVIDENCE
At the outset of proceedings, I ruled that the evidence in one matter shall be the evidence in the other.
There were four witnesses in this case - Mr Hamid Eghlima and Mr David Eghlima, and for the respondent, Mr Peter Behrens and his
wife, Mrs Cordula Hohnen-Behrens (Mrs Behrens). To avoid confusion, I shall hereinafter refer to the applicants as David and Hamid.
Applicant’s Evidence
David said that on 30 November 2011, he left his home in Hornsby around 6:30am and drove in the Company vehicle to Macquarie Park
to pick up his brother. His brother then drove to Canberra. They did not stop for breakfast. David said that when they arrived
at the School, the faulty window was about 2 and a half metres from the ground. While he was on a ladder, he fell and hurt his ankle
and knee. They completed the job in about 3 hours and left Canberra at about 2pm. Because of David’s leg injury, Hamid drove
Around 4pm, while still in the car, David said he received a mobile phone call from Mr Behrens. He put it on loud speaker. Mr Behrens
told him to come back to the office at Brookvale to discuss a job in Port Macquarie the next day. David told Mr Behrens that he
had hurt his leg and could not drive to Port Macquarie the next day. Mr Behrens became angry and told him the job had to be done
tomorrow. He then shouted at him and said he wanted to speak to his brother. Hamid said that he could not talk while driving and
he would speak to him when they got back to Sydney.
Mr Behrens rang back again at 6pm when they were nearing Hornsby. He spoke to Hamid and said ‘they’ would have to go
to Port Macquarie and do the job and return the same day. Hamid said that he could not sit in the car for another 9 hours, as he
had driven both ways, to and from Canberra, and his back was hurting. Mr Behrens shouted in reply that the job needed to be done
‘you are not useful to me anymore. I can’t keep you employed anymore.’
Hamid said that this was not the right way to talk to them after 5 years and all of their good work. He told Mr Behrens he would
get a doctor’s certificate. Mr Behrens repeated
‘You are not useful anymore. I can’t keep you employed’.
Hamid told Mr Behrens he could do a job in Sydney, but he could not go to Port Macquarie, as he wouldn’t
‘kill myself for money.’
Mr Behrens insisted he go to Port Macquarie, otherwise he wouldn’t be kept employed. He then said that with his background
and nationality he wouldn’t be able to find another job. When David said
‘what’s wrong with our nationality?
’, Mr Behrens hung up.
David said he was shocked by these conversations after all the good work he had done for the respondent.
David said that, at around 6:30pm, he rang Mr Behrens to try and resolve the situation. He put the call on loudspeaker at his apartment.
He told Mr Behrens that for 5 years they had done all the big jobs. The customers were happy, he wanted to continue working for
the respondent, and he couldn’t understand why Mr Behrens was treating them in the manner he was and they didn’t like
it. Mr Behrens said the job had to be done the next day. Otherwise, he and his wife would come and pick up the van and the tools.
David said Mr Behrens repeated the nationality remark. He told Mr Behrens that, as the van was his property, if he wanted it, he
could pick it up.
put the phone on loudspeaker. David said she coldly stated
‘I heard you guys do not want to work for Winco anymore.’
Hamid told her that that wasn’t right, it was just because of their medical conditions that they couldn’t go to Port
Macquarie. He was happy to work in Sydney. David said Mrs Behrens replied that it was too late, they were finished from that day
and she demanded a resignation letter. Hamid said he wasn’t signing anything, as he hadn’t resigned. When she insisted
he had resigned, he had said he was stressed out and in pain and he asked if they could talk next week. She insisted a resignation
letter be signed, which she would email to them. Hamid told her not to bother, as she couldn’t force him to sign.
Mr Behrens and Mrs Behrens arrived outside the apartment around 8pm and David met them downstairs. They could see he was limping
and he told them he was going to the doctor the next day about his injury. They checked the van and asked for the keys and the petrol
card. Mrs Behrens produced a piece of paper and flattened it out on the bonnet. She said it was a resignation letter and he had
to sign it. He refused. She said they would receive their outstanding entitlements and she was sorry for what had happened, but
they were finished from that day. He replied
‘we didn’t finish. You finished us.’
David received a medical certificate and was unfit for work until 5 December 2011. On 2 December, he received an email from Mrs
Behrens headed ‘Immediate Employment Termination Notice’. In this letter, it was claimed that as he had told her and
Mr Behrens that he did not want to work for Winco anymore, his employment was immediately terminated. I reproduce this and other
exchanges of relevant emails that followed:
‘Dear David
You told us Wednesday, that you do not want to work for Winco any more, that you cannot work together.
That means our Employment Relationship with us was immediately terminated with effect on 30/11/2011.
All other consequences from your immediate termination will be notified to you.
We will certainly write a reference for you and certainly you will receive all your entitlements.
The property of Winco System, the van, the computer and hopefully all tools (which you had from us in good faith) we collected
On Wednesday already.
A written letter has been sent out today. Expenses, your last timesheet...you can scan and send us via email
There is no need to come to the office on Monday, 5/12/2011
We are confident that you will find new and better employment conditions as electrician with less driving... as you had with us.
I am very sorry for this...
We wish you all the Best for the future.
Kind Regards
(2 December 2011)’
‘Dear Cordula
First of all I hurt me leg in Canberra and I have a medical certificate up to Tuesday next week. The second thing is that we never
said we don’t want to work Peter told us that he doesn’t want us any more, that’s why when he said he is coming
to pick of the van on Wednesday right after we arrived from Canberra I said it is ok.
David Eghlima
(2 December 2011)’
I am sorry about your leg. Unfortunately you said you would not want to work for Winco and you could not work with Peter. When we
opened the car Peter asked you if you would not want to keep the shoes and the helmet, you said you wanted none of it any more. So
we left. We are not a kindergarden (sic) and unfortunately we had to accept your decision and picked up the van. When I talked with
Hamid over the phone he repeated he would never work for Winco any more, not one day. I asked him if he could send an email confirming
this, which he refused. He only wanted that I write a nice reference for him, which I promised to do.
Unfortunately this has happened, your employment has terminated and the letters are sent out.
Kind Regards
(2 December 2011)’
Mr Behrens sent both applicants the following email on 9 December 2011:
I tried many time to contact you and Hamid the last days without success.
I have written also an email to you to contact you.
By Australian law you are obliged to cooperate for another 2 weeks if we have any questions about the current work and past work relations.
If you do not do so, avoid to do it or even do not care at all, what seems to us is the case currently, you may loose (sic) substantial
parts on your entitlements.
So please don’t hide. Call me and answer my calls and emails.
David denied ever resigning from the respondent or being unwilling to work. He obtained a further doctor’s certificate on
7 February 2012 in relation to the treatment he was receiving for his work related injury.
On 12 February 2012, the applicants received an email from Mrs Behrens accusing them of being ‘criminals’ and of defrauding
the respondent. She threatened to make a complaint to the Police and further ‘damage’ them. David strongly denied her
allegations and said he had always provided full records of his working hours and expenses, in a timely manner.
oral evidence
, David deposed that he could not recall Mr Behrens phoning him around 11am on 30 November 2011 and asking where he and his brother
were, as the client was inquiring as to their whereabouts. He believed they arrived in Canberra around 11am. David said he fell
off the stepladder soon after commencing the job that day. Nether he or his brother advised Mr Behrens of his injury at the time.
He was unaware of any requirements or company policy which required him to do so. He did not advise anyone onsite or seek any medical
treatment or first aid that day. He just wanted to get back to Sydney and they did not stop on the way back.
David agreed it was not unusual for Mr Behrens to ask them to go back to the Brookvale office. He denied that Mr Behrens had only
wanted one of them to go to Port Macquarie. He could not recall if the first phone call lasted for over 8 minutes. He agreed he hadn’t
written all of what was said during the conversation in his statement. He denied his recollection of the conversation was ‘selective’.
David believed that Mr Behrens knew why they couldn’t go to Brookvale. David insisted there was a second phone call from Mr
Behrens around 6pm. By this time, it was clear that Mr Behrens was only requesting his brother to go to Port Macquarie. He wasn’t
aware of Mr Behrens offering to drive.
David accepted that it was not until the second or third conversation with Mr Behrens that he had terminated their employment. In
the third conversation, he said he was coming to pick up the van and the tools.
David said he had observed and listened to the fourth conversation between his brother and Mrs Behrens. He denied Mrs Behren’s
version of this conversation; in particular, denying that his brother had said they didn’t want to work for Winco anymore.
He denied that Mrs Behrens had asked them to help with the jobs which needed to be done in the following week.
David was closely questioned as to the fourth conversation when Mr Behrens and his wife arrived around 8pm at his apartment to pick
up the van. David said he came down from the 5th floor apartment after receiving a phone call from Mr Behrens. He was limping and
told them that he was going to see a doctor about his injury. David said his brother remained in the apartment because he did not
want to face them. David said he didn’t read the piece of paper Mrs Behrens laid out on the bonnet of the van. She had said
it was a resignation letter and he needed to sign it. He refused as he hadn’t resigned. David could not recall if the document
was typed or handwritten.
David agreed that Mrs Behrens had offered them to take their work shoes and protective equipment, but he refused. This conversation
was not in his statement because he didn’t think it was relevant. He agreed that this was the only part of the conversation
which they both agreed had been said.
David said that his brother later told him that he had been watching them from a third floor balcony, after using a key to enter
a friend’s apartment. He had heard everything which was said. When David returned, his brother was back in his apartment on
David said that, up to this point, he and his brother had had a good relationship with Mr and Mrs Behrens and they had attended both
of their weddings. David said that, despite their good relationship, Mr Behrens would still be regularly checking up on him. David
agreed that he and his brother had a great deal of autonomy in terms of the work they performed. However, Mr Behrens would call them
at least 6 or 7 times a day. Time sheets were provided on a monthly basis. He had not provided the November 2011 time sheet on legal
advice that they not contact the employer. David said he would record work details in his diary on a daily basis and then transfer
the details to the monthly time sheets. He has the records for November 2011.
David was asked about the requirement for all employees and contractors to scan on and off the Multiplex job (University of New South
Wales). As part of the induction on site, it was important for Multiplex to know who was on and off the job at a particular time.
He and his brother had received the scanning cards. He was asked to explain how a time sheet he had prepared had disclosed that he
and his brother had worked on the site 33 days, but the scanning records showed his brother only scanning 6 times and he, only 12
times. He said that sometimes the security wasn’t there or they had to carry tools and equipment from 1-2 kilometres away.
However, the Multiplex supervisor always knew when they were on site.
David said that after picking up his brother, there were 3 ways to get to the Multiplex site at the University of New South Wales.
They would arrive about 7:30am, look for offsite parking and carry their tools and equipment to the site. The time would depend on
the traffic, finding a park, collecting materials and going to the office.
David was questioned about an incident on the NIB job in Newcastle when Mr Behrens tried to call them after a complaint from the
client that they hadn’t arrived. David explained that they had been waiting at the gate to be let in. He could not recall
another occasion when Mr Behrens couldn’t find him on the Multiplex job.
David deposed that he had wanted to come in to the office on 6 December to talk about what had happened, but they were told they
were dismissed. While Mr Behrens had been trying to contact them, David said that his lawyer had told him to have no contact.
David was asked about a notice to produce his phone records. He claimed he had thrown them out, as he had no reason to keep them
and only kept the front page, including a most recent 15 page account for May 2012.
David said he had tried to retrieve invoices and other records in answer to the summons, but it had been difficult getting them from
his accountant. He conceded he did have invoices at home and was able to get all the records from his accountant. David said he had
no phone records for his fixed home phone.
David said that since their dismissals he and his brother had set up their own business (HD Electrical) around January 2012 and had
been doing a small amount of work. He had already been working for the building manager in the building where he lived, doing odd
electrical jobs. He agreed the ABN for the business was dated January 2008.
David said that since January, he and his brother have concentrated on building up their business and had not sought any alternative
paid employment. The business is a partnership with its own ABN and bank account which can be drawn upon by both of them. He acknowledged
the account was in operation prior to 30 November 2011, but only in respect to the small building strata management jobs. However,
he could not recall exactly how long the account had been open for. David said he also had credit cards and a private savings account.
David was shown a bundle of invoices for HD Electrical from 7 December 2011 to 4 June 2012. All of them were signed by him and only
one signed by his brother. The first one was numbered 11.39. He agreed there may have been earlier invoices. David agreed that the
business was set up in January 2008 and has its own web page created by his brother. The invoices disclose the webpage address, their
mobile numbers and licence numbers. He agreed the webpage was created earlier than January 2012 and contained photos of work which
had been performed by them on Winco’s projects. David conceded he had not asked for his employer’s permission to take
the photos and post them on HD Electrical’s webpage. Nor had he told the employer that he and his brother had been running
a separate business. He didn’t think he had to, because it was done in their own time. The first page of the website disclosed
that they were available 24 hours, 7 days a week with emergency callouts. He agreed business cards for their company had been printed,
but only after he and his brother were dismissed.
David was asked about their hours of work on the University of NSW job. He said that the employer was always checking the tolls,
the parking, petrol and other expenses for which they were reimbursed. He was aware that the respondent had alleged certain discrepancies
between the records and the timesheets. He explained that they may have been buying and preparing materials, talking to the builder
or carrying tools from the car to the site. He strongly denied any fraudulent activity.
David was asked about a contract of employment given to him and his brother about 2 weeks before finishing up with the respondent.
They had not signed it. He agreed it included a disclosure requirement if they performed other similar work to that of the employer.
He had not signed it for reasons other than that he was running his own business.
David deposed that while he had earlier told the Tribunal he could produce his diary for work performed for Winco, he now could not
find it. However, he was certain the diary did not contain details of work he performed for his own company. As to his company’s
business cards, David said he believed they were printed by a company in Parramatta and paid for using a credit card in both their
David was shown a bundle of Commonwealth Bank records disclosing that the business account operated by himself and his brother had
an amount of $8031 credit as of 12 December 2011. He agreed he had operated the account earlier than 30 November 2011. He said in
evidence that he had no other bank records for earlier than 30 November, but believed they could be obtained from the bank.
David was questioned about the toll tag in the company vehicle and their driving movements on 30 November 2011. He said the traffic
was very heavy at the time. He again explained the scanning discrepancies on the University of NSW site. Sometimes they didn’t
scan in, other times they used a back entrance that didn’t have scanning equipment or they were carrying work items and didn’t
scan in. In re-examination, David said that when Mr Behrens came to the site, he didn’t see him sign in or scan in. In further
re-examination, David said that the employer had continually checked their expenses throughout their employment and they would be
paid any expenses due after 2 or 3 weeks.
David described the work at the University of NSW job. He believed they may have actually finished the job earlier than planned
and they received references from the contractor they were subcontracted to for the work they had performed. David gave a detailed
description of the materials and tools they were required to carry on to and off the University of NSW job site and the difficulties
in parking offsite. David identified a number of other jobs where they had received references, although Mr
, Counsel for the respondent, doubted their relevance as they were dated 22 December 2011. Mr
noted that there was no issue prior to 30 November 2011 about the applicants’ work performance. The respondent’s concerns
arose later.
David said that he had performed 44 major jobs for Winco over the years. At the time of commencing their employment he and his brother
had been unaware that they would be required to work long distances from Sydney. They had no contract of employment; only a letter
of offer. David gave further details of some of the major jobs he had done for Winco. As to the $8000 in the business account, David
said it was probably attributable to a 5-6 month period for work performed on weekends only for his own business. Since his dismissal
he and his brother had only earnt about $10,000 each from their business.
David deposed that he had never received any safety training and that he had been injured many times over the 5 years of employment
with Winco. However, he didn’t stop work when injured, because it was just he and his brother who performed the work. David
said he had a lot of accumulated sick leave.
David emphasised that he had never resigned and he had no doubt he had been sacked. He was very upset on 30 November 2011 and couldn’t
believe how he and his brother were treated after 5 years of doing everything for the employer. He said that in that time, despite
constant checking of invoices, dockets and timesheets and Mr Behrens constantly phoning, or turning up on site, there was never any
issue put to him about inconsistencies in the timesheets.
Hamid Eghlima
Hamid’s statement was largely corroborative of and, in many respects, identical to his brother’s evidence. To that extent,
I will endeavour not to repeat it. He also described the trip to Canberra on 30 November 2011 when he had driven down and back after
his brother had fallen off a ladder and hurt his ankle and knee.
Hamid said he had heard what Mr Behrens had said in the phone conversation around 4pm on the way back as his brother put the phone
on loudspeaker. Mr Behrens became angry when David had said he had hurt his leg and wouldn’t be able to drive to Port Macquarie.
Mr Behrens asked to speak to Hamid, but he said he couldn’t because he was driving. When Mr Behrens phoned back he insisted
that Hamid go to Port Macquarie the next day, but he said he couldn’t do so because his back was hurting after driving both
ways to Canberra.
Hamid reiterated the words his brother said Mr Behrens had used, being
‘The job needs to be done, you are not useful to me anymore. I can’t keep you employed anymore’.
When he protested about their treatment, Mr Behrens repeated the comment. He told him that he wouldn’t kill himself for money,
but would do a job in Sydney. Mr Behrens said he had to go to Port Macquarie otherwise he couldn’t keep him employed and with
his background and nationality he wouldn’t be able find another job. Hamid replied
: ‘What’s wrong with our nationality?’
Mr Behrens then hung up.
Hamid said that because of his back injury, his doctor had told him not to be in a car for more than one hour whenever he was in
pain (from Doctor’s certificate of 1 December 2011). Hamid gave the same account as David of the conversation with Mr Behrens
at around 6:30pm that day. Hamid described exactly the same version of the conversation with Mrs Behrens concerning her insistence
that he and his brother sign a resignation letter.
As to the conversation between his brother and Mr and Mrs Behrens downstairs outside the apartment, Hamid said:
‘I was on the balcony and could see and hear what was occurring.’
There was no mention in his statement of going to level 3 and using a key to enter a friend’s apartment or of him telling his
brother he had done so. He then described the same conversation as his brother records as between his brother and Mrs Behrens.
Hamid said that he attended a medical appointment with Dr Fong regarding his back pain with on 1 December 2011 and received a certificate
excusing him from work from 1 December to 5 December (curiously, exactly the same period as his brother after visiting the same doctor
on the same day). He emailed the certificate to Mr Behrens and told him he would ‘attend the office on 6 December 2011’.
his unwillingness to work. He responded as follows:
‘Dear carjula (sic)
Regards your email, this is not true, i never said i’m resigning in fact i am still working for winco system.
The discussion we had on 30/11/2011 was, peter behrens ask us to drive 8 hours to other city to do the job over there and com (sic)
after nearly 5 years peter unfirly (sic) told me, i cannot employe (sic) you any more, he came and collect the van and all the tools.
Anyway i have medical certificate and this was peter decision to immediately terminat (sic) our enployment (sic) relationship and
he prove that by collecting the van and all the tools on 30/11/2011
Hamid Eghlima’
Mrs Behrens replied:
‘Dear Hamid
You told us Wednesday, that you do not want to work for Winco any more, not even one day.
That means our Employment Relationship with us was immediately terminated with effect on 30/11/2011.
All other consequences from your immediate termination will be notified to you.
As discussed Wednesday on the phone already, we will certainly write a reference for you and certainly you will receive all your entitlements.
The property of Winco System, the van, the computer and hopefully all tools (which you had from us in good faith) we collected on
Wednesday already. Expenses, your last timesheet...you can scan and send us via email. There is no need to come to the office on
Monday, 5/12/2011
We are confident that you will find new and better employment conditions as electrician with less driving...as you had with us.
A written letter will be sent out today. As I have only your former address with David I will send it there, if you do not send your
new address.
I am very sorry for all this but I wish you all the Best for the future
Kind Regards
Hamid denied ever saying that he was unwilling to perform any future work for Winco. He had only said that because of his injury,
he was unable to spend so much time in the car to go to the job in Port Macquarie. He denied ever resigning.
On 7 February 2012, Hamid received a further medical certificate from Dr Fong in relation to his work related injuries and recurrent
back pain from April 2009 and earlier.
Both applicants received the same email from Mrs Behrens on 12 February 2012 accusing them of being ‘criminals’ and committing
fraud against the respondent. Hamid denied these allegations and said he always provided records of his working hours and expenses
in a timely manner.
cross-examination
, Hamid explained that he had been out of Australia for 3 and a half months and returned from Iran at the end of September. Although
he had since worked for HD Electrical, he had not worked much due to his back pain and being overseas. He had not been in any other
paid work since his dismissal, other than seeking work for the partnership with his brother. He recalled working with his brother
on a school in Eastwood which he had signed the invoice for. There was no particular reason why he had signed the invoice and not
his brother.
Hamid confirmed that HD Electrical had been in existence prior to 30 November 2011 and had operated a joint bank account. He wasn’t
sure if credit cards were attached to the account prior to this time. The company had a website, which included mobile phone contacts
and photos which he had recently created. He agreed the photos were primarily of work performed by him and his brother while working
took Hamid through the various conversations he and his brother had with Mr and Mrs Behrens on 30 November 2011, pointing out that
he and his brother’s versions of the conversations were identical. However, Hamid said he didn’t recall everything that
was said and couldn’t recall if the first conversation lasted for 8 minutes. He couldn’t exactly recall the route they
took to and from Canberra that day. He said he drove back to Hornsby that day partly because David had hurt his leg, but also because
a friend of his lived in David’s building and he was minding his place while he was overseas. He had not spoken to or called
out to the Behrens when they arrived later to pick up the van. He was upset and in pain himself and didn’t want to speak to
them, because Mrs Behrens was forcing them to sign a letter of resignation.
In a further phone call around 6:30pm that evening, Mrs Behrens said that she wanted him to go to Port Macquarie the next day. Hamid
agreed that in a third conversation between his brother and Mrs Behrens, he gave no indication he was present, nor does his brother.
Hamid agreed he was not dismissed in the first conversation but rather by Mr Behrens in the second conversation when he said
‘the job needs to be done and he was not useful to me’
. He had explained that having driven both ways to Canberra, he couldn’t sit in the car for another 9 hours. He told Mr Behrens
what excellent work he and his brother had done for him and how the customers were always happy.
Hamid denied that he had answered Mr Behrens’ first phone call. Mr Behrens had not said that he needed someone with authorisation
to accompany him to Port Macquarie to enter the site. They had not discussed anything about the job because he was driving. In the
later conversation he could not recall if he told Mr Behrens that he couldn’t drive for more than one hour if he was in pain.
However, Mr Behrens’ evidence was that he had. Hamid believed he mentioned 9 hours being a long time to drive and that Mr Behrens
may have been confused with the doctor’s certificate. He denied saying he would not drive longer for 1 hour after Mr Behrens
had said they had a problem. He also denied telling Mr Behrens he did not want to work for Winco anymore and ‘
there was something wrong with the Company anyway
’. He denied it was he who hung up in the first conversation. He denied ‘making up’ with his brother, the words
said to have been used by Mr Behrens in the second conversation.
Hamid said his brother had rung Mr Behrens at 6:30 to try and resolve the situation. He denied that his brother had agreed with
him that he wouldn’t work for Winco anymore. Hamid denied that Mrs Behrens had said that she had heard that they didn’t
want to work for Winco anymore and how awful this was and surely it can’t be true. He denied all of Mrs Behrens’ version
of this conversation. Hamid could not explain why he and David, as the only electricians doing the work for Winco, would be dismissed
when work was available for them.
Hamid affirmed his earlier evidence that on the night in question, he went down to his friend’s unit on the 3rd floor and could
hear everything which was said between his brother and the Behrens. He now recalled Mrs Behrens referring to them taking the work
boots and protective gear, but had not mentioned this in his statement.
Hamid was asked about his attendance on the University of NSW job and said that, despite only being scanned on 6 days, he was there
all the time. They had used a back door. He said his brother had kept a diary in a notebook of all the hours they had worked and
he had trusted him to do it. He agreed there were monthly reimbursements of expenditure and overtime worked. He was aware that the
employer had timesheets showing them commencing work at 7:00am or 7:30am, but with Harbour Bridge records showing them on the Bridge
at 10:00am. On another occasion, the Bridge record showed a crossing at 7:42am, but the site records did not show them signing in
at the site until 10am. He explained that this was because they may have had to buy materials, go to the office or find parking.
In re-examination, Hamid detailed the conversation with Mr and Mrs Behrens and said he believed he was dismissed by Mr Behrens in
the second phone conversation. He queried why he would have resigned at the end of the year.
understandable objection, Mr
was granted leave to re-examine Hamid in respect to photographs recently taken by him of his brother’s apartment block and
the adjacent road. He marked the photos as to where he and his brother and Mr and Mrs Behrens and the van were on 30 November 2011.
In further cross-examination, Hamid said that his brother and Mr and Mrs Behrens were standing on the passenger side of the van nearest
the building. His brother was facing away from the building and the Behrens towards the building on an angle. Mrs Behrens walked
around the van and was checking it thoroughly. Mr Behrens just followed her. Hamid claimed that he didn’t stand up properly
and was crouching behind the balcony railing because he didn’t want them to see him.
In further re-examination, Hamid explained when and how he received his back injury in 2008. He and another person had moved the
office to Brookvale and in 2009, a large heavy window arrived from Germany. It took 4 people to carry it up 2 levels into the showroom.
His pain became worse, he visited his doctor regularly and was eventually admitted to hospital. Mr Behrens was well aware of the
injury and had queried him about it. However, he could still drive long distances, despite the pain. He said he was reluctant to
keep mentioning his injury to Mr Behrens because he feared the consequences of doing so and that the consequences he had feared had
now occurred.
Respondent’s Evidence
[64] Mr Peter Behrens’
version of the Canberra incident on the 30 November 2011 was that he had been informed by the customer that David and Hamid arrived
at around 12:35pm and left at approximately 2pm. He disputed that the applicants’ had left Sydney at 6:30am, as it was a three
and a half hour trip to Canberra. He produced tollway records showing the company vehicle passing the M2 tollpoint at 8:44am at a
location which is 5 minutes from where Hamid lives in Macquarie Park.
In respect to the phone conversation at 4:30pm, Mr Behrens disputed the applicants’ version to the following effect: Mr Behrens
had told Hamid that he would drive to Port Macquarie as he only needed one person to accompany him. Hamid said he couldn’t
go because of his back pain and that he couldn’t drive for longer than one hour. Mr Behrens noted that most journeys from Macquarie
Park to the City, or even to Canberra were longer than 1 hour. Mr Behrens said he told Hamid
‘Then we will have an employment problem. For us, it is necessary that you drive for longer than one hour.’
Hamid said he would not do it anymore. He did not indicate this was temporary or that he was getting a medical certificate or he
would be ‘happy to help us out’ with other work. Mr Behrens denied he was shouting. Rather Hamid became agitated and
‘No, no then that’s it. I don’t want to work for Winco, anymore, there is something wrong with the company anyway’
and hung up. Mr Behrens denied making threats or referring to Hamid’s nationality. David was not part of the conversation,
as he only needed one person to go to Port Macquarie.
Mr Behrens said that David then called him around 6pm and said words to the affect of
‘What is going on here? I agree totally with Hamid. I don’t want to work for Winco again.’
Mr Behrens said he replied by saying he was tired of struggling with them to go to jobs outside Sydney. David responded
‘I am tired too, to do any work for Winco again. Over.’
He hung up. They did not discuss returning the van. Mr Behrens called back at 6:31pm and told David that he needed to pick up the
van to carry out work in the following few days.
Mr Behrens said that after this call, he phoned his wife and told her what had happened. She was surprised and couldn’t believe
it. She said that she would try to speak with them. Around 7pm his wife spoke to Hamid from the car and asked what was this awful
story she had heard about he and David not wanting to work for them. He replied
‘We don’t want to work for Winco anymore. We don’t do anything more for you.
His wife said something like,
Do we really finish like that. Is that all?’
Hamid said he wanted a good reference and his wife agreed. Hamid repeated
‘It is over, will not work for Winco anymore’
. His wife asked about helping out with the jobs the next week, but he refused. She asked him to send an email confirming they had
left their employment with Winco. Hamid refused. She said she would send something confirming what had happened.
He and his wife arrived to pick up the van around 8:00pm. His wife did most of the speaking. She asked David why they didn’t
want to work for them anymore. David just replied
‘It’s over. We don’t want to work for Winco.’
His wife then offered him their work boots and protective clothing. David said they didn’t want anything more to do with
Winco. His wife said she was sorry that it had to end like this.
Mr Behrens said his wife had not prepared a resignation letter or anything else for them to sign. She couldn’t have because
his earlier phone call was made from the car on their way home. Mr Behrens received an email from Hamid on 2 December 2011, indicating
he would be coming into work on 6 December 2011 and enclosing a medical certificate for his back injury (Mr Behrens had been in Port
Macquarie on 1 December). Mr Behrens thought it was nonsense that Hamid was proposing to come to work, when he refused to work and
terminated his employment the day before.
On 2 December 2012, his wife wrote letters to both applicants headed ‘Immediate Employment Termination Notice’. Mr Behrens
explained that, by using the words ‘been placed on immediate termination’, he did not mean Winco had dismissed them.
They had refused to work and were ‘placed’ on termination on the basis of their unwillingness to work. He stressed that
their contractual obligation had been broken. There then followed various emails earlier referred to (see para [14]). Mr Behrens
said that over the next week he had encountered numerous work difficulties which he wanted to discuss with David. Despite trying
to contact him on three occasions, David would not respond.
Mr Behrens gave evidence of various discrepancies in the time sheets of the applicants. He had been alerted to a need to check these
timesheets after visiting the University of NSW site on 27 October 2011 and only finding David on site. David said his brother had
left the site to take his wife to the Doctor, but the van was onsite at the time. Their timesheets indicated they had both worked
from 7am to 4:50pm that day, including paid overtime. He asked his wife to make further inquiries. He said that the applicants were
paid in good faith based on the timesheets submitted, including overtime. However, comparing these records, with other information,
disclosed many discrepancies. For example, RTA Toll records show journeys via the Sydney Harbour Bridge and Lane Cove Tunnel using
the company van, not reconciling with the times recorded on the timesheets. Further, parking records regularly submitted for reimbursement,
show entry and exiting parking stations at very different times to the times recorded on the timesheets.
In addition, site attendance records for Multiplex at the University of NSW site, required for OH & S purposes, show that David
had attended the site on only 13 of the 33 days recorded on his timesheets and that Hamid had attended the site on only 6 of the
33 days on the timesheet.Mr Behrens said that his wife had calculated overpayments based on discrepancies for the period from 1 Sept
2010 - 31 October 2011 of $17,718.75 for David and $16,109.92 for Hamid. These concerns and overpayment claims had been forwarded
by his solicitors to the applicants, on several occasions, without any response from them. Mr Behrens said that, had he been aware
of the nature and scale of the applicants’ misrepresented timesheets without plausible explanations, the applicants would been
summarily dismissed much earlier than 30 November 2011.
cross-examination
, Mr Behrens described the history of his company and his role and duties as the Managing Director. He said that many of the parts
and products used by his Company are imported from Germany.
Mr Behrens said that despite having control over the applicants, they were often quite hesitant to say where they were. When he asked
they would say
‘why do you need to know that’
. Mr Behrens described how he would communicate the company’s requirements to the applicants. This was done 3-4 days in advance
for small jobs and sometimes many weeks in advance for large jobs. Mr Behrens described the terms of the applicants’ employment
and how they first came to be employed by him. They were provided with letters of appointment at the time. Mr Behrens said that the
Company had sent David to Germany to learn more about the products and these costs were all met by the Company.
Mr Behrens detailed the applicant’s work on the Bligh Street job which lasted 6-8 months. However, the applicants did not work
exclusively on that job during that time. This was the nature of subcontracting in the building industry. Mr Behrens said that a
company vehicle was provided to the applicants’ and it could be garaged at their home. However, he made it clear that driving
time was not work time. The arrangement was that the first hour to the job was not working time.
Mr Behrens explained that he had not expected either of the applicants to do any work at Port Macquarie. The work involved reprogramming
a computer and although he knew how to do it and the instructions were all in German, he required an inducted person to accompany
him on the commercial site. This was an unusual situation. Both applicants had been inducted on the site and no one else had. The
job was urgent because it was the peak Christmas period in Port Macquarie’s biggest shopping centre. In the result, he was
‘fined’ $5000 for not carrying out the work.
It was Mr Behrens’ evidence that he first learnt of the urgency of the job that day (30 November). He had never asked the
applicants to come back to the office after driving from Canberra. Mr Behrens said Hamid may have mentioned his back problem to him
once previously, perhaps in 2011 but he did not know how the injury had occurred. Hamid had never told him about it. Mr Behrens recalled
an earlier occasion when a large hatch, possibly weighing 150kg had been delivered to the office and carried up the stairs by 4 men,
including Hamid.
Mr Behrens recalled another injury Hamid told him about when he broke his toe playing soccer barefoot. He was off work for 8-10 weeks
and although he was only obliged to pay him 10 days sick leave, he continued to pay him for the whole period.
Mr Behrens said that in the previous 12 months of the applicants’ employment 90-95% of their work was around Sydney. In the
past they had performed work on some big contracts, including one in Adelaide in which the Company paid for David’s wife to
accompany him while he did the job.
Mr Behrens agreed that in the first phone conversation on 30 November 2011, after asking Hamid to go to Port Macquarie, Hamid also
said his brother had fallen off a ladder and would be seeking a medical certificate so he couldn’t go either. Mr Behrens said
he was aware of his obligations as an employer in respect to an employee’s injury. However, if it was severe, the employee
should seek immediate medical help and Workcover should be notified. Mr Behrens conceded that he did not conduct tool box meetings
as he believed they were relevant only to big companies. Nevertheless, the company had an OH&S policy, requiring risk assessments
to be conducted on every job.
It was Mr Behrens’ evidence that he had accepted the applicants’ resignations on the day they were offered and that he
did not seek to have them change their minds, despite having plenty of work for them to do.
Mr Behrens believed the applicants had received scissor lift training. Mr Behrens said he did not refuse to hire a scissor lift for
the Bligh Street job, because it was not in the contract. He added that car parking for the applicants on that job amounted to $3500.
Mr Behrens’ evidence was that he had spoken to the applicants on several occasions about the amount of overtime they had been
claiming. He agreed that all of their time sheets were checked and invariably the applicants would complain about underpayments which
were later found to be unjustified.
Mr Behrens denied he was angry in any of the phone conversations he had with the applicants on 30 November 2011. He had never said
anything about them not being useful to him anymore. Hamid had said that he would not work for Winco anymore and didn’t mention
getting a medical certificate. Mr Behrens could not recall if he had queried why Hamid could travel to Iran with his back injury.
However, he had not made fun of him about it. Mr Behrens said he had tried to contact the applicants after 30 November, but they
wouldn’t answer his emails or phone calls. The Company had many jobs to do at the time and needed help.
Mr Behrens said it was nonsense that Mrs Behrens had prepared a resignation letter for the applicants to sign. When Mr Behrens was
shown his wife’s email of 12 Feb 2012 (calling the applicants liars and criminals) he said he had not previously seen it. His
evidence was that he did not share his wife’s views as contained in the email.
Mr Behrens reaffirmed that the time sheet for the Canberra job did not reflect the toll record reports. Mr Behrens was asked about
other jobs and whether the preparation work was done on site, or off site, or if the jobs required them to purchase materials or
to train on equipment. He said that none of the applicants’ timesheets reflected what they now said were their explanations
for the discrepancies in the timesheets. Mr Behrens denied knowing where the applicants were on any given day and time. He said
there were ‘big holes’ in the timesheets records compared to other independent records, amounting to a difference of
up to $100,000. It was Mr Behrens’ evidence that he had trusted the applicants because David had insisted that if they didn’t
trust him he wouldn’t work for them anymore. If there were arguments over discrepancies he told his wife to pay them to avoid
further conflict.
In relation to the Port Macquarie job, Mr Behrens said again that the client needed the job done urgently. Before he had time to
discuss the matter, Hamid had said they didn’t want to work for Winco again. Mr Behrens accepted David had been injured and
told him to go to the doctor. He denied raising his voice. On the contrary, it was Hamid who was shouting. Mr Behrens referred to
three other occasions where he had had to intervene on a building site because Hamid wanted to fight somebody. He was the hot tempered
In re-examination, Mr Behrens said that if the applicants ever had to leave one site to go to another (which was the exception rather
than the norm), he expected this to be recorded on the timesheets. It never was.
Mr Behrens outlined his expectation of what times should have been recorded for the Canberra job. If there was 10 hours of elapsed
time, 2 hours would be taken off for travelling and there would be one and a half hours overtime. There was also requirement for
a half hour break. Mr Behrens queried the applicants’ claim that they worked through without a break because whenever he had
visited sites they were on, they were always on smoke breaks as they were both heavy smokers.
Mr Behrens said that, in respect to the University of NSW job, there would have been no requirement to purchase anything in November
2011. They had never submitted timesheets or expenses for November 2011. If their claims were valid, they would have been paid.
[91] Mrs Cordula Behrens
said her husband had told her of the two phone conversations he had with the brothers on their way back from Canberra. She described
the situation as ‘unfortunate’ because they had told him they did not want to work for Winco anymore. He had mentioned
that Hamid had referred to his back injury. Both of them had said they did not want to work for Winco again. She told her husband
that maybe they hadn’t meant to resign and she would call them to see what the situation was.
Mrs Behrens said she was astonished by their decision as the Company had tried to be fair to both of them, including giving them
extra holidays over Christmas and allowing Hamid an extra month off a year to return home to Iran. While this was inconvenient, they
were happy to do so.
Mrs Behrens described her conversation with Hamid as they were driving from home to Hornsby. Hamid reiterated four times that they
didn’t want to work for them anymore and he asked for a reference. She queried their decision and asked them to help out the
next week. However, he refused. She asked him to send an email confirming they had left employment. When Hamid said ‘no’,
she told him she would send something to confirm what had happened. She then made arrangements to collect the van and tools. Mrs
Behrens denied the applicants’ evidence that they wanted to work and were happy to work, subject to limitations from their
injuries. She insisted their responses were direct, and without explanation.
Mrs Behrens said that when they arrived at David’s apartment around 8pm, she phoned him and he came downstairs. She had previously
been to David’s apartment in 2009 (for his wedding) and believed it was on the 8th or 9th floor of the building (20 - 25 metres)
and some 8-10 metres from the street. Mrs Behrens said she asked David again why he didn’t want to work for them again and
he simply replied that it was over, they didn’t want to work for Winco and couldn’t work with Peter (her husband). She
offered to let them keep their boots and protective clothing, but David said ‘
No we don’t want anything more to do with Winco
’. Mrs Behrens denied having prepared a letter of resignation or anything for him to sign, as she still thought they might take
back what they had said.
Mrs Behrens referred to the exchanges of emails referred to earlier. She noted particularly the wording of the letter dated 30 November
2011 headed ‘Immediate Employment Termination Notice’. She believed that as the applicants had refused to work for Winco
again, they had ended their employment and broke their contractual obligations.
Mrs Behrens deposed that her husband had asked her to check the applicants’ timesheets against other Company records. When
she did so, she became concerned that they had claimed to be at work when the records showed they were not, or they were travelling
to or away from a site. She reaffirmed her husband’s evidence as to the examples she had investigated and said that the records
suggest a significant number of hours when they were not at work, despite claiming on their timesheets that they had been. She also
referred to their solicitors’ subsequent letters to the applicants regarding these overpayments.
While Mrs Behrens did not believe her email of 12 February 2012 was relevant to these proceedings, she conceded that she should not
have written this email. However, she had not threatened them with assault and certainly had not intended to interfere with the
conduct of these proceedings. She had unconditionally withdrawn the email in a letter from her solicitors. Her solicitors subsequently
provided the applicants’ solicitor with details of the documents on which the overpayment claims were based ($17,718.75 for
David and $16,109.92 for Hamid). No reply had been received. She agreed with her husband that, had they been aware of the applicants’
misinterpretation of their timesheets, the applicants would have likely been dismissed. Mrs Behrens attached various records of timesheets
and RTA Toll records to her statement.
Mrs Behrens provided a supplementary statement which detailed her accessing of further records of the Company, being Toll records
of the work van and mobile phone records of phones paid by the Company, including her own and her husbands’.
cross-examination
, Mrs Behrens described her role and duties for the Company as its Financial Controller. She is a medical doctor, but when the Company
began to expand in 2009, her husband asked her to work full time looking after the finances. She did not regard herself as an expert
in human resources. Mrs Behrens said the Company now has only 10 employees, including an electrician in Sydney who was engaged after
the applicants left. The position was advertised in January 2012.
After being shown some of the applicants’ payslips, Mrs Behrens agreed that David had a significant amount of accrued sick
leave. However, he did not bring in doctor’s certificates when he was sick.
Mrs Behrens agreed that part of her job was to pay expenses and reimburse the applicants for any Company expenses which they incurred.
She said the applicants used their own credit card and provided receipts. If there were tolls or petrol on weekends or while they
were on leave, these were deducted. However, she believed it was very much a matter of mutual trust and she trusted the applicants
to provide the correct claims. She referred to a dispute over mobile phone usage in 2010 in which monthly work related calls were
averaging around $130 and then jumped to nearly $400 a month. There was another occasion when the cost of city parking was around
$75 a day. The Company had wanted them to catch a train, but they never did.
Mrs Behrens deposed that when she spoke to her husband on 30 November 2011, he told her that the applicants didn’t want to
work for Winco anymore and that Hamid could not travel to Port Macquarie the next day because of his back. Mrs Behrens said she
had no knowledge of Hamid’s back injury or how it was caused. As far as she knew the Company had not recorded any injuries
before. The Company had a safety booklet and any injury had to be formally reported to her through an incident report. None were
ever provided by either applicant.
Mrs Behrens confirmed her version of the conversation with Hamid around 7:30pm on 30 November 2011. She was very upset and queried
why they did not want to work for Winco anymore. She agreed that they didn’t have a chat about the situation after everyone
had calmed down. This was because the applicants were determined. However, she still had hoped the applicants would call her back.
As to picking up the van, Mrs Behrens said that at no time did she see Hamid at David’s apartment. The van was usually garaged
under the building but that night it was parked on the street. Mrs Behrens agreed that David was limping that night when she saw
him. She accepted that they both subsequently provided her with medical certificates. Despite this, she had asked if they could
work for the Company the next week and they refused.
Mrs Behrens strongly denied having any piece of paper with her which was intended to secure the applicants’ resignations. She
denied sacking the applicants and said her letter titled ‘Immediate Employment Termination Notice’ reflected the fact
they no longer worked for Winco. She pointed out that she waited all day and the next day (1 December 2011) for the applicants to
call her back, but they didn’t.
Mrs Behrens agreed that while she had trusted the applicants, she had still checked their timesheets with their expense claims and
tolls reports, but not as thoroughly as she had after they had lodged their unfair dismissal applications.
Mrs Behrens said that the Company had been very busy this year. She said that while she was aware of the Small Business Fair Dismissal
Code, the applicants had not been dismissed. She insisted that she had not sought a resignation letter from the applicants and had
not discussed it with them.
Mrs Behrens agreed that the Company had offered the applicants’ contracts about a month before they left. She said it was unfortunate
that these contracts had not been signed earlier, although the applicants did have letters of offer.
Mrs Behrens acknowledged that the email of 12 February (calling them ‘
’) was sent to the applicants because she was so upset that the applicants ‘
had played with my trust for years
’. She accepted that, four days earlier, she had sent a conciliatory email wishing them the best for the future. Mrs Behrens
said that neither her husband or their lawyer knew of the email she had sent on 12 February and she was very sorry to have sent it.
It was just because she was so upset. She insisted that the Company was so busy just before Christmas that they never would have
dismissed the applicants in that situation.
In re-examination, Mrs Behrens explained that another employee, a sales person in Melbourne, had been made redundant and his unfair
dismissal case had been settled.
Mrs Behrens said that the only injury she could recall to either of the applicants before 30 November 2011 was Hamid breaking his
toe during a soccer game, for which he was paid 6 or 7 weeks while he was off work.
It was Mrs Behrens’ evidence that, had the extent of the discrepancies been known while the applicants were still employed,
she would have been raised the matter with them. The fact was she had trusted them, despite some concerns about claims of starting
early when they were not on site. She had been extremely upset and felt she had been played with for many years.
SUBMISSIONS
For the applicants
outlined the events of 30 November 2011 and submitted that both the applicants had legitimate and reasonable excuses preventing them
from working in Port Macquarie the next day. Hamid was even prepared to work in Sydney. Without any attempt to calm the situation
or discuss the matter, the applicants were both unfairly dismissed. Mr
cited the words alleged by Mr Behrens ‘
that he could not keep them employed anymore’.
Mrs Behrens had later told Hamid they were both ‘finished’ as of that date. Without any attempt to resolve the situation,
the Behrens hastily arranged to collect the Company’s van and tools. There were also attempts by Mrs Behrens to force the
applicants to sign resignation letters. The applicants’ evidence was that, at no time, did they resign from their employment.
They had also provided medical certificates concerning their injuries. Mr
submitted that the applicants were dismissed at the initiative of the employer and that their dismissals were ‘
harsh, unjust and unreasonable
The applicants sought orders for compensation reflecting the equivalent to the amount of remuneration they both would have received,
had they not been dismissed. They had been out of work since 30 November 2011 and had also not been paid their statutory entitlements.
sought interest on the outstanding entitlements and costs.
In oral submissions, Mr
agreed that this matter ‘
turned on the credit of witnesses
’. He queried why, if the applicants’ had resigned, they were sent an ‘immediate termination notice’ and,
if the Company had ongoing work, why didn’t the Behrens try to resolve the situation?
From the applicant’s perspective, Mr
questioned why they would go to the trouble of obtaining medical certificates. He also queried why the applicants would challenge
the assertion that they had resigned. He noted they were doing a good job and enjoyed their work. It made no sense for them to resign
a few weeks before Christmas when they may have received a $1000 bonus. Mr
said that the work the applicants performed for the Company was multilayered. It wasn’t merely turning up at the site at 7am
and finishing at 3pm. There was travel time, preparation and maintenance time.
In relation to the timesheet discrepancies, Mr
raised questions as to how the work got done if the applicants were not where they said they were. The respondent had conceded that
there were no issues of the quality of the applicants’ work. In respect to their own Company, Mr
submitted that they had only ever performed small handyman jobs in David’s apartment block and in their own time on weekends.
There was no mention of Winco on the company’s website. The Company had only made about $21,000 from January to July this year.
relied on the evidence that the applicants were always under the control and supervision of Mr Behrens. He knew where they were at
all times and directed them as to what jobs were to be performed and when.
noted that the applicants had still not been paid for expenses incurred in November 2011 or for outstanding entitlements. Mr
replied that the respondent was still assessing the documentation recently provided by the applicants and was arranging for payment
to be made in a day or two.
said that Hamid’s injury had resulted in a recent hospital admission. He had not sought to make a workers’ compensation
claim because of fear of any repercussions. He just wanted to continue to work and provide for his new family. As to David’s
circumstances, Mr
said he was a hard working and loyal employee. He had suffered financially and psychologically from his dismissal and his own business
had faltered. Work in the construction industry was slow and competition very tough.
For the respondent
said the jurisdictional issue in this case was clear. It was not a case of forced resignation, but a straightforward ‘word on
word’ case as to whether the applicants had resigned or were terminated at the employer’s initiative. This legal question
can be determined by findings of fact as to the conversations on 30 November 2011 between 4:34pm and 8pm. This was the date both
parties accept as the termination date.
said that despite the applicants’ use of the plural ‘we’ as to being asked to go to Port Macquarie, there was never
a need for both of them to do so. Mr Behrens just needed one of them to accompany him so as to gain access to the site as both has
been inducted. The objective evidence disclosed that the first phone call was for 8 minutes and it must have been a wide ranging
conversation. If Mr Behrens is to be believed and Hamid had said for the first time that he could not sit in a car for longer than
one hour, then it was perfectly reasonable for Mr Behrens to state that there may be a problem as to his future employment, as Winco
required such travel regularly, including in and around Sydney.
traced the history of the phone calls as disclosed by the phone records. Despite the applicants’ claim of a call to David at
6pm in which comments about the applicants’ nationality were alleged to have been made, no such call was made. A phone call
was made at 6:31 to inform David that Mr Behrens and his wife were coming to pick up the van.
It was agreed that none of the words used in the first conversation at around 4:30pm were words of termination. Hamid said he was
dismissed in the second conversation but no such conversation was directed to his brother. So even on the applicants’ evidence
they could not have been sacked in the same conversation.
David said he was sacked in a third conversation initiated by him at 6:30pm, when Mr Behrens said he was coming to pick up the van.
said what is more likely is that in the first conversation Hamid indicated he would not work for Winco anymore. There was no second
conversation, because Mr Behrens knew that neither of them were going to accompany him to Port Macquarie.
said that Mrs Behrens learnt of the events after 6:31pm in the car travelling up to Hornsby and was why she initiated a call to Hamid
around 7:30pm. It was obviously to see if the situation could be resolved. Otherwise, there would have been no need for her to call.
said it was interesting that immediately after this call of 8 minutes another call was put through to David supporting the view that
the Behrens believed the brothers were not together in the apartment. Mr
noted that neither of the applicants had mentioned in their statements that in course of the the conversation at the van, Mrs Behrens
had offered them their boots and protective clothing. David was adamant that he didn’t want anything to do with Winco. This
demonstrates the finality of their position and the respondent could not force them to resume work, even though their work was needed.
said the applicants then did nothing until sending their medical certificates later on 1 December 2011. Mr Behrens had only ever
expressed that a problem might exist if Hamid couldn’t sit in a car for over an hour. He did not dismiss him and both of their
refusals to work for Winco were stated again 3 hours later.
said in summary that the evidence of the Behrens should be preferred and that was the end of the matter - FWA had no jurisdiction
to deal with the applicants’ claims of unfair dismissal.
noted that the efforts by Mrs Behrens to seek to resolve the situation were consistent with the Company having ongoing work for the
applicants. Also of concern was the fact that the versions of the conversations recorded in the applicants’ statements were
identical. However, the most incredible evidence arose from the 100% corroboration of what was said outside the apartment when Hamid
said he travelled down two floors, unseen by anyone and crouched behind the balcony with a bad back. Mr
said that the applicants’ credit must surely be in question.
referred to other issues in the case, notably questions as to why the applicants hadn’t sought to adduce evidence in the form
of invoices or bank statements showing that the work performed for their own Company was minimal. He noted the evidence concerning
the expense claims and the timesheets and the admission that the applicants had not scanned into the University of NSW job site.
emphasised the respondent’s case was not based on allegations of fraud or other acquired knowledge; See:
Lane v Arrowcrest Pty Ltd [1991] AILR 39
. No submissions were obviously put about the Small Business Fair Dismissal Code because the respondent’s case was that the
applicants had not been dismissed, rather they had resigned.
put submissions in respect to the fairness of the situation and the lack of evidence as to any post termination of employment or income.
tendered a bundle of authorities in respect to:
a) Termination at the initiative of the employer;
b) Repudiation of the contract;
c) the Small Business Fair Dismissal Code;
d) Fabrication of records;
e) After acquired knowledge;
f) Mitigation; and
g) Compensation
In reply, Mr
said that the applicants seek $10,000 each in compensation based on their years of service. Mr
intervened and submitted that the positions of the applicants are different and this would warrant a different and separate consideration
of the tests for compensation under s 392 of the Act. Mr
also foreshadowed a costs application.
CONSIDERATION
The applicants maintained that they were ‘terminated on the employer’s initiative’ while the respondent argued
that the applicants had resigned their employment. There was no suggestion that the applicants were forced to resign. Indeed, their
evidence was that at no time had they done so. This being so means that this case does not involve considerations of constructive
Resolving the parties’ opposing evidentiary positions was not assisted by direct language or any documentary corroboration
of either party’s position. Ultimately, it might be observed that the evidentiary foundation of this case was hopelessly conflicted.
It rests entirely on whose version of the conversations of 30 November 2011 is to believed. This has been a task not without some
difficulty, although my conclusions in this respect are fortified by some of the other surrounding evidence.
That said, much reliance was placed on the email headed ‘Immediate Employment Termination Notice’ as a dismissal initiated
by Winco. While this heading is an unfortunate characterisation of what had occurred, it must be read in the context of what is said
in the letter itself. There is no doubt that the subsequent wording reflects what Mrs Behrens believed had occurred. The heading
of the letter reflects Mrs Behrens’ lack of human resources expertise, rather than a direction that the applicants had been
or were dismissed at the employer’s initiative.
As I just mentioned, direct and unequivocal language such as ‘
’ or conversely ‘
you are dismissed
’ was not used by either party. Simply put, the applicants’ claim Mr Behrens had said:
You are not useful to me anymore. I can’t keep you employed anymore
On the other hand, both Mr and Mrs Behrens said that both applicants had said more than once:
I don’t want to work for Winco anymore
Each party denies the others’ assertions.
I accept that the language said to have been used by both parties supports the propositions which they respectively advance; that
is, the words alleged to have be used by Mr Behrens would constitute a dismissal at the initiative of the employer and alternatively,
the words alleged to have been used by Hamid, and allegedly confirmed by David, would constitute a freely given resignation.
Before resolving the evidentiary conflict, I refer to the decision in
Elgammal v BlackRange Wealth Management Pty Ltd
[2011] FWAFB 4038
where the Full Bench said:
‘It is adequate for us to indicate that we accept that when considering whether an employer has repudiated the contract the
test is not the employer’s actual intention, judged subjectively, but whether the conduct of the employer, judged objectively
by reference to the effect on a reasonable person evinced an intention to no longer be bound by the contract.’
Two earlier decisions of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission (‘AIRC’) are also worthy of mention in the present
context: In
Stubbs v Austar Entertainment Pty Ltd
[Print Q0008, 9 April 1998] the Full Bench said:
‘We do not doubt that Mr Stubbs believed he had good reason to resign. However, the fact that an employee has good reason to
resign does not of itself establish that the employment is not voluntarily left by the employee. To constitute termination at the
initiative of the employer the termination must be the direct or consequential result of ‘some action on the part of the employer
intended to bring the employment to an end and perhaps action which would, on any reasonable view, probably have that effect . .
Rheinburger v Huxley Marketing
, 16 April 1996 per Moore J].’
A Full Bench of the AIRC in
ABB Engineering Construction Pty Limited v Doumit
[Print N6999, 9 April 1996] said:
‘Often it will only be a narrow line that distinguishes conduct that leaves an employee no real choice but to resign employment,
from conduct that cannot be held to cause a resultant resignation to be a termination at the initiative of the employer. But narrow
though it be, it is important that that line be closely drawn and rigorously observed. Otherwise, the remedy against unfair termination
of employment at the initiative of the employer may be too readily invoked in circumstances where it is the discretion of a resigning
employee, rather than that of the employer, that gives rise to the termination. The remedies provided in the Act are directed to
the provision of remedies against unlawful termination of employment. Where it is the immediate action of the employee that causes
the employment relationship to cease, it is necessary to ensure that the employer's conduct, said to have been the principal contributing
factor in the resultant termination of employment, is weighed objectively. The employer's conduct may be shown to be a sufficiently
operative factor in the resignation for it to be tantamount to a reason for dismissal. In such circumstances, a resignation may fairly
readily be conceived to be a termination at the initiative of the employer. The validity of any associated reason for the termination
by resignation is tested. Where the conduct of the employer is ambiguous, and the bearing it has on the decision to resign is based
largely on the perceptions and subjective response of the employee made unilaterally, considerable caution should be exercised in
treating the resignation as other than voluntary.’
After carefully assessing all of the surrounding circumstances and drawing conclusions on the balance of probabilities, I am satisfied
that the truth of the matter lies with Mr and Mrs Behrens versions of the conversations on 30 November 2011.
It follows that I conclude that Hamid had told Mr Behrens that he would not work for Winco anymore and David later told Mr and Mrs
Behrens that he agreed with his brother and would likewise not work for Winco anymore. These words were not uttered in the heat of
the moment, indeed they were repeated several times. The resignations were not sought to be withdrawn subsequently, despite attempts
by Mr Behrens to have the applicants respond to emails and phone messages.
I am fortified to the above findings by the following observations and conclusions:
a) Given the busy time of year and the Company’s full forward schedule, it made absolutely no sense why the respondent would
dismiss the applicants knowing they had no one else in NSW to do the work. It just doesn’t make any logical sense.
b) The evidence of the two applicants as to what was said in the various conversations was not just corroborative, but exactly ‘word
for word’ as to what was said. Corroboration is one thing, but to have numerous detailed conversations recalled exactly ‘word
for word’ by two persons, raises concerns as to collaboration of the evidence. I consider it highly implausible that two persons
could remember, let alone recall exactly the same words used in a number of conversations, including conversations of at least 8
c) The undisputed phone records of the respondent record the first conversation as lasting for 8 minutes. On the applicants’
version of events, the conversation lasted for a considerably shorter period of time. In my view, a conversation of 8 minutes would
be explicable in the context of Mr Behrens inquiry of the applicants about the Canberra job, where they were, how David had injured
himself, Mr Behrens explaining the requirement for one of them to accompany him to Port Macquarie the next day, Hamid arguing as
to why he couldn’t drive for longer than 1 hour, Mr Behrens saying then they had a problem and Hamid indicating he would not
work for Winco any more.
d) It seems strangely co-incidental that both applicants complained of workplace injuries as the reasons why neither of them could
go to Port Macquarie the next day when, over the past 5 years, there had been no issue with Hamid driving for longer than one hour,
particularly when he was required to do so on a regular, if not daily, basis.
e) If Hamid believed he had been dismissed on 30 November 2011, it makes no sense for him to have told Mr Behrens on 2 December 2011
that he would be in for work on 5 December 2011. This is even more curious, given the unanswered emails and messages Mr Behrens made
to the applicants, inquiring as to the situation in the few days after 30 November 2011.
f) There had been a long history of trust in the applicants, and a friendship between them and the Behrens. There had been a willingness
to accommodate their specific circumstances and issues: For example:
1. David was sent to Germany to be trained at the Company’s expense.
2. David’s wife accompanied him, over a lengthy period and at the Company’s expense, to Adelaide for a job.
3. Hamid continued to receive full pay after a non work related injury.
4. Hamid was given extended leave to deal with personal issues in Iran.
5. Mr and Mrs Behrens had attended the weddings of both applicants.
g) Given what I have just referred to, it seems entirely understandable that in Mrs Behrens call to Hamid at around 7:30pm, she would
have expressed surprise at what her husband had told her and sought to resolve the matter by asking them to reconsider their decision
not to work for Winco any longer.
h) If it was truly the intention of the respondent to dismiss the applicants on 30 November 2011, it would seem to be a very awkward
and problematic construction of events to secure that outcome. It would assume that the Port Macquarie travel was part of a preconceived
pretext to dismiss them. This does not sit comfortably with the facts that, firstly, the Port Macquarie job was only known of the
day before, secondly, Mr Behrens only required one, and not both, of the brothers to attend Port Macquarie with him, and thirdly
Mrs Behrens was in on the ploy, but still tried to salvage the situation and then, on the applicants’ case, tried to force
the applicants to sign resignation letters. This set of circumstances has a sense of unreality and implausibility about it.
i) There was no explanation given or retraction from the applicants in light of the objective evidence that showed that Mr Behrens
could not have made a phone call to David’s phone at 6pm in which it was alleged comments were made about his nationality.
I do not believe that this call as alleged by the applicants was ever made. The independent evidence (the phone records) discloses
only two calls to David’s phone at 5:09pm and 6:31pm. In the latter call, Mr Behrens indicated that he and his wife would
be coming to pick up the van.
I make two other specific findings. Firstly, I do not accept the evidence of the applicants that Mrs Behrens had sought to force
the applicants’ resignations. I found Mrs Behrens to be a witness of credit, particularly given her regret and apology for
her unfortunate outburst in the 12 February email. I accept her evidence that she had not sought to force the applicants’ resignations
when she arrived to pick up the van and tools, or at any other time.
Secondly, I have serious doubts that Hamid was even at his brother’s apartment when the Behrens came for the van and tools.
Was it necessary for him to corroborate what his brother said in another phone conversation in the apartment or what was said outside
the apartment?
It seems highly suspect that it wasn’t until these proceedings that Hamid said he used a key to enter a friend’s apartment
on the third floor of the building and crouched down and heard and saw everything which was said. If true, this was an omission of
some importance. Aside from the lateness of the introduction of this evidence, which on any view was significant, it seems extraordinary
a) Someone with serious back pain would have crouched down to hide behind the railing;
b) No one else saw him there;
c) His brother does not record anything about this in his written statement and nor does he;
d) Hamid claims he overheard a third phone conversation between his brother and Mrs Behrens in his brother’s apartment but,
unlike all the other earlier calls, he didn’t identify himself as being there; and
e) Hamid’s friend lived below his brother and just happened to be away and had given Hamid his keys.
H D Electrical - the applicants’ company
Putting all the above matters aside, there is one issue which dominated these proceedings and it was one which I found particularly
troubling. It may well account for the applicants’ decision to cease working for the respondent.
Despite the applicants’ insistence of only performing minor handyman jobs at his apartment block outside of work time, which
I found singularly unconvincing, there raises in my mind a distinct possibility that the discrepancies in their timesheets, when
compared with other of the objective evidence, such as phone, site and toll records, may have been related to the establishment of,
and ratcheting up of, their Company’s activities. While I hasten to add, like Mr
that I refrain from describing these discrepancies as ‘fraudulent’ or ‘criminal’, the evidence, to my mind,
was most alarming and disconcerting.
What the evidence makes clear is that:
a) The applicants had established a joint partnership Company prior to 30 November 2011 with its own ABN.
b) The applicants did not advise their employer of this Company’s activities, let alone seek permission to operate their Company
which, on any view, was in direct competition with Winco’s business.
c) The Company had an elaborate and detailed website with an email address and phone contacts for the brothers and, cheekily, included
photos of work performed on Winco’s jobs.
d) As at 30 November 2011, the Company’s account had an amount of $8031 in credit. The applicants produced no evidence of the
income and expenditure from this account prior to 30 November 2011.
e) Curiously, despite David informing the Tribunal in June 2012 that he could produce a notebook from which he transferred their hours
of work to their timesheets, he later explained that the notebook could not be found.
What I found particularly disturbing was the applicant’s explanation for the discrepancies in their timesheets compared to
the Multiplex site access records. Of 33 days claimed for work on the Multiplex job, site access records reveal access by David
of 12 days and by Hamid of 6 days. The main explanation offered was that they would often gain access by a backdoor which was not
security coded.
I find this explanation utterly unbelievable. It means that the very important and fundamental Occupational Health and Safety purpose
of ensuring that all employees who access building sites can be accounted for in an emergency, would be effectively nullified and
made completely worthless. If the applicants had gained such access, it would obviously mean that unauthorised access would be available
to many other employees or contractors. For a major building contractor, such as Multiplex, to condone such a practice would be unconscionable
and untenable, and I daresay for them, vigorously contested.
In my opinion, the applicants’ explanations are so implausible as to be ridiculous. It is not supported by a skerrick of corroborative
evidence. It is more likely that Multiplex’s records are a true reflection of when the applicants were on the site. That being
so, is it any wonder that the respondent had serious reservations with the applicants’ conduct in light of the revelations
it discovered after their resignations?
stressed that the respondent had adduced evidence that they constantly checked the applicants’ timesheets and expenses. He
queried that if the respondent so closely monitored the applicants’ records, why did it take them till after 30 November 2011
to discover major discrepancies? This was nothing more than a ‘red herring’. The issue was not that the respondent condoned
such behaviour, but that the discrepancies were blatantly obvious and unexplainable.
Moreover, it seems plain enough that the Behrens had a high degree of trust in the applicants. While they might have discovered
the occasional petrol purchase or toll charge on the weekend, the extent of the discrepancies only became apparent by a closer examination
of the correlation between their submitted timesheets with other of the objective evidence.
made another obvious submission: if the applicants were not on site for such long periods, how did the work get done? This is a reasonable
question to ask. However, I think it can be answered by understanding the nature of subcontracting in the building industry.
I am certain the applicants had not expected the more intensive examination of the records which revealed the extent of the discrepancies.
However, it is not possible, on the state of the evidence, to make findings linking the exposed discrepancies with the performance
of work for their own Company. Nevertheless, huge gaps of non attendance at Winco jobs, must at least raise an inference that that
is precisely what was happening.
Against this background, even if I be wrong as to my conclusion that the applicants resigned and FWA has no jurisdiction to determine
these applications, I think it highly unlikely, given the nature and scale of the incontrovertible evidence of the timesheet discrepancies,
that their dismissals (if so found) would be found to be unfair by FWA. One might be able to give the benefit of the doubt if there
were two of three discrepancies, with explicable explanation, but so many inconsistencies demonstrate a pattern of behaviour and
conduct which would, in my opinion, constitute a valid reason for the applicants’ dismissals. The applicants were in flagrant
breach of their duty to ensure the trust and confidence of their employer.
It was not expressly argued by Mr
(and it is unnecessary for FWA to make findings in this respect) that an employer is able to rely on conduct discovered post a termination
of employment to justify a dismissal, so long as the facts of that conduct existed at the time of dismissal. However, this is a commonly
accepted industrial principle. So much so is evident from the authorities of this Tribunal and other Courts.
In a frequently quoted Federal Court judgment
Lane v Arrowcrest Group
at page 456:
‘In my opinion it is still open to an employer to justify a dismissal by reference to facts not known to the employer at the
time of the dismissal, but discovered subsequently, so long as those facts concern circumstances in existence when the decision was
made. Whether the decision can be so justified will depend on all the circumstances. A circumstance, likely to favour the decision
to dismiss, would be that fraud or dishonesty of the employee had cause or contributed to the employer’s state of ignorance.’
Metricon Homes Pty Ltd v S Bradley
[2009] AIRCFB 374. The principle in
Lane v Arrowcrest
was adopted by the High Court in
Byrne v Australian Airlines
[1995] CLR 410
I am satisfied that the applicants resigned their employment with Winco Systems on 30 November 2011. As there was no dismissal of
the applicants for the purposes of s 385 of the Act, FWA has no jurisdiction to consider the merits of the applications for remedies
from alleged unfair dismissal. Specifically, it is unnecessary for FWA to consider whether the applicants’ terminations of
employment were ‘
harsh, unreasonable or unjust
’. The applications must be dismissed for want of jurisdiction. Orders to this effect will be published contemporaneously with
this decision. Any application as to costs must be made in accordance with s 402 of the Act.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
for the applicants
of Counsel, for the respondent
Hearing details:
22 October, 31 October, 7 November
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR532749>
No downloadable files available