Tenants' Union of Queensland Inc, Tenants' Union of NSW Co-op Ltd, and complainants A and B v TICA Default Tenancy Control Pty Ltd [2004] PrivCmrACD 1 (16 April 2004)
Complaint Determination No. 1 of
Federal Privacy
Commissioner
Table of Contents
Determination No. 1 of 2004
1. Made under the
section 52.
Parties to the Complaint
Complainants
2. The Tenants’ Union of Queensland Inc, Tenants’ Union of NSW Co-op
Ltd, and complainants A and
3. TICA Default Tenancy Control Pty
4. This determination relates to a complaint lodged by the Tenants’ Union
of Queensland Inc (TU QLD) in February 2003
5. The respondent to the complaint is TICA Default Tenancy Control Pty Ltd
(TICA). As set out below (see [10]) TICA’s business
activities involve
the collection, use and disclosure of personal information. It is complained
that certain acts and/or practices
of TICA may be an interference with the
6. The complaint is a representative complaint, lodged pursuant to
. TU QLD has identified the class of member to the representative
complaint as:
former tenants, who incur charges from TICA in order for them to access
information about their listing on the database.
7. I also received complaints made by the Tenants’ Union of NSW Co-op Ltd
(TU NSW), complainant A and Complainant B. The individuals
the subject of those
complaints fell within the class of members identified by TU QLD and,
accordingly, those complaints were dealt
with as a part of the representative
complaint brought by TU QLD
8. I decided to investigate the relevant acts and practices of TICA pursuant to
, being satisfied that there was an act or practice
which may have been an interference with the privacy of an individual and that
the complaints received were validly made under
9. I am also satisfied that the requirements for the making of a representative
complaint, set out in
, have been
Background,
allegations and remedies sought
10. TICA is one of a number of organisations that
operates what is known as a tenancy database. Its Tenancy History Database
personal information about many thousands of Australians relating to
alleged defaults on tenancy agreements, including failures to
pay rent or damage
to property. It also holds personal information about applicants for tenancies
in what is known as the Enquiries
of TICA and makes the personal information it holds on its
11. I understand that TICA has in place arrangements for individuals to access
their personal information held by TICA in two
for a charge of $11.00 which must be paid at the time of making a request for
access by either bank cheque or money order.
Personal cheques are not accepted.
A written response is sent to individuals within 10 working days (or up to 14
days elapsed days
as advised by TICA on its webpage ‘Courtesy advice from
TICA’.). The written response will either advise an individual
is no personal information held in relation to them on the relevant database(s),
or provide them with a copy of the personal
information that is held in relation
to them; or
via a telephone call to 190 222
0346 (I will refer to this as ‘the 190 number’). Calls to the 190
number are charged to
the individual at a rate of $5.45 per minute inclusive of
GST ($327 per hour). Higher rates apply from mobile or pay phones. The
advised of the charges at the beginning of the call and must elect to continue
the call before the $5.45 per minute charge
is imposed.
12. When seeking access to their personal information, individuals must provide
TICA with their full name, date of birth, driver’s
licence number,
passport number if applicable and their current address and contact telephone
13. Personal information obtained from individuals in the course of seeking
access to their personal information is not added to
the Enquiries or History
14. The complainants alleged that the amount TICA charges individuals for access
to personal information is excessive. Further,
the complainants argued that
both the 190 number and the current mail system impose a charge for requesting
access to personal information.
Due to the number of issues canvassed in this
complaint I have chosen to explain the nature of each allegation in detail
discussing my findings.
Section 38(2)
, requires amongst other things that a
complaint identify the remedy sought. The remedy sought by the complainants is a
declaration
by the Federal Privacy
Commissioner:
prohibiting
any charges by TICA when tenants or former tenants contact the company by
telephone during business hours;
requiring TICA to provide
information to a tenant or former tenant about their
(a) electronically or by mail – for no cost; or
(b) by other means – only after approval by the Privacy Commissioner and
on a marginal cost-recovery basis;
TICA to publicise on its website and in other appropriate materials the fact
that access to information by a tenant can
be provided free of charge
electronically or on a cost recovery
16. The NPPs in Schedule 3 of the
outline standards for handling
personal information that legally bind organisations, as defined by
Section 13A
specifies that an act or practice of an
organisation will be an interference with the privacy of an individual if,
amongst other
things, the act or practice breaches an NPP in relation to
personal information that relates to that individual.
18. Most relevant to the present complaint are NPPs 3 and 6.
19. NPP 3 provides:
An organisation must take reasonable steps to make sure that the personal
information it collects, uses or discloses is accurate,
complete and
up-to-date.
20. NPP 6 provides that:
6.1 If an organisation holds personal
information about an individual, it must provide the individual with access to
the information
on request by the individual, except to the extent that:
(a) in the case of personal information other than health
information--providing access would pose a serious and imminent threat to
life or health of any individual; or
(b) in the case of health information--providing access would pose a serious
threat to the life or health of any individual; or
(c) providing access would have an unreasonable impact upon the privacy of
other individuals; or
(d) the request for access is frivolous or vexatious; or
(e) the information relates to existing or anticipated legal proceedings
between the organisation and the individual, and the information
would not be
accessible by the process of discovery in those proceedings; or
(f) providing access would reveal the intentions of the organisation in
relation to negotiations with the individual in such a way
as to prejudice those
negotiations; or
(g) providing access would be unlawful; or
(h) denying access is required or authorised by or under law; or
(i) providing access would be likely to prejudice an investigation of possible
unlawful activity; or
(j) providing access would be likely to
(i) the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or punishment of
criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing a penalty
or sanction or breaches
of a prescribed law; or
(ii) the enforcement of laws relating to the confiscation of the proceeds of
(iii) the protection of the public revenue; or
(iv) the prevention, detection, investigation or remedying of seriously improper
conduct or prescribed conduct; or
(v) the preparation for, or conduct of, proceedings before any court or
tribunal, or implementation of its orders;
behalf of an enforcement body; or
(k) an enforcement body performing a lawful security function asks the
organisation not to provide access to the information on the
providing access would be likely to cause damage to the security of
6.2 However, where providing access would reveal evaluative information
generated within the organisation in connection with a commercially
decision-making process, the organisation may give the individual an explanation
for the commercially sensitive decision
rather than direct access to the
information.
Note: An organisation breaches subclause 6.1 if it relies on subclause 6.2 to
give an individual an explanation for a commercially
sensitive decision in
circumstances where subclause 6.2 does not apply.
6.3 If the organisation is not required to provide the individual with access
to the information because of one or more of paragraphs
6.1(a) to (k)
(inclusive), the organisation must, if reasonable, consider whether the use of
mutually agreed intermediaries would
allow sufficient access to meet the needs
of both parties.
6.4 If an organisation charges for providing access to personal information,
those charges:
(a) must not be excessive; and
(b) must not apply to lodging a request for access.
6.5 If an organisation holds personal information about an individual and the
individual is able to establish that the information
is not accurate, complete
and up-to-date, the organisation must take reasonable steps to correct the
information so that it is accurate,
complete and up-to-date.
6.6 If the individual and the organisation disagree about whether the
information is accurate, complete and up-to-date, and the individual
organisation to associate with the information a statement claiming that the
information is not accurate, complete or up-to-date,
the organisation must take
reasonable steps to do so.
6.7 An organisation must provide reasons for denial of access or a refusal to
correct personal information.
Section 6D(1)
defines a small business as one with an
annual turnover of ‘$3,000,000 or less’.
Section 6D(3)
provides for a small business to be classed as ‘a small
business operator’ and therefore not subject to the
specified circumstances, including where an organisation trades in personal
information.
also provides that small businesses which are subject to the
would not be subject to the provisions of the NPPs until 21 December
2002. Consequently, when investigating this complaint I have
been restricted to
examining evidence relating to the acts and practices of TICA which occurred
after 21 December 2002
except where
23. In this regard with respect to small businesses NPP 6 applies to personal
information collected after 21 December
With respect to providing
individuals with access to personal information it is open to TICA to deny
access to individuals on the
basis that personal information was collected
before 21 December 2002. However, I understand that in practice TICA does not
a distinction between personal information collected pre and post
21 December 2002 and is aiming to operate the whole database
by providing access to all personal information held.
provides that after I have investigated a
complaint I may make a
determination:
the complaint; or
finding the complaint
substantiated and making a declaration that:
respondent has engaged in conduct constituting an interference with the privacy
of an individual and should not repeat or continue
such conduct; and/or
the respondent should perform any reasonable act or course of conduct to
redress any loss or damage suffered by the complainant;
the complainant is entitled to compensation for any loss or damage –
including injury to the complainant’s feelings or
humiliation suffered by
the complainant.
25. In my view it is also within my powers under
to make recommendations which will promote compliance with the NPPs.
Investigation
Section 40(1A)
provides that I must not investigate a
complaint where the complainant has not first complained to the respondent,
unless I consider
that it was not appropriate for the complainant to have done
so. In the present case, I am aware that TU QLD has had ongoing contact
TICA in relation to a number of privacy issues arising out of its activities and
that this contact may be considered to be by
way of ‘complaint’. To
the extent that the present complaint falls beyond those
‘complaints’ made to the
respondent, which I note have not resulted
in the resolution of these matters, I am satisfied that the complex nature of
raised and their significance for the rights of the people concerned
makes it inappropriate for them to be the subject of direct
complaint to the
respondent.
27. My Office’s investigation of this complaint involved the
advising the parties that I was opening an investigation into the complaint
section 40(1)
and inviting the parties to
gathering evidence and
considering information provided by TU QLD, TU NSW, the individual complainants
and TICA in submissions or
in response to matters raised by my staff or the
complainants;
providing the respondent
and the complainants with opportunities to comment on an initial preliminary
view on the complaint in September
visiting TICA’s premises to
discuss the issues raised in the complaint, to observe its database in practice
and gather additional
information about the operation of the
providing the parties with
the current Office position on the complaint in February 2004 following changes
in some aspects of the
views since September 2003 and extending an invitation to
make oral and/or written submissions;
holding a hearing on 3 March 2004
affording the parties the opportunity to appear before me – TU QLD and TU
NSW accepted the
invitation to appear at the
considering written and oral
submissions and gathering information to clarify claims made by the
providing the primary
representative complainant (TU QLD) and TICA with the opportunity to see
information and submissions provided
by the other party;
engaging an organisation specialising
in ‘mystery shopping’ to make a number of requests for access via
number to test the time taken to provide a response;
pursuant to
section 43(5)
and the principles of procedural fairness, providing the parties
with a revised preliminary view in March 2004 and a final opportunity
before I finalised the determination;
holding a further hearing on 8 April
2004 affording the parties the opportunity to appear before me – TICA
accepted the invitation
to appear at the hearing;
providing TICA and TU QLD with
copies of the submissions, excluding some material that involved personal
information of third parties,
made by the other party in response to my March
preliminary
considerations
28. Before setting out my findings in relation to this complaint I will make
some general comments about the context in which this
complaint is made.
29. Housing is essential for all people and is one of the basic human rights set
out in the Universal Declaration of Human
The operation of tenancy
individuals listed on the
tenancy databases, such as TICA, can be seen as a legitimate risk minimisation
for property managers.
30. A number of the NPPs relevant to this complaint require an assessment of
‘reasonableness’ (for example, the ‘reasonable
required of an organisation under NPP 3). I take the view that in making an
assessment of ‘reasonableness’,
it is appropriate to take into
account the purposes for which personal information is collected and the
consequences for the individuals
concerned. In this case I am satisfied that
tenancy databases, such as the one operated by TICA, do have an impact on an
individual’s
ability to obtain housing; my understanding is that this is
part of the intention when establishing such databases.
31. However, this is only one factor I have taken into account. I have also
considered the overall intention of the
including that business
needs to be able to operate efficiently and effectively and that the NPPs are
general principles and are
not prescriptive in how they apply.
32. It is relevant to note that this complaint is against TICA, not its members.
Accordingly, I will not consider how the NPPs apply
to the acts and practices of
its members. That would be the subject of separate investigation should such a
complaint be made against
a member I acknowledge TICA's request in its
submission in response to my March preliminary view that it be advised about
of its members that may be breaches of the
so that it can
assist to address these practices.
Small business provisions
33. I find that TICA is an ‘organisation’ as defined by
, and is accordingly bound by the NPPs.
34. TICA does not appear to fall within the exemption to the
applies to ‘small business
operators’.
‘small business’ in terms of the
, in that its annual
turnover is ‘$3,000,000 or less’. However, as TICA trades in
personal information, it does not appear
to fall within the definition of
‘small business operator’ by virtue of
section 6D(4)(c)
for access to personal information via mail
Complainants’
allegations
35. There are, in essence, two complaints in relation to the charge of $11.00
imposed by TICA for mail inquiries. The first is that
the charge is a charge
that applies to lodging a request for access to personal information, contrary
to NPP 6.4(b). The second is
that the charge is excessive, contrary to NPP
36. In support of the second aspect of this complaint, the complainants suggest
that the cost acts as a disincentive to individuals
to exercise their access
right. They allege that the mail charge does not reflect the actual cost to
TICA in providing mail access
to personal information. They further argue that
the cost of purchasing a money order (the cost of which is $2.50 Australia wide,
except in Western Australia where stamp duty increases the cost to $2.60) or a
bank cheque ($8.00) must be added to this charge,
raising the actual costs to
the individual to between $13.50 and $19.00.
37. TICA denies that it charges a fee for the lodgement of access requests via
mail. Rather, they seek to characterise the charge
as being one for the supply
of information, based on the fact that the provision of any information
(including the fact that no personal
information is held in relation to an
individual) requires the use of resources which amount to a cost to TICA.
38. TICA argues that a request for access is made, not when the individual
actively advises the organisation that they wish to access
their personal
information but when the individual seeks information about how they may obtain
access to their personal information.
For example TICA states that when an
individual searches the TICA website for information about access methods
‘the individual
is seeking access via our website and as such is
requesting access. The individual is advised via our website on how access can
obtained and therefore the request is made prior to the advice on how access
is obtained. The request via the website is free of
charge’. Another
example provided by TICA is as follows: ‘The individual obtains
information from tenancy advocacy groups,
government departments and so on about
access. That information is obtained free of charge and the individual is
advised how to access
and the costs for access’.
39. TICA further claims that the charge is not excessive as it reflects the
costs incurred to provide the mail access service. TICA
also claim that the cost
is not priced in an attempt to, nor does it, discourage individuals from making
access requests.
Does the charge
apply to lodging a request for access?
40. The ability of individuals to gain access to personal information about
themselves is critical to their ability to exercise the
rights to privacy
provided by the
. NPP 6.4(b) requires that organisations which hold
personal information about individuals allow requests for access to be made
applying a charge for ‘lodging’ such a request.
41. There has been no judicial consideration of NPP 6.4(b), or the issue of what
is a charge for ‘lodging a request for access’.
I am of the view
that the proper approach is to consider the ordinary meaning of the expression.
In my view, a charge which is payable
upon making a request, without which no
action will be taken in processing that request (including making a
determination of whether
or not any information is held in relation to that
person) is a charge which ‘[applies] to lodging a request for
42. This does not prevent TICA from imposing a charge for access to personal
information and requiring its payment ‘up front’.
Such a charge
could be imposed at a stage at which it is determined that personal information
is, in fact, held in relation to a
person. While I do not encourage charges to
be imposed for access to personal information, for the reasons set out below, it
that such a charge is permissible under NPP 6.4 provided that it is not
43. In my March preliminary view I suggested that one way to avoid the present
problem may be for there to be a mechanism (by phone,
email, internet, fax, or
mail) by which individuals are able to find out, for no charge, whether or not
their personal information
is held by TICA, at which point they are either
informed that no personal information is held by TICA or that personal
information
is held and that if they wish to have access to that information, a
fee is payable. It is relevant to note that such personal information
electronically and this initial assessment is unlikely to be onerous (although I
accept that it cannot be said to be without
any cost to TICA). I note also that
if such requests are received over the phone or by email, the process of
notification that personal
information is held and that a charge is payable for
access is made particularly easy and efficient. In any event, it may be that
there is a minimum level of service required to comply with NPP 6.4(b).
44. TICA responded by arguing that such a mechanism would necessitate the
introduction of an additional database, the ‘Public
individual sought access’ to ensure
that individuals are not making access
requests that are frivolous or vexatious. TICA submits that such a database
would be necessary
‘so that the free service the Commissioner would be
inflicting upon TICA could not be abused’. TICA further argues that
implementation of such a database would increase the time taken to provide
access and would be likely to increase the cost of
access borne by
individuals.
45. I stress that the mechanism proposed in paragraph 44 is a suggested
resolution based upon TICA’s current operations and
is not directive. I am
not convinced, however, that there would be any need for an additional database
to be created to prevent ‘abuse’
of the ‘free service’.
46. Although NPP 6.1(d) provides that organisations can deny access on the basis
that a request is frivolous or vexatious, there
is no obligation on
organisations to create such a ‘Public Inquiry’ database nor do
organisations have to screen each
access request to determine if it is frivolous
or vexatious. The decision to take this course of action would be TICA’s.
Organisations
that are engaging in such a practice would need to be convinced
that the collection of this personal information is necessary to
their functions
or activities and be careful to ensure that this personal information is used in
accordance with NPP 2. In particular
I would be carefully monitoring such
organisations to ensure that this personal information was not used for unlawful
secondary purposes.
47. I find that the $11.00 charge in its current form is a charge which applies
to lodging a request for access and is a breach of
Is the charge for access
48. As a consequence of finding that the $11.00 charge in its current form is a
charge which applies to lodging a request for access
and is a breach of NPP
6.4(b) it may therefore not be strictly necessary for me to consider whether or
not the charge, in as far
as it could also be said to be a charge for providing
access to personal information, is excessive. However, the matter is the subject
of specific complaint and I have received significant submissions from both the
complainants and TICA on the issue. I will therefore
provide my findings.
49. A decision to charge for access to personal information is at the discretion
of an organisation. In my view it is preferable
that organisations do not charge
an access fee, or only do so where the organisation would incur substantial
costs in the provision
of access. This view is consistent with the Explanatory
Memorandum to the amendments to the
that introduced NPP 6 which
indicates that the intention of the section is to allow for organisations to
charge for work done only
where ‘substantial costs’ are
50. However, NPP 6.4 is unambiguous in saying that organisations
charge for access provided that charge is not excessive. The NPPs do not
specifically state that access charges can only be imposed
where substantial
costs have been incurred. While the Explanatory Memorandum is relevant in
understanding the terms of the
, I am ultimately bound by the terms
51. TU QLD compare TICA’s mail access charge to that of the consumer
credit reporting databases which provide access within
ten days for no cost.
However, credit reporting databases are required to provide access on these
terms by the Consumer Credit Code
of Conduct issued by the Federal Privacy
Commissioner under
section 18A
. There are no such specific
requirements in the NPPs nor is there a provision for the Federal Privacy
Commissioner to make this
a blanket requirement for all organisations. The
comparison drawn by the complainants does not, therefore, appear to be of much
assistance.
52. The complainants have also put to me that in making a finding about whether
the cost of providing access is excessive I need
to take into account the
economic circumstances of the individuals who are seeking access. In my opinion
this is a relevant consideration.
I accept that people are more likely to be
listed on a tenancy database if they are facing economic hardship as this will
more likely to default on rental payments or have an outstanding
53. I have also taken into account the potential importance of access to the
information on a tenancy database. An adverse listing
may prevent an individual
from obtaining housing. If such a listing is inaccurate, the ability to promptly
access the information
so as to be able to correct it may be vitally
54. In addition the complainants have argued that the assessment as to whether
the charge for access is excessive must also take
into account the fact that
TICA to date has not accepted personal cheques but rather has required payment
by money order or bank
cheque. I find that these additional costs (although
they are not part of the ‘charge’ imposed by TICA) are relevant
determining whether or not the charge is excessive in all of the circumstances.
Research by this Office indicates that the cost
of a bank cheque can vary from
$6.50 up to $15.00. The cost of a money order is $2.50, or $2.60 in WA.
55. I have also taken into account the costs to TICA in providing mail access to
personal information. In my view, the additional
marginal cost of providing
access is an important factor in determining whether or not a charge for access
to personal information
is excessive. There are, for example, the costs for
postage, stationery, staff time in confirming the individual’s identity,
staff time in searching the databases and staff time in preparing the material.
Nevertheless, it is relevant that TICA’s database
is intended to provide
prompt and easy access to the information it contains. It is not a system which
involves extensive documentary
records – it is an electronic database.
56. I have considered the charges that other organisations are making to provide
access, including for example the charges made for
providing access to health
records. These charges vary considerably.
57. I am also aware that some businesses offer a ‘no charge’ access
service for individuals who are willing to wait for
access to information (for
example for a period of 10 days), and a ‘premium’ service for which
a charge is incurred when
access is sought immediately. In my opinion, this
approach is a better practice and I would encourage TICA to consider providing
‘no charge’ means of providing access. TICA may wish to consider,
for example, providing access via secure email for
no cost. The cost of
providing this method of access is likely to be considerably less than providing
a written copy as there are
no costs for stationery or postage. However, it
must be remembered that the charge for a premium service must not be
58. In the course of my investigations I indicated a preliminary view that the
charge of $11.00 was not excessive. Having received
further submissions from the
complainants on this issue, having further considered the matters I have set out
above and based upon
TICA’s current operations, I find that, in all of the
circumstances, a charge of $11 for access
excessive and a breach of
NPP 6.4(a).
59. In communications between my Office and TICA throughout the course of this
investigation, TICA indicated that it may be possible
reduce its mail access
charge. A figure of $8.80 was suggested by TICA. Having assessed further
information that TICA has provided
at my request about its relevant marginal
costs, it is my view that a charge of $8.80 more accurately reflects
TICA’s costs
in providing mail access.
60. In discussions with my Office, TICA has agreed to investigate the provisions
of payment by credit card. Further, TICA indicated
it would consider accepting
requests for mail access via facsimile with payment by credit card. This
facsimile number would be advertised
on the TICA website and documentation. Such
changes would, in my opinion, be reasonable and sensible.
access to personal information via the 190 number
Complainants’
allegations
61. As in the case of the complaint made in relation to the $11.00 charge for
access to personal information via post, the complaint
in relation to the charge
for access to personal information via TICA’s 190 number ($5.45 per
minute) has basically two elements.
The first is that the charge (or a component
of it ) is a charge which applies to lodging a request for access, contrary to
NPP 6.4(b).
The second is that the charge is excessive, contrary to NPP
62. In support of its argument that the charge is excessive, the complainants
claim that the charge does not reflect the actual cost
to TICA in providing
telephone access to personal information. They also note that the cost acts as a
disincentive to individuals
to exercise their access
63. TICA acknowledges that the 190 number imposes a greater cost to the caller
when the call exceeds two minutes than would be the
case if the request was made
by mail. However, it argues that the phone access service is faster and
immediate, therefore the greater
cost is justified. TICA does not consider the
190 number charge for access to be excessive or a disincentive to persons
seeking access
to their personal information.
64. TICA states that the amount of gross income generated by the 190 service in
the period December 2000 to December 2002 was not
sufficient to cover the cost
of providing the 190 service. TICA contends that the reason it has office space
and non-directorial
staff is so individuals can access the database. It claims
that without the additional staff needed to provide the 190 access service
business could be run from a small home office. TICA has provided statistical
information showing that in the period February
1999 to February 2003 the
average 190 call time has decreased from 12.95 minutes to 3.76 minutes. TICA
claim that the reduced call
length is a result of IT upgrades. TICA itself does
not receive the full $5.45 per minute from calls made to the 190 number; a
substantial
proportion of this cost is received by telecommunications companies.
Does the charge apply to lodging a
request for access?
65. I note TICA’s claim that the 190 number generates revenue but not
profit. Nonetheless, in my opinion, NPP 6.4(b) prohibits
an organisation from
charging an individual for lodging a request for access to their personal
information, irrespective of whether
or not such a charge generates revenue or
66. The only way individuals can make a telephone request for access is by
incurring a $5.45 per minute charge. It is therefore my
finding that this is a
charge which applies to lodging a request for access, contrary to NPP 6.4(b).
67. While I am of the opinion that at present TICA does not provide any means of
accessing personal information without the payment
of a fee for lodging a
request for access to personal information, I would note that I consider it is
not a response to a breach
of NPP 6.4(b) that a person could seek access in
another way which does not attract a charge for lodging a request for access.
terms of NPP 6.4(b) would appear to be clear. If an organisation charges for
providing access to personal information, those charges
must not apply to
lodging such a request. I find that any charge that is properly viewed as
applying to lodging a request for access
is impermissible under the terms of NPP
Is the charge
68. As I noted above in the context of my findings in relation to the charge for
mail access, it may be unnecessary for me to consider
whether the charge for the
use of the 190 is excessive in as far as it relates to access to personal
information. However, for the
same reasons, I believe that it is appropriate
that I provide my findings on the issue.
69. I accept the complainants’ argument that the motive of the private
sector amendment to the
was to avoid discouraging individuals from
seeking access to their personal information. I also acknowledge that
individuals who
immediate access to their personal information and they have no idea how
the access process will take or how much the access charge will be. In my
opinion, individuals wanting to access their personal
information who may be on
modest incomes may be discouraged from seeking access if there are charges for
making a call and they have
no way of knowing in advance how much the call might
70. In considering this matter it is important to make a clear distinction
between costs of access via the 190 number and call costs
imposed as a result of
‘non-access conversations’. My examination is restricted to the
portion of the call that is relevant
to access. I find that any portion of a
call that deals with a discussion about tenancy laws is to be excluded from my
deliberations.
If a caller has obtained access and is subsequently discussing
general tenancy matters, this portion of the conversation will not
be relevant
to the amount of the access charge.
71. In considering if the access charge imposed by the 190 number is excessive I
am of the opinion that I should give weight to both
the per-minute cost of the
call and the length of the telephone call. It is the combination of these
factors that gives rise to
the actual cost incurred by individuals.
72. I am not in a position to make a finding as to how much each individual
forming a part of this representative complaint has been
charged by TICA to
access their personal information via the 190 number. Neither TICA nor TU Qld
suggested that I should attempt
such an exercise. The amount will vary in every
case depending upon the time taken.
73. However, in the course of investigating the complaint there was significant
discussion of
times taken to provide access and this is, in my
view, a useful starting point in assessing whether or not the charge for access
to personal information over the telephone is excessive.
74. TU QLD claims that the average call time to obtain access is more than 4
minutes 40 seconds. The cost for such a call is approximately
75. TICA initially claimed that calls to the 190 number for information on
listings last an average of two to three minutes. This
represents a cost of
$10.90 - $16.35.
76. In order to establish an independent assessment of the average time it takes
to obtain access via the 190 number I engaged a
market research company to
conduct an appropriate test. The result of that test was that the call times for
access to personal information
where the caller had their identification details
at hand and did not discuss any matters except access took an average length of
6 minutes and 3 seconds. The cost for such a call is in excess of $32.
77. TICA was provided with the opportunity to comment on the findings of the
market research company. TICA did not dispute the times
recorded by the market
research company. However, it did seek to explain why such results may have been
reached. TICA advised that
the length of access calls to the 190 have increased
since the commencement of this complaint. This is because TICA was initially
providing individuals with access to their personal information contained in the
Tenancy History database only. After advice from
my Office, TICA began
providing individuals with access to their personal information contained in
both the Enquiries database and
Tenancy History database. TICA explains that
additional time arising from searches of the Enquiries database account for the
discrepancy
between the initial time advised (two to three minutes) and the
average time found by the market research company. TICA concluded
estimation of time provided by TU QLD was ‘closer to being accurate’
than that provided by the market research
company because the latter estimation
was arrived at after the practices of TICA were changed to comply with the
78. I accept that compliance with the requirements of the
increased the time required to provide access to individuals’ personal
information. Nevertheless, the issue I am required
to consider is whether, in
all of the circumstances, the charges imposed by TICA for access are excessive.
It is no answer to this
question that access could be provided more cheaply if
TICA was not required to comply with the
. For the reasons set out
above, I have found that TICA is required to comply with the
79. On the evidence before me, I am satisfied that the individuals who are
members of the class of complainants to this complaint
are presently charged, on
average, $32 for access to their personal information via TICA’s 190
80. In assessing whether or not this charge is excessive I have considered the
factors set out above in the context of the charge
for mail access, in
particular:
seeking access to information from a tenancy database are more likely to have a
lower capacity to pay a charge;
impact of imposing an excessive charge for access is potentially significant as
it may make prompt access unaffordable for persons
of limited means who are
seeking to correct an incorrect record which may have the effect of denying them
access to housing; and
the relevant
marginal cost to the respondent of providing access will be an important
81. In the course of conducting this investigation, I raised with TICA my
concerns about the impact that the 190 telephone access
charge has on
individuals and sought detailed information about the marginal cost to TICA in
responding to a standard request for
access. During the investigation of this
complaint TICA offered to reduce the telephone access charge to $4.50 per minute
upon it current operations. This may indicate that there is room in
TICA’s cost structure to reduce the 190 access charges.
82. In all of the circumstances I find that the current charge of $5.45 per
minute for access via the telephone, resulting in an
average cost of $32, is
83. I therefore find that this aspect of the complaint is substantiated.
Pursuant to
section 52(1)(b)(i)(B)
, I declare that the
respondent, TICA, has engaged in conduct constituting an interference with the
the class of complainants. I further declare that
the respondent should not repeat or continue such conduct.
84. I am not of the view that I am able to prescribe the manner in which TICA
should act so as to avoid a repetition or continuation
of the conduct which I
have found to be a breach of the
. It would appear, however, that
TICA will be able to avoid continuing to charge an excessive amount for access
to personal information
on the telephone either by reducing the amount charged
per minute for access, or finding ways to reduce the time taken to provide
information to people making inquiries over the telephone, or both.
85. One ongoing concern that I have with TICA’s current method of charging
for telephone access is that there is no maximum
call cost. Setting a reasonable
maximum call cost would appear to be an effective way to avoid the imposition of
an excessive charge
for access, particularly in cases where, for whatever
reason, telephone access takes more than the average time.
section 52(1)(b)(ii)
I am able to make a
declaration that the respondent should perform any reasonable act to redress any
loss or damage suffered by class
members. There is not sufficient evidence
before me to determine the extent of the loss or damage suffered by class
members, either
in total or individually. In the circumstances I do not make any
declaration for compensation under
s 52(1)(b)(ii)
87. I note, however, that individuals have a means of redress through making an
individual complaint to my Office if they believe
that TICA has imposed an
excessive access charge via the 190 number. Individuals would need to supply
evidence that they sought access
to their personal information via the 190
number and that the cost of the call was
of personal information via the 190 number
Complainants’
allegations
88. The complainants alleged that the 190 number charges a fee for amending
personal information.
89. I agree with the complainants that where TICA is receiving a request to
amend information via the 190 number there is a charge
to the individual. NPP 3
imposes an obligation on organisations to take ‘reasonable steps’ to
make sure that the personal
information it collects, uses and discloses is
complete, accurate and up-to-date.
90. In addition NPP 6 requires organisation to take reasonable steps to amend
personal information that is proven to be inaccurate,
incomplete or
out-of-date.
91. It is not in my view taking ‘reasonable steps’ to charge
individuals for the time it takes to meet these obligations.
discussion of NPP 3 is provided in Determination No. 2 of 2004.
92. However, I find there is a mechanism whereby individuals can amend their
personal information, namely by mail. Although I acknowledge
that telephone
amendment is, in most cases, a swifter means of amendment, and there is a cost
incurred to the individual, in my opinion,
this cost incurred via the 190 number
is not specifically prohibited by the
and there is a no-cost method
of amendment available via mail. I do believe that this practice is contrary to
standard industry
practice and, I would urge TICA to provide a local call cost
method of resolving disputes and amending personal information, or to
individuals to deal with such matters via the phone at no cost to the
individual.
via members
Complainants’
allegations
93. TU NSW has complained that TICA does not allow its members (property
managers) to give personal information on the database directly
to individuals.
Whilst this would be a way that individuals could get access to their personal
information held by TICA (and at no
cost to TICA) this is not access from TICA
94. TICA claims that it has never prevented its members from providing
information to individuals about listings but has prohibited
members from
providing printed copies of listings as the member’s login information and
password is printed at the bottom of
95. I find that there is no obligation for TICA to provide individuals with
access to their personal information via property managers
and this is not a
breach of the
. However, I would certainly encourage such an
arrangement being set up, so long as individuals seeking access identify
(to ensure that inappropriate disclosure to third parties does not
Determination
96. I find that TICA has breached NPP 6.4(b) by charging individuals an $11.00
fee to lodge a request for access to their personal
information via mail. I
therefore find this element of the complaint substantiated and declare that TICA
has engaged in conduct constituting
an interference with the privacy of
individuals who are the members of the class identified in the complaint. I
declare that this
conduct should not be continued or repeated.
97. I find that TICA has breached NPP 6.4(a) by charging individuals an
excessive amount of $11.00 for access to their personal information
via mail. I
therefore find this element of the complaint substantiated and declare that TICA
has engaged in conduct constituting
an interference with the privacy of
individuals who are the members of the class identified in the complaint. I
declare that this
conduct should not be continued or repeated.
98. The complainants have asked me to make declarations requiring TICA to
provide access via specific methods. In my opinion, I
do not have the power to
do so under
section 52(1)(b)(i)(B)
. Having found that
TICA has engaged in conduct constituting an interference with the privacy of an
individual I am able to declare
that it should not repeat or continue that
conduct, but it does not appear that I have the power to otherwise prescribe how
should act.
99. However, based upon TICA’s present practices, I would recommend that
TICA charges no more than $8.80 for access to personal
information via mail
an alternate charging option, namely credit
maintain this charge for three
years from the date of this determination (subject to any legislative
requirement to do otherwise);
access within working ten days (that is the individuals receive their personal
information within ten days on
100. I find that TICA has breached NPP 6.4(b) by charging individuals a $5.45
per minute fee to lodge a request for access to their
personal information via
the 190 telephone number. I therefore find this element of the complaint
substantiated and determine that
TICA has engaged in conduct constituting an
interference with the privacy of individuals who are the members of the class
in the complaint. I declare that this conduct should not be continued
or repeated.
101. I find that TICA has breached NPP 6.4(a) by charging individuals an
excessive amount of $5.45 per minute for access to their
personal information
via TICA’s 190 number. I therefore find this element of the complaint
substantiated and determine that
TICA has engaged in conduct constituting an
interference with the privacy of individuals who are the members of the class
in the complaint. I declare that this conduct should not be
continued or repeated.
102. Based on TICA’s present practices, I would recommend that the 190
number access charge be reduced, at least to $4.50 per
minute for a period of
three years. I further recommend that lhe length of access calls be kept to a
minimum to ensure that the cost
does not become excessive, or alternatively that
a means by which call costs can be ‘capped’ be introduced. As noted
earlier individuals have a means of redress through making an individual
complaint to my Office if they believe that TICA has imposed
an excessive access
charge via the 190 number. Individuals would need to supply evidence that they
sought access to their personal
information via the 190 number and that the cost
of the call was excessive.
103. I find that the complaint in relation to TICA’s practice of amending
personal information via the 190 number is unsubstantiated
and is therefore
104. I find that the complaint in relation to TICA’s failure to provide
access to personal information via its members is unsubstantiated
therefore dismissed.
Federal Privacy Commissioner
Dated 16 April 2004
I note that
section 38C
gives me the power to amend a complaint so that it can be dealt with
as a representative complaint. In the event that it is necessary
to amend the
complaints received from TU NSW and the individuals concerned so as to make them
a part of the wider representative
complaint, I would do so pursuant to
TICA is not bound by an approved privacy code in terms of
section 13A(b)(ii)
Article 25 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights
http://www.un.org/Overview/rights.html
I note that TICA has been
offered the opportunity to make any submissions or provide any material to me in
relation to this exemption.
I have not received any submissions or material in
relation to this issue.
section 6D(4)(c)
does not prevent a body corporate from
being a ‘small business operator’ only because it discloses personal
information
with the consent of the individual, or as required or authorised
under legislation. I am not presently of the view that TICA has
the consent of
all of the individuals whose personal information appears on their database (in
particular, those individuals whose
personal information was collected before 21
December 2002) and is disclosed to TICA’s members. I note that TICA has
not claimed
that it does have such consent, although it has been given the
opportunity to do so.
Amendment (Private Sector) Bill 2000
Revised Explanatory Memorandum
http://scaleplus.law.gov.au/html/ems/0/2000/0/0642454531.htm.
Credit Reporting Code of Conduct and Explanatory Notes
, paragraphs 1.6
and 1.12, Privacy Commissioner March
I note that there is no
requirement in the NPPs for access to be provided within a specified timeframe
and that I have said, for
example in my Guidelines to the National Privacy
Principles, that it is generally reasonable for organisation to provide access
30 days. In the present case, however, given the nature of the database,
the information on it, the importance of access for individuals
and the fact
that access to housing may be at risk unless access (and correction) is achieved
quickly I consider that 10 days is
an appropriate time for providing access. It
is also my opinion that the time taken may be considered relevant in determining
or not a charge is ‘excessive’ in the circumstances.
No downloadable files available