Jones v Toben [2000] HREOCA 39 (5 October 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION ACT 1975
No. H97/120
JEREMY JONES AND MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL
OF AUSTRALIAN JEWRY ON BEHALF OF THOSE MEMBERS OF
THE JEWISH COMMUNITY OF
AUSTRALIA WHO ARE MEMBERS OF ORGANISATIONS AFFILIATED TO THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL
OF AUSTRALIAN JEWRY
Complainant
FREDRICK TOBEN ON BEHALF OF THE ADELAIDE INSTITUTE
REASONS FOR
DECISION OF
MS KATHLEEN McEVOY
INQUIRY COMMISSIONER
Hearing: Sydney
Date of hearing: 2 November 1998
Date of Decision: 5 October 2000
Appearances: Complainant: Mr Stephen Rothman SC
Respondent: In
1. INTRODUCTION
This inquiry arises out of a complaint made on 31 May 1996 to
the Race Discrimination Commissioner (“the Commissioner”)
Human Rights & Equal Opportunity Commission (“the Commission”)
by Jeremy Jones, the Executive Vice President
of the Executive Council of
Australian Jewry (“ECAJ”), against the Adelaide Institute. The
complaint alleged the Adelaide
Institute had published material on its World
Wide Website “which constitutes malicious anti-Jewish propaganda”.
complaint alleged the material published on the website was contrary to
section 18C
Discrimination Act 1975
(“the Act”).
The Commissioner enquired into this complaint but considered it was not
amenable to conciliation and referred it to a public inquiry
pursuant to section
24E(1)(a) of the Act on 10 April 1997. The reference was accompanied by a
report from the Commissioner which
included the downloaded contents of the
website as at 31 May 1996.
The matter did proceed to a public hearing which was conducted by me in
Sydney on 2 November 1998 pursuant to section 25A of the Act.
However, the
process of the conduct of the inquiry of this matter was protracted and complex,
and in some respects relevant to the
substantive consideration of this
complaint. Accordingly, I shall set out in some detail the processes of this
inquiry as well as
its substance.
Pre-hearing Procedures
Prior to the public hearing into
this matter I endeavoured to identify and clarify the matters the subject of
this inquiry; the process
by which the inquiry would be held, including the
location of the inquiry, the evidence to be presented and the identity of the
and generally to ensure the matter was ready for the public hearing
once this occurred. To this end I convened a number of directions
conferences
for the parties, both by telephone and in person. I received numerous written
submissions in particular from the respondent,
and in particular a large number
of witness statements relating to the evidence which he wished to place before
me at the inquiry.
On 24 October 1997 I published a preliminary decision which
dealt with a number of these matters. The complaint was originally
listed for a
public hearing for 15-19 December 1997, but shortly before this date, Dr
Fredrick Toben, on behalf of the respondent,
indicated the respondent was
withdrawing from the proceedings, and the inquiry did not proceed and the
hearing dates were vacated.
The hearing was re-listed for 2 and 3 November
1998, and Dr Toben advised he would not attend. However, on the day of the
Dr Toben did attend at the inquiry.
The first directions conference was held by telephone on 18 June 1997. Dr
Fredrick Toben, the Director of the Adelaide Institute,
appeared on behalf of
the Adelaide Institute, and Mr Jones for himself. At that hearing I made
directions that the hearing, when
it was held, would be in public, and would be
in Sydney as the place where the website had been accessed and the complaint
Dr Toben objected to the hearing being in Sydney as it presented
difficulties for himself as he is located in Adelaide. However
he indicated a
number of witnesses whom he wished to call were from elsewhere in Australia or
overseas, and he might require evidence
to be given by telephone or video link.
At that conference there was some discussion as to the precise identity for the
of the legislation of both the complainant and the respondent, and I
invited written submissions on these matters to be made. Such
submissions were received by me from the complainant on 9 July 1997 and the
respondent on 1 August 1997.
In the complainant’s written submission of 9 July 1997, Mr Jones
identified the specific acts of which he complained by referring
to specific
aspects of material contained in the respondent’s website. He also made
submissions on the appropriate identification
of the complainant. Dr Toben
responded to that submission and also provided to the Commission a witness list
identifying 36 witnesses
whom he proposed to call in the course of the inquiry.
He subsequently added two more witnesses to this list. He also formally
leave to video record any further proceedings.
A further directions
conference was convened for 30 September 1997. This conference was in person,
but at that time I directed, pursuant
to section 25H(2) of the Act, that the
directions conference be held in private. This direction was made against the
objection of
Dr Toben, but my view was that it is normal to hold a directions
conference in private as its purpose is to deal with procedural
issues in the
preparation of the matter for public inquiry. I made it clear that direction
did not affect the earlier direction
I had made that the hearing into the
substance of Mr Jones’ complaint would be held in public. At that
directions conference
I gave leave to both parties to be legally represented
pursuant to section 25G of the Act. Mr Jones was represented at that conference
by Mr Stephen Rothman SC. Dr Toben continued to represent the Adelaide
Institute. At the commencement of that conference I rejected
request to video record the proceedings as the matter was already being
transcribed by an accredited and pre-arranged
court reporting service, and I
regarded that as the appropriate formal record of the proceedings. There were
also a number of other
persons present in the hearing room at that conference,
and it was my view each person individually would have to consent to the
recording should I have permitted it to proceed. I note Dr Toben had not raised
this issue prior to the listing of the matter
for the directions conference.
At that conference Dr Toben sought a direction from me that the matter be
returned to the Commissioner for conciliation processes
to be put in place. I
rejected that request as the Act makes it clear that once a matter is referred
to the Commission for inquiry
the Hearing Commissioner is bound to conduct that
inquiry: see section 25A(1) which directs “the Commission
hold an inquiry into each complaint or matter referred to
it” (my emphasis). I noted I am empowered in the course of an inquiry
attempt to resolve a complaint by conciliation (see section 25Q). However, it
was clear at the directions conference Mr Jones
was not prepared to engage in
any conciliation processes at this stage of the inquiry in the absence of any
new basis for conciliation
being offered by Dr Toben. I took the view that
where one party was not willing to engage in conciliation and no basis has been
proposed for resolution of the complaint, to direct a further conciliation
process would not constitute a reasonable step “to
effect an amicable
settlement” of the complaint. When I made that direction Dr Toben left
the hearing room and refused to
further participate in that directions
conference. It continued in his absence.
I made some directions following that conference, having considered the
written and oral submissions of the complainant, and the written
submissions of
the respondent received prior to the conference. I published the reasons for
some of those directions in a preliminary
decision dated 24 October 1997. In
that determination I dealt with the following matters: that the complaint was to
be classified
as a representative complaint pursuant to section 25L of the Act;
that the complainant was properly therefore identified as “Jeremy
and members of the Committee of Management of the Executive Council of
Australian Jewry, on behalf of those members of the
Jewish Community of
Australia who are members of organisations affiliated to the Executive Council
of Australian Jewry”, and
that the respondent was appropriately identified
as “Fredrick Toben on behalf of the Adelaide Institute”. The dates
for the public inquiry were set for 15-19 December 1997 to be held in
Two other matters were clarified in the course of that directions conference.
Prior to leaving the conference, Dr Toben confirmed
he was responsible for
placing the material which appears on the Adelaide Institute website, and that
he took responsibility generally
for any acts which could be said to be ascribed
to the Adelaide Institute, an unincorporated association of which he is
The complainant also identified the relief sought from this Commission in the
written submission filed prior to the conference and
confirmed at the
conference. Mr Jones stated no financial compensation was sought as a
consequence of the establishment of the complaint,
but the complainant sought
three directions from the Commission: the withdrawal of the allegedly offending
material from the Internet
site; a direction that the material was not to be
published or re-published elsewhere; and an apology from Dr Toben on behalf of
the Adelaide Institute, as well as a statement to be included on the website
concerning any finding of unlawful behaviour by this
Commission.
directed Dr Toben to file witness statements in relation to the witnesses whom
he proposed to call by 7 November 1997. Dr
Toben did file witness statements in
relation to 42 proposed witnesses. A further directions hearing (via telephone)
was convened
for 25 November 1997 in order to determine which witnesses would be
called by Dr Toben in response to the complainant’s case
to be presented
at the inquiry. At the outset of that directions conference I advised Dr Toben
the evidence to be presented at the
inquiry must be relevant to the matter in
issue before me as referred for inquiry. In particular I advised that the
evidence must
be relevant to a determination of whether the publication of the
material contravened
section 18C
of the Act, and whether the exemption contained
section 18D
of the Act was available to the respondent. Dr Toben’s
response to this direction was that the witnesses whom he proposed
to call could
all give evidence which would establish that the assertions in the material
contained on the website were true, and
his basic case in response to the
complaint was that “truth is the defence”.
At that conference there was a very lengthy discussion concerning Dr
Toben’s proposed witnesses. It was apparent at that conference
had not made formal arrangements for these witnesses to give evidence before the
inquiry, and most of the “witness
statements” provided were accounts
by Dr Toben of the position of these witnesses in relation to “Holocaust
Revisionism”.
Some of the witness statements indicated the witnesses were
at present unavailable or uncontactable, or were in relation to persons
Toben had contacted as possible witnesses but who had made no response to him:
15 of the statements are identified as falling
into this category. A large
number of the proposed witnesses were based in Europe or the United States.
Dr Toben’s primary contention was that the purpose of the inquiry was
to “prove” whether the events known as “the
in fact occurred. Dr Toben’s argument was that his website and his own
research was concerned with the extent
to which the events and circumstances
relating to Jewish people in Europe in the 1930s and 40s had been
“mythologised”:
his proposition was that all credible evidence
pointed to the fact that although the German State regarded Jewish people as
of the State and took steps to exclude them from the German State by,
among other things, placing them in labour camps where many
died, there was no
process of State sanctioned mass extermination of Jewish people, and in
particular there were no gas chambers
at the various labour camps such as
Auschwitz. Dr Toben also asserted there was significant evidence which now
established significantly
fewer than 6 million Jewish people perished during
this period of time: possibly, he asserted, as few as 1.8 million. Dr
argument which is asserted in the material on his website as well
as at this and other directions hearings conducted in relation
to this inquiry,
is that implications concerning the political position of the Jewish Community
can be derived from the fact that
it takes a variety of significant steps (such
as the making of this and other complaints to this Commission) to prevent or
the conduct of research and investigations such as his into the truth of
the events relating to what Dr Toben refers to as “the
Holocaust”.
Dr Toben also asserted there were issues I should consider about his right to
freedom of speech, as well as his freedom to engage
in free academic research
into matters such as this. I shall deal with the issue of freedom of speech
below, but it was when I indicated
in the course of this directions hearing that
I was bound by the terms of the legislation to conduct this inquiry, and if I
satisfied on the basis of the evidence which the inquiry demonstrated that
Dr Toben had engaged in acts contrary to
section 18C
of the Act it was my duty
to make appropriate determinations, that Dr Toben indicated I was an immoral
person who had no interest
in the truth, and it would be immoral for the inquiry
to proceed on that basis, and that he would have no further dealings with the
inquiry. Despite that assertion the directions conference of 7 November 1997
did continue.
At the end of that conference I directed evidence would be heard from six
witnesses, including Dr Toben: the other witnesses whom
I directed could give
evidence if called by Dr Toben, were Olga Scully an Associate of the Adelaide
Institute and the respondent
to another complaint by Mr Jones of a similar
nature to that before this present inquiry; Professor Brian Martin, a social
Ronald Conway; John Bennett, member of the Victorian Council for
Civil Liberties; and Geoffrey Muirden, Deputy Director of the Adelaide
Institute. I indicated I was not prepared to hear evidence from a number of
other witnesses, including all of those from whom no
response had been received
by Dr Toben, but also in relation to some whose evidence appeared to have no
clear relevance to the matter.
I reserved my decision in relation to seven of
the other witnesses proposed by Dr Toben, and requested Dr Toben to provide
information concerning those proposed witnesses so I could make a ruling
concerning the admissibility of their evidence in the sense
of its general
relevance. Dr Toben did not provide that further information at any time. One
of the witnesses whom Dr Toben proposed
to call was David Irving. At the time
of this conference Dr Irving, a widely published writer on this period of
European history,
and in particular on the activities of the German government
under Adolf Hitler and the circumstances of the European Jewish community
that time, was appealing against a decision of the Australian government not to
grant him an entry visa into Australia. I indicated
to Dr Toben it was possible
that evidence from witnesses who were not able to attend a hearing could be
received by telephone link,
but he would have to make the arrangements himself,
although in the conduct of the proceedings the cost would be borne by the
Commission.
I note Dr Irving has since been unsuccessful in proceedings in the
High Court, Queen’s Bench Division (UK), in which he presented
argument to that sought to be presented by Dr Toben in this matter:
Penguin Books Limited and Deborah Lipstadt,
unreported, 11 April 2000,
decision of Gray J (Dr Lipstadt was another of the witnesses whom Dr Toben
indicated he wished to call,
but who did not respond to his request).
At a further directions conference on 27 November 1997 Dr Toben indicated he
wished to make submissions on the general validity of
the legislation. I
declined to hear these submissions. I shall refer to this further below.
Subsequent to that conference Dr Toben indicated he wished to withdraw from
the proceedings altogether. The hearing dates which had
been set for mid
December 1997 were then vacated. Throughout 1998 there were considerable
further discussions and although Dr Toben
had indicated he had withdrawn from
the proceedings he continued to send documentation to me and the Commission.
Further dates for
the public hearing were then set for 2 and 3 November 1998:
Dr Toben was advised of the dates but continued to indicate he would
attending the hearing nor calling any witnesses. However, on 28 October 1998 Dr
Toben forwarded to the Commission a copy
of a lengthy document (390 pages) by J
S A Hayward, submitted to the University of Canterbury in part satisfaction of
the requirements
for a Master of Arts degree. The thesis is entitled
The Fate of the Jews in German Hands: An Historical Enquiry into the
Development and Significance of Holocaust Revisionism
”. The thesis
appears to be unpublished and is dated 1993. Dr Toben at this time indicated he
wished to provide to the Commission
two other books which he indicated would be
provided at the hearing.
When the public hearing of this inquiry commenced on 2 November 1998 Dr Toben
did attend at the inquiry. He represented himself.
The complainant was
represented by Mr Rothman SC.
FOR THE INQUIRY
The Legislation
The complaint made by Mr Jones
was that the material contained in the Adelaide Institute website was contrary
section 18C
of the Act.
Section 18C
is contained within
“PROHIBITION OF BEHAVIOUR BASED ON RACIAL HATRED”. This Part of the
Act came into operation on 13 October 1995.
The relevant sections of that Part
to this inquiry are
sections 18B
(a) an act is done for 2 or more reasons; and
(b) one of the reasons is the race, colour or national or ethnic origin of a
person (whether or not it is a dominant reason or a substantial
reason for doing
then, for the purposes of this Part, the act is taken to be done because of
the person’s race, colour or national or ethnic
18C(1) It is unlawful for a person to do an act, otherwise than in private,
(a) the act is reasonably likely, in all the circumstances, to offend, insult,
humiliate or intimidate another person or a group
of people; and
(b) the act is done because of the race, colour or national or ethnic origin of
the other person or of some or all of the people
in the group.
18C(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), an act is taken not
to be done in private if it:
(a) causes words, sounds, images or writing to be communicated to the public; or
(b) is done in a public place; or
(c) is done in the sight or hearing of people who are in a public place.
18C(3) In this section:
public place
” includes any place to which the public have
access as of right or by invitation, whether express or implied and whether or
not a charge is made for the admission to the place.
Section 18C
does not render unlawful anything said or done reasonably and
in good faith:
(a) in the performance, exhibition or distribution of an artistic work; or
(b) in the course of any statement, publication, discussion or debate made or
held for any general academic, artistic or scientific
purpose or any other
genuine purpose in the public interest; or
(c) in making or publishing:
(i) a fair and
accurate report of any event or matter of public interest; or
(ii) a fair
comment on any event or matter of public interest if the comment is an
expression of a genuine belief held by the person
statement.”
Issues Raised by the
In the directions conferences prior to the public hearing of
this matter, Dr Toben raised two particular matters which he claimed
central to his response to the complaint. Both were related, although they
raised different issues as matters of law.
The first was raised somewhat tangentially by Dr Toben on a number of
occasions, but specifically at the directions conference on
27 November 1997.
On this occasion Dr Toben indicated he wished to make submissions on the
validity of the legislation contained
of the Act. At that
directions conference I indicated to Dr Toben that as an Inquiry Commissioner I
was not empowered to determine
any question as to the validity of Commonwealth
legislation, as the Commission does not constitute a court for such a purpose.
The second issue which permeated Dr Toben’s response, both in terms of
the evidence which he wished to adduce before the inquiry
and his objection to
the process and direction which I adopted in the course of the inquiry, was that
“truth is a defence”.
2.2.1 Validity of the legislation
The issue of the constitutional
validity of
of the Act might be raised by the development in the High
Court of Australia of the constitutionally entrenched freedom of political
communication, implied from terms of the Australian Constitution: (see in
particular,
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR
, and other related cases).
It is my view it is clear that as a
Commissioner exercising power under an Act which does not entail any investment
of the judicial
power of the Commonwealth as set out in Chapter III of the
Constitution, I am unable to comment in any meaningful way on the validity
this legislation. It is appropriate that I assume the constitutional
of the legislation which I am required to apply:
Re Adams and the
Taxation Agents Board
(1976) 12 ALR 239
, per Brennan P). This is a well
established principle and one which, with respect, I accept. It was pursuant to
this principle
I advised Dr Toben I would not entertain his submissions on the
validity of the legislation, as in my view such submissions are misplaced
must be made more appropriately before a court exercising the judicial power of
the Commonwealth. As I understand it, no such
challenge to the validity of Part
IIA has been made before a court of appropriate authority.
Nevertheless, it is appropriate to give some consideration to the principles
relating to the implied freedom of political communication,
as I take the view
Parliament would not have enacted legislation which was intended to operate
contrary to the constitutional principles
limiting the exercise of its power.
Those principles are usefully summarised by the High Court in
at pages 567-8, where the Court set out the relevant questions to be
considered in determining whether the principle had been infringed:
“First, does the law effectively burden freedom of communication about
government or political matters either in its terms,
operation or effect?
Second, if the law effectively burdens that freedom, is the law reasonably
appropriate and adapted to serve
a legitimate end the fulfilment of which is
compatible with the maintenance of the constitutionally prescribed system of
representative
and responsible government and the procedure prescribed by s.128
for submitting a proposed amendment of the Constitution to the informed
of the people... If the first question is answered “yes” and the
second is answered “no”,
is invalid.”
The relevant consideration to my mind is whether the restrictions imposed by
Part IIA of the Act do effectively burden freedom of
political communication in
a way which is not reasonably appropriate and adapted to serve
a legitimate end,
the fulfilment of which
is compatible with representative and responsible
government in Australia. I note section
18D (set out above) sets out a number
of exemptions which apply in relation to material which would otherwise come
within the proscribed
behaviour defined in section 18C:
it would appear these
exemptions are included in the Part for the purpose of addressing the issue
making the law reasonably appropriate
and adapted to serve the legitimate ends
of preventing the form of racial discrimination
sought to be proscribed by this
Part. Without
making any determination (as I am unable to do) on the issue of
validity, I do accept
Parliament in passing this legislation addressed
to the issue of what Dr Toben described as “freedom of speech”,
which the High Court describes as freedom
of political communication guaranteed
under the Australian Constitution. In considering whether the complaint before
me comes within
the scope of Part IIA of the Act, it is appropriate I interpret
the relevant provisions (sections 18C and 18D) in the light of these
constitutional limitations
on the assumption Parliament intended them to be read
and applied in that context.
2.2.2 Truth as a Defence
raised on a number of occasions the issue of whether “truth is a
defence”. He did so both in the context of
the material which he wished
to present before this inquiry and in a criticism of my conduct of the inquiry
and of the Commission
and its processes generally.
Dr Toben wished to adduce evidence before this inquiry as to “the
truth” of “the alleged Holocaust” (his expression).
indicated to Dr Toben that was not the issue before me or the issue I had to
determine under the Act. My view is that I am required
to determine whether a
public act has been carried out by Dr Toben which “is reasonably likely,
in all the circumstances, to
offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate another
person or a group of people”, and further whether if that is the case,
act has been done because of the “race, colour or national or ethnic
origin of the other person or some or all of the people
in the group”.
The “truth” of an assertion made is not the only factor which the
legislation requires to be taken
into account in making this determination. It
may well be the case that even if an assertion is “true”, it might
bring section 18C into operation. The “truth” may be more
relevant to the operation of section 18D, which provides an
exemption from the
unlawfulness established by section 18C. I shall address this issue and in
particular section 18D below.
PUBLIC HEARING OF THIS INQUIRY
The Conduct of
the Inquiry
Following the pre-hearing procedures set out above, the
public hearing of this complaint was conducted by me in Sydney on 2 November
1998. Dr Toben had indicated for some months he did not intend to participate
in any further aspect of the inquiry, but shortly
before the date of hearing he
provided substantial documentation to the Commission and indicated he wished to
place other material
before the inquiry. However, he did not advise whether he
would attend the inquiry to make submissions or give evidence, or whether
would be calling any of the witnesses whom he had indicated earlier he wished to
give evidence in support of his own response
to the complaint.
Dr Toben did attend the inquiry on 2 November 1998. Mr Jones also attended,
and he was represented at the inquiry by Mr Rothman.
Dr Toben was
unrepresented, and indicated he would not be calling any witnesses. Mr Rothman
indicated only Mr Jones would be giving
evidence for the complainant. Dr Toben
was advised the complainant would present his case and Dr Toben would have an
opportunity
to cross-examine Mr Jones. If he gave evidence, he would be subject
to cross-examination by the complainant. Subsequent to evidence
being given,
submissions would be sought on issues of law. Dr Toben indicated he wished to
provide as evidence before the inquiry
the thesis by Mr Hayward which he had
forwarded to the Commission shortly before the hearing, and two other books. I
indicated to
him the complainant needed an opportunity to examine the
documentation he proposed placing before me and it was very late in the
of the inquiry to be placing documentary information before the Commission,
particularly in light of the very extensive pre-hearing
processes which had
occurred. Dr Toben made some complaints concerning a recent publication in
The Australian Jewish News
of 30 October 1998, which he asserted involved
some defamatory statements concerning him, and placed before me a large bundle
documentation which he invited me to look through and on which he commenced
to comment.
Dr Toben then advised the inquiry that he had a “moral problem”,
and made the following comments:
“If the truth is no defence before this Commission, then the lie must
obviously prevail, and that is a moral problem I have.”
“Because our behaviour, if we have no truth as a defence, is immoral.
We cannot proceed with these proceedings if we are moral
persons, because truth
is no defence.”
Dr Toben then described the inquiry as “an inquisition”, and said
he had come to the hearing because he wanted to continue
in placing his
arguments but “I can’t if you can’t give me that
assurance”. He described the inquiry as
“an immoral outfit”
and concluded:
“It’s immoral what you’re doing.
The Commissioner
: Highly immoral and improper. Truth is no defence. Truth
is therefore relegated nowhere except the lie flourishes. We can’t
and yet you will.
The Commissioner
: Mr Jones will have to establish his complaints to
my satisfaction.
: I shall leave it to you, Commissioner. I beg to be
The Commissioner
: That’s your choice, Dr Toben.
: As I said, if truth is no defence, the lie must prevail.
Goodbye gentlemen. Mr Jones and Mr Wertheim, they didn’t even
morning to me – or they didn’t even shake hands. What rudeness.
The Commissioner
: I’m sorry if they have been discourteous to
you, Dr Toben, that you may feel that.
: Thank you.”
Dr Toben then left the inquiry and did not return.
After Dr Toben left the inquiry proceeded in his absence. Mr Rothman made
certain submissions concerning the complaint and the requirements
legislative provisions. He then tendered a number of documents as evidence
before me. This included the contents of the
website of the Adelaide Institute
as at 31 May 1996:
http:\\www.adam.com.au\-fredadin\adins.html
also tendered a witness statement from the complainant, Jeremy Sean Jones, and
two articles: Michael Shermer
the Holocaust. The
Refutation of Revisionism & the Restoration of History
1994, Bol 2, No 4) and Jeremy Jones
Holocaust Denial: “Clear and
Present” Racial
Vilification
1 Australian
Journal of Human Rights 1
69). Mr Jones also gave sworn evidence at the
At the conclusion of Mr Rothman’s oral submissions and the presentation
of the complainant’s evidence, a timetable was
set for the provision of
written submissions on the law. It was agreed the complainant would make
written submissions on the law
to be filed with the Commission and provided to
the respondent by 6 November, with a response from the respondent to be filed
the Commission and provided to the complainant by 13 November. It was
understood further arrangements could be made, if appropriate,
for a further
reply and for any further conference necessary to address the submissions.
The complainant did provide written submissions but not until 2 March 1999.
Dr Toben was provided with a copy of these written submissions
and asked for any
response by 12 March 1999. He did not provide any response.
However in the week immediately following the hearing, Dr Toben wrote to the
Commission seeking leave to tender the two books to which
he had referred in his
opening remarks at the hearing but which he had not tendered. Dr Toben has
given no indication of the relevance
of this documentation and it had not
previously been provided to the complainant. The complainant opposed the
acceptance into evidence
of this documentation after the public inquiry had
ended. I did not accept as evidence the two books Dr Toben wished to tender.
In my view Dr Toben had every opportunity in the twelve months of the
adjournment of the matter subsequent to the vacating of the
previous dates for
hearing to advise of any material he wished to have before the inquiry, but he
did not provide this material to
either the Commission or the complainant until
either very shortly before or at the hearing. It was when this issue was
with both parties at the hearing Dr Toben announced he would no longer
participate in the hearing process and withdrew from the hearing
tendering the documentation on which he wished to base his response. In the
absence of any submission from Dr Toben at the
hearing as to the relevance of
this documentation, the complainant is unable to make any response to it, and
nor am I in a position
to adduce its relevance. Further, it would be
inappropriate to accept evidence at this stage. My view was if the books were
into evidence it would be necessary to re-convene the hearing to hear
submissions from Dr Toben on their relevance: Dr Toben had
already abruptly left
two hearings, refusing to address the matters for which those hearings had been
convened, and had on numerous
occasions expressed the view that he would not
participate in the inquiry. Under those circumstances the material was not
as evidence.
Subsequent to these events, Dr Toben wrote to me at the Commission as
“12 March 1999
Dear Ms McEvoy
You should perhaps get a grant for a travel tour of Poland and Ukraine to
then more effectively assess what our conflict is all about.
I mentioned my HREOC conflict to a number of people from all walks of life
– and they laugh because it reminds them of the Stalinist
show trials and
its aftermath – until the ideology crumbled.
Now Poland and Ukraine suffer from exploitative capitalism.
Jeremy Jones’ aim – “to stop them from functioning”
meaning to silence his critics by using words such as
“anti-semite”
“hater” “racist” and “anti-Jewish” –
is in the true Leninist-Stalinist
tradition, and has no place in Australia!
Jones tells lies about the Auschwitz concentration camp – and any
judgment from you in his favour would support such lies.
Do you want to be
known as a supporter of liars?
Fredrick Toben”
I include the text of this letter from Dr Toben not as evidence before me in
this matter but rather to indicate his ongoing though
spasmodic contact with the
Commission and because it illustrates the general tenor with which Dr Toben
conducted these contacts during
the course of this inquiry. It is dated on the
date on which his response to the complainant’s submission was due, so I
it as constituting his response.
The Evidence
At the inquiry I had before me as evidence
the material to which I have referred above. In addition Jeremy Sean Jones gave
evidence in support of his witness statement and to address certain issues
raised by me and in questions from Mr Rothman.
I also had before me material provided by Dr Toben on 4 November 1997. This
material constituted 41 pages of commentary and explanation.
tendered by Dr Toben, but at the hearing I indicated I would regard it as a
submission made by him for me to take into
account. However, it is difficult to
regard it as constituting evidence other than in a broad sense. Dr Toben also
provided large
numbers of other documents but tendered none to the
3.2.1 The Evidence of the Complainant
At the hearing Mr Jones tendered a witness statement
setting out the matters which he wished me to take into account in support of
the complaint. Mr Jones had provided this witness statement in October 1997,
and he gave sworn evidence in support of this witness
Mr Jones attests that because of his elected position within the ECAJ and his
circumstances within the Jewish community, he receives
numerous unsolicited
communications from Jewish Australians when they believe they have encountered
anti-Semitism. He states he
received complaints about the Adelaide Institute
website and that it contained anti-Semitic material which was grossly offensive,
insulting and derogatory from 1 May 1996. His first complaint had been from
“a distressed child of a Holocaust survivor”.
At the request of
members of the Jewish community in Sydney, Melbourne and Adelaide, “the
matter of the offence and distress
caused by the Adelaide Institute web-site was
listed for discussion at a meeting” of the ECAJ on 16 May 1996, and
was the unanimous view of that meeting that the web-site contained
offensive material”, and the organisation determined to
representative complaint to this Commission. Much of the witness statement
represents a submission on legal issues which
were raised before the inquiry
orally and later in writing by Mr Rothman.
In his sworn evidence Mr Jones told the inquiry that when he became aware the
matter was proceeding to a hearing, he made enquiries
over the Internet as to
the possible academic standing of research such as that engaged in and promoted
by Dr Toben on the Adelaide
Institute website. Mr Jones said he sent Internet
messages out on a series of academic Internet lists and estimated he reached up
to 1,000 researchers and academics in different institutions around the world.
The question he asked was, “Was anybody aware
of any academic or other
educational institution in the world where a Holocaust denial or Holocaust
revision was considered genuine
academic research?”. Mr Jones said of
those answers he received, there was consistently a rejection that such an area
of academic
research existed. The institutions he approached included United
States, Canada, Spain, Belgium, Germany, France, United Kingdom,
Australia and
used instrument” for seeking
information from academic institutions.
Mr Jones also told the inquiry he had originally been alerted to the Adelaide
Institute site by very distressed members of the Australian
Jewish community.
He said those who made complaints to him “were having difficulty in
expressing their feelings of pain and
hurt at seeing this material emanating
from an Australian Internet site”. Mr Jones said he personally was not
unused to seeing
such material because of the work which he undertook, but he
considered the organised and extensive way in which the Adelaide Institute
collected and disseminated the material through the Internet had a different
impact from individual or isolated examples of
anti-Semitism. The material on
the Internet “was material which was going to the world, in effect, which
was saying, ‘You
are part of a conspiracy because you’re a Jew, that
if anyone committed an evil act and they happened to be Jewish it’s
because of their Jewishness that they committed that evil act’, and it was
saying that ‘you are now confronting someone
who is going to challenge
your right to live your life in this country and elsewhere free of
harassment’.” Mr Jones
said, “that’s what it said to
Mr Jones believed the material published by Dr Toben on the Adelaide
Institute website had an effect on the quality of life of many
Jewish people in
Australia. He considered the material to be not only insulting and offensive,
but likely to cause many people to
act negatively towards Jewish people in
Australia. He said he believed it particularly affected many young Jewish
people in Australia,
and made many Jewish Australians feel profoundly anxious
Submissions
Mr Rothman made submissions on both the
facts before me in the material presented as part of this inquiry (which
includes the content
of the Adelaide Institute website as at 31 May 1996), and
on the issues of law raised by the complaint. He preceded his initial
submissions by rejecting Dr Toben’s assertion the matter was concerned
with the question of freedom of speech. He submitted
Australian law, including
the provisions of the Act, is predicated on a general right and liberty of
freedom of speech, but subject
to such restrictions as may be placed on it by
the various Parliaments within Australia. One such restriction is contained in
Act in Part IIA. Mr Rothman pointed out these legislative proscriptions
make exceptions in relation to academic, scientific and
artistic debate,
other genuine debate in the public interest, and fair comment.
He further submitted as a preliminary point that the “truth” of
the history of Jewish people in Europe in the twentieth
century was not the
matter before this Commission. He submitted the complaint was not about the
Holocaust or about how many people
died at Auschwitz or elsewhere. Rather, the
complaint before me is a complaint relating to offensive behaviour based on the
colour, national or ethnic origin of a group of people, that is, those
represented by the complainant.
Mr Rothman submitted the crux of the material on the Adelaide Institute
website is that Jewish people as a group “have embarked
conspiracy and hoax relating tot he Holocaust”. Mr Rothman submitted that
to say such an allegation entailed discussion
of the Holocaust was
“nonsense”: “akin to saying that the allegation made in the
Middle Ages that Jews poisoned
water wells was about water quality”. Mr
Rothman submitted the subject matter of the complaint is not the issue of
inaccuracy: rather it is a complaint that the presentation of Jewish
people on the website is that they as a group have been involved
which on any reasonable basis is reprehensible.
In a document filed with the Commission dated 9 July 1997, Mr Jones in
response to a direction from me, detailed in relation to the
material on the
website each specific “act” which he alleged breached section 18C of
the Act. Mr Rothman made submissions
on each of these.
(1) The first act complained of is that “the material generally on the
website seeks to present the Nazi genocide not as a
matter of fact but as an
opinion held by a group of individuals acting with malicious intent, who are
opposed by persons fighting
to establish the ‘truth’. ...A secondary
claim which appears a number of times on the website is that the claims of
and the Soviet Union in general are ‘Jewish’.” Mr
Jones in his written submission of 9 July and later Mr Rothman
submitted that
“the Nazi Genocide is the subject of major ongoing historical
investigation and continuing debate as to matters
of detail. What is not a
matter of historical debate is that a campaign of Nazi Genocide existed and that
millions of non-combatant
Jews were put to death at the hands of Nazis and their
collaborators”. The final submission concerning the general content
the website is that:
“The Adelaide Institute website should
be considered as a single document which seeks to further the
Holocaust Denial.”
(2) Mr Jones refers to the first sub-directory of the website (titled
”) as containing the claims
(a) the perceived knowledge of the Nazi Holocaust is nothing more than an
“allegation” levelled by “defamers and
libellers”;
(b) there was a “Jewish-Bolshevik Holocaust”, which is not
referred to as “alleged”, which shows that “Jews”
“murderers”.
The material in this sub-directory refers to the Holocaust as “an
allegation”, and refers further to the “alleged
homicidal gas
chamber story” and “alleged homicidal gassings”, and that
“those who level the homicidal gassing
allegations at the Germans”
are “defamers and libellers of the Germans”. It concludes
“there is no evidence
that millions of people were killed in homicidal gas
It was submitted that to describe the Holocaust as “an
allegation” is to put in issue that it occurred. Mr Rothman submitted
that although Dr Toben denied at a directions hearing that he was a
“Holocaust Denier” and said rather he was a “Holocaust
Revisionist”, this was disingenuous, as he publicly aligns himself with
Robert Faurisson, a French Holocaust Revisionist, whose
summary of the Holocaust
is adopted by Dr Toben: “No holes, no Holocaust!”, referring to Mr
Faurisson’s assertion
there were no holes in the ceiling of the alleged
gas chamber at Auschwitz, and therefore no ingress for gas. Mr
Faurisson’s
conclusion is that without such holes, there could have been
no gassings, and therefore “no Holocaust”. Mr Jones’
submission in his written document is that, “in context, the material ...
seeks to maintain the vile argument that Jews have
foisted on the world the myth
that there was Nazi Holocaust and that a “Holocaust” was committed
by Jews. The clear
implication is that, in addition to being collectively
guilty of fraud and extortion, Jews are also ‘murderers’.”
(3) Mr Rothman referred to references by Mr Jones to specific newsletters
contained on the Adelaide Institute website, in particular
newsletters No 50,
56, 53, 54 and 57.
In newsletter No 50 the Holocaust is described as an “evil
lie” used to exploit “moral sensibility”, promote
“feelings of guilt” and extort money from the US Government and
“German taxpayers”.
In newsletter No 56, among other things, the commentary refers to some Jews
as “AshkeNazis”, and makes direct comparisons
between Jews and
Nazis, and refers to the “Mezuzah-Monitored Machine-Gunfire of the
American media”. Mr Rothman explained
at the inquiry the Ashkenazis
constitute a group within Jewish culture, being generally that group which
originally emanated from
Central Europe. The use of the term AshkeNazis, spelt
as in the Adelaide Institute Newsletter is, Mr Rothman submitted, a deliberate
attempt to insult a significant part of the Jewish ethnic group. Mr Rothman
also explained the Mezuzah is a Jewish religious symbol,
and he submitted the
article clearly identified Jews as deserving of contempt and hatred.
In newsletter No 57, an Adelaide Institute Associate, David Brockschmidt,
refers to “the idea of the Holocaust” as an
“attempt to create
a guilt complex for Christians”. The writer also refers to “the
Bolshevik Regime” which
was responsible for persecutions of non-Jews, but
which was “created and sustained by Jews”. The material, in Mr
written submission, “invokes anti-Jewish stereotypes,
misrepresents Judaism and concludes with the implicit threat, ‘if
not come to terms with the dark side of your own history, then you will be
history’.” Mr Rothman submitted the
material in the context of the
website argued that individuals who maintain that the perceived history of the
Nazi genocide is not
a myth are racketeers and maniacs. Mr Rothman also
referred to material in newsletter No 50 where the Associate Director of the
Adelaide Institute, Geoffrey Muriden, describes the Holocaust offensively as
“the big H”. In newsletter No 53, another
article by Mr
Brockschmidt, presented as an open letter to Mr Jones, makes similar statements.
Further material in that newsletter
includes a statement by Mr Jack King that
“It appears in reality that God has ‘chosen’ Jews to
demonstrate how
people should not behave”, and refers to a “Talmudic
habit of deceit and manipulation”. Mr King in this document
claims that “the Talmud condones lies, deceit, perjury, brutality, greed,
vile obscenities, sodomy, paedophilia, bestiality,
hatred of gentiles,
Christians in particular, and sadistic killings of Christians simply because
they are Christians”.
Mr Rothman submitted this material refers to Jews as a group, referring to
people behaving in a particular way because of their character
as Jews, and
repeats accusations and libels against Jews as a group, which he submitted
“could only be quintessentially that
which racial vilification legislation
is aimed at”.
In newsletter No 54 a letter from a contributor refers to “the
pseudo-religious dogma of the ‘Shmolocaust’”,
and, although it
concedes it as “a fake”, refers to “the Protocols of the
Elders of Zion” as “a faithful
documentation of the Judo-Communist
methods of political subversion”.
Mr Rothman submitted that again this referred to Jews as a particular ethnic
group, and by virtue of their membership in that sense
of engagement in
political subversion. He submitted the use of the word
“Shmolocaust” is an offensive and intimidating
remark, and clearly
is intended to be such. Further material in this newsletter includes a comment
that “Jews brought forth
the homicidal ideology which enveloped half the
planet like a cloud of poison gas and killed off a hundred times more than a
6,000,000”, and reprints two extracts from Mein Kampf. Mr Rothman
submitted this minimised the obvious feelings of distress
and hurt at the
Holocaust and the “lousy 6,000,000”.
Mr Rothman’s final submission in relation to the material contained on
the site is that essentially the material “speaks
for itself”. He
described the material as quintessentially the sort of material which the
legislation is designed to proscribe.
Mr Rothman also made submissions on the application of the legislative
provisions to these facts and I deal with these below.
The facts of this matter were essentially not in issue. Dr
Toben acknowledged and indeed asserted he was responsible for the material
was placed on the Adelaide Institute website, and said he was responsible for
all actions of the Adelaide Institute. Dr Toben
proudly asserted the Adelaide
Institute represented independent and international research into an important
historical and sociological
issue. It was this which formed the basis of his
argument that the complaint by Mr Jones was one which threatened his right to
of speech, and which I understand forms the basis of a claim (which he
did not articulate at the inquiry either in writing or orally)
that if any of
the material were caught by section 18C, of the Act it should come within the
exemptions provided for in section 18D.
I shall address this below.
this into account, as well as the other evidence before me, I make the following
findings of fact:
Dr Toben is the
Director of an unincorporated association the Adelaide Institute based in
administers a website at http:\\www.adam.com.au\-fredadin-adins.html and is
responsible for the material and its content
which appears on that website.
The website is
not password protected and is publicly available to any person who has access to
the Internet.
The website is
easily accessible by any search engine under “Jews”,
“Holocaust”, “Nazi” and other
Complaints were
made to Mr Jones in both his personal and professional capacity by members of
the Jewish community in Australia who
had accessed the website and been
offended, insulted and hurt by the material contained therein.
Mr Jones was
also offended, insulted, humiliated and intimidated by the material contained on
the website, and he brought an action
on his own behalf and on behalf of other
members of the Jewish community represented by his and affiliated
organisations.
No recognised
academic or educational institution within Australia or elsewhere recognises
Holocaust denial or revisionism as genuine
academic research, although it is not
denied by the complainants that investigating any aspect relating thereto can
constitute genuine
academic research.
The material
contained on the Internet site is material which consistently presents Jews as a
group of people who are engaged in a
manipulation of the truth or an attempt to
conceal or pervert the truth in order to obtain political, economic and other
It consistently presents Jewish people as at the heart of
“Stalinist crimes”, and “Bolshevism”. It suggests
sensitivity about matters relating to what is known as the Holocaust is an
attempt to impose guilt on non-Jews, in particular
Christians. It presents the
circumstances known as the Holocaust as allegations or assertions, made and held
by persons acting maliciously,
dishonestly and manipulatively. Those persons so
acting are unmistakably identified on the website as Jews, and further they are
represented as so acting because they are Jews. The material has at its heart
the proposition that the events of “the Holocaust”
constructed, distorted and manipulated to create a myth for the promotion of the
social, political and economic interests
of the Jewish people, and suggests
there is no evidence to support the existence of this interpretation of
Material on the
website also contains insulting and offensive expressions in relation to Jewish
people and “the Holocaust”
which are intended to be offensive and
intimidating, and indeed have caused offense and anxiety.
I accept Mr Jones’ evidence concerning the effect of the
contents of this website on the persons who made complaints to him,
the effect it had on himself. I accept this ranged from extreme anxiety and
distress and intimidation, to a more fundamental
sense of social dislocation and
unhappiness. Dr Toben did not challenge this evidence in any way other than to
suggest that if Mr
Jones were “hurt” by material “he should
seek counselling”.
I also accept the submissions made in relation to the characterisation of the
material on the website. There are many aspects of
that material which are
quite explicit in their denigration of Jewish people, and many other aspects of
the material which make this
clear by imputation. The central theme of the
website is the assertion that the Holocaust is, in the terms in which it is
understood, “a myth”: Dr Toben’s statement was that
he was not a Holocaust denier but merely a revisionist seeking
the truth. He
told the inquiry at an earlier directions hearing that his concern was to make
available on the website research which
indicated far fewer Jewish people died
in labour and concentration camps than had previously been understood (1.8
million, not 6
million), and that they largely died of natural causes and the
However, his central assertion is that there was no plan for the extermination
of Jews, and certainly no action put in
place to systematically eradicate them
in the way which is presented as “the Holocaust”. None of the
material contained
on Dr Toben’s Adelaide Institute website is of an
historical intellectual or scientific standard which is persuasive on these
issues, and is largely expressed in highly tendentious and often offensive and
insulting language about Jewish people which makes
it difficult to give serious
consideration to the propositions contained in it. It is this language which
characterises the website
and its material, and leads me to be satisfied that
the material contained on the website has a consistent theme of the vilification
of Jewish people.
Section 18C
Section 18C is set out above. For material
or behaviour to be brought within the terms of section 18C, a number of factors
established: there must be “an act” done by the respondent;
it must be done “otherwise than in private”;
“reasonably likely in all the circumstances to offend, insult, humiliate
or intimidate another person or a group
of people”; and it must be done
“because of the race, colour or national or ethnic origin of the other
person or some
or all of the people in the group”.
The people in this group are Australians of Jewish origin. It was not
contested in this matter that Australian Jews should be regarded
as a group with
common ethnic origins for the purposes of Part IIA of the Act: indeed, Dr Toben
conceded this was the case early
in the proceedings. I am satisfied to direct
an act towards Jewish
people in Australia is to direct that act towards people
basis of their “ethnic origin” as Jews. I am satisfied
aspect of section 18C is therefore fulfilled.
I am also satisfied “the act” of placing material on the Internet
on the Adelaide Institute site and maintaining it there
was an act undertaken by
Dr Toben on behalf of the Adelaide Institute. Indeed, Dr Toben acknowledged
this was the case. I am satisfied
placing material on an Internet site which is
not password protected and is generally available to any who can access an
connection, is doing an act “otherwise than in private”: it
is my view the provision of material on a non-password protected
Internet site
is equivalent to publishing material in a newspaper. This is a public act.
The two central provisions of section 18C relate to the nature of the act and
its likely effect and its purpose. I am satisfied that
placing the material of
the type described above in Mr Jones’ and Mr Rothman’s written and
oral submissions, was an act
which was reasonably likely in all the
circumstances to offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate persons of Jewish
origin in Australia
(and indeed beyond). I am satisfied it did have that effect
on many Jewish people in Australia. I note the submission made by Mr
that a very high proportion of Jewish people in Australia (approximately 40%)
are Holocaust survivors or their direct descendants.
Mr Rothman told the
inquiry Australia has the highest proportion per capita of Holocaust survivors
among its Jewish population outside
Israel. He submitted that meant it was
extremely likely the material placed on the Internet by Dr Toben would cause
particular offense,
insult, humiliation or intimidation among members of the
Jewish community in Australia, and he submitted Dr Toben had to take the
community as he found them, even if they were particularly sensitive to such an
issue. He submitted the nature of the Jewish
community in Australia was such
that it was likely to be very sensitive to material which proposed that Jews as
a group had perpetuated
an evil lie about the occurrence of the Holocaust,
and/or occasioned a Holocaust in the Soviet Union. He submitted these
circumstances
were such that it was reasonably likely that such material would
be found to be offensive, insulting, humiliating or intimidating.
I accept this
submission: however, in my view, it is reasonably likely to be regarded as
offensive, insulting, humiliating or intimidating,
even without such a
proportion of “Holocaust survivors” in the Jewish population. I do
not think the issue of any particular
sensitivity of Australian Jews is of
relevance, given the extreme and offensive nature of the material.
Section 18C(1)(b) requires the act to be done “because of” the
national or ethnic origin of the group of people (in this
case Australian Jews).
Section 18B must be read in conjunction with this requirement: I have set out
section 18B above, but it provides
that where an act is done for more than one
reason, it is sufficient for the purposes of Part IIA that one of the reasons is
race, colour, or national or ethnic origin of the person, even if this is
not the dominant or substantial
reason for the doing of
which arises in relation to section 18C(1)(b) is the meaning of the phrase
“because of”. While it is enough
that ethnic origin is one reason
for the act complained of and found substantiated, there must be a causative
relationship between
the ethnic origin of the persons offended, and the doing of
the act. I am quite satisfied in this case that causative relationship
present: this material published by Dr Toben is material which vilifies a group
of persons expressly by reference to their ethnic
origin. I note in a matter
recently decided by another Commissioner on a similar matter (
Hobart Hebrew
Congregation and Jeremy Jones v Olga Scully
, 21 September 2000 Commissioner
Cavanough), the Commissioner made the following comment on this issue:
“In the present case, the relevant act is the distribution of material
which vilifies certain persons (done repeatedly as part
of a public campaign).
The Jewishness of the persons vilified is not a mere “background
factor”... . It brought about
the vilification. The authors of the
documents (and Mrs Scully is amongst them to the extent of her annotations and
highlighting
on the documents) disparaged the persons referred to in them
because those persons were Jews. Further by distributing, selling and
to sell the documents, Mrs Scully became responsible for their contents. She
became a party to the disparaging of certain
persons and groups of persons
because they are Jews.”
Precisely the same comment is applicable to the contents of the Adelaide
Institute website and Dr Toben’s role here. The relevant
act in this case
is the placing of the material which vilifies a group of persons (Jews) on the
Adelaide Institute website. The
Jewishness of the group of persons vilified is
not a mere “background factor”. As in the
“it brought about the vilification”. Dr Toben was an author of many
of the documents, and he expressly took responsibility
for the placing of all of
the documents on the website. Dr Toben and the other authors “disparaged
the persons referred to
in them [the documents placed on the website] because
those persons were Jews”. Dr Toben, as did Mrs Scully, became responsible
for the content of documents written by others by placing and publishing them on
his Adelaide Institute website. Under those circumstances,
Dr Toben was
responsible for the content of the material, and a party to the disparaging of
particular persons and groups of persons
because they are Jews.
Under these circumstances I am quite satisfied the publication of the
material on the Adelaide Institute website for which Dr Toben
is responsible is
unlawful behaviour contrary to section 18C of the Act.
Section 18D
In directions hearings held prior to the
public hearing of this matter, I invited Dr Toben to consider the application of
18D in relation to his response to the complaint. He agreed he would do
so but did not present any submissions or information which
I was clearly able
to take into account in this respect. However, in the presentation, in
particular of the Hayward thesis (not
tendered in evidence), and in his
assertion that he was concerned to promote freedom of speech for himself and
generally within the
Australian community and on the Internet, I assume Dr Toben
was raising the exemption contained within section 18D of the Act.
Section 18D provides that section 18C “does not render unlawful
anything said or done reasonably and in good faith” in
“in the course of any statement, publication, discussion or debate made or
held for any genuine academic...or any
other genuine academic purpose in the
public interest”, or in making or publishing a fair and accurate report of
or matter of public interest, or a fair comment on any event or matter
of public interest, if the comment is an expression of a genuine
belief held by
the person making the comment.
To establish that material which has been brought within section 18C (as has
the material contained on the Adelaide Institute website)
can come within this
exemption, requires a number of factors to be established. The material
(otherwise unlawful) must have been
said or done reasonably and in good faith:
this is the overarching requirement which applies to all aspects of the
exemption set
out in section 18D. Further, the material (to come within section
18D(b)) must be for a
academic purpose,
in the public interest
my italics). To come within section 18D(c), a report must be “fair
and accurate on a matter of public interest”, or “a
comment” on a matter “of public interest”, and in
circumstances where there is “an expression of a genuine
belief held by
the person making the comment”.
Section 18D presents a very difficult range of hurdles to be overcome by a
person asserting that material otherwise unlawful as racially
vilificatory
contrary to section 18C, is nevertheless exempted from that determination of
unlawfulness. Section 18D sets up a range
of requirements based on
reasonableness, good faith, genuine academic or other purpose, fairness, public
interest, and a genuine
belief in the opinion.
Dr Toben faces two other hurdles in establishing section 18D applies in
relation to the material he publishes on the Adelaide Institute
website. In the
first place, as an exemption to established unlawful circumstances, the onus is
on Dr Toben as respondent to establish
that the requirements of section 18D are
made out. The onus of course is on the complainant to make out the terms of the
but once the terms of the complaint are made out, as I am satisfied
they are in this case, the onus to establish the exemption switches
respondent. Dr Toben has taken no steps to discharge that onus, as he has
presented no evidence. This brings me to the second
issue. The second hurdle
faced by Dr Toben is presented in section 25W of the Act:
“In determining whether an act is unlawful by reason of a provision of
Part II or Part IIA, the Commission is not required to
have regard to any
exception or exemption provided for in those Parts unless there is evidence
before the Commission that the exception
or exemption is or may be applicable to
The application of section 25W raises the issue of what
evidence there is before me which may enable section 18D to become relevant.
Toben did not present any evidence at the inquiry: he insisted on leaving the
hearing before the presentation of evidence commenced.
Subsequent to the
hearing he sought leave to tender two books which he had brought with him at the
hearing but did not tender them.
I subsequently declined leave to receive that
evidence after the hearing had been completed, for reasons set out above.
this Commission is not bound by the rules of evidence and may inform
itself on any matter in such manner as it thinks fit (see section
Act), I am satisfied the material to which section 25W refers is material which
must be presented in such a way that it
can be examined at the inquiry and
responded to by the other party. The Commission is of course bound by the rules
of natural justice.
Dr Toben did not present evidence of this form in any sense
at all. Under these circumstances it is clear section 18D of the Act,
provides for the establishment of an exemption in relation to section 18C,
formally need not come into operation at all, as
there is no evidence relating
to the exemption. Accordingly I do not need to consider whether the content of
Dr Toben’s website
could fall within the exemption of section 18D.
I am quite satisfied Dr Toben had every opportunity to present his case.
From the time of referral until the time final submissions
were required, was a
period of two years. The Commission maintained frequent contact with Dr Toben
in that time, providing him with
copies of all documentation provided by the
complainant and all directions made by me. Further, throughout that time it
various documentation from Dr Toben and others on his behalf. The
matter was adjourned for a period of twelve months once Dr Toben
had indicated
he had “withdrawn” from the matter, although he continued to send
material to the Commission. There were
numerous telephone conferences and
directions extending time for Dr Toben to provide material. Dr Toben was aware
when the matter
came on for public hearing in November 1998 that I would not
hear evidence concerning what he chose to call “the truth of the
matter”, and in particular that I would not permit him to call certain
witnesses whose evidence I had ruled was not relevant
to the matters referred to
the inquiry. He was aware of the issues which were to be addressed at the
hearing and in the documents
to be provided prior to the hearing, and which he
agreed to provide. Dr Toben refused to continue to engage in any way on the two
occasions when there was an in person hearing: the directions conference on 30
September 1997, and the public hearing on 2 November
1998, and he was not
prepared to call any witnesses to that public inquiry. He was aware of the
issues which had been clearly set
out in both written material from the
complainant and the Commission and in the oral discussions and subsequent
directions made by
me in the course of directions conferences held prior to the
public hearing.
Under these circumstances I am satisfied Dr Toben had ample opportunity to
present his case including the presentation of any evidence
or submissions he
may have wished to make in relation to the application of section 18D of the
Nevertheless I will consider the application of section 18D as far as I am
As I have set out above, section 18D has an overarching requirement in
relation to all of its operation that the act sought to be
brought within it
must have been “said or done reasonably and in good faith”. I would
have very great difficulty in
determining any of the material placed on the
Adelaide Institute website by Dr Toben was put there “reasonably and in
faith”. I note Dr Toben’s reiterated assertions that he
believed he was engaged in proper and open research and intellectual
and that this represented his genuine belief. However, part of my difficulty
stems from Dr Toben’s own behaviour
before this Commission in the course
of its inquiry, and subsequent to it (I refer in particular to the letter Dr
Toben sent to me
which I have quoted in full above). Dr Toben did not present
as a person engaged in reasonable behaviour or in good faith in his
before this Commission, and in particular in his withdrawal from both the in
person hearings. It is difficult to regard
him as acting in good faith with his
very late (even after the inquiry had concluded) provision of information. It
is also difficult,
whatever his subjective belief, to accept he has behaved
reasonably and in good faith in considering the inflammatory and highly
offensive nature of some of the material placed directly on his website, and
further on the links Dr Toben has established between
his website and other
“hate sites” and “white supremacist” sites. It seems to
me these links (which must
have been placed there by Dr Toben) indicate a lack
of reasonableness within the intention of the Act. Under those circumstances,
it seems to me Dr Toben would have had to present a significant amount of
evidence and in a different manner in which he dealt with
the Commission and the
inquiry in order to establish he had placed the offending material on the
Adelaide Institute website reasonably
and in good faith.
I assume Dr Toben would not suggest the material on his website came within
the scope of section 18D(a), but rather would have directed
my attention to
section 18D(b), which refers to statement, publication, discussion or debate
“for any genuine academic, artistic
or scientific purpose or any other
genuine purpose in the public interest”. I am satisfied on the basis of
evidence put before
me by Mr Jones that the material contained on Dr
Toben’s website does not form part of any publication, discussion or
in the context of any genuine academic purpose in the public interest.
It is the case Dr Toben provided (although it was not in
evidence before me) the
Hayward thesis submitted at the University of Canterbury in part fulfilment of
an MA degree: however, there
is no information before me as to the circumstances
in which this occurred, nor its outcome. Nor am I satisfied, in the absence
submissions in evidence from Dr Toben and any other witnesses, that the Hayward
thesis falls clearly within this category.
It may be Dr Toben may have presented an argument or even evidence that
material dealing with the issues in which he has an interest
is excluded by some
way or means from mainstream academic debate for the reasons of which he has
complained in this inquiry and on
his website. He has not presented that
argument or any evidence for it before me or in the materials he has provided.
the quality, nature and expression of much of the material placed on
his website suggests that regardless of its content, it is unlikely
to form part
of any academic discussion or debate.
Section 18D(c) refers to the making of fair and accurate reports, and fair
comment. Again, the nature of much of the material contained
on the Adelaide
Institute website makes it very difficult to regard it as “fair and
accurate report”: indeed, most of
it is not expressed in terms of “a
report” of any kind, but rather as polemic and assertion. Dr Toben
asserted he indeed
held “a genuine belief” in the comments he made
and the material he published on the website: however, Dr Toben’s
subjective genuine belief is not in itself sufficient. Not only must he hold a
genuine belief (on which I make no comment), but
the material must itself
constitute “a fair comment” as well as be said or done reasonably
and in good faith. I am satisfied
the material is not said or done reasonably
or in good faith, but in any event, most of it does not constitute “fair
in the sense understood by the law at all. Again I refer to
Commissioner Cavanough’s conclusion on this issue in the
case: (at page 31) he concluded:
“I do not think that a racial vilifier can be heard to say that he or
she is acting “in good faith” for the purposes
of s.18D merely
because he or she honestly or sincerely believes that persons of the race (or
ethnic group) concerned are inferior
or evil by nature and that they should be
made to suffer for that reason”.
I am satisfied the same considerations apply here.
In reaching this conclusion I am also mindful of Parliament’s apparent
intent in passing the Part of the Act with which this
inquiry is concerned.
Section 18D refers not only to reasonableness, good faith and genuineness, but
also, in (b) and (c), to “public
interest”. The behaviour proscribed
in section 18C, and the provision in section 25W that the exemption of section
activated, so to speak, unless evidence is presented in its support,
indicate that on any proper interpretation of the Act I should
be slow indeed to
accept that any racially vilificatory material, such as I have found the content
of the Adelaide Institute website
to be is in the public interest.
I have indicated above it is my view section 18D is not applicable because of
the lack of evidence placed before me by Dr Toben in
support of it. Further
however, I have considered the possible material and submissions Dr Toben may
have put before me had he remained
for the course of the inquiry and presented
his response to the complaint, and I am nevertheless satisfied that such
arguments and
material as I can discern would not be able to establish the
exemption of section 18D would be available to him.
am satisfied the complaint the subject matter of this inquiry has been
substantiated and that the content of the website of the
Adelaide Institute,
both in the specific instances referred to in the complaint and in general, are
unlawful as contrary to section
18C of the Act, as constituting offensive
behaviour based on racial hatred. Further, I am satisfied the material
contained on the
Adelaide Institute website does not come within any of the
exemptions set out in section 18D of the Act.
DETERMINATIONS
complainant set out very specifically the determinations which were sought from
this Commission. This was articulated as early
as in documents filed with the
Commission on 13 October 1997. The complainant sought determinations that the
respondent has breached
section 18C of the Act; that the material be removed
from the Adelaide Institute website and any other website published by the
where it is accessible to members of the public; that the respondent
be restrained from publishing or re-publishing the offending
material; that any
website published by the respondent permanently bear on its homepage an apology
in terms set out by the complainant;
that the respondent apologise to the
complainant in terms specified by the complainant; and that the respondent
undertake a course
of counselling by a conciliation officer of this
Commission.
I have given careful consideration to the appropriate determinations to make
in this matter. In doing so I bear in mind the unusual
nature of these
proceedings and the relatively novel aspect of considering the publication of
material contained on the Internet.
I further bear in mind that determinations
of this Commission are not of course enforceable, as this Commission is not a
court (this
is further acknowledged in section 25Z(2) of the Act). I am also
influenced by the fact the complainant has not sought any monetary
compensation
for the hurt, humiliation and anxiety which I am satisfied the complainant and
those whom he represented have suffered
as a consequence of Dr Toben’s
unlawful act. In the context of enforceability, I am also conscious of the
difficulties presented
by the presentation of materials as in this case on the
Internet, and the ease of placing such materials on the Internet outside
available and accessible within Australia.
However, I am quite satisfied the material published publicly by Dr Toben is
quintessentially the type of material proscribed by section
18C of the Act. Dr
Toben spoke in the course of this inquiry of freedom of speech, but it must be
acknowledged that the freedom
which he seeks in the material which he has
published, deprives others of their freedom of speech, if they are so humiliated
intimidated they are no longer able to access that freedom. I am satisfied
that is one of the consequences of the vilificatory,
bullying, insulting, and
offensive material contained on Dr Toben’s Adelaide Institute website. Dr
Toben also referred to
freedoms in Australia: it is my view one of the freedoms
promoted by the
Racial Discrimination Act
is that of diversity and
tolerance. Dr Toben sought support for this diversity and tolerance for the
promotion of his views and
interests: however the form in which he has chosen to
promote his views and interests are such that they do not accord tolerance
respect for the interests, rights, and freedoms of others. Under these
circumstances, it seems to me appropriate to make a determination
that Dr Toben
cease the unlawful dissemination of this material on the Adelaide Institute
website. In order to do this, the material
must be removed from the website and
not re-published elsewhere by Dr Toben.
I am also of the view that, bearing in mind the very public nature of the
publication of this material and the public way in which
Dr Toben conducted his
engagement in the inquiry process, it is appropriate that a public apology be
provided to the complainant.
This is particularly the case as no financial
compensation is sought by the complainant. I also consider it appropriate that
apology should appear on the respondent’s website, should this be
maintained.
The complainant also sought a determination that the respondent should at his
own expense undertake a course of counselling by a conciliation
officer of the
Commission. I understand no such course of counselling is available and I shall
not make any direction along those
Pursuant to section 25Z(1)(b) I make the following determinations:
(1) I find the complaint substantiated;
(2) I declare that the respondent Dr Fredrick Toben, representing the Adelaide
Institute, has engaged in conduct rendered unlawful
section 18C
of this Act
in the publication of material racially vilificatory of Jewish people, on the
Adelaide Institute’s Internet site.
This conduct is rendered unlawful by
of the Act;
(3) I declare that the respondent Dr Fredrick Toben, representing the Adelaide
Institute, should remove the contents of the Adelaide
Institute website from the
World Wide Web and not re-publish the content of that website in public
(4) I declare that the respondent Dr Fredrick Toben, representing the Adelaide
Institute, should make a statement of apology to Mr
Jeremy Jones and those
members of the Jewish community of Australia whom he represented in this
complaint. That apology should be
made in writing to Mr Jones, and further
should appear on the home page of the Adelaide Institute website. The terms of
the apology
are to be as follows:
“I hereby unreservedly
and unconditionally apologise to you and to the Australian Jewish community for
having published materials
inciting hatred against the Jewish people in
contravention of the
Racial Discrimination Act
. I undertake that neither
I nor any employee or agent of mine (actual or ostensible) will publish any such
material in the future
and that all such material which is presently published
by me, or by any employee or agent of mine (actual or ostensible) in any
or electronic media (including the Internet) will forthwith be withdrawn from
publication”.
I certify that this and the preceding thirty-eight pages is a true
copy of the Reasons for Decision of Ms Kathleen McEvoy, Inquiry
Commissioner.
Hearing Solictor:
October, 2000
RTF format (127 KB)
Signed PDF/A format