Plaintiff S22-2025 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs [2025] HCA 36 (3 September 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAGELER CJ,
AND JAGOT JJ
PLAINTIFF S22/2025 PLAINTIFF
MINISTER FOR
IMMIGRATION AND
MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS DEFENDANT
Plaintiff S22/2025 v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
[2025] HCA 36
Date of Hearing: 16 June
Date of Judgment: 3 September
The questions stated for the opinion of the Full Court in the special case
filed on 21 May 2025 be answered as follows:
Question (1): Should an extension of time be granted under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) for the filing of the application for a
constitutional or other writ?
Answer: Yes.
Question (2): Is the non-revocation decision affected by jurisdictional
error on the basis that the delegate, in addressing the legal
consequences of
the decision:
a. misapprehended or failed to consider the legal consequences of the
decision; and/or
b. reasoned in a way that was legally unreasonable?
Answer: No.
Question (3): Is the non-revocation decision affected by jurisdictional
error on the basis that the delegate failed to comply with
Ministerial Direction
110, and so failed to comply with
Migration Act 1958
(Cth), in the consideration of the expectations of the community?
Answer: No.
Question (4): Is the non-revocation decision affected by jurisdictional
error on the basis that the delegate:
a. denied the plaintiff procedural fairness; and/or
b. proceeded in a legally unreasonable manner,
by taking into account legal advice given to the plaintiff, without
notice to the plaintiff?
Answer: No.
Question (5): What relief, if any, should be granted to the
Answer: None.
Question (6): Who should pay the costs of the proceeding?
Answer: The plaintiff.
Representation
Lenehan SC with T M Wood and K E W Bones for the plaintiff (instructed by Human
Rights Law Centre)
P M Knowles SC and B D Kaplan with M P A Maynard for
the defendant (instructed by Australian Government Solicitor)
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
Plaintiff S22/2025 v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
Immigration – Visas – Cancellation
of visa – Where plaintiff held Temporary Protection (Class XD) (subclass
visa ("TPV") – Where plaintiff's TPV mandatorily cancelled under
Migration Act 1958
("Act") following
conviction and imprisonment for offence – Where plaintiff made
representations about reasons why mandatory
cancellation of TPV should be
revoked under
but Minister's delegate decided not to
revoke cancellation – Where plaintiff released from immigration detention
plaintiff incorrectly believed cancellation of TPV revoked when
plaintiff released under Bridging R (Class WR) (subclass 070) (Bridging
Pending)) visa ("BVR") – Where BVR ceased pursuant to
when Republic of Nauru granted plaintiff permission to enter and remain –
Where documents plaintiff gave Department of Home
Affairs in support of
representations included legal advice subject to legal professional privilege
– Where delegate read and
quoted from legal advice in delegate's reasons
– Whether necessary in interests of administration of justice to grant
of time under
– Whether non-revocation
decision void for jurisdictional error – Whether delegate did not properly
confront legal consequences
of non-revocation decision as required by
Ministerial Direction 110 – Whether delegate misapplied para 8.5
of Ministerial Direction
110 – Whether use of legal advice by
delegate without notice to plaintiff denied plaintiff procedural fairness or
legally unreasonable.
Words and phrases – "certiorari",
"constitutional writs", "expectations of the Australian community", "extension
of time", "immigration
detention", "irrational or unreasonable", "jurisdictional
error", "legal advice", "legal consequences of decision", "legal professional
privilege", "mandamus", "mandatory cancellation", "necessary in the interests of
the administration of justice", "no real prospect
of removal",
"non-refoulement", "non-revocation", "practical injustice", "procedural
fairness", "protection finding", "protection
visa", "refugee", "relevant adverse
Judiciary Act 1903
ss 36(2)(a)
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth), regs 2.08F, 2.20(18), 2.25AA(2), 2.25AB, Sch 2, cll 070.612(1),
070.612A(1).
GAGELER CJ,
EDELMAN AND JAGOT JJ. By an amended application filed on 28 May 2025 the
plaintiff seeks a writ of certiorari quashing
a decision of a delegate of the
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs not to revoke the mandatory
cancellation of the
plaintiff's Temporary Protection (Class XD) (subclass 785)
visa ("TPV") under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) and a
writ of mandamus requiring the Minister to make a decision under
whether to revoke the cancellation of the plaintiff's TPV according to
The plaintiff and the
Minister filed a special case in which they agreed the relevant facts and
questions for the opinion of the
Full Court.
will be explained, as we are satisfied "it is necessary in the interests of the
administration of justice" to make such an order
as provided for in
Migration Act
, the plaintiff should be granted an
extension of time for the filing of the application for the constitutional
writs. The plaintiff's
contentions that the delegate's decision not to revoke
the cancellation of the plaintiff's TPV is void for jurisdictional error,
however, are not established.
The basic facts
plaintiff is a 65‑year-old citizen of Iraq who arrived in Australia in
2012. He cannot read, write or carry on a conversation
in English. He was
diagnosed as suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder in or around 2013. He
made a valid application for
a protection visa in December 2012, which was
converted into an application for a Temporary Protection (Class XD)
(subclass 785)
visa by operation of reg 2.08F of the
Regulations 1994
(Cth). The Refugee Review Tribunal determined that the
plaintiff was a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom Australia has
obligations because he was a refugee in accordance with
Migration Act
in 2015. On remittal from the
Refugee Review Tribunal a protection finding was made for the plaintiff in
respect of Iraq for the
purposes of
s 197C(5)(a)
and the TPV was granted to the plaintiff.
June 2022 the plaintiff was convicted of the offence of specially aggravated
detaining of a person for advantage and was sentenced
to imprisonment for five
years and nine months, with a non-parole period of three years and six months.
On 21 March 2023, the plaintiff's
TPV was mandatorily cancelled under
Migration Act
. The plaintiff made representations
to the Minister as to why the mandatory cancellation of his TPV should be
revoked in response
to the Minister's invitation to do so, but the Minister's
delegate decided not to revoke the cancellation on 24 October 2024.
The extension of time
plaintiff was in immigration detention when the delegate's decision not to
revoke the cancellation of his TPV was notified to
him on 24 October 2024. The
notification occurred by an officer of the immigration detention centre handing
to the plaintiff the
notification together with a 335‑page "notification
package". The plaintiff was then informed he was being released from immigration
detention. The plaintiff incorrectly believed that the cancellation of his TPV
had been revoked when, in fact, he had been released
from immigration detention
under a Bridging R (Class WR) (subclass 070) (Bridging (Removal Pending))
visa ("BVR") granted on 24 October
2024, being a type of visa which the Minister
may grant to an eligible non-citizen in accordance with reg 2.25AB(1) of
Migration Regulations
(the plaintiff being a non-citizen who, as
provided for in reg 2.20(18), "there is no real prospect of the removal of
... from Australia
becoming practicable in the reasonably foreseeable
15 February 2025 the plaintiff's BVR as then in
ceased pursuant to
Migration Act
when the Republic of Nauru granted the
plaintiff permission to enter and remain in Nauru. The next day, 16 February
2025, the plaintiff
was taken into immigration detention. On that day the
plaintiff, who had been placed into contact with a lawyer, realised for the
first time that the cancellation of his TPV had not been revoked and that the
period of 35 days to apply to this Court for review
of the non-revocation
decision as provided for in
Migration Act
Section 486A(2)
permits this Court to grant an extension of time as it
considers appropriate if: (a) an application for that order has been made
in writing to the Court specifying why the applicant considers that it is
necessary in the interests of the administration of justice
to make the order;
and (b) the Court is satisfied that it is necessary in the interests of the
administration of justice to make
the Minister submitted that the grant of an extension of time should depend on
the plaintiff's grounds for review being
accepted, the interests of the
administration of justice dictate that an extension of time should be granted
irrespective of the
outcome of the plaintiff's challenge to the validity of the
decision. It was not reasonable to expect that the plaintiff, who read
almost no English, would understand that he was being released from immigration
detention not because the mandatory cancellation
of his TPV had been revoked,
but because the mandatory cancellation of his TPV had not been revoked and,
until Nauru gave him permission
to enter and remain in Nauru, he could not be
lawfully detained in immigration detention as there was no real prospect of
of him from Australia becoming practicable in the reasonably foreseeable
It follows that
there is a reasonable explanation for the delay of the filing of the plaintiff's
application for the constitutional
writs. The delay is also not excessively
long, the originating application having been filed on 21 February 2025, about
four months
after the non-revocation decision. The Minister also points to no
prejudice resulting from the delay. In light of the combined strength
matters, and an assessment of the merits of the proposed grounds of review as a
whole at a "reasonably impressionistic
we are satisfied
that it is necessary in the interests of the administration of justice to make
the order for an extension of time.
statutory conditions in
are satisfied. The extension of time is
therefore granted.
Legal consequences of decision
Plaintiff's challenge
plaintiff's challenge, although put in three different ways, emanates from one
aspect of the delegate's reasoning. In applying
Ministerial Direction
as required by
Migration Act
, para 9.1(1) (legal consequences
of decision under
, the delegate's reasons include
the following:
"117. I am aware that even if a non-revocation decision is made under
, [the plaintiff] will not remain indefinitely in detention. He
will be released from immigration detention. The Minister will separately
consider the type of visa on which he should reside and conditions to be imposed
on that visa, following further advice from the
Department."
statement reflected the delegate's express understanding that, as the plaintiff
was the subject of a protection finding in respect
of his country of
citizenship, Iraq, and there was no real prospect of his removal to a third
country at that time, the plaintiff
"would not be subject to indefinite
detention pending his removal and would instead be released from
detention".
plaintiff contended that the statement at para 117 of the delegate's reasoning
exposes jurisdictional error by reason of the
delegate not confronting the legal
consequences of the decision not to revoke the cancellation of the TPV in that:
(1) based on his
dealings within the Department of Home Affairs, the
delegate in fact knew that the Minister would not consider the "type of visa
which" the plaintiff should reside in Australia and the conditions of that visa
and that the plaintiff would be granted the BVR
on the conditions that were
mandatory to be imposed on the BVR, so that the reasoning process, being
contrary to the known facts,
was legally irrational and unreasonable;
(2) the delegate failed to understand that the only visa the plaintiff
could be granted
in accordance with the statutory scheme was the BVR; and
(3) the delegate failed to consider the consequences of the application
that statutory scheme to the plaintiff. The plaintiff further asserted that the
"human implications" of the monitoring conditions,
the breach of which carried
the consequence of imprisonment, reinforced the asserted requirement for
consideration of the statutory
consequences of the grant of a BVR.
Migration Act
the delegate, in performing the
delegate's functions and exercising the delegate's powers, was required to
comply with Ministerial
Direction 110. Paragraph 9(1) of Ministerial Direction
110 provided that, in making a decision under, amongst other provisions,
, certain considerations must be taken into account, where
relevant, including "in accordance with the following provisions ...
legal consequences of the decision". The "following provisions" stated,
amongst other things: that "[d]ecision-makers should be mindful
that unlawful
non-citizens are, in accordance with
section 198
, liable to removal from
Australia as soon as reasonably practicable in the circumstances specified in
that section" (para 9.1(1));
that "[w]here a protection finding (as defined
section 197C
) has been made for a non-citizen in the course of
considering a protection visa application made by the non-citizen, this
non-refoulement
obligations are engaged in relation to the
non-citizen" (para 9.1.1(1)); and the potential inability of the
non-citizen to apply
for another visa except a Bridging R (Class WR) visa
(para 9.1.1(3)).
can be inferred that the delegate knew that, as a consequence of the delegate's
decision not to revoke the cancellation of the
plaintiff's TPV, the plaintiff
would be considered for and would most likely be the subject of a grant of the
BVR including the mandatory
conditions to which such visas are subject. This
does not mean, however, that the statement in para 117 of the delegate's reasons
exposes a failure to confront the legal consequences of the delegate's decision
in any of the ways proposed on behalf of the plaintiff.
To the contrary, in
circumstances where the plaintiff is correct that the delegate knew that the
grant of a BVR to the plaintiff
was being considered and was very likely to be
granted on the same day as the delegate's decision refusing to revoke the
cancellation
of the plaintiff's TPV, it is impossible to infer that the delegate
misunderstood the statutory scheme or failed to consider its
application to the
the delegate made no specific reference to the consequences of the grant of a
BVR, including the imposition of mandatory
monitoring conditions, there was no
obligation upon the delegate to make express reference to those consequences
(however probable)
of a discretionary exercise of executive power while the
plaintiff was being detained or after
The plaintiff is
then left with the first way in which he alleges that the decision is void on
this ground, being legal irrationality
or unreasonableness based on what should
be characterised as nothing more than, at worst, mere infelicitous drafting of
explain further, the statement that the Minister "will separately consider the
is incorrect in that it is
common ground that the only "type" of visa that could be granted to the
plaintiff after the delegate decided
not to revoke the cancellation of the
plaintiff's TPV was the BVR. The plaintiff submitted that the statement in para
117 exposed
that, contrary to the true position, the delegate wrongly believed
that the Minister could grant a visa other than a BVR to the plaintiff
Migration Act
Section 195A(2)
provides that
if "the Minister thinks that it is in the public interest to do so, the Minister
may grant a person to whom [s 195A]
applies a visa of a particular class
(whether or not the person has applied for the visa)", but by
section only applies to a "person who is in detention" under
delegate clearly understood that the plaintiff would be granted another visa
because he could not be kept in immigration
plaintiff accepted, in oral argument, that no mistake could be inferred to have
been made by the delegate if the words "the type"
of did not appear in
para 117 of the delegate's reasons.
It is settled, however, that
reasons for decision of an administrative decision-maker "are not to be
construed minutely and finely
with an eye keenly attuned to the perception of
It is not to be
assumed that the delegate understood the power in
to be available
expressly confines that power to a person in detention under
Migration Act
and the very purpose of the delegate
in giving the relevant part of the delegate's reasons in which para 117 appears
was to explain
why the plaintiff could not be held in immigration detention
given this Court's reasoning in
NZYQ v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship and Multicultural
although the words "the type of" are inapt in their application to the visa the
plaintiff could be granted, they are apt
for the conditions to be imposed on any
such BVR as only certain conditions are
whereas other
conditions are discretionary. In addition, apart from the words "the type of" in
para 117, there is no suggestion in
the delegate's reasons that the
delegate wrongly believed that some type of visa, other than the BVR, would be
available to the plaintiff.
in circumstances where it must be inferred from the internal departmental
communications that the delegate knew the grant
of the BVR to the plaintiff was
being considered and was very likely to be granted on the same day as the
delegate's decision refusing
to revoke the cancellation of the plaintiff's TPV,
the real import of para 117 is reasonably clear. The real import is twofold.
that as a result of this Court's decision in
NZYQ v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
plaintiff could not be held in immigration detention for so long as there was no
real prospect of removal of him from Australia
becoming practicable in the
reasonably foreseeable future and therefore would reside in the Australian
community. Second, that the
process by which it would be decided if the
plaintiff would be granted a visa regulating his residing in the community and,
the conditions to be imposed on that visa would be the subject of
separate consideration (and, by implication, a separate decision)
decision the delegate was making not to revoke the cancellation of the
plaintiff's TPV. It must be inferred that the unstated
alternative if the
plaintiff was not granted the BVR, that he would reside in the community without
a visa as an unlawful non-citizen,
was not mentioned by the delegate because he
knew that the grant of the BVR was the overwhelming likelihood. Nothing in this
involves a failure to consider the legal consequences of the
delegate's decision.
also cannot be inferred, therefore, that the delegate misunderstood that the
plaintiff could be granted some type of visa other
than a BVR. On the same
basis, it cannot be concluded that the delegate's reasoning process was legally
irrational or unreasonable.
The Minister, via the Minister's Department, was
"separately consider[ing]" the grant of the BVR to the plaintiff. The delegate's
point, rightly made, was that the process involving any such grant was separate
from his own decision-making process. Nor, in so
saying, was the delegate
failing to consider the application of the statutory scheme to the plaintiff and
the resulting "binary"
consequences of the delegate's refusal being that, for so
long as there was no real prospect of the removal of the plaintiff from
Australia becoming practicable in the reasonably foreseeable future, the
plaintiff could not be detained in immigration detention
and therefore would be
in the Australian community either under the BVR or not. To the contrary, the
delegate was correctly recognising
that the statutory scheme provided for the
performance of the delegate's functions and exercise of the delegate's powers
Migration Act
(the power of the Minister to
revoke the cancellation decision) separately from the performance of other
functions and exercise of
other powers of the Minister to grant the BVR in
accordance with reg 2.25AB(2) of the
Migration Regulations
to conditions including the mandatory conditions.
these reasons, the delegate complied with the obligation imposed by
para 9(1)(a) of Ministerial Direction 110 to consider the
consequences of the delegate's decision and each of the three ways in which the
plaintiff puts this ground of challenge to
the validity of the delegate's
decision must be rejected.
Expectations of the Australian
Plaintiff's challenge
Ministerial
Direction 110, para 6, provides that a decision-maker must "take into
account the considerations identified in [paras]
8 and 9 [of the Direction],
where relevant to the decision". Paragraph 8.5, headed "Expectations of the
Australian Community", contains
the following provisions:
"(1) The Australian community expects non-citizens to obey Australian laws while
in Australia. Where a non-citizen has engaged in
serious conduct in breach of
this expectation, or where there is an unacceptable risk that they may do so,
the Australian community,
as a norm, expects the Government to not allow such a
non-citizen to enter or remain in Australia.
(2) In addition, visa cancellation or refusal, or non-revocation of the
mandatory cancellation of a visa, may be appropriate simply
because the nature
of the character concerns or offences is such that the Australian community
would expect that the person should
not be granted or continue to hold a visa.
In particular, the Australian community expects that the Australian Government
should refuse entry to non-citizens, or cancel their visas, if they
raise serious character concerns through conduct, in Australia
or elsewhere, of
the following kind:
(3) The above expectations of the Australian community apply regardless of
whether the non-citizen poses a measureable [sic] risk
of causing physical harm
to the Australian community[.]
(4) This consideration is about the expectations of the Australian community as
a whole, and in this respect, decision-makers should
proceed on the basis of the
Government's views as articulated above, without independently assessing the
community's expectations
in the particular case."
is common ground that the plaintiff's offending did not involve conduct of the
kind specified in para 8.5(2).
complying with Ministerial Direction 110, the delegate said this in the
delegate's reasons for decision:
"101. The Direction indicates that the Australian community expects
non-citizens to obey Australian laws while in Australia. Where
a non-citizen has
engaged in serious conduct in breach of this expectation, or where there is an
unacceptable risk that they may
do so, the Australian community, as a norm,
expects the Government to not allow such a non-citizen to enter or remain in
102. In addition, the Direction also indicates that non-revocation of the
mandatory cancellation of a visa may be appropriate simply
because the nature of
the character concerns or offences is such that the Australian community would
expect that the person should
not continue to hold a visa. In particular, the
Direction states that the Australian community expects that the Australian
can and should cancel a visa if the visa holder raises serious
character concerns through certain kinds of conduct.
103. In this regard, I have also noted the Direction states that the above
expectations of the Australian community apply regardless
of whether the
non-citizen poses a measurable risk of causing physical harm to the Australian
104. I have proceeded on the basis that the Australian community's general
expectations about non-citizens, as articulated in the
Direction, apply in this
case. I have attributed this consideration significant weight against revocation
of the cancellation of
[the plaintiff's] visa."
plaintiff contended that the delegate misapplied para 8.5(2) in that,
first, as none of the plaintiff's conduct was of the specified
kind there was no
logical basis to apply the expectation in that provision and, second, the
reasoning is internally inconsistent
with the delegate's reasoning that the
plaintiff would be granted another visa permitting the plaintiff to reside in
the Australian
community for so long as there was no real prospect of removal of
him from Australia becoming practicable in the reasonably foreseeable
contention of the plaintiff withstands scrutiny. Paragraphs 101 to 103 of the
delegate's reasons reflect the terms of para
8.5(1), (2) and (3) of Ministerial
Direction 110. Paragraph 104 of the delegate's reasons applies para 8.5(4)
of Ministerial Direction
110, which required the decision-maker to "proceed
on the basis of the Government's views as articulated above, without
independently
assessing the community's expectations in the particular case". In
referring, in para 104, to the "Australian community's general
expectations", it
is not to be assumed or inferred that the delegate wrongly believed the
plaintiff's conduct fell within the list
specified in para 8.5(2) of Ministerial
Direction 110, thereby triggering the application of the "particular"
expectation in the
second sentence of that paragraph. To the contrary, the fact
that the delegate does not identify any such specific conduct of the
and instead refers at a high level of generality to para 8.5(2) as concerning
"certain kinds of conduct" conveys that the
delegate understood both that the
plaintiff had not engaged in any kind of the specified conduct and that the
plaintiff was therefore
not subject to the particular expectation in the second
sentence of that paragraph.
reading of the delegate's reasons is reinforced by the fact that in
para 104 the delegate refers only to the "Australian community's
expectations". Those "general" expectations are to be understood as a reference
to the "norm" identified in para 8.5(1) (that
"[t]he Australian community
expects non-citizens to obey Australian laws while in Australia" and "[w]here a
non-citizen has engaged
in serious conduct in breach of this expectation ... the
Australian community, as a norm, expects the Government to not allow such
non-citizen to enter or remain in Australia") and the statement in the first
sentence of para 8.5(2) (that "non-revocation of the
mandatory cancellation of a
visa ... may be appropriate simply because the nature of the character concerns
or offences is such that
the Australian community would expect that the person
should not be granted or continue to hold a visa"). The provision in the second
sentence of para 8.5(2) beginning with the words "[i]n particular", as a matter
of ordinary English text, operates separately and
solely by reference to the
specified conduct. Having already characterised the plaintiff's custodial
sentence for his offending as
reflecting the view of the sentencing court that
the offending was "very serious", the delegate was entitled to give the
expectations
of the Australian community significant weight in deciding against
the revocation of the mandatory cancellation of the plaintiff's
visa even though
the plaintiff's conduct was not of the kind specified in para 8.5(2).
is there any inconsistency between that evaluation and the delegate's
recognition that the plaintiff would be in the Australian
community for so long
as there was no real prospect of removal of him from Australia becoming
practicable in the reasonably foreseeable
future. Paragraph 8.5(2), in saying
that "the Australian community would expect that the person should not be
granted or continue
to hold a visa", must be understood in context. It is plain
from the context that the "visa" being referred to in this sentence,
in the case
of a visa that has been subject to mandatory cancellation, is the visa that
permitted the non-citizen to remain in Australia
– such as, in the
plaintiff's case, the TPV. The reference is not to the BVR, which includes
mandatory conditions regulating
the plaintiff's conduct and which ceases by
operation of
Migration Act
once removal of the
non-citizen from Australia is reasonably practicable because of a third country
granting the non-citizen a right
to enter and remain in that country.
these reasons, the delegate complied with the obligation imposed by
para 8.5 of Ministerial Direction 110.
Delegate's use of
legal advice
Plaintiff's challenge
plaintiff's challenge is based on agreed or undisputed facts that: (1) the
plaintiff gave to the Department documents in support
of his representations to
the Minister to revoke the cancellation of his TPV; (2) those documents
erroneously included a legal advice
from counsel in respect of the plaintiff's
prospects of appealing against his sentence; (3) the legal advice was the
subject of legal
professional privilege, having been provided by his then
solicitor to the plaintiff under cover of a letter also provided to the
Department stating that the enclosed legal advice (and related documents) were
protected by legal professional privilege and the
envelope in which they came
was not to be opened nor the documents read or inspected by any person other
than the plaintiff; (4)
the plaintiff did not intend to waive that legal
professional privilege when giving the legal advice to the Department;
(5) the Department
provided the legal advice to the delegate; and
(6) the delegate read and quoted the legal advice in the delegate's
delegate recorded in para 7 of the delegate's reasons that he had considered the
representations made by the plaintiff and the
documents provided in support and
recorded in para 35, in the context of considering the nature and seriousness of
the plaintiff's
conduct leading to the plaintiff's conviction, that "[o]verall,
[the sentencing judge] found [the plaintiff's] criminality to be
of a high order
Attachment H2
". Attachment H2 is the legal advice. As noted, the
legal advice concerned the prospects of the plaintiff successfully appealing
his sentence. The legal advice stated that the sentencing judge found
the plaintiff's "criminality to be one of a high order", quoting
sentencing judge's remarks on sentence. The legal advice concluded that an
appeal against the severity of the sentence was
unlikely to succeed.
plaintiff submitted that the delegate was on notice that the legal advice was
subject to legal professional privilege and had
been provided in error, the
knowledge of the Department of that fact being attributable to the delegate.
Further, that the legal
advice contained material adverse to the plaintiff in
that it supported an inference that the sentence imposed on the plaintiff was
not too severe and therefore had the effect of bolstering the delegate's view as
to the seriousness of the plaintiff's offending.
According to the submissions,
the delegate's use of the legal advice denied the plaintiff procedural fairness
and was legally unreasonable
in the circumstances.
problems for the plaintiff's submissions are twofold. First, it cannot be
inferred that the Department or the delegate knew that
the plaintiff had
provided the legal advice to the Department in support of the plaintiff's
representations in error. Second, the
content of the legal advice concerned only
the prospects of success of the plaintiff appealing against the severity of his
These problems for the plaintiff are related in their consequences for
the plaintiff's arguments. The consequences are that, in circumstances
plaintiff's own representations included that he was "very wrong to commit" the
offences, took "full responsibility for
[his] actions", and felt "so remorseful"
delegate that
the plaintiff had provided the legal advice in support of his
representations that he recognised the wrong he had done and, as he
wished, wanted only to "rebuild [his] life as a productive and law-abiding
member of society". In the face of that reasonably
open inference, it would not
be inferred that the Department or the delegate knew that the plaintiff had not
intended to waive legal
professional privilege in providing the legal advice in
support of the plaintiff's representations.
the quote from the legal advice is itself a quote from the sentencing judge's
remarks on sentence of the plaintiff, which
the Department had separately
provided to the delegate. The delegate could take no more from the legal advice
than that separately
established fact and that, given the sentencing judge's
assessment of the seriousness of the plaintiff's offending, the plaintiff
unlikely to have been able to successfully appeal against the severity of his
sentence. There is no suggestion in the delegate's
reasoning that the legal
advice had any effect on the delegate's assessment of the seriousness of the
plaintiff's offending. It would
have been irrational for the delegate to so
reason as, the sentence having been imposed and not having been subject to
appeal, the
sentence was an incontestable fact, as was the sentencing judge's
assessment that the offending was "of a high order". It therefore
cannot be said
that the legal advice could have bolstered the delegate's conclusion about the
seriousness of the plaintiff's offending.
these reasons, the legal advice did not constitute relevant material adverse to
the interests of the plaintiff such as to attract
an obligation of procedural
fairness requiring disclosure to the plaintiff of his error and an opportunity
for the plaintiff to claim
legal professional privilege over the legal advice.
Nor was any practical injustice caused to the plaintiff by not having been given
that opportunity. To explain, the sentencing judge's sentencing remarks were
relevant adverse material, but the plaintiff was on
notice of those remarks and
had the opportunity to make representations about them. Therefore, the quote
from the legal advice in
the delegate's reasons, being no more than a quote from
the remarks of the sentencing judge, could not constitute separate relevant
adverse material. The opinion in the legal advice that it was unlikely that the
plaintiff could successfully appeal against the severity
of his sentence is not
mentioned in the delegate's reasons. No doubt, this absence reflects the
irrelevance of that opinion. Given
that the plaintiff had not in fact appealed
against sentence, the delegate, in any event, was required to assume the
sentence and
the remarks on sentence of the sentencing judge to be correct.
the same reasons, the plaintiff's submission that the delegate using the legal
advice in the way in which the delegate did was
legally unreasonable cannot be
accepted. The delegate could have quoted the remarks of the sentencing judge
directly; that the delegate
did so indirectly by relying on the quote in the
legal advice was neither unreasonable nor irrational in the circumstances of
Answers to separate questions
separate questions are to be answered as follows:
an extension of time be granted under
Migration Act
for the filing of the application for a constitutional or other
Answer: yes.
the non-revocation decision affected by jurisdictional error on the basis that
the delegate, in addressing the legal consequences
of the decision:
a. misapprehended or failed to consider the legal consequences of the
decision; and/or
b. reasoned in a way that was legally unreasonable?
Answer: no.
the non-revocation decision affected by jurisdictional error on the basis that
the delegate failed to comply with Ministerial
Direction 110, and so failed
to comply with
Migration Act
consideration of the expectations of the community?
Answer: no.
the non-revocation decision affected by jurisdictional error on the basis that
the delegate:
a. denied the plaintiff procedural fairness; and/or
b. proceeded in a legally unreasonable manner,
by taking into account legal advice given to the plaintiff, without notice to
the plaintiff?
Answer: no.
relief, if any, should be granted to the plaintiff?
Answer: none.
6) Who should pay the costs of the proceeding?
Answer: the plaintiff.
The matter cannot be remitted to
the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) or the Federal
Court of Australia
as they do not have jurisdiction in respect of the matter:
Migration Act 1958
Judiciary Act
On 6 November 2024 the Minister
granted to the plaintiff another Bridging R (Class WR) (subclass 070)
(Bridging (Removal Pending))
NZYQ v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 280 CLR 137 at 162
Tu'uta Katoa v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2022] HCA 28
276 CLR 579 at 591
, 605 [54].
Direction no. 110 – Visa
refusal and cancellation under section 501 and revocation of a mandatory
cancellation of a visa under
section 501CA
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth), regs 2.25AA(2) and 2.25AB(2).
Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
(1996) 185 CLR 259 at 272, quoting
Collector of Customs v Pozzolanic Enterprises Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 456
; (1993) 43 FCR 280
(2023) 280 CLR 137.
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth), Sch 2, cll 070.612(1) and 070.612A(1).
(2023) 280 CLR 137.
RTF format (236 KB)
Signed PDF/A format