URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1968/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ogden Industries Pty Ltd v Lucas [1968] UKPCHCA 1; (1968) 118 CLR 32 (25 November 1968)
PRIVY COUNCIL
OGDEN INDUSTRIES PTY. LTD. v. LUCAS
[1968] UKPCHCA 1
(1968) 118 CLR 32
Workers' Compensation (Vict.) - Statutes
Privy Council
Lord Reid(1), Lord Hodson(1), Lord Upjohn(1), Lord Donovan(1) and Lord Pearson
Workers' Compensation (Vict.) - Death - Statutory amendment increasing rate
of compensation - Whether amended rate applies in case
of death after
amendment when original injury from &which worker suffered was incurred before
amendment - Pulmonary oedema causing
death of worker suffering from coronary
heart disease - Acts Interpretation Act 1958 (Vict.),s.7(2)* -
Compensation Act 1958
(Vict.) (as amended by Workers' Compensation (Amendment)
Act 1965 (Vict.)), ss. 5 (1), 9 (1).*
Statutes - Repeal - Interpretation and operation of repealed statute - Right
or liability acquired accrued or incurred under repealed
statute - "Right" -
"Liability" - Acts Interpretation Act 1958 (Vict.), s. 7 (2)* - Workers'
Compensation Act 1958 (as amended by
Workers' Compensation (Amendment) Act
1965 (Vict.)), ss. 5 (1), 9 (1).*
1968, July 8-11, 15, 16; November 25. 25:11:1968
APPEAL from the High Court of Australia.
November 25.
The advice of their Lordships was delivered by LORD UPJOHN:-
This appeal gives rise to a question of some general importance with regard
the amendment to the workers' compensation legislation
in the State of
Victoria in 1965. (at p33)
2. When the claim for compensation came before the Workers' Compensation
Board in Melbourne the facts were agreed and can be very
briefly stated. The
deceased Reginald George Lucas, an employee of the appellants, suffered from
heart disease but it was admitted
that this disease was aggravated and
accelerated by the nature of the deceased's employment with the appellants and
was a contributory
factor to his death. He suffered from a coronary occlusion
and myocardial infarction on 18th February 1965 and became totally
incapacitated;
he did not work again. He became entitled to weekly payments at
the rate prescribed by the
Workers' Compensation Act 1958
Victoria (the 1958 Act) which he duly received. In March 1965 the deceased was
admitted to hospital for treatment;
he returned
there on 19th June 1965 and so
remained until his death on 7th July of that year. On 30th June 1965 he
suffered a further
occlusion and myocardial infarction and on the day
of his death he had a pulmonary oedema from which he died. He left surviving
three persons wholly dependent upon his earnings namely his widow the
respondent and two children under the age of sixteen. No
arisen and the compensation payable to the dependants would have been
calculated in accordance with s. 9 of
the 1958 Act
(to which their Lordships
will refer presently) but for the fact that that Act was amended by the
Workers' Compensation
(Amendment)
Act 1965, No. 7292, of the State of Victoria
(the amendment Act) which became operative on 1st July 1965. The amendment
increased the benefits payable to dependants and also altered a number
of definitions but the substantial question is
the circumstances
the dependants are entitled to be paid compensation at the increased rate
under the amendment Act. An
interim award
of the amount admittedly due to the
dependants under the 1958 Act was made and when the matter came before the
Compensation
Board they were awarded the additional amount due on the
footing that the amendment Act was applicable. This question
reserved for the determination of the Supreme Court of the State of Victoria.
On 28th February 1967 the Full Court (Winneke
Smith and Pape JJ.) (Lucas
v. Ogden Industries Pty. Ltd.
(1967) VR 620
) upheld the award of the
Compensation Board upon the ground
that for the purposes of the relevant
legislation the deceased suffered
an injury on 7th July 1965 which gave him a
new title to
compensation or that it was open to the Board so to hold as a
fact. The appellants appealed to the High Court of Australia.
judgment (Ogden Industries Pty. Ltd. v. Lucas
[1967] HCA 30
(1967) 116 CLR 537
) delivered
on 20th September 1967 the High
Court by a majority
dismissed the appeal but
for reasons differing entirely from that
of the Supreme Court. (at p34)
3. Two questions arise; the first, of general importance, is whether as the
amendment Act came into operation after the original
injury from which the
worker suffered though before his death, his dependants on his death are
entitled to the increased rates prescribed
by that Act. In the High Court
Taylor, Windeyer and Owen JJ. (dissentiente Barwick C.J. and Kitto J.) held
that they were so entitled.
Secondly, did the deceased after 30th June 1965
suffer a further injury or aggravation thereof which gave him a new title for
purposes of the Amendment Act as held by the Full Court. No Judge of the
High Court agreed with this view. (at p34)
4. Their Lordships must set out the relevant sections of the 1958 Act and of
the amendment Act.
Workers' Compensation Act 1958
"5 (1) It in any employment personal injury arising out
of or in the course of the employment is caused to a worker
his employer shall subject as hereinafter mentioned be liable
to pay compensation in accordance with the provisions of this
"9 (1) Where the worker's death results from or is materially
contributed to by the injury the compensation shall be a sum
in accordance with the provisions of the clauses appended to
this section."
(The clauses referred to)
"1 (a) (i) If the worker leaves a widow or any children
under sixteen years of age at the time of the death or leaves
any other dependants wholly dependent upon his earnings,
the amount of compensation shall be the sum of Two thousand
two hundred and forty pounds together with an additional
sum of Eighty pounds in respect of each such child."
Section 9 (2) and cl. 1 (b) appended thereto provided for
weekly sums to be paid to the injured workman during his
incapacity and he was duly paid.
Workers' Compensation (Amendment) Act 1965
"2 (a) For the interpretation of 'Dependants' there shall
be substituted the following interpretation: '"Dependants"
means such persons as were wholly mainly or in part dependent
upon the earnings of the worker at the time of the death or
who would but for the incapacity due to the injury have been
so dependent.';
(b) For the interpretation of 'Injury' there shall be
substituted
the following interpretation: '"Injury" means any
physical or mental injury, and without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, includes:
(a) a disease contracted by a worker in the course of his
employment whether at or away from his place of
employment and to which the employment was a
contributing factor; and
(b) the recurrence aggravation or acceleration of any
pre-existing
injury or disease where the employment was a
contributing factor to such recurrence aggravation or
acceleration - and for the purposes of this interpretation
the employment of a worker shall be taken to include
any travelling referred to in sub-section (2) of section
eight of this Act.';"
Section 5 of the amendment Act increased the benefits payable by virtue of cl.
1 (a) (i) of the 1958 Act to Four thousand five hundred
pounds with an
additional sum of One hundred pounds for each child under sixteen. (at p35)
5. It will also be convenient at this stage to set out s. 7 (2) of the Acts
Interpretation Act 1958.
"(2) Where any Act passed on or after the first day of
August One thousand eight hundred and ninety, whether
before or after the commencement of this Act, repeals or
amends any other enactment, then unless the contrary
appears the repeal or amendment shall not:
(a) . . . .
(b) affect the previous operation of any enactment so
repealed or amended or anything duly done or suffered
under any enactment so repealed or amended; or
(c) affect any right privilege obligation or liability acquired
accrued or incurred under any enactment so repealed or
amended; or
(d) . . . .
(e) affect any investigation legal proceeding or remedy in
respect of any such right privilege obligation liability
. . . as aforesaid."
Section 5 (3) of this Act is discussed in the judgments in the High Court but
no argument was based upon it before their Lordships.
6. The first question depends entirely upon the true construction of the
relevant Acts and in their Lordships' opinion should be
solved by construing
the Acts without reference to authority and then to see whether authority
compels a different conclusion. The
basic difference between the majority and
minority view in the High Court depends upon a different approach to the true
s. 5 of the 1958 Act but it is fair to say that the minority view
was undoubtedly affected to some extent by the considerable body
of authority,
especially in the House of Lords, upon this matter. The first problem is to
ascertain the true nature of the liability
which s. 5 of the 1958 Act imposes
upon the employer when it enacts that he shall be liable to pay compensation
in accordance with
the Act. As Windeyer J. pointed out in the course of his
judgment the word liability may be used in several senses. It seems to their
Lordships that in s. 5, which follows quite closely the workers' compensation
legislation in the United Kingdom, the Act is not there
defining liability in
any strict sense for it nowhere defines to whom the employer is to be liable
nor when nor in what circumstances;
and as a matter of construction s. 5
directs the reader to the rest of the Act to discover what is the true nature
of the liability
imposed upon the employer. That leads to s. 9. It seems to
their Lordships that the object of s. 5 or its predecessor was to introduce
what was fundamentally new legislation and to indicate to the employer in
general terms that though he himself might not be in breach
of any duty of
care to his employee he nevertheless would be liable to compensate him for
injuries received during the course of
his employment and that he could no
longer rely on the then existing doctrine of common employment as a defence to
any action by
the worker. Their Lordships are content to assume that when the
injury happens the worker has a vested interest in the compensation
him during incapacity under s. 9 (2) although such incapacity may not appear
until later. But it is not necessary to decide
that point in this case for the
injury and incapacity were coterminous. This much however is clear that upon
the happening of the
injury the worker has a sufficient interest to enable him
to obtain a declaratory judgment if, through the nature of his injury,
incapacity is likely to appear: see King v. Port of London Authority
7. Then s. 9 (1) provides for the dependants. It is not in dispute and the
authorities establish that the rights to compensation
of the dependants of the
injured workman who has died, are independent of his right, but that does not
seem to their Lordships to
carry the matter any further in this case. (at p37)
8. Under the 1958 Act the widow did not have to prove that she was in fact
dependent upon the earnings of her husband though under
the amendment Act she
has to do so. Nevertheless it is quite clear as a matter of law that no single
person can say under either
Act the moment before the death "I shall be a
dependant at the death if I so long live". First it must be established that
was caused or contributed to by the injury, secondly that the widow
will be the deceased's widow at the date of death and not dead
or married to
some other man, and the children must show that they are under sixteen. None
of these things can be ascertained (let
alone proved) until after the moment
of death of the worker. Accordingly it seems to their Lordships that the
dependants at the death
cannot before the death be described, as a matter of
legal phraseology, or with strict accuracy, as a class having a contingent
to succeed to certain benefits from the employer upon the death of the
injured workman. Such potential dependants have no more than
a mere expectancy
or as it is sometimes called a mere spes successionis and such a hope or
expectancy gives rise to no rights in
law at all. It is a mere possibility.
This is well established as for example in the case of those entitled upon an
intestacy, or
what is perhaps more important, in the case of those who are
entitled to succeed under limitations dependent upon an intestacy. The
judgment of Kay J. in In re Parsons; Stockley v. Parsons
(1890) 45 Ch D 51
illuminates this point. No doubt the potential dependant
may assign this
possibility for a consideration but this belongs to the
realm of contract. In
their Lordships' judgment s. 5 is itself
merely introductory and even when
taken in conjunction with s. 9 and
the appended clauses does not confer upon
the dependants any
rights until the moment of the worker's death. If that be
the true nature
of the benefits conferred by the 1958 Act upon the potential
dependants then the vital question is whether on the true construction
(2) (c) of the Acts Interpretation Act (which applies
to amendments as well as
repeals) the rights and liabilities of the
parties are thereby preserved and
so are not to be affected by
the subsequent amendment of the 1958 Act. (at
9. In their Lordships' opinion in s. 7 (2) (c) the rights, privileges and
obligations acquired or accrued on the one side and the
liabilities incurred
on the other side referred to in that paragraph are mutual and correlative.
10. As in their Lordships' judgment the potential dependants had no rights in
law before the death there is in their view no true
liability in a legal sense
for the purposes of s. 7 of the Acts Interpretation Act upon the employer
vis-a-vis the dependants until
the death of the worker. In their opinion the
word liability in s. 7 is used to connote something quite different from the
referred to in s. 5 of the 1958 Act. The object and intent of the
Interpretation Act is to preserve rights and privileges acquired
or accrued on
the one side and the corresponding obligation or liability incurred by the
person bound to observe or perform those
rights or privileges on the other
side; so that when a subsequent Act repeals or amends those rights privileges
and liabilities for
the future that would not affect the pre-existing mutual
rights and liabilities of the parties. If therefore the potential dependants
could establish a right or privilege within the true meaning of par. (c) their
Lordships would entirely agree with the remarks of
the Chief Justice in the
course of his judgment to the effect that if there had been an entire repeal
of the Workers' Compensation
Acts nevertheless the rights of the dependants
and the corresponding liability of the employer would be preserved. But in the
that their Lordships take there is for the purposes of the Interpretation
Act no right in the dependants and no correlative liability
upon the worker's
employers until the moment of death. Therefore apart altogether from authority
their Lordships are of opinion that
the Acts Interpretation Act has no
application and the rights of the dependants and the corresponding liability
of the employer must
be tested and ascertained at the date of the death; at
that time there was an obligation upon the employer under and by virtue of
1958 Act as amended by amendment Act to compensate the dependants in
accordance with its provisions. That was the ground of decision
majority of the High Court in their very careful judgments with which their
Lordships agree. But there can be no doubt that
there is a formidable body of
authority tending to show that a different view has been taken of the basic
nature of s. 5 of the 1958
Act and of the corresponding legislation in the
United Kingdom and their Lordships must examine some of the cases. They desire
reiterate however what has so often been said before that in a common-law
system of jurisprudence which depends largely upon judicial
precedent and the
earlier pronouncements of judges, the greatest possible care must be taken to
relate the observation of a judge
to the precise issues before him and to
confine such observations, even though expressed in broad terms, to the
general compass of
the facts before him, unless he makes it clear that he
intended his remarks to have a wider ambit. It is not possible for judges
always to express their judgments so as to exclude entirely the risk that in
some subsequent case their language may be misapplied
and any attempt at such
perfection of expression could only lead to the opposite result of uncertainty
or even obscurity as regards
the case in hand. (at p39)
11. These general principles are particularly important when questions of
construction of statutes are in issue. (at p39)
12. It is quite clear that judicial statements as to the construction and
intention of an Act must never be allowed to supplant
or supersede its proper
construction and courts must beware of falling into the error of treating the
law to be that laid down by
the judge in construing the Act rather than found
in the words of the Act itself. (at p39)
13. No doubt a decision on particular words binds inferior courts on the
construction of those words on similar facts but beyond
that the observations
of judges on the construction of statutes may be of the greatest help and
guidance but are entitled to no more
than respect and cannot absolve the court
from its duty of exercising an independent judgment. It is with these
principles in mind
that their Lordships approach this very considerable body
of authority. (at p39)
14. They preface their observations by saying that in only one reported case
namely Dwyer v. Broken Hill South Ltd. (1928) 2 WCR
(NSW) 207 before the
Supreme Court of New South Wales has a point so very close to that before
their Lordships as to be virtually
indistinguishable come before any court.
That Court decided it in the sense in which the majority of the High Court
have decided
it in this case. But no authority was cited and perhaps the
reasons which were stated with extreme brevity are not of great persuasive
authority. Their Lordships do not propose to review all the authorities to
which they were referred and it would not be helpful so
to do but there are
some cases in the House of Lords and in the Court of Appeal in England which
their Lordships must examine and
then see how far those cases have been
adopted as part of the law of workers' compensation in the State of Victoria.
15. The first case is that of the United Collieries Ltd. v. Simpson
. A workman was injured and died five days after
his injury as a result of
it. His mother was a dependant but she died three months
later. The mother's
executrix made a claim but
it was argued that as the mother had made no claim
in her lifetime the executrix could
not do so and it was further alleged that
the mother's rights (if any) did not survive her death. Neither argument
succeeded. The
appellants relied on some observations in
Lord Macnaghten's
opinion at the foot of p. 393 and top of p. 394 as establishing the principle
that the liability accrues from the
occurrence of the accident, and of course
so it does in the sense intended by the noble Lord
when he went on to say that
the liability
falls upon the employer by reason of the accident; no one could
doubt the accuracy of that
as a general statement. He then went on
to consider
the precise legal issues before him namely whether liability was altered or
by notice of the accident or a claim
for compensation or the death of
the mother, which have nothing to do with this case. (at p40)
16. Plainly nothing in that opinion bears upon the instant problem and indeed
other observations of Lord Macnaghten later on p.
399 and of Lord Loreburn at
p. 389 make it plain that they were considering only rights arising or
becoming vested upon the workman's
death. (at p40)
17. Their Lordships were referred to some observations of Lord Dunedin in
Daff v. Midland Colliery Owners' Mutual Indemnity Co.
(1913) 6 BCC 799
at p 814 , which were quite accurate in relation to the case before the House
which was concerned solely with
the rights of the
worker himself. (at p40)
18. Then in 1925 and 1927 there were three cases in the United Kingdom
bearing on this problem which have played the greatest part
in the formulation
of judicial decisions in Australia. They are Moakes v. Blackwell Colliery Co.
(1925) 2 KB 64
; Briggs v. Thomas
Dryden & Sons
(1925) 2 KB 667
in the Court
of Appeal and Clement v. Davis & Sons Ltd.
(1927) AC 126
, in the House of
approved Moakes' Case
(1925) 2 KB 64
19. In his reply before their Lordships counsel for the appellants very
fairly said that upon the main point he really relied on
Moakes' Case
and Clement's Case
(1927) AC 126
20. The appellants relied on some observations of Atkin L.J. (as he then was)
in Briggs' Case (1925) 2 KB, at p 680 but in their
Lordships' view he was
doing no more than stating his view of what Moakes' Case
(1925) 2 KB 64
decided although he expressed his
agreement with it. (at p41)
21. In Moakes' Case
(1925) 2 KB 64
and in Clement's Case
(1927) AC 126
court was also concerned with the effect of a statutory
amendment, the
Workers' Compensation Act 1923 after the injury. Before
the amendment the
position was cogently stated by Lord Sumner
(1927) AC, at pp 133, 134 , as
"Before that Act an employer, who had on his books a
continuing present liability to make weekly compensation payments to an
injured man, would also, week by week, be entitled to write down pro tanto
the contingent liability, which would accrue in the
event of that workman's
death. In the present case the employer had thus written it off
altogether. Week by week his payments had
vested in him a corresponding
right - a diminution of his contingent liability until it reached zero."
The 1923 Act abolished this right of deduction in so far as it deduced the
compensation payable to dependants below 200 pounds. (at
22. Those cases were therefore concerned with the question whether and to
what extent the subsequent enactment reduced the employers'
right of set-off
in respect of payments to dependants. It was held that the 1923 Act had at
common law no retrospective operation
for that would affect the employer's
right to reduce his obligation to the dependants when ascertained at the
death. (at p41)
23. In their Lordships' opinion there is nothing in the judgments of the
Court of Appeal in Moakes' Case
(1925) 2 KB 64
of assistance. Kitto
J. in his judgment in the present case relied on some observations of Pollock
M.R. and Scrutton L.J.
respect those observations did not state the
true ratio decidendi as accurately as it was stated in the House of Lords -
(1927) AC 126
24. In Clement's Case
(1927) AC 126
there is no doubt that some of their
Lordships used language which, broadly interpreted, fully
supports the
argument of the appellants.
Thus Lord Dunedin said that in the case of
accidents arising out of and in the course of
employment in the past certain
liabilities accrue at once to the workman and his dependants on the
one hand and the employer
on the other (1927) AC, at p 131 .
But Lord Dunedin
cannot have had in mind the problem before their Lordships, for it did not
His language was sufficiently
accurate for the determination of the
point in issue namely whether the employer's right to reduce
his liability to
whoever the dependants
might be found to be at the death by payments to the
worker during his life was affected
by the subsequent Act. (at p42)
25. In that context the use of the words "contingent liability" by Lord
Sumner in the passage already quoted was sufficiently accurate
and appropriate
to explain the point then before their Lordships and had no all-embracing
meaning applicable to determination of
the point in this case. (at p42)
26. In Australia these judgments have been literally construed in some cases
as establishing broad principles of construction applicable
to cases going far
beyond the issues at stake in those judgments; a judicial process against
which their Lordships have already protested;
see for example Australian Iron
& Steel Ltd. v. Coal Mines Insurance Pty. Ltd.
(1951) 52 SR (NSW) 47
Street C.J.; in Van
v. Haslington
(1964) 64 SR (NSW) 387
, where Walsh
J. in the opening words of his judgment plainly felt himself bound by judicial
authority against his inclination; and
Fisher v. Hebburn Ltd.
[1960] HCA 80
(1960) 105 CLR
, per Fullagar J. (1960) 105 CLR,
at p 194 . But
in truth these
broadly-stated observations were not inappropriate to the facts and
circumstances before those Courts.
Whether the
judgment in Van Kooten's Case
(1964) 64 SR (NSW) 387
which depended entirely upon the construction of s. 71
of the Workers'
Compensation
Act of New South Wales, which deals with the
where the worker or his dependants have left the State after the injury
no close counterpart in the Victorian legislation,
reconsideration is not a matter which their Lordships have considered.
27. The cases of Stevens v. Railway Commissioners for N.S.W.
(1930) 31 SR
; Kraljevich v. Lake View & Star Ltd.
British Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd. v. Simmons
[1921] HCA 52
(1921) 30 CLR 102
dealing only with the rights
of the worker. In each case it was held
that the rights of the worker and the corresponding
of the employer
were vested
at the time of the injury and naturally some observations in
Clement's Case
(1927) AC 126
and Moakes'
(1925) 2 KB 64
were relied
rightly in their Lordships' opinion but none of these cases were in the least
concerned with
the problem before their
28. Like the majority of the High Court, their Lordships cannot find in the
English or Australian cases sufficient to compel them
to depart from the view
of the true construction of the relevant Acts in relation to the rights of
dependants which they have already
expressed. Upon the main point therefore in
their Lordships' judgment the appeal fails. (at p42)
29. Although the second point does not arise their Lordships propose to say a
few words upon it. The point is peculiar to the facts
of this case and depends
upon proof of the fact that the deceased suffered a further injury on or after
1st July 1965, when the amendment
Act came into operation, for which he and
his dependants would then be plainly entitled to compensation under its terms.
30. As already mentioned the Supreme Court of Victoria took the view that the
deceased suffered an injury on 7th July by reason
of his pulmonary oedema and
that arose out of the employment, so that the employers were fixed with
liability to pay compensation
under the amendment Act. In part the decision of
the Supreme Court purported to depend upon the findings of the Workers'
Compensation
Board but in fact there were none, for the Board heard no
evidence and the facts were agreed before them. No doubt the Board was
entitled to draw inferences from those facts but in fact it merely interpreted
those facts so as to bring them within the definition
of a new injury which
was plainly a matter of law open to review in the higher courts. If anything
was to be made of this point then
their Lordships agree with Kitto J. that the
facts should have been fully explored with the direct assistance of medical
rather than left to an agreed statement of facts which the learned
Judge described not inaptly as a murky piece of jargon. But on
the decision
that there was a post 30th June 1965 injury, in the High Court of Australia
all of their Honours except Owen J. (who
having decided the matter in favour
of the respondent on the main point quite reasonably did not feel it necessary
to deal with this
point) reached the conclusion that the final pulmonary
oedema which caused the workman's death on 7th July was no more than a
phase of the illness which he had earlier incurred and that the
injury for the purposes of the Workers' Compensation Acts had been
before 30th June 1965. The position was stated succintly by the Chief Justice
in these terms:-
"The work caused the injury and on the agreed facts the
injury resulted in death. The relevant effect of the contribution of work
to the disease so as to constitute it an injury, in my opinion, was, so to
speak, spent in February 1965 when the injury was received
by the worker.
All else was the result and consequence of the injury" (1967) 116 CLR, at
Their Lordships entirely agree with this view of the position and only desire
to add that though it is not necessary finally to decide
the point, as at
present advised it seems to them that having regard to the wording of the
revised definition of injury contained
in s. 2 of the amendment Act, if a
claim is based on a recurrence aggravation or acceleration of a pre-existing
injury or disease
that must be contributed to by further employment after the
original disease. This may in many cases pose a most difficult question
fact but in this case there is no difficulty for the deceased never returned
to his employment after 18th February 1965. (at p44)
31. An argument was addressed to their Lordships with regard to the
compulsory insurance of the employers' liability under the workmen's
compensation legislation but the matter was never fully developed before the
High Court and no point was taken thereon in the appellant's
case and their
Lordships therefore do not think it is necessary to deal with that argument.
In any event it would seem to their Lordships
that if there was a lacuna in
the compulsory insurance provisions, that could not affect the proper
construction of the Act as between
employer and worker or his dependants. (at
32. In conclusion their Lordships share the regrets expressed by the Chief
Justice and Taylor J. in the course of their respective
judgments that the
Victorian legislature did not see fit when passing the amendment Act to make
transparently clear their intentions
as regards injuries sustained before the
amendment. (at p44)
33. Their Lordships will humbly advise Her Majesty that the appeal should be
dismissed. The appellants must pay the respondent's
costs of the appeal on a
solicitor and own client basis in accordance with their undertaking. (at p44)
Solicitors for the appellant, Allen & Overy.
Solicitors for the respondent, Radcliffes & Co.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter