Westnedge and Repatriation Commission (Veterans' entitlements) [2025] ARTA 2400 (12 November 2025)
Westnedge and Repatriation Commission (Veterans' entitlements) [2025] ARTA
2400 (12 November 2025)
ReviewNumber: 2024/1218, 2024/1227
Applicants: Neil Westnedge & Ann Westnedge
Respondent: Repatriation Commission
Tribunal Number: 2024/1218 & 2024/1227
Tribunal: Deputy President O'Donovan
Place: Brisbane
Date: 12 November 2025
The reviewable decision dated 1 December 2023 is set aside
and the matter is remitted to the respondent for assessment of any service
pension payable on the basis that the excess curtilage is valued at nil as at 2
December 2022.
Statement made on 12 November 2025 at 1:38pm
VETERAN’S AFFAIRS
– Service pension – value of total combined assets – dispute
excess curtilage – consideration of valuation
method – decision under review set aside and remitted to respondent for
reconsideration.
Legislation
Veterans Entitlement
Re Reynolds and Secretary,
Department of Social Security
[1986] AATA 304
Statement of Reasons
and Mrs Westnedge (‘the applicants’) lodged a combined application
for a service pension under the
Veterans Entitlement Act 1986
(‘VEA’), received by the Department of Veterans’ Affairs on 2
December 2022.
decision the subject of this review was made on 1 December 2023. That decision
affirmed an earlier decision of the respondent
dated 6 March 2023 which declined
the applicants’ request for a service pension due to the value of the
applicants’ combined
among the applicants’ assets was the value of the land surrounding their
primary residence, categorised as ‘excess
curtilage’. Under the VEA,
a person’s principal home and up to two hectares of land surrounding it is
excluded from the
assets test when determining pension eligibility. If the
principal home is on a larger parcel of land, in most circumstances the
above two hectares is described as ‘excess curtilage’ and needs to
be ascribed a value and included in the asset
the present case the applicants principal home sits on 4.32 hectares of land.
The respondent contends that the 2.32 hectares of
excess curtilage has a value
which should be included in the applicants’ asset pool. When the excess
curtilage was valued based
on a desk assessment in 2023, the value attributed to
the land was $150,000. The respondent now accepts that that valuation was too
high. The respondent contends that the value of the excess curtilage was $60,000
as at December 2022 and this amount should be included
in the asset pool of the
applicants. That contention is supported by a professional valuation undertaken
after a site visit by well
known valuation firm JLL.
applicants oppose the inclusion of that sum in their asset pool.
contend that, correctly valued, the excess curtilage’s value is nil. This
contention is supported by a valuation prepared
by an experienced valuer from
the local area.
the alternative, the applicants contend that any value attributable to the
excess curtilage should be disregarded in working out
their pension because the
‘severe financial hardship’
apply such that the
value can be disregarded in working out the applicants’ pension rate under
s 52Z of the VEA.
have had regard to the following documentary material:
Date of Document
Description
Applicants’ letter to Tribunal in support of application
Letter from Ann Westnedge to Tribunal (enclosed with A1)
Applicants’ letter to Tribunal in support of request for review
DVA information page – “Ask us not count some assets in assets
test” (enclosed with A3)
Applicants’ letter to respondent regarding further valuation
Applicants’ letter to Tribunal providing information regarding the
valuation of the excess curtilage enclosing:
Appendix A – Diagram of 21 Corrie Road, Alpine NSW 2575
Appendix B - Photos of runoff and drainage issues in the south
Appendix C – Photos showing paddocks post drainage works
Appendix D – Agricultural land classification map for Wingecarribee
Appendix E – Observations on agistment
Applicants’ briefing note for Tribunal Directions Hearing
DVA Property Evaluation Appeal Form (enclosed with A12)
Applicants’ letter regarding property valuation
Applicants’ letter to Bruce Clisdell, Southern Highlands Property
Valuations, requesting a property valuation (omitting enclosures)
Report of Bruce Clisdell, Certified Professional Valuer, B & C Clisdell
Applicants’ Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions
Valuation Advisory, Market Value Report, Desktop Assessment, prepared by
Jones Lang Lasalle Services Pty Ltd
Letter to Jones Lang LaSalle Advisory Services requesting a property
Value and Risk Advisory, Market Value Report, On-site Valuation, prepared
by Sasha Milanko, Certified Practicing Valuer, Jones Lang
LeSalle Advisory
Respondent’s Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions
addition to the documentary evidence, Mr Westnedge gave oral evidence and was
cross-examined by the respondent. Mr Clisdell, the
applicant’s valuer,
gave expert evidence on their behalf, and Mr Milanko from JLL gave expert
evidence for the respondent.
Both were subject to cross-examination.
Consideration
considered the material before me, I am satisfied that excess curtilage should
be valued at nil. In those circumstances, it
is unnecessary for me to consider
whether the financial hardship rules apply. My reasons for this conclusion are
as follows.
applicants are both in their 70’s and have been married since 1968. Mr
Westnedge joined the Royal Australian Navy on 7 March
1966. He served in Vietnam
on the HMAS Sydney and was discharged from the Navy on 17 October 1975.
applicants purchased a small rural property at 21 Corrie Road, Alpine NSW 2575
in January 2021. They jointly own the property.
The property consists of 4.32
hectares of land and includes a four-bedroom home and a number of other
improvements. Unless certain
tests in the VEA apply, the value of the 2.32
hectares additional to the 2 hectares of land on which the principal home sits
be included in the applicants’ assets for the purpose of assessing
the rate of service pension payable.
excess curtilage consists of land with significant drawbacks. It is sloping and
wooded with trees that cannot be cut down. It
is adjacent to a busy road and
adds to the property’s bushfire risk.
proper way of determining the value of the excess curtilage has been the subject
of numerous decisions of the Administrative Appeals
(‘AAT’). Generally speaking, where the land in question is not
capable of separate subdivision the following
approach has been
First, obtain the market value of the whole of the real
property by assessing what amount the applicant as a hypothetical but not
unwilling seller could obtain from his property from a hypothetical desirous
purchaser. Second, obtain the market value of the applicant’s
hypothetical and not unwilling seller, could
obtain for that property from a
hypothetical desirous purchaser, as if that property were capable of
subdivision. Third, disregard
the value of the home and curtilage by deducting
from the market value of home and curtilage from the market value of the whole;
the difference is then the value of the property to be taken into account for
the purpose of assessing the applicant’s rate
the applicants, Bruce Clisdell a certified professional valuer (recently
retired), prepared a report dated 25 May 2025 following
an inspection on 24 May
2025. The valuation date was as at 24 May 2025. He valued the ‘current
fair market value, of 2 hectares
and the improvements constructed thereon...as
May 2025 to be two million six hundred thousand dollars
expressed the opinion that the ‘current fair market value of the residue
land being 2.32 hectares of the subject property...as
2025 to be nil dollars only’. In his oral evidence he confirmed that the
value of the property as at December 2022 would
not be much different.
Clisdell explained his reason for concluding that the excess curtilage had no
value in the following way. He had been a valuer
based in the Southern Highlands
for more than two decades. In his experience, most buyers in that market who are
looking for a rural
lifestyle block, do not regard larger land as desirable and
do not change the price at which blocks change hands. In some cases,
additional land deters buyers because of the additional costs and upkeep
associated with them. He was fortified in this view
by the fact that a property
very close to the applicants with larger land area, but inferior quality
fittings sold for only $2,405,000
in November 2024, which was less than the
valuation both JLL and he put on the applicants’ property.
the respondent, JLL valuer Sasha Milanko, a certified practising valuer
undertook the valuation exercise. After visiting the property
on 9 December 2024
and examining comparable sales, Mr Milanko assessed the market value of the
whole of the property at $2,680,000
as at 2 December 2022 and the market value
of the primary residence and surrounding two hectares at $2,620,000. This yields
curtilage value of $60,000.
question in this case is which valuation should be preferred.
respondent contended that the JLL valuation should be preferred because the
valuation it prepared was prepared using the method
expressly authorised in
earlier AAT decisions and the valuation provided was for the correct date
– ie the date of the claim
rather than the date of the valuation.
relation to the first contention, I accept that in formal terms the JLL
valuation most closely follows the method set out in
Re Reynolds
However, Mr Clisdell’s valuation method does allow me to reconstruct the
method endorsed in earlier cases.
the information he has given, the market value he would assign to the whole of
the property is $2,600,000 (the value of the primary
residence and two hectares
of land ($2,600,000) plus the values of the excess curtilage ($0)). He would
also assign the same value
to the house and two hectares of land. So much can be
inferred from the valuations he sets out on page 21 of his report. The fact
he has not set the valuation out in a specific form is not a reason to disregard
accept that the valuation also suffers from the fact that it did not value the
property as at December 2022. However, given that
as a matter of principle Mr
Clisdell did not consider the excess curtilage to have any value, regardless of
market conditions on
any particular date, it was clear that his assessment of
the value of that part of the property was not sensitive to any particular
those circumstances, I am not prepared to dismiss consideration of Mr
Clisdell’s assessment for those technical reasons.
question then is, is there another basis on which one valuation should be
preferred over the other.
Clisdell’s valuation depends upon a proposition that is on its face
somewhat surprising - that adding more land to a property
for sale is not going
to increase its sale price. I would have been very sceptical about this
proposition had it not attracted some
support from Mr Milanko in his oral
evidence. Mr Milanko accepted that there was a point at which additional land
ceased adding to
the value of a rural lifestyle block, but in his view that
point was not reached until the block was over ‘five or six
conclusion that adding land does not necessarily increase value is confirmed by
following material in Mr Milanko’s report.
Mr Milanko valued the
applicants’ 4.32 hectare block in December 2024 at $2,750,000. He also
noted that a 7.28 hectare block
at Pheasants Nest, which he described as
‘comparable overall’ sold for $2,725,000 on 10 August 2024. This
closeness in
price despite very significant land size difference confirms that
the valuers are correct when they say that rural lifestyle buyers
Southern Highlands do not necessarily approach purchasing decisions on the basis
that additional land attracts a price premium.
Consequently,
the disagreement between the valuers was not about whether blocks existed where
the excess curtilage should be valued
at nil because it was not value enhancing,
but whether that threshold was reached with blocks of only 2 hectares.
comparable sales data provided by both valuers provides no real insight.
those circumstances, I have come to the conclusion that Mr Clisdell’s
assessment is to be preferred. Mr Clisdell has greater
familiarity with the
market in the Southern Highlands having worked in the area for more than 25
years and is better placed to assess
the behaviour of buyers in that market.
this reason I accept his view that with or without the excess curtilage, the
applicants’ property would sell for the same
price. Thus when the formula
Re Reynolds
is applied, the resulting valuation for the excess
curtilage is nil.
light of that conclusion, I decide that the reviewable decision dated 1 December
2023 is set aside and the matter is remitted to
the respondent for assessment of
any service pension payable on the basis that the excess curtilage is valued at
nil as at 2 December
is no need to consider whether the value of the excess curtilage should be
otherwise disregarded.
Date of hearing 6 November 2025
Applicants’ representative Neil Westnedge
Respondent’s solicitor Sparke Helmore
VEA, s 52Y.
Re Reynolds and Secretary,
Department of Social Security
[1986] AATA 304
RTF format (12.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format