Longer & Longer [2013] FMCAfam 257 (2 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
2013] FMCAfam 257
FAMILY LAW – Parenting – children aged
6 and 4 – where the mother unilaterally relocated from [M] to Newcastle
the children after separation more than two years ago – where the
father has remained in the [M] area – where each parent
consider moving closer to the other parent – whether the mother should be
required to re-establish the children’s
residence in [M] – whether
the children should live primarily with the mother or in a week about
arrangement – whether
if the children live with the mother in Newcastle
the father should be able to spend overnight time with them and take them to [M]
– where the mother contends that the father is a coercive and controlling
man who fails to supervise the children properly,
has no empathy with them and
may pose a risk to their safety – where the father is critical of the
mother’s day to day
care of the children and would rather give the mother
bags of healthy groceries than pay child support.
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth),ss.60CC, 61DA,
Collu & Rinaldo
[2010] FamCAFC
Gravis & Major
[2010] FamCAFC 239
Mazorski & Albright
[2007] FamCA 520
(2007) 37 Fam LR 518
Sampson & Hartnett (No.10)
38 FamLR 15
Respondent:
File Number:
NCC 731 of 2011
Judgment of:
Hearing dates:
9 & 10 February 2012, 7 & 8 June 2012 and 24 July 2012 & 27
February 2013
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the Applicant
(Direct Brief)
The Respondent:
(1) Subject to order (2) the mother shall have sole
parental responsibility for the children
[X] born [in] 2007
born [in] 2008
(2) The mother is not permitted to:
(i) change the
children’s names;
(ii) relocate
the children’s place of residence to a place at a greater distance from
the father’s residence than they
are living at present;
(iii) travel
internationally with the children
without the written
consent of the father or an order of the court.
(3) The children shall live with the mother.
(4) The children shall spend time with the father as follows:
school terms:
(i) on the last
weekend of each month from 9.00am on Saturday until 4.00pm on Sunday until the
commencement of Term 4 2013 and thereafter
from 5.30pm on Friday until 4.00pm on
Sunday save that the father may at his election (to be notified to the mother by
less than 72 hours prior to the commencement of time on the last
weekend in August) forgo time with the children on the last weekend
each year and spend time with the children on the Father’s Day weekend in
10.00am until 5.00pm on the second Sunday of each month
PROVIDED THAT
father has given the mother at least 72 hours notice by email of his intention
to exercise this time and that the time takes
place in the Newcastle area.
school holidays:
(i) for five
consecutive days in the Term 3 school holidays in 2013 from 9.00am on the first
Saturday of the holidays until 4.00pm
on the first Wednesday of the
(ii) for two
five day blocks in the Christmas school holidays which commence in 2013 on dates
to be agreed between the parties and
failing agreement from 9.00am on the first
Saturday of the holidays to 4.00pm on the following Wednesday and from 9.00am on
2014 to 4.00pm on 8 January 2014.
(iii) for one
half of the Term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays each year commencing with the Term 1
school holidays in 2014 being the second
half in odd numbered years and the
first half in even numbered years.
(iv) for two
non-consecutive one week blocks in the Christmas school holidays commencing in
2014 and unless otherwise agreed between
the parties from 9.00am on the second
Saturday of the holidays to 4.00pm on the following Friday and from 9.00am on
the second Saturday
in January 2015 to 4.00pm on the following Friday.
(v) for half of
the Christmas school holidays in 2015 and each year thereafter being the first
half of the holidays which commence
in odd numbered years and the second half of
the holidays which commence in even numbered years.
(vi) at such
additional or alternate times as may be agreed between the parties.
(5) For the purposes of orders 4(b)(iii) school holiday time shall be deemed to
commence at 9.00am on the Saturday following the
last Friday of the NSW public
school term or at 9.00am on the following Saturday as the case may be and end at
4.00pm on either the
middle or the last Saturday of the NSW public school
holidays as the case may be.
(6) For the purposes of order 4(b)(v) the Christmas school holidays shall be
deemed to commence at 9.00am on the first Saturday following
the last Friday of
the NSW public school term and end at 4.00pm on the last Saturday prior to the
children commencing school in the
new school year. Changeover during these
school holidays shall take place at 4.00pm on the day closest to the mid point
of the school
holidays and if there is an uneven number of days between the
deemed start and end point of the holidays the children shall spend
day with the father.
(7) Changeover for the purposes of orders 4(a)(i) and 4(b) shall unless
otherwise agreed between the parties take place at [D] and
changeover for the
purposes of order 4(a)(ii) shall take place at [W] Park.
(8) The mother may arrange for a nominee known to the children to pick up and
drop off the children on her behalf.
(9) The father shall have telephone and/or Skype communication with the children
each Tuesday and Friday with the father to initiate
the communication between
5.30pm and 6.00pm NSW time and the mother to make the children available to take
part in the communication.
(10) The father shall also have telephone and/or Skype communication with the
children on the children’s birthdays and on Christmas
Day if the children
are not with him on these days with the father to initiate the communication
between 5.30pm and 6.00pm NSW time
and the mother to make the children available
to take part in the communication.
(11) The mother may have telephone and/or Skype communication with the children
on the children’s birthdays and on Christmas
Day if the children are with
the father on these days with the mother to initiate the communication between
5.30pm and 6.00pm NSW
time and the father to make the children available to take
part in the communication.
(12) The parent with whom the children are living at the time of telephone
and/or Skype communication shall ensure that the children
are given privacy
during that communication.
(13) Each parent shall keep the other advised of their residential address,
email address and mobile and if they have one landline
telephone number and
shall inform the other party in writing of any change to those details within 48
hours of the change occurring.
(14) The mother shall keep the father informed of the school(s) the children are
attending and each party may obtain from the children’s
school(s) copies
of school reports, newsletters, order forms for school photographs and other
information normally provided to parents
and may attend events at the
children’s school(s) normally attended by parents.
(15) Each parent shall keep the other advised of the name of any medical
practitioner or other health professional who treats the
children and the other
parent is authorised to request from that treating medical practitioner or
health professional any information
that person is lawfully able to provide
(16) Each parent shall advise the other as soon as reasonably practicable if the
children while in their care are involved in an
accident or medical emergency
resulting in attendance at hospital or are diagnosed with a serious illness and
each parent shall be
at liberty to visit the children in hospital.
(17) Each parent is restrained and an injunction is granted restraining them
from denigrating the other parent or any partner of
the other parent to or in
the presence of the children.
(18) In addition to any communication required for the purposes of implementing
these orders and in lieu of the parties exchanging
a communication book the
father may send one email to the mother immediately following the
children’s time with him on the
last weekend of each month to raise
general issues concerning the children and the mother must respond to the email
within 72 hours.
(19) Each parent shall ensure that whenever the children are transported in a
motor vehicle they are restrained by the child restraint
applicable for their
age as prescribed by the law of New South Wales.
(20) The father is restrained and an injunction is granted restraining him from
transporting the children or allowing them to be
transported in a motor vehicle
which is unregistered or of which he is the driver if he is unlicensed.
(21) The father shall ensure that at all times when the children are in his home
any firearms in the home are secured at all times
within a locked cabinet
meeting the requirements of NSW gun laws.
(22) Each parent is restrained and an injunction is granted restraining them
from physically disciplining the children.
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment under the
Longer & Longer
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
NCC 731 of 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
proceedings concern parenting arrangements for [X], 6 and [Y], 4 ½. Dr H,
who prepared the Family Report, described them
as winsome children and they have
no special needs.
children live with their mother in Newcastle and have done since she
unilaterally relocated there with them from [M] in February
children spend (if he is able to get to Newcastle to exercise it) one day per
week with the father pursuant to interim orders
first made in May 2011.
final orders sought by the mother were that:
have sole parental responsibility for the children.
children live with her in Newcastle.
children spend time with the father from 9.00am to 5.00pm each alternate Sunday
with changeover in Newcastle.
father be restrained from taking the children away from the Newcastle
mother alleged that the father had been physically violent to her during the
relationship and was a coercive and controlling man
who was careless of the
children’s safety. The mother said that it made her nervous that the
father lived in an isolated wooded
area and owned guns and that she could not
come to terms with the idea of the children spending time with the father at his
final orders sought by the father were that:
parents have equal shared parental responsibility for the children.
mother be required to relocate to [M].
children live with a week about arrangement once the mother completed an anger
management course or anger management psychotherapy
and pending this and 12
months passing the children live with the father and spend time with the mother
for one night and one afternoon
per week at first, progressing after 6 months to
two nights and one afternoon per week.
the court declined to order that the mother return to [M] and ordered that the
children live with the mother in Newcastle then
the children spend time with him
for two nights each alternate weekend during school terms and for half of the
school holidays with
changeover to take place in [M] or as a fallback position
in [R], half way between Newcastle and
the minute of order he handed up on 27 February 2013 the father did not suggest
what should happen if the mother chose not to relocate
close enough to him to
make equal time practicable but in his 4 June 2012 affidavit he said that if the
mother declined to move back
to [M] then the children should live with him and
spend as much time with the mother as possible.
father said he had been unjustifiably marginalised in the children’s lives
since the mother’s unilateral relocation.
He said that the children were
strongly attached to him and that while he has made some slips in the past as a
parent they had only
been occasional and he was a generally competent parent.
father admitted being occasionally violent to the mother during the relationship
but said that the mother had also been occasionally
violent to him. He denied
being a coercive and controlling person and said that it was absurd to suggest
that he would deliberately
harm his children.
father alleged that the mother was neglectful of the children’s day to day
care and their medical and dental needs and was
ill tempered and aggressive with
the children which had resulted in them sustaining minor injuries. He said that
the first set of
concerns made it imperative that he have at least equal care of
the children on a day to day basis and the second concern was the
sought that the mother be required to undergo an anger management course and
have restricted time with the children until
the course took effect.
father sought a number of specific orders about the way the children should be
cared for and he also sought an order that he be
permitted to take the children
to the Czech Republic (his home country) for a holiday. The mother considered
the specific orders
unwarranted and opposed to the father being permitted to
take the children to the Czech Republic.
The Evidence
hearing occupied two days in February 2012, two days in June 2012 and a further
day on 24 July 2012 at which point I reserved
my decision.
5 November 2012 the father filed an application in a case which raised new
issues. As a result the hearing was re-opened, further
documents were filed and
further evidence was taken and submissions made on 27 February 2013.
mother relied on her amended application filed on 23 January 2012, her
affidavits filed on 20 January 2012, 4 December 2012,
7 December 2012, 18
January 2013 and 12 February 2013, the evidence about family violence contained
in her affidavit filed on
22 March 2011 and her financial statement filed on
18 January 2013.
also relied on the affidavits of :
her mother Mrs C
filed on 22 March 2011.
her step-father
Mr C filed on 22 March 2011, 7 October 2011 and 11 February 2013.
her brother Mr R
filed on 19 May 2011.
sister-in-law Ms H filed on 24 March 2011.
her friends Mr O
filed on 18 May 2011 and Ms O filed on 27 May 2011.
mother and all of the above witnesses were cross-examined.
mother also relied on the affidavit of Ms T filed on 22 March 2011. It was
agreed during the hearing that paragraph 16 of this
affidavit would be struck
out and as a result the father did not require Ms T for cross-examination. Ms T
is a childcare worker at
[E] and gave evidence about the father removing the
children from the centre on 21 March 2011.
father relied on his affidavits filed on 24 March 2011, 28 March 2011, 10 May
2011, 24 May 2011, 25 May 2011, 7 October 2011,
20 January 2012, 4 June 2012, 29
October 2012, 9 January 2013, 24 January 2013 and 11 February 2013.
father also relied on the affidavits of his sister Ms L filed on 11 May 2011 and
his partner Ms V filed on 4 June 2012.
did not permit the father to rely on the affidavit of his friend Mr D because Mr
D could not be made available for cross-examination
and I refused the father
leave to rely an affidavit he sought to file in court on 27 February 2013.
father and his available witnesses were cross-examined.
father handed up a Minute of Orders sought on 27 February 2013.
Family Report was prepared by Dr H, a
Regulation 7
Family Consultant of
considerable experience. Dr H was also cross-examined.
preparing this judgment I have also had regard to the following:
An email dated 7
August 2012 sent by the mother’s counsel to my Associate pursuant to order
2 of orders made on 21 July 2012
indicating acceptance by the mother that the
father’s partner had indeed purchased a property near [M]. I have marked
email Exhibit K.
A notation to
orders made on 12 December 2012 setting out two changes of circumstance which
occurred after 24 July 2012.
An assessment of the witnesses
was cross-examined the father for the best part of two days; he
traversed the evidence in her affidavits paragraph by paragraph.
She made some
admissions against interest about violence committed by her during the
relationship and some admissions which cast
some of her allegations in a
somewhat different light but by and large she stuck to the story in her
affidavits.
do need to bear in mind however that the mother is determined to achieve her
desired outcome of remaining in Newcastle and that
this could result in evidence
being tailored to or selectively emphasised.
difficulty with the evidence of both the mother and the father was highlighted
by Dr H who administered personality tests to them.
She found that the results
for both were problematic and said among other things as follows:
parents completed the Paulhus Deception Scales. In clinical interviews and
questionnaires some people will answer frankly and
fearlessly, others will
deliberately dissemble in order to make a positive impression and others will
consider they are answering
honestly but in fact over-exaggerate their virtues
as a result of self-deception. The Paulhus Deception Scales (PDS) are useful to
inform decisions about the accuracy of self-descriptions and the validity of
scores on standardised measures which lack in-built
validity scales. The PDS
probes both positive impression management (IM) and self-deceptive
self-enhancement (SDE).
possible profiles on the PDS are described by the test developers.
profile of high IM and low SDE displayed by both parents is common in forensic
contexts when people who are aware of their own
shortcomings are presenting
themselves as socially desirable due to the perceived situational demand. This
is not a psychologically
unhealthy profile, but given they were both at or above
the cut-off for invalidity identification self-serving reports should be
received sceptically when no objective verification is possible.
large amount of the material in
22 March 2011 affidavit was
struck out because it was either a recounting of things the mother had told her
or was her own personal
opinion and conclusions. Mrs C remained firm about the
truth of the remaining matters in her affidavit.
was a good witness. He was not successfully challenged on the accuracy of
any of his evidence and he was evenhanded when giving evidence.
affidavit contained a large amount of opinion and conclusion and a
recounting of things told to him by others. This material was
not struck out but
that does not mean that I can place weight on it. Mr R remained adamant about
the truth of his evidence.
affidavit consisted partly of a recounting of things said to her
by the mother (post separation and after the mother unilaterally
relocated to
Newcastle). Her affidavit, like Mr R’s, was prepared in support of the
mother’s urgent application for a
recovery order in March 2011 and I need
to bear in mind the risk that the information in it is unbalanced.
became friends with the mother in 2009 when the mother and father moved to
[M]. Her affidavit was not particularly helpful. She made
very general
statements such as the father had
“shown neglect toward his children
and disregard for his wife
” and that she had seen him “
them more as possessions”
She provided no foundation for these
general assertions and I cannot place weight on them.
O recounted the mother telling her about an occasion in November 2010 when the
mother felt that the father had manipulated her
into not attending a reunion
with friends and she expressed the opinion (again without giving any adequate
foundation) that the mother
had been the children’s primary carer.
remained firm about the accuracy of his evidence concerning events he had
witnessed during the parties relationship but I have some
reservations about
whether he did accurately remember such things as the amount of time the father
was inside a supermarket or the
amount of wine consumed at a dinner. The risk is
high that that purported recollections of this nature have been influenced by
discussions.
is Czech by birth and English is his second language. He speaks good
although accented English. He prepared his own affidavits and
cross-examined the
mother thoroughly. He did not ask for nor was there any apparent necessity for
him to have a Czech interpreter.
father is very bitter about the mother’s unilateral relocation and I need
to bear in mind that some of his recollections
of the past and his evidence
were inconsistencies in the father’s evidence. He maintained for example
that he could not afford to pay child support
and yet said that if the children
returned to live in [M] he would pay for them to attend a private Catholic
school. When explaining
why he refused to move closer to Newcastle he maintained
that the travel distance between [M] and Newcastle was not an unbearable
but insisted that it was a major problem on other occasions.
father gave evasive evidence about the issue of his capacity to earn income and
pay child support.
was pleasant in the witness box but was very clearly in the father’s
camp. She refused to contemplate that the father could
have been more sensitive
in his handling of [X]’s involvement in ballet events at the end of
gave evidence through a Czech interpreter. She was a pleasant and
co-operative witness.
mother is Australian and the father Czech. The father migrated to Australia in
2005 and met the mother online and then in person
in Sydney in early 2006. The
parties quickly formed a relationship and the mother fell pregnant soon after
parties married in 2006 and they have two children, [X], born [in] 2007 and [Y],
born [in] 2008.
father was a self-employed [omitted] and the mother an [occupation omitted] when
they commenced a relationship. According to the
father the parties initially
lived in [omitted] and according to the mother they lived in Sydney. It was
common ground however that
soon after [X]’s birth they moved to Newcastle
to live in a property owned by Mr & Mrs C.
[X]’s birth both parents were at home, the mother because she gave up work
to care for [X] and the father because he worked
[X] was about a year old the mother fell pregnant again and during her pregnancy
she completed a bridging course designed to
allow her to enrol in a [omitted]
August 2009 the parties moved to [M]. The move was in pursuit of the
father’s dream to live in the country, although he did
not quite achieve
his dream as the parties ultimately purchased a home in [M] township.
the move to [M] the father continued to work from home as a [omitted] and the
mother commenced studying [omitted] part time
and toward the end of 2010
obtained some part time work at [omitted].
16 January 2011 the parties separated under one roof and almost immediately the
father commenced a relationship with Ms A, a woman
he had met online. He took
[X] away for a camping weekend with
Ms A only days after separation.
the separation the parties discussed the future care of the children who were
then aged almost 4 and a little over 2. The
father made it clear that he wanted
equal time, while the mother argued that the children should live primarily with
2 February 2011, while the issue of the future care of the children was still
unresolved, the maternal grandfather Mr N, who did
not give evidence in these
proceedings, came to [M] from [O] and enticed the father from the home on a
pretext. While the father
Mr C collected the mother and children
and drove them to Newcastle and when the father arrived home he found a note on
the table from
the mother telling him that she had gone away for a while. The
mother contacted the father when she arrived in Newcastle to tell
him where she
mother’s actions that day are deeply to be regretted, because nothing in
the evidence establishes that it was necessary
for her to act as she did, and
had she been open and fair with the father from the beginning and taken legal
steps instead of resorting
to self help some of the subsequent events which have
impacted adversely on the children might never have occurred.
father protested to the mother about what she had done but he did not commence
legal proceedings and on several occasions over
the next six weeks he travelled
to Newcastle and spent some short periods of time with the children in parks
with the mother present.
she was settled in Newcastle the mother enrolled the children at [E], a day care
centre, and on 21 March 2011 took them to the
centre for their first day. Within
hours the father swooped and removed the children and took them to Sydney.
mother promptly filed an application for a recovery order which came before me
on 24 March 2011. I made interim orders that the
children be returned to the
mother and that the father deliver the children to her the following day.
order which allowed the children to remain with the father until the following
day was made at the suggestion of the mother. I
expressed surprise on subsequent
occasions that the mother proposed this given the concerns which she raised in
her affidavits about
violence and gun ownership.
children were returned to the mother as ordered.
29 March 2011 interim orders were made for the father to spend time with the
children each alternate Monday between 3.00pm and
5.00pm supervised by Mr A, a
private supervisor. The father attended on each of the next four alternate
Mondays and spent time with
the children in accordance with these orders.
26 May 2011 interim orders were made for the father to spend unsupervised time
with the children from 10.00 am to 4.00pm each Friday,
and on 10 October 2011
this was changed to 9.00am to 4.00pm each Sunday, later varied to be from
10.00am to 5.00pm. These orders
remain in force. Orders were also made early on
permitting the father to have telephone or Skype communication with the children
twice each week and these orders also remain in force.
father has travelled to Newcastle for nearly two years now in order to spend
time with the children. Initially he attended each
week but as time went by he
found this difficult to maintain and since he lost his licence for demerit
points in October 2012 he
has attended far less regularly.
The nature of the parties’ relationship
mother raised the spectre early in the proceedings of the father being a man who
might potentially commit familicide. She has
since tempered her position but she
continues to maintain that the father is a violent and coercive and controlling
father vigorously denied that he was such a man and said that the suggestion
that he might commit familicide was laughable.
starting point in assessing the mother’s claims is to consider the
evidence about what happened during the parties’
relationship.
is not uncommon in proceedings in this court for parties to focus on the faults
of the other party and to give evidence only about
the negatives of their past
relationship and it is important to note that the parties relationship was not
all doom and gloom, nor
was it an isolated relationship during which either
party was cut off from the outside world.
mother never ceased to have contact with her family; members of the maternal
family visited the parties in [M] and the parties
visited the maternal family in
Newcastle. The parties visited the father’s family in the Czech Republic
in June 2007 with [X]
and in December 2009 with both children and the mother
commenced learning Czech.
was also not a relationship marked by applications for Apprehended Domestic
Violence Order or by visits by the police to the
parties’ home.
course serious problems can exist in a relationship without there being much
outward sign and the mother made some very concerning
claims about the
father’s conduct during the relationship.
mother alleged that the father told her that he had been violent in a previous
relationship and she alleged that he was physically
violent to her and engaged
in coercive and controlling behaviour. She alleged that:
a few months
into the relationship the father slapped her hard across the face during an
argument saying that he had to do it to calm
after she threw
cargo pants at him during an argument in July 2006 the father grabbed her by
hair and throat and pushed her onto a
in February 2007
during an argument in a motor vehicle the father slapped her face claiming that
he had to do it to prevent an accident.
in mid-2007 the
father raised his fist at her.
in early 2008
the father slapped her during an argument causing her to fall into a screen
door. The mother said that she cut her lip
and the father showed remorse.
in November 2009
the father struck her on side of head after they argued and she pushed a
computer lid down on his hands. The mother
said that she fell to the floor and
was deaf for two days.
on occasions
(mainly mid-2008 but more recently in [M]) the father would push or try to
physically restrain her and she would scratch
and push him in return.
in November 2010
during an argument over a dog the father pushed her and called her a stupid
bitch and said “
Do you want me to hit you?”.
mother drew attention early in the proceedings to the fact that the father owned
guns, and in July 2011 she showed Dr H a newspaper
review of a book by a woman
who had escaped a violent relationship with a man who went on to murder his
second family. The mother
created the impression during her interview with Dr H
that she had fled [M] due to fears for her safety.
mother said that the father would not let her have her name on bank accounts;
would not let her drive or have access to the car;
would not let her have a car
key; resented her studying [omitted] and disconnected the internet when she had
an assignment due; and
told her that she could only study if her jobs as
mother said that the father forced her to engage in part time work when she
would rather have stayed at home and studied but nevertheless
insisted that the
housework was women’s work and on one occasion refused to let her go to
work when she was called in until
she had done the dishes.
mother said that the father hacked into her Facebook page and made it difficult
for her to keep up friendships. She also said
that he constantly belittled her,
calling her a stupid, lazy selfish, person with no morals and put down her
skills. She gave evidence
of an occasion when she said that the father had
kicked her out of car and she had to walk for an hour and of another occasion
she would not get in the car because she considered that the father was too
drunk to drive and had to walk a long distance to get
mother alleged that on one occasion the father was cruel to a puppy which he
left chained up and Mr C mentioned another occasion
of alleged cruelty to the
mother’s brother and sister-in-law confirmed that on one occasion they
heard the father call the mother a stupid stupid
women and other witnesses of
the mother gave evidence of behaviour by the father which they considered was
controlling and demeaning.
father said that it was absurd to suggest that he was a violent man who might
murder his children and that the mother had made
these claims up to try to
justify her unilateral relocation.
father admitted having slapped the mother in November 2009. He said that he and
the mother were staying at Mr & Mrs C’s
while he was working on his computer the mother asked him to keep an eye on the
children while she had
a shower. The father said that he demurred and the mother
slammed the lid of his laptop on his fingers and held it there. He said
instinctively lashed out and slapped the mother on the face. The father left the
separated for a short time.
father denied that there has been any other unprovoked acts of violence by him.
He said that the mother was violent to him during
the relationship and that in
the early years she would throw things at him (such as crockery, glass and
clothes), scratch him, slap
his face and hit him with closed fists. The father
said that he would defend himself from the attacks and was bruised and scratched
as a result.
his affidavit filed on 20 January 2012 the father said that he had been obliged
physically defend/cover
” himself from the mother’s
fierce attacks,”
and it was a consistent theme of the
father’s evidence that the mother had verbally abused him and physically
attacked him and
thrown objects at him on various occasions during the
relationship.
his first affidavit the father described his relationship with the mother as
volatile, passionate and loving. He alleged that the
mother was verbally abusive
to him and would call him a dickhead, prick, fuckwit and similar.
father said that while the parties were living in [W] the mother caused three
holes in the walls by throwing things which hit
the wall. He said that on one
occasion he went to his GP after he was struck in the face by the mother’s
watch during a dispute.
He produced medical records which confirmed his
attendance and confirmed him telling the GP he had been struck by the
father gave evidence that the children were sometimes present during outbursts
of anger by the mother.
father said that with time he learned to control his reaction to the
mother’s outbursts and to walk away but the mother
never learned to
moderate her behaviour. He vehemently denied having been cruel to a dog saying
that he and the mother had a disagreement
over how to train the dog. He also
vehemently denied the mother’s allegation concerning specific acts of
violence or coercive
and controlling behaviour as outlined in paragraph 70 and
72 earlier, often providing an alternative explanation for events which
which he said cast the matters in a very different light.
father’s sister gave evidence that when she stayed with the mother and
father in [M] for a few days in January 2011 she
heard and saw the mother
verbally attacking and verbally abusing the father.
to the bottom of this conflicting evidence is not easy and there were some
inconsistencies in the father’s evidence
admitted during the hearing that he had told a Family Consultant at an 11F Child
Dispute Conference in
March 2011 that he had hit the mother several times but in
his affidavit he admitted hitting her on only one occasion, namely in
the other hand the mother’s evidence on this topic was also unsatisfactory
when taken as a whole. She made no mention of
any violence or aggression by
herself in any of her affidavits or in conversation with Dr H, but in an email
she sent to the father
after the November 2009 incident she said as
first got together and when I was pregnant and we had those insane fights we
were both crazy, and anything I ever did was
fully accepted by me as my doing,
in no way at all did I ever blame you for throwing stuff at you or losing my
temper like a mad
woman, and you should not be blaming me, regardless of whether
I was trying to close your computer and raising my voice.
cross-examination the mother admitted that on the honeymoon she threw items at
the father which broke the windscreen of the
parties’ campervan,
commenting that “
I feel terrible about that.
admitted throwing other things for example a pair of cargo pants
his direction,”
throwing a bowl which smashed, and slamming doors. The
mother admitted that she had scratched the father and had hit him with her
hands. She said that there were
“regrettable incidents where the
children were around.”
of the incidents which involved the father being violent certainly also involved
the mother doing physically provocative things,
for example throwing a pair of
cargo pants at father’s torso or pushing the computer lid down on his
fingers and what occurred
as a whole has much more the appearance of being
situational couple violence than coercive and controlling violence.
her report when discussing the various types of violence Dr H said
In common couples conflict violence physical and
psychological aggression occurs only in response to conflict does not escalate
may not always be gendered. Violence towards an intimate partner of this
sort might be expressed by men who are not otherwise anti-social,
are [sic] do
not show personality or mental health disorders but who respond aggressively in
response to conflict (e.g around the
time of break-up and family separation) and
negative internal
layer of complexity is added by the fact that I certainly gained the impression
during the hearing that the father was a man who
had very rigid views about the
ways things should be done and therefore a man who might be expected to go to
considerable length
to ensure that things were done his way. An example of this
was the evidence (admitted by the father) that he had a fixed regime
to where the car keys were kept – one in the bowl and one in the document
folder – and refused to accept any
deviation from this.
father denied being a person of rigid ideas who was prepared to go to great
lengths to try to ensure that things were done his
way but some of the orders he
sought (that the children not be fed fast-food meals e.g. McDonald’s, KFC)
that they have a healthy
diet (fruits/and or vegetables each day) and that each
parent ensure for the children regular daily hygiene including oral, their
cut, finger and toe nails trimmed as required) suggest that the father is indeed
a person of rigid ways.
gained the impression after listening to the father over a period of 6 days that
he might have been a very difficult person to live
with on occasions but the
evidence as a whole does not support the mother’s contention that the
father controlled everything
and it was clear that during the relationship the
mother sometimes prevailed.
father did not want the children to go to day care but the mother was keen on it
so that she could study in peace and the father
eventually agreed to the
children attending one day a week.
father did not want to move to [W] at the time of [X]’s birth but he did
move there and the parties remained there for 2
is a strong flavour in the evidence of the parties being very different people
who each wanted to do things their own way. The
mother complained that the
father would not let her do the accounts for his business even through she was a
[occupation omitted].
She admitted during cross-examination however that the
father did initially let her do the accounts but that the father did not agree
with the way she was doing them and she did not want to do the accounts his way
so she ceased doing the accounts.
father did not respond violently to the mother’s decision to separate from
him and did not respond with threats to harm
himself if she left the
relationship. In a letter he sent her after he separated from Ms A in 2011 he
proposed a reconciliation and
ended the letter by saying:
free not to reply to this letter – I will take silence as rejection of my
offer and signal to finally move on with my
summary I am satisfied that the father did commit acts of family violence during
the relationship and the mother’s slamming
the computer lid on his fingers
in November 2009 in no way excuses his slapping her face. However it is
impossible for me to be satisfied
on the state of the evidence that the father
engaged in coercive or controlling violence or engaged in a reign of terror to
own way, and the mother’s behaviour during the relationship was
also far from perfect.
have no doubt that the father’s determination to get his own way about
certain things and his rigid insistence about issues
such as where the car keys
should be kept would have made him difficult for the mother to live with and
this likely helps to explain
(although in my view does not justify) the
mother’s decision to unilaterally relocate rather than face an endless
debate with
the father about care arrangements for the children following
separation. However the mother in a quieter manner also seems determined
her own way and to be quite capable of persisting on occasions until she
achieves this.
The parties’ current circumstances
is 30 and is a [omitted] student. She is living in a property in [W]
owned by Mr and Mrs C and has recently commenced a relationship
with Mr S, an
[occupation omitted], although they do not live together.
is enrolled at [E] School and [Y] attends [E].
mother will not under any circumstances consider returning to live in [M] and it
is inconceivable to her that the court might
order her to do so. She has no ties
in [M] other than ties of friendship which she formed when she lived there with
the father, whereas
in Newcastle she has family support, assistance with
accommodation and now a new relationship.
mother was born in [O] and the maternal grandfather Mr N lives in [O] and the
mother visits him there sometimes. [O] is about
2 ½ hours from [M] by road
but [O] has no attractions for the mother either as a place to live.
is 34 and has permanent residency in Australia. He said that
obtaining Australian citizenship was not a priority for him and that
he could stay in Australia that was sufficient.
father’s only relative in Australia is his sister Ms L who has been here
since January 2011 and is on a student visa which
expires in March 2014. Ms L
lives Sydney and when she gave evidence in July 2012 was living in a 2 bedroom
apartment. She said that
she had a flatmate but that the flatmate would be
leaving in October 2012.
paternal grandparents live in the Czech Republic. The paternal grandfather is in
poor health and the father’s unchallenged
evidence was that he was not
able to travel to Australia.
the 2012 part of the proceedings the father said that he was a [occupation
omitted] who did most of his work from home and
had occasional meetings in
Sydney. In one of his affidavits he said that he intended to support his family
in the future from [omitted]
but during cross-examination in 2012 he said that
practically unemployed at the moment.”
the witness box on 27 February 2013 the father described himself as [occupations
omitted] and he estimated his income at about
$16,000.00 per annum. The father
had a declared income of over $50,000.00 per annum prior to separation but
maintained that his income
earning capacity had been affected by the events
following separation.
father was in a relationship with Ms A at the time of the Family Report
interviews in July 2011 and Ms A told Dr H that she intended
to purchase a
property in [M] and live there with the father. The father and Ms A separated
not long afterwards however and in September
2011 the father commenced a
relationship with Ms V.
V is 36 and is a [occupation omitted]. She was living in Sydney when she
commenced her relationship with the father but on 11 April
2012 she purchased a
property at [omitted] via [M] and she and the father live on this property.
V gave birth to the parties’ child [name omitted] on [date omitted] 2012.
She said that she supported the father’s
application for the children
either to be returned to him or to be allowed to spend time with him in [M].
[omitted] property is located about half an hours drive from [M]. The
mother’s counsel tendered a Google Earth map of the
property which showed
that it was partially covered by thick vegetation and was surrounded by other
heavily wooded properties.
father extolled the virtues of the property and said that it was in a
picturesque valley and that he intended to purchase chickens,
ducks, sheep and
goats. He denied that the property was especially isolated and said that two
families with young children lived
father was adamant that he would not consider relocating closer to Newcastle. He
said that he had moved to [M] in 2009 because
of the lifestyle it offered and
that he had
“done his time
” in Sydney and was not interested
in moving to a larger centre. He has now achieved his dream of being able to
live in the
countryside and said that he would not be able to find a place in
Newcastle or even in countryside near Newcastle where he could
be remotely
The children’s best interests
determining appropriate parenting orders I must treat the children’s best
interests as the paramount consideration and
& (3) of the
Family Law Act
(as it stood prior to the amendments on 7 June 2012) sets
out the matters to which I must have regard in order to determine the
best interests.
primary considerations
are as follows:
benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both of the
children’s parents; and
b) The need
to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected
to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family
is usually logical to make findings about the primary considerations in
before turning to the additional considerations in
some cases it is difficult to make findings about the primary considerations
until findings have been made about the additional
considerations and this is
such a case.
findings are made about such things as the nature of the relationship of the
children with each of their parents, the capacity
of each parent to provide for
the needs of the children and the implications of the family violence in the
relationship it will not
be possible for me to make findings about the primary
considerations.
Full Court in
that it was acceptable to consider the
and (3) matters in reverse
order and I intend to do so in this case.
first of the additional considerations is
any views expressed by the children
and any factors (such as the children’s level of understanding) that the
court thinks are
relevant to the weight to be given to those views.
H considered the children too young at the time of her report (4 & 2) to
have their views canvassed, and there was no independent
evidence that the
children had views about any of the issues in dispute.
father maintained that the children had both said at times that they wanted to
live with him and wanted to live in [M] but I cannot
place weight on this
evidence. First, it coincides with the father’s own wishes and does not
come from an independent source,
and the father was not always a witness of
even if one or other of the children did say these things they are both very
young and are not mature enough to understand
the full ramifications of such
choices. Third, I cannot exclude the possibility that the children either said
those things to please
the father or said them but felt differently the next
moment or the next hour or upon their return to their mother.
must consider
the nature of the relationship of the children with each of
their parents and any other persons (including any grandparent or other
of the child).
am satisfied that the children have a good relationship with the mother.
does not follow from the fact that [X] has clung to the father on occasions
after visits and has not wanted to leave him that she
has a poor relationship
with her mother.
H who is independent in the matter said as follows:
observed [the children] in the playroom with maternal kin they displayed secure
base behaviour towards their mother and grandparents,
all of whom took their cue
from the children’s play interests. As is normal for children their age,
both were reserved with
me (a stranger) initially but after a time [Y]
acknowledged me as a friendly presence and responded to my questions and
[X] snubbed me throughout.
the last two years (one third of [X]’s life and nearly half of
[Y]’s) the children have lived primarily with the mother
and have seen the
father at best for one day each week. I am satisfied that the children have a
good relationship with the mother
and are primarily attached to her.
am satisfied that the children also have a good relationship with the father.
mother and Mr & Mrs C told Dr H that the children loved the father and
looked forward to seeing him, and Dr H said as follows:
told [X] Daddy was coming [X] jumped for joy. [Y] took the announcement more
children greeted their father very affectionately, especially [X]. Their father
had brought them sweets and presents. Although
I was sitting quietly observing
and not participating in play [Y] came at times to show me his trucks and cars.
[X] ignored me. In
play interaction their father was more directive than their
mother or grandparents but they seemed happy to refuse his offers and
suggestions. For example he offered them All Natural Company Snakes several
times. Both kids matter-of-factly said No to the repeated
offer. They did not
seem in awe or fear of Dad at all, and appeared confident that he would respond
when they signalled their needs
C, giving evidence in June 2012 twelve months after the family report
interviews, said that he attended most of the changeovers
on Sundays and that
the children were mostly happy to go with the father and came back happy. He
said that they often also came back
tired but he put that down to them being
exhausted as a result of having had an active day. He said that the children
were sometimes
a bit withdrawn and contrary at changeover which he put down to
the tension surrounding changeover.
27 February 2013 Mr C gave evidence consistent with this.
father has briefly met the mother’s partner Mr S and said that he accepted
that the children did not have a problem with
V will be an important part of the children’s lives if they spend more
time with the father or even live with him. The father
did not know Ms V when Dr
H conducted her interviews and I have no independent evidence about her
relationship with the children,
but the mother said that the children had
mentioned Ms V and expressed no concerns about her. Ms V has met the children
with them on some of the father’s Sunday visits.
children have a baby sister in the father’s household but they have at
best had spent some fairly minimal time with her
and there was no evidence about
their relationship with her.
children’s relationship with Mr & Mrs C was not the focus of much
inquiry at the hearing. The father suggested that
Mrs C had at one time said
that they did not want to be required to look after the children too often, and
he expressed concern about
the possibility of the mother leaving the children
with them too often, but neither during cross-examination or during the
final submissions was anything much made of this, and there was
no evidence that [Mr & Mrs C] were being asked to do excessive
babysitting.
must consider
the willingness and ability of each of the parents to
facilitate and encourage a close and continuing relationship between the
and the other parent.
father questioned whether the mother had this willingness and ability given that
” the children after separation and in two
years had never agreed to him having anything more than day time contact with
maintained that the mother was hostile to him and fed lies to the children such
as that he had smacked them when they were babies.
The tenor of his evidence was
that the mother was intent on undermining his relationship with the children.
do not accept that this is the case. I am satisfied that the mother has a
reasonable willingness and ability to facilitate and encourage
a close and
continuing relationship between the children and the father. She was determined
to get her own way about being the children’s
primary carer and living in
Newcastle after separation but she has facilitated the father spending time with
the children since then,
and insofar as she has proposed restricted time I
accept that this has been because of genuine (although it remains to be
whether well-founded) fears about the father’s parenting
father has never overtly expressed a desire to exclude the mother from the
children’s lives and his preferred outcome (subject
to the mother
overcoming her alleged anger management problem) was stated to be equal time.
However he has a very poor view of the
mother’s parenting capacity and
harbours considerable bitterness toward her as a result of her unilateral
relocation and it
is open to question whether he has the capacity to refrain
from criticising her to the children.
Denigration
of the mother to the children could undermine the children’s relationship
with her, especially if the children spent
more time with the father than the
must consider
the likely effect of any change in the children’s
circumstances including the likely effect of separation
of their parents or
other child, or other person (including a grandparent or other relative of the
children) with whom the children have been
father proposed several possible changes for the children, the first being that
they live primarily with him either for twelve
months before moving to an equal
time arrangement or indefinitely if the mother chose not to move back to [M].
is seriously open to question whether the children would cope with a complete
change of residence. No matter how good their relationship
with their father,
their world since 2011 has been living primarily with their mother. They would
be unlikely to understand why a
complete change to these arrangements had
occurred, and unless the father had empathy for the children and parenting
skills of the
highest order it is likely that such a change would be detrimental
for the children.
will need to consider later in the judgment whether the father has that empathy
and those parenting skills.
second change proposed by the father was that the mother (and therefore the
children) should be forced to return to [M].
for a moment that I have the power to engineer this outcome, the benefit to the
children of returning to live in [M] would
be that their father would be close
at hand and they would be able to see him frequently and with little travel
involved. However
the mother would be forced to find new accommodation, her new
relationship would be tested and the support she enjoys from Mr &
regular basis would be removed, and if the mother was unhappy or worse in [M]
this would impact negatively on the children.
third potential change would be the children living in a week about arrangement,
and this has the potential to be detrimental
for any children unless they are
old enough to cope with it and unless their parents get on well and have good
communication skills
and similar levels of parenting ability. I will need to
consider after making further findings about the
(2) matters whether
these pre-conditions exist in this family.
must have regard to
the practical difficulty and expense of the children
spending time with a parent and whether that practical difficulty and expense
will substantially affect the children’s right to maintain personal
relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular
is about a 4 ½ hour drive from Newcastle, and the father’s home at
[omitted] is about half an hour further away again.
the father was asked to consider this in the context of the desirability of him
moving closer to Newcastle he said that the driving
unfortunate
but bearable
” and he would rather do the driving than move to
various other times in the proceedings however the father complained about the
cost and tiring nature of the travel, and the problem
of distance became
exponentially worse in October 2012 when the father lost his licence for demerit
points. Until May 2013 he is
dependent on his partner to drive him to Newcastle
and he has missed numerous visits with the children.
father has a long history of incurring fines and demerit points for driving
offences, mainly for exceeding the speed limit by
up to 10kms or between 10 and
20km’s per hour. Since 2006 his licence has been suspended and/or his
motor vehicle deregistered
on a number of occasions as a result of non-payment
of fines and he is currently paying off thousands of dollars worth of fines by
instalments.
father should regain his licence in May 2013 but given the above history the
risk is high that the father will lose his licence
or have his vehicle
deregistered again in the future.
father was adamant however that he would not leave the [M] area and the
attractive rural lifestyle it provided, so absent me making
an order that the
mother relocate to [M] there is nothing I can do to alleviate the problem of
distance compounded by the problem
of the father’s driving history.
the parties continue to live 4 ½ to 5 ½ hours driving distance apart
the location for changeover becomes an issue. The
father’s primary
proposal was that changeover should take place in [M]. This was fair he said
because he had been forced to
do all the driving for 2 years as a result of the
mother’s unilateral relocation and the mother should be required to take
father’s secondary proposal if the court declined to order that the mother
drive to [M] was that changeover take place in
[R], a place located between [M]
and Newcastle.
mother was strongly opposed to being required to do any significant driving for
changeover. She said that she was a student on
a very limited income and that
the father was paying no child support. She submitted and I accept that it would
cause her some financial
hardship if she had to do a return drive regularly to
and from [R], let alone a 9 hour plus return drive each way to and from [M].
will also need to take into account however in any decision about changeover
location the potential risk to the children of driving
with a tired parent.
am required to consider
the capacity of each parent and any other person
(including any grandparent or other relative of the children) to provide for the
needs of the children, including their emotional and intellectual
maintained that she was the children’s primary carer prior to
separation. The father did not concede this and insisted that
he and the mother
shared the care of the children equally but the totality of the evidence
supports a finding that the mother was
the primary carer.
were snippets in the father’s answers during cross-examination which
suggested that he was less used than the mother to
intensively caring for the
children. He was asked about Ms V coming with him for visits with the children
and commented “
I do need help during the 7 hours, yes.”
father was asked during cross-examination in June 2012 whether he had contacted
[X]’s school since she had commenced there
and he said that he had not.
When asked why he said he had not thought of it and then said that he thought
that if there were any
issues the mother would tell him.
any view the mother has been the children’s primary carer since
separation, and the father was highly critical of her care
of the children. He
complained that they frequently came to him with runny noses and dirty
fingernails and inappropriately dressed
for the weather.
H commented however that the children looked healthy and well-cared for, and the
mother has appropriately enrolled them in school
and day care. I do not accept
that there is substance in the father’s complaints that the mother is
failing to properly care
for the children on a day to day basis.
father alleged, based on his interpretation of something said to him by [X],
that on one occasion the mother had allowed [X] to
drink wine. The mother denied
it and there was no evidence to support a finding that any such thing had
father alleged that during the relationship the mother would scream and yell at
the children and that [X] would become distressed,
and he said that things [X]
had said to him since separation suggested that this problem was ongoing.
said that the children regularly complained about the mother yelling at them and
hitting them and during the proceedings on 27
February 2013 he maintained that
the children had unexplained scratches and bruises which he believed had been
caused by the mother.
cannot instantly dismiss the allegations about the mother yelling and screaming
at the children given the mother’s admissions
the early years of the relationship and Ms L’s evidence about the mother
yelling at the father,
and Dr H did not speak separately to the children and I
have no window into this issue by this means.
cannot exclude the possibility that the mother does yell at the children on
occasions. However Dr H observed a satisfactory relationship
between the mother
and the children and there was no independent evidence to suggest that the
mother’s day to day treatment
of the children over minor transgressions in
the home was a problem for the children. I cannot draw the conclusion the father
me to draw from the evidence he presented.
father alleged that [X] had a dental problem which required immediate
rectification or it would be irreversible. He said that
he had offered to
initiate treatment but the mother had rejected his proposals. There was no
expert evidence to confirm that this
problem existed and I am not prepared to
make a finding that the mother has been indifferent to this aspect of
[X]’s care on
the basis of an allegation by the father.
father complained that the mother exposed the children to inappropriate media
content in music and on television and that the
children acted aggressively as a
result. I cannot make a finding that this is so because I do not have enough
information about the
kind of music the mother habitually listens to or the
television shows to which she allegedly exposed them.
also note that the father has maintained throughout that he is content for the
children to live 50% of the time with the mother
provided that she does an anger
management course and this raises a real possibility that tit for tat rather
than genuine concern
may be behind some of the father’s allegations about
the mother’s care of the children.
father complained that the mother left the children at Mr and
assertion and there was no evidence
to support this claim.
am satisfied that the mother is properly providing for the children’s day
to day and intellectual needs. However she has shown
a lack of insight into the
children’s emotional needs on occasions, most notably when she
unilaterally relocated in early February
2011, and I need to carefully consider
her capacity to provide for the children’s emotional needs in the future.
H administered a test to both parents to assist her to assess their ability to
see things from the children’s view point.
She concluded that the mother
showed some capacity to think about the children as people who had thoughts and
feelings of their own.
example Dr H gave to illustrate this was a little suspect but Dr H also
commented on the fact that when she asked the mother questions
children the mother answered about the children, unlike the father who used
every opportunity to launch into a criticism
of the mother.
are still occasions when the mother fails to prioritise the children’s
needs over hers and her decision to serve court
documents on the father at a
recent changeover, provoking a reaction from the father, is an example of this,
but I am satisfied in
broad general terms that the mother has the capacity to
provide for the children’s emotional needs in
the future.
insisted that he contributed equally with the mother as a parent but
for reasons given earlier I am satisfied that the father was
far less involved
with the children during the relationship than the mother. I accept however that
he did have a role in their care.
The children both related well him at the
family report interviews which suggests that the foundation of a prior caring
involvement
mother was highly critical of the father’s parenting capacity and alleged
that when he did mind the children he was often
neglectful of them and would
leave them crying while he used the computer.
mother gave evidence that on one occasion when she left the children with the
father while she went to work and they were later
seen by a neighbour wandering
alone in the street, although the father appeared after a short time and
retrieved them. The father
admitted that this incident occurred but blamed it on
a faulty side gate.
mother gave evidence about an occasion when the father left the children
unattended in a car at a supermarket while he went in
to buy groceries. When he
came out the children were playing with the lights blinkers and horn and people
were gathered around the
car. Mr & Ms O witnessed this incident and
varyingly claimed that the father was inside the supermarket for twenty minutes
half an hour.
father admitted that he left the children in the car but denied that it was for
anything like twenty minutes or half an hour and
said that it would have been
for about five minutes. I cannot be certain that the time estimates of Mr &
Ms O was correct and
the father had a propensity to minimise his culpability for
his actions but whether the children were left for half an hour or five
it should never have happened.
mother said that on another occasion the father left [X] in the car while he had
a drink. The father admitted that this occurred
but said that he was standing
next to the car.
mother said that the father often did not put the children’s seatbelts on
and the father admitted that the “
forgot sometimes
claimed that the mother did as well.
mother also said that the father proposed leaving the children at home alone
while the parents drank at another person’s
place across the road. The
father denied that this occurred.
summary the father admitted some instances of neglectful behaviour and errors of
judgment with the children but said that on each
occasion he had learned his
lesson and had not repeated his mistake.
of the father’s lapses are concerning and I have considerably less
confidence in his capacity to care for the children
on a day to basis for a
lengthy period than I do in the mother’s but I am not persuaded that the
children would be a risk of
harm from sub-standard parenting if they spent
longer periods of time with the father than they are doing at present. The
did not allege that anything had gone wrong during the day periods the
father has been spending with the children since May 2011.
mother maintained that the father had an alcohol problem and she alleged that
during the relationship he drank every night. She
said that at least 4 times a
week he drank a bottle of wine and 2 to 3 beers in a sitting. She also said that
after the children
were born the father would consume not less than 3 alcoholic
drinks a day and quite often he would consume more.
mother also alleged that the father had driven intoxicated on more than one
difficulty with the mother’s evidence on this topic was that it was for
the most part not sufficiently detailed to enable
me to make findings. The
mother alleged for example that in November 2006 the father had been drinking
and the parties argued because
the mother was concerned that he might be over
the legal limit. The mother did not give any evidence about what alcohol had
consumed or about what it was about the father’s appearance or
behaviour which led her to believe that he might be too drunk
to drive, and in
those circumstances it is difficult for me to find in the face of the
father’s denials that this incident
occurred as described by the mother.
mother gave specific evidence about the father’s behaviour and appearance
following the consumption of alcohol on only one
occasion, 16 October 2010, but
again her evidence does not help her. She said that she caught a cab home and
the father followed
in the car and that the cab driver remarked on the driving
of the car behind. That is the extent of her evidence and I cannot make
adverse to the father based on that.
C alleged that the father “
would often drink drive on any occasions
where we would be out for lunch or dinner
” but she provided absolutely
no foundation for a finding that the father had been too intoxicated to drive.
mother agreed during cross-examination that there was an occasion when the
father called her and asked her to pick him up because
he had been drinking and
did not want to drive.
father denied that he had an alcohol problem and said that the mother was a
light drinker and was unduly sensitive about his alcohol
consumption which
exceeded hers.
mother conceded during cross-examination that when the father did get drunk he
was usually a happy drunk. She also agreed that
he was able to abstain from
alcohol consumption on occasions and that he would have detox months for example
for the charity fund
raiser Dry July.
is impossible on the state of the evidence for me to find that the father has an
alcohol problem and in any event the evidence
drinking at all for periods of time creates optimism that if an order was made
that the father not
consume alcohol to the point of intoxication while the
children were with him that he would be able to comply.
mother expressed considerable concern about the fact the father has a firearms
licence and owned 5 rifles.
father said that he enjoyed target shooting and rabbit hunting and that one
rifle was for target shooting, three were different
calibre rifles for hunting
rabbits and goats and the fifth was bought so that his then friend Mr O could
learn to shoot.
mother agreed during cross-examination that the father had used his guns to
shoot rabbits and kangaroos and for target shooting.
father said that he would get rid of the guns if the court required it.
asked about the father’s ownership of firearms during cross-examination Dr
H was scathing about it, implying that no sane
person would wish to hunt or
desire to own a firearm. This is very judgmental.
people in the 21
century find the idea of hunting
distasteful and few people in the western world need to hunt in order to obtain
food (although it
was different for some in the Great Depression less than a
hundred years ago) but human beings have hunted for millions of years
realistically it may be some time before the desire to hunt is bred out of all
of us. It is not illegal in Australia to hunt
rabbits or to shoot birds in
season, and target shooting is an Olympic sport.
mother said that the father was careless with his guns during the relationship
and would leave them lying around the house or
propped against a cupboard. The
father said that he had accidently left a bullet on the floor once but otherwise
the guns were only
out when he was cleaning them or had been using them for
target shooting or to shoot rabbits.
am not persuaded that the father’s ownership of firearms is a reason to
severely restrict his time with the children. I am
also not persuaded that there
is anything sinister about the father choosing to live on a rural property
outside [M].
have concerns about the father’s capacity to provide for the
children’s emotional needs.
H expressed the view that the father showed no capacity to focus on the children
as individuals with lives of their own or to empathise
with them and some of his
actions post separation confirm this.
removed them from the day care centre in Newcastle on the first day that they
were enrolled there and took them to Sydney. He did
not contact the mother to
tell her where the children were and he returned the children only after being
ordered to do so by the
court. The father refused to concede that this incident
might have been distressing for the children or that either of them might
fretted for their mother.
father’s response to the issue of [X] attending for end of year events
connected with ballet showed a marked inability to
prioritise [X]’s needs
over his own. He rejected all the mother’s suggestions about how he could
be involved in [X]’s
ballet concert in December 2011, and when the mother
withheld [X] on a Saturday so that she could attend the concert he promptly
brought a contravention application.
mother should not have withheld [X] but the incident says a lot about the
father’s inability to empathise with the children.
When pressed about the
incident of the ballet concert and the ballet photos during cross-examination
the father said that “
to me ballet is not important; to [X] it is
important on Thursdays
is an element of tit for tat and lack of child focus in some of the orders
sought by the father. He openly sought an order that
the mother travel to [M]
for changeovers for twelve months because he had been forced to travel to
Newcastle for over twelve months
as a result of her unilateral relocation.
his separation from the mother the father has had two new relationships in quick
succession. He met Ms A on an online dating
service in December 2010 and
commenced a relationship with her days after he and the mother separated in
January 2011. That relationship
ended in about September 2011 and very soon
after the father commenced a relationship with Ms V. He said that he
struggled with being single
” and was alone in Australia.
This raises some concern about how stable the father’s life will be in the
future but is
not necessarily a reason why he should not spend longer time with
the children than he is doing at present.
must consider
the maturity sex lifestyle and background (including the
lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the children and of either of the
parents, and any other characteristics of the children that the
court thinks are relevant.
children’s age is a relevant issue. [Y] is only 4 and [X] 6 and for [Y] in
particular an equal time arrangement may not
be appropriate as a result of his
age. Dr H certainly seemed to adopt as an underlying part of her recommendation
the common view
that young children are better served by spending the majority
of their time with one parent and regular shorter periods of time
with the other
children’s background is also a relevant issue. The father is Czech and
except for his sister Ms L all members of his family
live in the Czech Republic.
father is proud of his heritage and wants the children to know about it and to
meet their relatives. The parties visited Czechoslovakia
when they were together
and the mother was learning Czech but there was no evidence that she had
continued to do or that she was
especially likely to keep the children in
English and
the children do not speak Czech so the father is the best conduit
for the children to communicate with and keep in touch with their
Czech family
and heritage is through the father.
27 February 2013 the father gave evidence that his mother had offered to pay for
him and the children to travel to the Czech Republic
and he asked the court to
make orders for this to occur, saying that his father was ill and unable to
travel and therefore his parents
visiting Australia was not a feasible
alternative.
accept that there would be benefits to the children travelling to the Czech
Republic and meeting their Czech relatives in their
own setting, but whether
this order is ultimately made will depend on a weighing of all the
(3) matters.
father is Catholic. He attends church and his faith is important to him. He
would like to be able to take the children to church,
although there was nothing
to suggest that he was rigidly determined to ensure that they were brought up
was no evidence that the mother had any religious interest and it is likely that
only through the father will the children be
exposed to participation in a
mainstream religion. The mother is not opposed to the children attending a
Catholic Church.
must consider the
attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of
parenthood demonstrated by each of the children’s parents.
am satisfied that the father genuinely desires a relationship with the children
for its own sake. There was no flavour of the father
seeking time with the
children in order to keep tabs on the mother. He has consistently sought time
with the children since the mother
unilaterally relocated and he has taken every
opportunity to spend time with them since, subject to the difficulties posed by
cost of travel and the loss of his licence. In that regard the
father’s attitude to the children cannot be faulted.
the father has shown a very poor attitude to his responsibility to financially
support the children.
mother applied for and obtained a child support assessment soon after separation
but the father has never paid child support.
He currently has arrears of
$15,000.00 although he maintained in February 2013 that he was challenging the
assessment which had led
to this outcome.
the primary issue is not the amount of money the father owes, it is the fact
that he has never paid any child support at all
and that in my view it is open
to me to find that he is unlikely to do so in the in the future.
one of his affidavits the father said as follows:
apologised and explained to [Ms Longer] many times that I am not in a financial
situation to be able to provide regular payments
(I have not been able to look
after my business) – however I offered her as much support as I could e.g.
every visit I leave
bags of healthy groceries with the children, as well as buy
them clothes, shoes or toys whenever I can afford
father said in oral evidence that at changeover he supplied food including fresh
fruit he thought they were lacking, yoghurts,
juices, flour and pasta.
pressed during cross-examination about the fact that he was not paying child
support the father said that he “
thought the children were being looked
after well, he couldn’t see any sign of a financial struggle”
seeing the children are well looked after I commit my
money to spend seeing them.”
father also said during cross examination that he would pay for art classes for
the children but not for their basic needs and
that he would pay for the
children to attend a Catholic School if they lived in [M] but could not afford
to do so if they lived in
father’s income has conspicuously declined since separation and there was
no sign at the hearing that his income was unlikely
to increase in the future. I
am satisfied that the father has deliberately placed himself in this position
because he disagrees with
the concept of being required to pay the mother money
and that as he is self-employed the mother is likely to face a long term
in obtaining child support from him.
am required to consider
any family violence involving the children or a
member of the children’s family.
H both in her report and during cross-examination used emotive language about
violence. In her report she used the term
“patriarchal
and when answering a question asked by the father during
cross examination she used the word “
This language
does not sit comfortably with the evidence about violence in this relationship
as it emerged during the hearing before
H was not privy to the evidence which emerged during the hearing and most
importantly she was not given a fair account by the mother
of her own behaviour
during the marriage.
father on his own admission did commit some acts during the relationship which
came within the definition of family violence in
Family Law Act
to 7 June 2012, most notably in November 2009. The mother’s actions in
throwing objects including an object which smashed
a car windscreen also
potentially come within that definition however.
overall picture painted by the evidence was more of couple violence than
coercive and controlling violence and I need to consider
what ramifications this
has for the orders I should make.
would have to be concerned about the possibility of the father committing acts
of family violence or being party to family violence
in another relationship but
it does not automatically follow that this would occur.
father is a man with very rigid views who likes to dictate how things are done
but there was no compelling evidence that he used
violence or threats of
violence to get his own way in his relationship with the mother. If he had a
placid and easy going partner
the risk of violence might be low. There was no
evidence that there was any violence in the father’s relationship with Ms
must consider whether the children themselves might be at risk of violence from
the father. However for reasons to be given a little
later I am not satisfied
that it is open to me to find that the father has ever directly subjected the
children to violence, and
by the time the hearing concluded he had been spending
time with the children on one day each alternate weekend for nearly two years,
although very likely not, it is true, under the circumstances which sometimes
stress parents therefore might and place children at
could speculate about what might happen if the children challenged the father
when they reached their teenage years but this is
so far away and so speculative
that I cannot take it into account in making orders.
also need to consider what might happen in the mother’s future
relationships but there was no evidence which would allow me
to conclude that
there was currently a risk of the children being exposed to family violence in
the separate care of the mother.
have never been any
family violence orders
between the parties or members
of their family.
must consider
whether it is preferable to make the order least likely to lead
to further proceedings.
risk that further proceedings may occur is high. The father filed contravention
applications on 18 July 2011, 16 January 2012
and 5 November 2012. He was
persuaded to withdraw them but there is a real prospect of further contravention
applications being filed.
The father is a pedantic man and the mother on one
occasion deliberately breached a court order and hoped that the court would
find that she had a reasonable excuse. There is zero trust and goodwill
between the parties.
do not consider however that there is much that I can do by way of making orders
to prevent further proceedings occurring save for
trying to word the orders as
carefully as I can.
must have regard to
any other fact or circumstance which the court thinks is
poor relationship between the parents, which has not been helped by this long
running litigation, is a relevant consideration.
By the end of the hearing they
each were both regularly resorting to the harsh word
“abduction”
to describe the conduct of the other in February
and March 2011 respectively.
father complained on 27 February 2013 that the mother was ignoring his emails
and the mother agreed that this sometimes happened
and said that she felt
overwhelmed by the emails she received.
party accepts responsibility for the poor state of their relationship and there
is no reason to be optimistic that anything
is likely to change in the future or
that their communication is likely to improve.
relationship between the father and Mr & Mrs C is not especially good but
changeovers between the father and Mr C have been
satisfactory absent the odd
occasion when Mr C has regrettably raised property matters at changeover.
was a clash between the father and Mrs C caused by Mrs C unwisely insisting on
an assurance from the father about the time of
his return, but Mrs C is not
normally involved with handovers.
father sought an order that no member of the mother’s family be allowed to
be present at changeovers but as changeovers
have generally been reasonably
trouble free and as the mother usually prefers not to do changeovers alone with
the father I would
be reluctant to make orders restricting who can attend at
changeovers.
now return to
primary considerations
first primary consideration is the benefit to the children of having a
meaningful relationship with both of their parents.
and [Y] will benefit from having a meaningful relationship with both their
parents. The father has rigidity to his character which
likely means that other
adults find him difficult to deal with on occasions but the children enjoy
spending time with him and he
can offer them different things to the mother,
including exposure to their Czech heritage.
do not have to order the mother back to [M] however to ensure that the father
has a meaningful relationship with the children. The
relationship between
children and a parent living at a distance may not be the same as it would have
been had the parent lived closer
but it can still be meaningful in other words
“significant important and valuable to the
Nurture and guidance can still be offered, albeit less frequently.
mother proposed that the father spend only one day each fortnight with the
children. This would not prevent the children having
a meaningful relationship
with the father but it would not provide the father with much scope to provide
nurture as well as do fun
activities with the children and it could only be
recommended if the children were likely to be at risk of harm if they spent
with the father.
second primary consideration is the need to protect the children from physical
or psychological harm as a result of being subjected
to or exposed to abuse,
neglect or family violence.
mother told Dr H in July 2011 that she had some fear of the father committing
familicide, a fear enhanced by the fact that the
father had guns. However there
was no evidence that such a catastrophic event was likely to occur.
was violence in the parties’ relationship but there was no violence and no
threat of violence at the time of separation
and there has been none since. The
father has not engaged in any obsessive behaviour post separation such as
stalking or making repeated
threats to the mother.
reasons the mother gave at the end of her affidavit filed on 20 January 2012 for
proposing that the father spend limited time
with the children did not include a
perceived risk of violence. The mother said as follows:
trust [Mr Longer] with the children. I do not trust him with alcohol, his
careless attitude to firearms, drinking and driving
with the children and
leaving the children without proper supervision. I do not trust him not to
denigrate me to the children and
I believe he is quite insensitive to their need
for security and settled relationships. I propose that the children see the
at least fortnightly but
cross-examination the mother that she did not consider that the father would
deliberately harm the children, and I also formed
that view after listening to
the parties’ interaction over two days when the father cross-examined the
was no evidence that there was any violence in the father’s current
relationship.
mother alleged that the father was occasionally abusive to children during the
relationship. She said that on one occasion he
hit [X] with a stick and Mr C
alleged that on another occasion the father pushed [X] out of way with a piece
of wood which cut her.
her affidavit filed on 22 March 2011 under the family violence heading the
mother alleged that in September 2010 she saw a bruise
on [X]’s bottom and
said that when she asked [X] what happened [X] said that the father had hit
father denied hitting [X] with a stick and denied pushing her out of the way
with a piece of wood at a barbecue and injuring her.
He also denied ever causing
a bruise on her bottom.
H did not observe any fear of the father in the children in July 2011 nor did
she perceive any anxious desire by them to placate
him and I cannot be satisfied
on the balance of probabilities that the father has even abused or assaulted
[X]. I am not satisfied
that the children would be at risk of abuse in the
father’s care in the future.
have concerns about the father’s parenting capacity but I do not consider
that he would pervasively neglect the children.
father alleged that he had seen scratches and bruises on the children and had
heard the mother yelling at them while he was on
the phone and he put two and
two together and concluded that she must be abusing the children. I am not
satisfied on the balance
of probabilities that this has ever occurred or is
likely to occur in the future, or that the children are likely to be exposed to
abuse (as defined in the
Family Law Act
pre-June 2012 or indeed as
defined now) or neglect or family violence in the mother’s care.
Parental Responsibility
Family Law Act
I am obliged to apply a presumption that
it is in the children’s best interests that the parents have equal shared
responsibility for them, absent a finding that one of the parents or a
person living with one of the parents has engaged in abuse
of the children or
family violence.
father committed an act of family violence in November 2009 and the presumption
does not apply. It is still open to me however
to make an order for equal shared
parental responsibility if I choose to do so, and this is what the father
order for equal shared parental responsibility requires the parents to comply
Family Law Act
which provides as follows:
(1) This section applies if, under a
(a) 2 or more persons are to share
responsibility
(b) the exercise of that
responsibility
involves making a decision about a major long-term issue in relation to the
(2) The order is taken to require the decision to be
jointly by those persons.
Note: Subject to any
orders, decisions about issues that are not
long-term issues
by the person with whom the
is spending time without a need to consult the other person (see
section 65DAE).
(3) The order is taken to require each of those persons:
(a) to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be
(b) to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that
(4) To avoid doubt, this section does not require any other person to
establish, before acting on a decision about the
communicated by one of those persons, that the decision has been
am always loath to remove parental responsibility from a parent of young
children who loves their children and will continue to
be part of their lives.
One parent is usually not the fount of all wisdom and children usually benefit
from having input from both
parents before major decisions are made. In addition
there can be unexpected developments in children’s lives which require
major decision to be made and an order for sole parental responsibility can have
unforseen consequences.
in favour of making an order for equal shared parental responsibility in this
case are that and [X] and [Y] are healthy
children and the number of long term
decisions likely to be required for them are on current indications limited.
parents were born in different countries but they have many things in common.
They both value education and although they do not
follow the same religion this
is not likely to be bone of contention between them. The father values a rural
lifestyle while the
mother does not but this in itself would not be of any great
relevance when it came to long term decision making once a decision
the risks in making an order for equal shared parental responsibility if parents
have a poor relationship, which these parents
do, include the matter needing to
come back to court so that a decision on a discrete issue can be made, one
parent becoming agitated
and stressed because of constant unproductive
communication which the mother does and finally a decision not being made at all
agreement cannot be reached.
parties have a demonstrated and not just a potential difficulty about reaching
agreement about major long term issues. During
cross-examination the father
acknowledged that the mother had spoken to him about a choice of school before
[X] started in 2012 and
that he had replied that he would not agree to any
school which was not in [M].
mother selected a school and once that was done the father did not complain
I just went
with her decision. I trusted her. I know she would have done the research. I
know she wouldn’t send them to a bad
school in the
was no sign during the hearing that the parties communication or their attitude
to each other was likely to change and I consider
that although major decisions
may not need to be made frequently it is not in the children’s best
interests that when they
are required they lead to stressful and unproductive
discussions. This is a case in which I consider that I must make an order that
one parent have sole parental responsibility, subject to some provisos so that
the children names are not changed without consent,
they are not relocated to an
inconvenient place and that they are not able to be taken overseas without
agreed or a court order.
The recommendations in the Family
must now decide the issue of the children’s living arrangements but before
I do so I need to consider the recommendations
in the Family Report.
H prepared a family report in July 2011, seven months before the hearing
said as follows in her report:
Substantially
shared cared, or even spending significant time with the non-residential parent,
is not a workable arrangement for
[Y] and [X] given their ages, the geographic
distance between households and the high conflict between their parents.
concluded opinion that it is not in the children’s best interests to
reside with Mr Longer. Mr Longer does not currently
appear to pose any immediate
risk of harm to his children but unless the evidentiary evidence should
establish that the allegations
of Ms Longer, her family and friends are
fabrications entirely without foundation I would not be prepared to recommend
[X] and [Y]
stay with Dad in [M] at this stage in their young lives. However,
the children are fond of their father, enjoy spending time with
him and may feel
rejected bafflement if he suddenly vanished from their lives. Accordingly, I
daytime visits should continue between the subject children and their father
should be referred to a Keeping in Touch program or equivalent program
arrangement could be reviewed in 12-18 months with an updated Family Report.
Favourable indicators would include evidence that
Mr Longer has been able to act
as an external stress regulator for his children during visits and at handovers,
that the parents
can effectively insulate their children from the ill-will
between them at handovers and that both parents have been assisted in
psychotherapy
to become more thoughtful about how to balance emotional
connection with personal sovereignty in family relationships.
H’s report contained the following comment:
negative impact on [X] and [Y] of circumscribed weekly contact with Dad is not
likely to be serious, and as long as they are
receiving normal nurturance from
their mother they will be able to cope with missing
cross-examination Dr H said that she did not support the children travelling to
[M] to spend time with the father until they
were much older. When asked why the
first reason Dr H gave was that they would need to travel there by motor
mother submitted that I should place considerable weight on
recommendations, but for the following reasons I find myself unable to do that.
H was not given a balanced picture of certain historical matters. She referred
more than once in her report to the incident of
the father removing the children
from the day care centre in March 2011 but made no mention of the mother’s
arbitrary removal
of the children from [M] in February 2011.
is considerable focus in Dr H’s report on the mother’s allegations
of violence and the fact that the father owns
guns. Dr H devoted a paragraph of
the report to the fact that the mother referred her to a book called
“Blood Vows” by
Helen Cummins which Dr H remarked “
light on a particular kind of domestic despot, the middle class professional,
much admired by outsiders, who treats his wife
as property
” and which
is a book by a first wife about a familicide-suicide committed by a man who
killed his second wife and children
and himself.
accept that it was necessary for Dr H to consider the issue of familicide
carefully because the mother raised it early in the case
and it is always a
deeply troubling when such a concern is raised. However that concern has abated
as time as passed and more evidence
has emerged.
the conclusion to her report Dr H said that the father did not currently appear
to pose any immediate risk of harm to the children,
but she responded quite
aggressively to questions he asked during cross-examination in July 2012. She
gave scathing and dismissive
answers to his questions and used the emotive term
” She gave the impression of dealing with all
suggestions put to her by the father against a background of firmly believing
that he was a perpetrator of controlling and coercive violence.
H did not have the opportunity to hear the evidence given at the hearing and was
not aware of the more rounded evidence about the
behaviour of each party which
emerged as a result of cross-examination. It is not open to me to find that the
father perpetrated
coercive and controlling family violence during the
relationship.
is a real possibility that the shadow of the concern raised about familicide and
the concern raised about whether the father
was a perpetrator of coercive and
controlling violence led Dr H to make somewhat unusual recommendations about the
amount of time
children (who were 5 ½ and 3 ¾ when Dr H was
cross-examined in July 2012) should spend with their father and I consider
I need to be careful about the weight I give to her recommendations.
have expressed more than once during the course of this matter my regret that it
commenced with the mother unilaterally relocating
from [M]. The father would
inevitably have felt considerable pain and some anger about the sudden removal
of his children to a place
4 ½ hours drive away and about the deception
practised on him by the mother and her family in order to achieve this
relocation.
as I said during the interim proceedings I have to make the orders which I
consider to be in the children’s best interests
and if that means that the
mother is permitted to remain in the place to which she unilaterally relocated
then those are the orders
which will have to be made.
father urged me to order that the mother be made to return to [M] and in the
Full Court decision of
Sampson & Hartnett
majority expressed the tentative view that the court had the power to order a
parent to relocate. They emphasised however that
if this power existed it would
only be appropriate to exercise it in the rarest of circumstances, and they also
expressed concern
did not relocate as ordered.
if I did have the power to order the mother to return to [M] and parent the
children there I would not exercise it. The mother
has been established in
Newcastle for a little over two years now. She has family support and assistance
with accommodation in Newcastle
and she would not have that in [M]. She has
formed a new relationship with a person who works in the Newcastle area.
mother finds the father very difficult to deal with and placing her in close
proximity to him without family support would be
highly likely to result in the
mother becoming stressed. There is a high likelihood that a forced return to [M]
by the mother would
impact adversely on the children.
is true that it would place the children in close proximity to the father and
enable the children to see him more frequently, but
the same outcome could be
achieved by the father relocating, something he stubbornly refuses to consider
that I am not prepared to make the mother move and that the father will not move
a decision has to be made about where the children
are to primarily live.
father proposed that the children live with him and spend limited time with the
mother while she completed an anger management
course and had time to absorb the
lessons learned.
accept that the children have a good relationship with the father but this
outcome would be highly likely to be detrimental for
them. The children would
have to move to a home in which they have never lived and become used to a new
family combination. They
would not understand why the change was being made and
would inevitably greatly miss their mother. The father does not value the
mother or have much capacity to empathise with the children and would not be
able to help them adjust to the change. I have reservations
father’s capacity to provide for the children’s day to day needs on
a full time basis.
father proposed that after 12 months the children commence living in a week
practicable because the
parties lived close together I do not consider that such an outcome would be in
the children’s best
parents frequently came into conflict with each other during their relationship
and they have different ways of doing things on
a day to day basis. The father
is not able to tolerate someone doing things differently to him, and the risks
of conflict between
the parents over the way each was caring for children if the
children moved between households would be unacceptably high.
only order reasonably open to me on the evidence is an order that the children
live primarily with the mother. They are primarily
attached to her indeed have
lived almost exclusively with her for a very significant portion of their lives
and I am satisfied that
the mother is doing a good job of caring for them. It
follows that an order should also be made that the mother have sole parental
responsibility for the children subject to the provisos mentioned earlier.
H did not endorse equal time because of the children’s ages and the
conflict between the parents and on this part of her
report I place weight.
then have to consider the time the children should spend with the father.
mother proposed that the children spend time with the father for one day each
fortnight and that he be restrained from removing
them from the Newcastle area.
The mother’s case was that an accumulation of small concerns about the
father (leaving the children
in the car alone in a shopping centre car park, his
carelessness with seat belts, his carelessness with guns, the children wandering
into the street on one occasion when they were in his care) meant that it was
preferable that the children spent shorter rather than
longer periods with him.
She submitted that the father could hold it together for shorter periods but
might not be able to for longer
do not consider that such a restrictive order can be justified.
effect of such an order would be that the children would not be able to see the
father in his home or interact with their half-sibling
in the comfort of that
dwindle away if he found regular
visits to Newcastle, the travel for which would
take longer than the time he was able to spend with them, impossible to
children have a good relationship with the father and while he has slipped up on
occasions in regard to their care I am not convinced
that they would be at risk
of harm if they spent longer periods with him than they do at present.
travel distance between [M] and Newcastle and the straitened financial
circumstances of the parties means that every alternate
weekend in [M] would be
too much but I am satisfied that it would be in the children’s best
interests to spend time with the
father on one weekend each month, from Saturday
to Sunday initially and then from Friday to Sunday once the single overnight has
had time to bed down.
also intend to order that the father be permitted to spend time with the
children on one Sunday each month in Newcastle provided
that he gives the mother
72 hours notice by email of his intention to do so. The father might not
exercise this time but the option
will be there, and the 72 hours notice means
that the mother will not be too inconvenienced if the father does not come.
is no point my ordering that the father spend the whole of this weekend with the
children in Newcastle because he is not in
a strong financial position and he
has no connections in Newcastle to assist with accommodation.
that the children are both at or near school age they also need to be able to
spend whole weekends with the mother, and she will
have two and sometimes three
weekends a month during school terms unaffected by the need to provide the
children to spend time with
the father.
am satisfied that some holiday time should be slowly introduced and I intend to
start by ordering that the children spend five days
with the father in the Term
3 school holidays. [Y] will by then be almost 5 and [X] will be more than 6
½ and there is no reason
why the children should not be able to manage such
mother proposed as an alternative that an order be made requiring the father to
spend time with the children at the home of his
Ms L. Ms L was asked
if she would be willing to have the father stay in her flat in Sydney and she
said that she would, but I do not
intend to make this order. I do not consider
that such a restrictive order is necessary in order to keep the children safe.
changeover is to occur is a very difficult issue.
mother proposed that changeovers be in Newcastle. She is a student and on a very
limited income. She is receiving no child support
and this is unlikely to change
in the near future.
am sympathetic to the mother and I am certainly not going to order that the
mother take the children all the way to [M] as the father
proposed but there is
much to be said for a changeover at a mid way point.
the father drives from [M] to Newcastle and picks up the children and then
drives back to [M] he will in the end have done over
10 hours driving. I cannot
be certain that his partner, the mother of a young child, will always be with
him and it will be safer
for the children if they drive with a parent who has
only driven for half this time.
am conscious of the financial impost of such an order on the mother but the
welfare of the children must come first and I intend
to order that changeovers
occur at [D]. This will result in the father doing more driving than the mother
and more driving then if
changeover was at [R] but it was the changeover point
the father originally proposed as an alternative to [M].
am also conscious of the fact that the mother may be reluctant to go to
changeovers alone but she has a supportive family and I
will also order that she
can arrange for a nominee to facilitate these (and indeed all) changeovers.
expect that the mother will consider the order for changeover in [D] most unfair
but to make a different order might place the children’s
relationship with
the father and possibly their safety at risk.
have considered the possibility of ordering that the father pay the mother
something for petrol costs but the issue was not raised
during the hearing, I
would have difficulty fixing an appropriate amount and implementation of such an
order could simply lead to
more conflict between the parties.
mother sought an order that each parent ensure the attendance of the children at
the children’s pre-arranged sporting social
and cultural events while the
children are in their care. I do not intend to make this order.
mother did not attempt to define cultural or social events and the term could
include birthday parties and local events which
the mother considered important
but the father did not. The risk of conflict occurring between the parties over
the interpretation
of those terms is unacceptably high and it also implies a
judgment that a whole range of local social activities are more important
the children than time with their father.
mother no doubt sought this order as a result of the debacle surrounding
[X]’s attendance at her end of year ballet concert
in 2012. I have been
critical of the father for the way he responded to the mother’s request
that he be flexible in order to
allow [X] to attend, but I am also concerned
the orders.
parents need to carefully heed the following passage in the Full Court decision
Gravis & Major
It needs to
be remembered when dealing with orders involving a fixed contact regime that
children are not parcels to be passed back
and forth at the convenience of the
parents. Children have lives and routines of their own. They do receive
invitations to birthday
parties of friends often at short notice. They do take
part in school productions which are commonly very important to them no matter
how minor their role in the production might be. These are things over which
the parent with whom the child is living has not much,
if any, control.
our view responsible parents will see the court orders as providing a template
around which they can build their time with the
child but in doing so they will
adopt a flexible and common sense approach so as to promote the child’s
happiness and wellbeing.
Of course, if the parents are unable to reach
agreement about a departure from the strict terms of the orders then the parent
to nominate a time with the child can insist upon a strict
compliance.
can only hope that once orders are in place giving the father more time with the
children he will be more accommodating if asked
to make changes to arrangements
than he was at the time of the ballet concert, and I can only hope that the
mother does not ask to
change the arrangements too often, and if it repeatedly
turns out that [X] has birthday party invitations and ballet events on the
weekend of each month then the father’s time with [X] will need to
mother sought an order that each party be restrained from consuming alcohol in
excess of the NSW drink driving limit whilst the
children were in their care.
The difficult with making such an order is that unless a parent happens to be
caught drink driving it
is almost impossible to enforce. The evidence about the
father’s alcohol consumption is not sufficiently concerning to persuade
that I should make such an order.
mother sought an order that the father be restrained from bringing the children
into contact with or allowing them to remain in
the presence of firearms. If
such an order was made it would be breached if the children were in the same
room as a gun cabinet.
mother is sensitive about the risk posed by firearms and many members of the
community share that sensitivity. The father did
not evince any desire to take
the children hunting or to engage them in target shooting and he has a choice
the guns when the children are with him. I intend to
order that the father ensure that whenever the children are in his home his
firearms are secured within a gun cabinet and are not removed from the gun
cabinet at any time during the children’s visit.
father offered to get rid of the guns if the court required it but I am not
persuaded that the evidence justifies me making such
light of the father’s admissions about seat belts I intend to make an
order as sought by the mother that the children being
secured in motor vehicles
with child restraints. In the light of the evidence about the father’s
driving record and his admission
that he had used an unregistered motor vehicle
to transport the children I intend to order that the father be restrained from
transporting
the children in a motor vehicle which is unregistered or in a motor
vehicle driven by him if he is unlicensed.
parties need to have a channel of communication so that they can exchange
information about the children on a regular basis, if
for no other reason than
to avoid each party stewing on unresolved concerns about the children. I could
order that they continue
to use a communication book but this is the
century and they are computer literate adults and
a preferable alternative is email communication.
the father sends emails and the mother ignores them this is likely to hasten the
return of this matter to court, and I intend to
order that the father be
permitted to send one email concerning the children to the mother immediately
following each monthly visit
and that the mother respond to that email within 72
hours. The parties will of course still need to communicate by email or text
message about other small issues as they arise.
am fearful of something going wrong but if I try to prescribe further how the
communication is to occur (by for example ordering
that the father keep his
emails short and non-blame focused and the mother respond at a reasonable
length) it will very likely only
fuel further contravention applications.
father repeatedly raised during the proceedings the issue of the mother
physically disciplining the children. The mother denied
that she has ever done
so harshly but I intend to order that each party be restrained from physically
disciplining the children.
Societal norms are moving in this direction and
compliance by both the parties with this order will remove a potential source of
do not intend to make any of the orders sought by the father about the manner of
the children’s day to day care as I am not
persuaded that it is necessary
to do so in order to ensure the children’s wellbeing.
do not accept that there is any need for the mother to do an anger management
course and I do not intend to order that she do so.
father sought an order that Skype rather than telephone be the default method of
communication between the parents and the children.
I hope that Skype will be
used as often as possible but I do not intend to prescribe it by order because
this is likely only to lead
to arguments and perhaps contravention applications.
There may be occasions where the mother is not at home and does not have access
to Skype at the time for telephone communication for example.
father sought an order that he be permitted to take the children to the Czech
Republic for a holiday in mid 2013. I do not intend
to make this order.
children have a good relationship with the father and it is important that they
maintain a connection with their Czech heritage
and their relatives in the Czech
Republic. However the children have not spent any overnight time with the father
since January 2011
and it would be a big stretch for them to spend several weeks
with him in the near future in order to travel with him to the Czech
is considerable merit in the submission by the mother’s counsel that it
would be preferable for the father to make a discrete
application about this
issue at some time in the future once he had a history of spending more
extensive time with the children.
H recommended in her report that interim orders only be made and the matter be
re-assessed and another Family Report be prepared
in 12-18 months time. Neither
parent sought this. They have been in the court system quite long enough. They
now need to try to manage
outside the court system absent some serious even
which requires the matter to return here.
hold onto the hope that once final orders are made the father will accept that
he cannot change the mother’s residence in
Newcastle and focus on being
the best parent he can be for the children. If that does not happen and if there
are continuing problems
with compliance with the orders or if serious issues
arise about parenting capacity or denigration then the children’s time
with the father may need to be revisited.
all of the above reasons the orders of the court shall be as set out at the
beginning of this judgment.
I certify that the preceding three
hundred and forty-four paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of
Date: 02 April 2013
This is a summary
of the effect of the Orders sought by the father as contained in Exhibit
Family Report
paragraphs 52 and
father’s affidavit filed 28 March
report paragraph
father’s affidavit filed
[2010]FamCAFC53
Dr H’s report paragraph
Family Report
paragraph 55, 56
Father’s affidavit filed 7 October 2011 paragraph
[2007] FamCA 520
(2007) 37 Fam LR
Mother’s affidavit filed 20 January 2012 paragraph
Report paragraphs 78 &
Report paragraph
& Hartnett (No.10)
(2007) 38 FamLR
[2010] FamCAFC 239
RTF format (737 KB)
Signed PDF/A format