Sharon de Jonge v Australian Broadcasting Corporation - re Relates to 63.5 Referral to the AIRC [2009] AIRC 957; (11 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
s.170LW - pre-reform Act - Application for settlement of dispute (certified agreement)
Ms Sharon de Jonge
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
(C2009/2628)
ABC EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT 2006 - 2009
(ODN) [AC303551]
Commonwealth employment
DEPUTY PRESIDENT LEARY
HOBART, 11 DECEMBER 2009
Relates to 63.5 Referral to the AIRC.
This is an application pursuant to s.170LW of the
Workplace Relations Act, 1996
(the Act) to have a dispute resolution process conducted for the settlement of a dispute between Sharon de Jonge (the applicant) and
the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (the respondent).
The applicant alleges “repeated bullying and harassment to the stage of causing psychological injury and denial of natural justice
and due process.”
The application was listed for a conciliation conference in Hobart on 22 July, 2009, however the respondent advised that it would
be challenging the jurisdiction of the Commission to hear the application.
On becoming aware that the applicant was based in Queensland (but was represented by her sister who is based in Tasmania), the respondent’s
representative is based in Sydney, and in an endeavour to limit the costs to either party and to not add any further stress to the
applicant the Commission decided to determine the matter
‘on the papers’
The following Directions were issued:
“The respondent has provided a document claiming that the Australian Industrial Relations Commission (the Commission) does not
have jurisdiction to hear and determine the application.
Accordingly the Commission issues the following Directions:
1. The respondent to provide written submissions by close of business Wednesday 29 July, 2009 with a copy forwarded to the applicant.
2. The applicant to provide a written response to the respondent’s submissions by close of business Wednesday 5 August, 2009,
with a copy forwarded to the respondent.
3. On receipt of the submissions the Commission will determine whether there is a need for a formal hearing or whether the matter
can be determined ‘on the papers’.”
Background:
The applicant was employed by the respondent from March, 1993, until August, 2005, when the employment was terminated due to redundancy.
“The applicant held a variety of positions throughout the course of her employment with the ABC.”
[Respondent’s written submission 15 July, 2009, page 1]
The ABC Employment Agreement 2003-2006
, covered the applicant’s employment at the time of termination.
The present application was lodged by the applicant in Hobart on 26 June, 2009, and states that the dispute relates to the application
of a number of clauses of a number of Certified Agreements to which the respondent is/was a named party.
The application makes reference to those agreements as being:
(i) ABC-CPSU Employment Agreement 1996-99 (
the first Agreement
ABC Employment Agreement 2000-2002
(the second Agreement);
ABC Employment Agreement 2003-2006
(the third Agreement);
ABC Employment Agreement 2006-2009
(the current Agreement)
The respondent argued that there were a number of jurisdictional issues which would not allow the Commission
“to conciliate or arbitrate”
the dispute notification.
Accordingly this decision deals only with the jurisdictional challenge raised by the respondent.
The submissions of the applicant were comprehensive and included details of a number of allegations and matters about which she complains
as well as addressing the jurisdiction issues.
The respondent submitted that the allegations made by the applicant have been raised
‘indirectly’
during the period of employment through an unsuccessful Comcare claim and a Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC)
claim which was subsequently withdrawn by the applicant. A claim of denial of natural justice and due process has not been previously
raised. Accordingly the applicant is unable to progress a dispute in respect to those matters.
The Comcare claim by the applicant was denied and the applicant voluntarily withdrew her HREOC claim. Accordingly the respondent
is of the view that all issues and claims raised by this application have been resolved.
The respondent submitted that “Given the significant issues which developed between Ms de Jonge and her Manager, and acting
in accordance with medical advice, the ABC determined it was not possible to mediate the grievances and return the parties to a situation
where they could work together. With the agreement of both parties, the ABC closed the two grievances.” It is presumed that
the two closed grievances, which were not identified, were the allegation of bullying and harassment raised by the applicant in her
May 2004, grievance and the grievance lodged by the applicant’s Manager alleging workplace stress as a result of dealing with
the applicant. [Respondent’s written submission page 3, paragraph 12]
The jurisdictional objections raised by the respondent:
The applicant was not party to any agreement at the time of lodging this notification:
The respondent submitted that the
ABC Employment Agreement 2003-2006
(the third agreement and referred to by the respondent as the
relevant agreement
), has since been replaced in total by the
ABC Employment Agreement 2006-2009
(the current agreement).
The third agreement was terminated pursuant to
of the Act effective 6 December, 2006, and replaced by the current agreement
At the time of this dispute [C2009/2628] being notified (26 June, 2009) there was no available power under which the notification
could be made as the applicant is not, and never was, a party to the current agreement
The respondent referred to the decision of Commissioner Deegan in
John Coochey v Department of Defence
In the Full Bench decision in ING Administration Pty Ltd v Jajoo Ramsin (ING) (2006) [158 IR 239] it was said that Commissioner Deegan
“…..found that the dispute settlement procedure could not be invoked because the relevant agreement had ceased to operate.
She went on to say that even if that was not the case, as the relevant individual was not an employee within the meaning of the
definition of employee in the relevant agreement, nor a person bound by the agreement within the terms of another clause, the individual
ceased to have the capacity to progress a dispute under the dispute settlement procedure in the agreement.” [
It was also submitted by the respondent that the majority decision of the High Court in
R v Hamilton Knight; Ex parte Commonwealth Steamship Owners Association (
[1952] HCA 38
[86 CLR 283]
established that entitlements under an award could not impose obligations on an employer outside the term of the award or after the
cessation of the employment relationship. In this matter the applicant seeks to impose an obligation outside the terms of the relevant
agreement and after the cessation of the employment relationship.
Not matters pertaining to the application of the agreement:
The respondent argued that the matters for which the applicant seeks resolution are not matters that pertain to the application of
the agreement. The applicant claims that the dispute relates to repeated bullying and harassment and a denial of natural justice
and due process. The issues raised by the applicant are about the relationship between the applicant and other employees of the respondent
and the way in which complaints raised by the applicant about those relationships have been handled. The respondent argued that they
are not matters dealt with by the agreement and are not issues relevant to the application or operation of the agreement.
It was submitted that the decision of the majority in Australian Municipal Administrative Clerical and Services Union v Automated
Meter Reading Services (AMRS) supported this view. It was said in that decision that “A relationship between the provisions
of the relevant agreement and the subject matters in dispute would appear to be an essential element in the identification of any
dispute over the application of the agreement…” [Print
at paragraph 75]
The respondent said that it had an Anti-Bullying policy and that procedural fairness is a general common law principle but neither
are specifically articulated in the agreement and so are not matters pertaining to the operation or application of the agreement.
The applicant is no longer an employee of the ABC:
The respondent said that the applicant was not an employee at the time of making this application.
The respondent referred to the majority decision of the Full Bench of the Commission in
where it was determined that the Commission had jurisdiction to progress a dispute under the relevant dispute procedure but only if
the issue in dispute remained unresolved at the time of the employee’s termination and it had been processed in accord with
the disputes resolution procedure of the relevant agreement and had been commenced prior to the termination.
The majority decision upheld the finding of Senior Deputy President Drake where she found that:
I believe the test is whether an applicant was an employee at the time the dispute arose and the dispute resolution process was commenced.
The dispute resolution process is intended to apply to disputes which arise in the course of employment between parties to the agreement.
And further:
Once those criteria are met the entitlement to access the process has arisen and continues limited to the matter in dispute …..”
paragraph 15]
The respondent submitted that there is no jurisdiction for the Commission to progress a dispute which arose after the termination
of the employment relationship.
Claim restricted to the third agreement:
The respondent said that references to clauses from both the first and second agreements, which were not in force at the time of the
applicant’s termination or at the time the allegations of bullying were raised, are not relevant. The respondent argued that
should the application proceed it be restricted to the clauses in the third agreement. However to do so would question what the
Commission could do given that Part N of clause 63.5.6 of the third agreement provides that
“no determination or recommendation may be made which is inconsistent with the terms of this Agreement.”
It was submitted that the agreement relates wholly to the relationship between the respondent and its current employees and provides
no mechanism allowing for reinstatement, awarding of compensation, written apology, the alteration of employment records or the reimbursement
of costs. Further some of the employees with whom the applicant had a grievance are no longer employed by the respondent and could
not be involved in any dispute resolution process.
The submissions of the applicant were comprehensive and addressed the substantive claims as well as the jurisdiction issues. The
submissions are repetitive, disjointed and much of their content is not relevant to the matter for decision. The submissions have
been provided without any relevant supporting documentation. Whilst there are many claims alleging non compliance with provisions
of the agreement and/or ABC policies such allegations are not supported by any specific references to clauses or particular policies.
This application is in regard to allegations of bullying and harassment, denial of natural justice and due process.
I attempt to put the submissions of the applicant into some context.
The claims and allegations by the applicant:
Firstly I deal with claims by the applicant that are not relevant to this notification.
There are four (4) claims relied upon by the applicant which are rejected as they have no relationship with the agreement or with
this dispute notification and are outside the jurisdiction of this Commission.
(i) Comcare claim:
The applicant said that in June 2005, a claim was lodged with Comcare alleging depression “stemming back to August 2002 as a
result of negative comments, criticism, harassment and bullying by her immediate supervisor.” The claim was rejected by Comcare.
According to the applicant this was because the “ABC chose not to support it and provided Comcare with information that was
false and misleading.” [Applicant’s written submission page 5, paragraph 26]
The respondent submitted that in June 2005, the applicant submitted a compensation claim alleging depression
“stemming back to August 2002”
as a result of negative comments, criticism, harassment and bullying by her supervisor. The respondent said the claim was rejected
by Comcare on the basis that her
“condition arose from reasonable disciplinary action as a result of undergoing a Performance Improvement Plan and receiving
a first warning in response to misconduct.”
[Respondent’s written submission page 3, paragraph 14]
I note the conflicting submissions. I note also no supporting documentation was provided by either party.
Nonetheless Comcare is an independent statutory authority acting under specific legislation. The claim to Comcare is unrelated to
any provision found in the agreement and this Commission has no authority to deal with an issue between the applicant and Comcare.
In my view, the claim has been determined by Comcare and in any case relates to an issue between the applicant and Comcare.
(ii) Application pursuant to s.170CE of the Act:
An application to this Commission pursuant to s.170CE of the Act [U2005/173] alleging that the applicant’s termination was harsh,
unjust or unreasonable and also breached s.170CK of the Act (discrimination or other prohibited reasons), was listed for conference
before a Member of the Commission in Brisbane on 7 September, 2005.
The application alleged unfair and unlawful termination and also referred to claims of
“sexual discrimination, bullying and harassment”.
[Application U2005/173 attached letter to Registrar in file]
A Notice of Discontinuance dated 13 September, 2005, was signed by the applicant which
discontinued matter U2005/173. The applicant submitted that this application was withdrawn following conciliation in September,
2005, and deciding to
“wait instead for the outcome of the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC) claim as the ABC had not responded
to the HREOC claim by this time.”
[Applicants written submission in response, page 5 paragraph 29]
The application was
discontinued by the applicant and cannot be re-instated by this dispute notification.
The unfair/unlawful dismissal claim has been settled by the applicant signing the notice of discontinuance.
(iii) HREOC claim:
In July, 2005, the applicant lodged an application with the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC) alleging bullying,
harassment and discrimination on the grounds of sex by a number of ABC employees. The applicant claims that the ABC response was
“false and misleading”.
Further it was submitted that “when Ms de Jonge read the response, [from the ABC] this exacerbated her psychological injury
to the stage where she had to withdraw the complaint due to genuine fears for her health and well-being.” [Applicant’s
written submission, page 5, paragraph 27]
The respondent submitted that in July, 2005, the applicant lodged a claim with HREOC alleging discrimination on the grounds of sex
and also allegations of bullying and harassment. In January 2006, the applicant withdrew her complaint to HREOC.
HREOC is an independent statutory authority and an application before it has no relationship to the agreement under which the applicant
was employed and cannot be re-instated by this application.
That matter has been settled by the applicant withdrawing her complaint.
(iv) Comcare Claim by Applicant’s Manager:
The claim by the applicant’s Manager regarding workplace stress as a result of dealing with issues surrounding the applicant
was accepted by Comcare.
The applicant’s Manager alleged his stress was caused by the applicant’s “continued poor performance and incompetence,
continued workplace bullying, harassment and intimidation, continued arguing and repeated non compliance with reasonable directions
and contravention of ABC’s email policy.”
The applicant challenges the findings of Comcare and claimed “that there was no evidence that the ABC was able to provide that
would prove that his condition arose as a direct result of working with Ms de Jonge.” [Applicant’s written submission
page 4, paragraph 23]
This is not a claim that could be pursued by the applicant under any provision in the agreement nor can it be dealt with by this application.
In any case it is unclear what the applicant seeks from the claim.
This is an issue between the applicant and Comcare for which no remedy can be imagined.
The complaints and allegations:
I attempt to unravel the various claims, complaints and allegations referred to by the applicant.
Performance Appraisal process:
The applicant responded to the written submission of the respondent stating that in August 1999,
“as part of an increment recommendation”,
she first raised concerns in respect to training, mentoring and supervision. It was submitted that the concerns were not addressed
appropriately, have been raised on subsequent occasions and remain unresolved. [Applicant’s written submission, page 2, paragraph
The submission of the applicant does not make any specific claim in respect to those concerns, nor does she provide any documentation
or information that a grievance had been processed in accord with any of the provisions of the agreement. It may be that the concerns
relate to a complaint in respect to the Performance Appraisal process which was the subject of discussion in September, 2002, where
she submitted that training, mentoring and supervision was raised again.
She said that on 11 September, 2002, a meeting to address work performance
‘as part of the Performance Appraisal process’
was held at which time issues relating to training, supervision and mentoring were discussed. The applicant claimed that the Manager’s
stress issue, as well as her complaints, were not appropriately addressed and remain unresolved.
The applicant submitted that she filed
Personal Grievance in respect to her Performance Appraisal sometime between October, 2003, and May, 2004, alleging that “….
the processes had not been performed in accordance with either the certified agreement or ABC policies.”
It was also her submission that from 2 October, 2003, to May, 2004, she made numerous requests to many ABC employees in respect to
her complaint in respect to the Performance Appraisal process. It was submitted that complaints from October, 2003, also raised
concerns that the Performance Improvement Plan was not following prescribed processes.
The applicant said her complaint was investigated and rejected by the Head, Organisational Design who determined that
“there was nothing in the way the process was conducted that would constitute a breach of the certified agreement.”
She claimed to have queried the process and disagreed with the outcome. It was also claimed that the wrong Performance Appraisal
had been reviewed.
Further she submitted that in May, 2004, she lodged another Personal Grievance relating to her
, the Performance Appraisal process and the Performance Improvement Plan.
The Federal Head of ABC Technical Services dealt with the initial complaint and it was referred to an appeal panel to investigate
the Performance Appraisal process only. (I note the agreement provides such a process at clause 23.8.3(b)).
The applicant submitted that “At this point in time Ms de Jonge had made many submissions to various ABC employees since 2002
that either expressly or implicitly made allegations of bullying and harassment….”
The applicant complained that many other recommendations of the Appeal panel were ignored by the respondent but provides no detail.
However this claim seems to contradict the applicant’s own submission at paragraph 18 which says that
“….the scope of the Appeal Panel’s investigation was limited to the 2002 Performance Appraisal.”
Nonetheless it is claimed that these grievances remain unresolved and that the issue in dispute about her Performance Appraisal remains
unresolved. [Applicant’s written submission, page 3, paragraphs 15 – 18]
It was also submitted by the applicant that “After the appeal panel made their report to the ABC that none of the claims made
by the ABC regarding Ms de Jonge’s perceived underperformance or bad behaviour were able to be substantiated by the ABC, Ms
de Jonge was required to defend herself against a personal grievance lodged by Mr B (Manager).” No further information was
provided other than the statement that the “issues remain unresolved.” [Applicant’s written submission page 4,
paragraph 22]
The respondent submitted “In mid 2004, following a request by Ms de Jonge to review her 2001-02 performance appraisal in which
she had been given a “U” (underperforming) rating, an appeal panel was formed in accordance with the provisions of the
relevant agreement. The appeal panel determined that the “U” rating had been given to Ms de Jonge inappropriately and
recommended that the 2002-02 rating be adjusted to an “M” (meets requirements). The appeal panel recommendation was
accepted by the ABC.” [Respondent’s written submission page 3, paragraph 10]
The respondent submitted that the Personal Grievance was in relation to allegations of bullying and harassment and that the complaint
in respect to the appeal of her Performance Appraisal was dealt with by reference to Clause 23 – Performance Management which
prescribes:
23.8 Reconsideration and Appeal
23.8.1 Notwithstanding employees’ right of appeal under the provisions of this subclause, it is expected that an employee will
raise any matter of concern regarding their Job Plan or performance feedback as soon as it arises during the cycle.
23.8.2 If an employee in Bands 1- 8 disagrees with the salary outcome of their Appraisal, or believes both that they have been regularly
performing, and were required to perform, tasks beyond the level specified in their Job Plan, they may, within 14 days of the notification
of the outcome of their Appraisal, refer the matter in writing to the delegate for reconsideration. The employee will state the reasons
they consider the Appraisal or Job Plan was unfair or failed to take into account all relevant factors. The delegate will reconsider
the matter and advise the employee of their decision (in writing and with reasons) within 7 days of receipt of the request for reconsideration.
23.8.3 An employee who remains dissatisfied may appeal to their director in accordance with the following process:
(a) The Appeal must be in writing and must be lodged within seven days of the delegate’s reconsideration decision.
(b) The Appeal will be considered by a panel comprising
(1) a management nominee other than the original assessor;
(ii) an ABC employee nominated by the appellant; and
(iii) a chairperson mutually agreed between the ABC and the appellant (or their representative), who is from outside the work area
and has been trained or is experienced in assessment procedures.
(c) The panel will consider relevant material and will seek the views of the affected employee, the employee’s manager, up to
two referees nominated by the employee and any other persons associated with the employee’s work. The panel may make its own
inquiries and will provide an opportunity for the employee and the manager to address any adverse material.
(d) The panel will provide its recommendation to the director from among the following options:
(1) that the employee remain on the salary point originally determined by the delegate (i.e. the appeal should be rejected); or
(ii) that the employee be advanced to an alternative salary point within the current band; or
(iii) that the employee’s Job Plan be amended to include the next higher band and the employee promoted to a salary point within
(e) The director will advise the employee of his/her decision within one month of the appeal being lodged or as soon as possible thereafter.
‘Where necessary, as a consequence of the decision, the employee’s salary will be adjusted accordingly. In the event
that the director rejects the panel’s recommendation, the director will furnish the employee and the panel with a clear statement
of the reasons for rejection and shall provide a copy of the panel’s recommendation to the employee.”
I am satisfied that the applicant’s grievance in respect to the Performance Appraisal was dealt with by reference to the relevant
provision in the agreement. That was the proper process to be followed. The applicant was found to have been
inappropriately
rated and the appraisal was adjusted in her favour.
I am of the view that complaint been resolved. It was resolved in the applicant’s favour and in accord with the certified agreement,
albeit the applicant maintains the complaint remains unresolved. I deal with the Personal Grievances later in this decision.
First Warning and Misconduct:
The applicant submitted that a First Warning was issued on 24 June, 2004. A complaint was raised by the applicant about the finding
of misconduct as well as a complaint that the investigation processes were not consistent with the provision in the agreement.
The complaint was reviewed by the Manager, Human Resources, NSW who, the applicant submitted, “
concluded that
the discrepancies didn’t matter and that Ms de Jonge was guilty of misconduct.”
[Applicant’s written submission page 4, paragraph 20]
The respondent submitted that on 24 June, 2004, following an investigation, the allegation of misconduct was substantiated and the
applicant was issued with a first warning.
The applicant sought a review of that decision to
“assess the process and merits of the case.”
The Manager, Human Resources, NSW concluded there was
“nothing lacking in the procedure”
or in the decision that had been made in relation to the finding of misconduct and the first warning letter. [Respondent’s
written submissions page 2, paragraph 9]
The applicant claims that the finding and the process of the appeal were inappropriate and that the issue remains unresolved.
Clause 57.3 of the agreement provided:
57.3 First Warning:
57.3.1 Where misconduct arises which is deemed insufficient to warrant an investigation, the relevant manager will convene a meeting
with the employee involved and the Human Resources manager. The employee will be:
(a) advised of the nature of the alleged misconduct;
(b) advised that at any stage during these or subsequent proceedings they may choose to be accompanied by a person of their choice;
(c) given an opportunity to explain their actions or inactions, and/or to respond in ‘writing in a timely manner to any matter
57.3.2 If the alleged misconduct is substantiated, the employee will be:
(a) formally warned, with a copy of the warning placed on the employee’s personal file and a copy given to the employee; and
(b) advised of any corrective action to be taken, and that failure to comply with the corrective action may lead to disciplinary action,
including possible dismissal.
57.3.3 If at any time the ABC forms the view that the misconduct is in fact serious misconduct, the matter shall then immediately
be dealt ‘with in accordance with clause 58. Serious Misconduct.”
I am of the view that the matter has been dealt with in accord with the relevant terms of the agreement, and perhaps with an additional
review not prescribed in the agreement, and has been resolved.
Performance Improvement Plan:
It was claimed by the applicant that the Performance Improvement Plan that arose out of the Performance Appraisal
“was later found to have been conducted in such an unfair manner that it should be set aside.”
[Applicant’s written submission page 3, paragraph 13]
Further it was submitted that the November Performance Improvement Plan was “…discontinued because of the way the PIP
was conducted caused a genuine health and safety risk for Ms de Jonge due to the process aggravating her psychological injury…”
[Applicant’s written submission page 3, paragraph 14]
Again the applicant provides no reference or documentation to support the above claim which contradicts the submission of the respondent.
The respondent submitted that in August 2003, a 3 month Performance Improvement Plan, in accord with the Performance Management provisions
of the agreement, was commenced to address issues of unsatisfactory performance.
And further that in December 2003, the applicant alleged that her Performance Improvement Plan had not been correctly managed and
the matter was referred to the State Human Resources Manager who found that the appropriate process had been followed. The applicant
was not satisfied with the finding and referred the grievance to the Head, Employment Services who sought a review by the Head, Organisational
In March 2004 the applicant was advised that the Head, Organisational Design had found that
“there was nothing in the way the process was conducted that would constitute a breach of the relevant agreement.”
[Respondent’s written submission page 2, paragraph 7.]
The agreement provided at clause 24.1 a process for review of a Performance Improvement Plan which states:
24.1 Performance Improvement Plan:
24.1.1 Where attempts to remedy underperformance have proved unsuccessful and/or an employee has been rated ‘unsatisfactory’
in their assessment, the manager will notify the employee that there is a problem and a Performance Improvement Plan will be developed
setting out:
(a) in what ways and to what extent the employee’s performance is unsatisfactory;
(b) the standards of performance required. These standards will be set fairly and shall be consistent ‘with the Work Level Standards;
(c) where appropriate, details of training programs and/or any rearrangement of duties or changes to the work environment designed
to assist the employee meet the required standard of performance;
(d) a time frame for the employee to show improvement; and
(e) the likely consequences if the employee does not meet the required standard.
24.1.2 The development of the Performance Improvement Plan and the assessment of the employee’s performance against that plan
will be carried out with the ongoing involvement of a Human Resources manager.
24.1.3 During a meeting with the employee to discuss the Performance Improvement Plan, the employee’s manager will:
(a) confirm that the planned action is appropriate and the timeframe is reasonable;
(b) offer an opportunity for the employee to respond so that all relevant matters can be considered;
(c) consult with the employee about any possible changes to the plan and consider any requests by the employee for training, re-arrangements
of duties or changes to the work environment and
(d) attempt to gain the employee’s agreement to change.”
I am satisfied the claim has been dealt with by application of the relevant clause in the agreement and by further action of the applicant
seeking unsuccessful reviews of the processes undertaken by the respondent.
In my view the matter has been resolved.
Personal Grievances:
The applicant submitted that she had lodged two (2) Personal Grievances. Those grievances are, in general terms, in respect to allegations
of bullying and harassment.
It was submitted by the applicant that from 2 October, 2003, to May, 2004, numerous requests were made by her to many ABC employees
including the lodging of a Personal Grievance
“in a bid to have the concerns raised in November 2002 regarding the Performance Appraisal processes not being performed in
accordance with either the certified agreement or ABC policies.”
[Applicant’s written submission, page 3, paragraph 15]
The issue of the Performance Appraisal
was considered by reference to clause 23.8 of the certified agreement and has been resolved in accordance with that process. It
was not considered under the Personal Grievance provision.
The applicant submitted that she lodged another Personal Grievance in respect to the Performance Appraisal process, the Performance
Improvement Plan and her
‘treatment’
. [Applicant’s written submission page 3, paragraph 18]
The Personal Grievance Resolution clause provides:
Personal Grievance Resolution
57.1.1 Personal grievances between employees, or between an employee and their manager, will be dealt with in a manner that:
(a) promotes quick and sensitive resolution at the lowest possible level in the workplace;
(b) is fair and equitable, having regard to natural justice, good conscience and the merits of the case.
57.1.2 Consistent with these principles, personal grievances will be dealt with in accordance with the ABC Personal Grievance Policy.”
The final step in the agreement Personal Grievance provision relies on the ABC Personal Grievance Policy.
A copy of the ABC Personal Grievance Policy was provided on request.
That document, dated May, 2004, is comprehensive, procedurally descriptive and sets out the processes to be followed by an employee
wishing to pursue a Personal Grievance.
The Policy prescribed:
“The Director of Human Resources (or delegate) may confirm the original findings and/or decision, or overturn the findings and/or
decision and make new findings and/or decisions.
The decision of the Director of Human Resources (or delegate) is
. All parties are expected to accept and implement the decision.
There are no further appeal mechanisms within the ABC
.” [My emphasis]
I have attempted to separate those issues which have been pursued by reference to the appropriate clauses in the agreement from those
which have been pursued under the Personal Grievance provision.
Those grievances it would seem were in regard to allegations of bullying and harassment (albeit there has been no documentation or
specific details provided). Complaints in respect to process and outcomes were considered in accord with the relevant clauses in
the agreement namely, Performance Appraisal; First Warning and Misconduct and Performance Improvement Plan; and have been resolved.
The applicant’s submissions state that the personal grievance claims were in regard to allegations of bullying and harassment.
The agreement provision in respect to Personal Grievance Resolution is quite specific and states that there is no further right of
appeal to the ABC and the decision of the Director of Human Resources (or delegate) is final.
Whilst the respondent is of the view that the Personal Grievance notifications have either been settled or withdrawn the applicant
argued that they remain unresolved.
Accordingly the process has been followed to conclusion and the decision of the Director of Human Resources (or delegate) is final.
The Personal Grievance claims and allegations have been resolved in accord with the appropriate agreement provision.
By July, 2008, it was submitted that the applicant’s psychological injury had stabilised enough for her family to contact Mr
Mark Scott, Managing Director of the ABC, to try to resolve the issues
“that were still causing depression and some anxiety”
for the applicant. The response from the ABC to some seven pages of questions from the applicant’s family, and as directed
by Mr Scott, is rejected by the applicant. That response said in part:
“Should [the applicant] have a current medical condition which her treating doctor believes has been affected by or caused by
her employment with the ABC, she is entitled to lodge a compensation claim with Comcare. I should note that Comcare is an independent
statutory body and will determine such a claim on its merits.”
The letter also noted that the allegations by the applicant that the ABC provided false or misleading information to HREOC
‘is a very serious allegation but one we would have defended in court if necessary.”
[Letter from ABC Director People and Learning, dated 26 August, 2008, attached to applicant’s written submissions]
The applicant submitted in regard to the response from the ABC that :
“….it is clear that the ABC believed all issues raised in Ms. de Jonge’s application have been raised previously
with the ABC; that the ABC had sufficient information in 2008 to be able to conduct a review and form definite conclusions as to
what had occurred; and that, whilst Ms. Dundas did not answer any of the de Jonge family’s question, that this was from a deliberate
lack of intent, as opposed to a lack of information or ability.
As such, it is not felt that Ms. de Jonge should be penalised, nor should the ABC derive a benefit, because of delays in resolving
the issues that were caused directly as a result of the actions of the ABC and the resultant psychological injury incurred by Ms.
de Jonge.” [Applicant’s written submission, page 9, paragraphs 62,63]
Was the applicant party to any agreement at the time of lodging this notification?
The application is made to
“have a dispute resolution process conducted under the following agreement”
and refers only to the
ABC Employment Agreement
and then refers to a number of clauses found in the first, second and third agreements. The third agreement was terminated pursuant
of the Act effective 6 December, 2006, and replaced by the
current agreement.
The applicant was employed by the respondent from 22 March, 1993, until her termination for reasons of redundancy took effect on 2
August, 2005. Accordingly her employment would have been subject to the terms and conditions of the first, second and third agreements.
All of those agreements have been terminated and replaced by other agreements with the
‘current agreement’
being the only agreement
under which an application could be made.
As the applicant has never been employed under the terms of the current agreement she therefore is not able to lodge a dispute with
the Commission under its provisions. Clause 3 –of the current agreement
Coverage and Parties Bound
provides that the agreement shall be binding on the ABC, named unions and all ABC employees (with some named exceptions). The applicant
does not satisfy the definition of an
of the ABC or the definition of an employee found in the Act.
The grievances, claims, and allegations of the applicant have been addressed by reference to the following provisions of the third
agreement which was in force at the time
of the claims were raised (it is difficult to ascertain which of the claims were raised formally and if so when they were so raised):
Clause 23 Performance Management;
Clause 57 Misconduct;
Clause 24 Unsatisfactory Performance;
Clause 62 Personal Grievance Resolution.
In any case the second agreement contained similar or the same provisions.
No submission has been presented by either party that would indicate a grievance, claim or allegation has been pursued by reference
to clause 63
Prevention and Resolution of Disputes
which provides:
“Prevention and Resolution of Disputes
63.3 Internal Process:
63.3.1 It is the responsibility of the parties to take reasonable and genuine internal steps to prevent or settle disputes by discussion
and, if necessary, by negotiation. In each instance the steps taken shall be timely and appropriate to the early settlement of the
matters in dispute. The following internal steps will be applied:
(a) Initially an employee, or their representative, should discuss a dispute with their local manager.
(b) Where this does not resolve the concern, the dispute will be referred to more senior levels of management.
63.4 Alternative Processes:
63.4.1 At any time during the process the parties may agree to:
(a) the use of mechanisms such as mediation and conciliation to assist in the resolution of the matter; and/or
(b) nominate an independent person to consider the matter and recommend action to resolve the dispute.
63.5 Referral to the AIRC:
63.5.1 Subject to 63.5.4, in the event that the parties are unable to resolve a dispute in a manner consistent with the above process,
the specific matter or matters in dispute may be referred to the Australian Industrial Relations Commission (AIRC) under section
170LW of the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
63.5.2 Unless the parties agree to the contrary, the AIRC is requested when dealing with a particular matter, to have regard to whether
the parties have complied with these procedures.
63.5.3 The parties agree to comply with, put into effect, and treat as final, any recommendation of the AIRC and will regard the recommendation
of the AIRC as final and binding.
63.5.4 Subclause 63.5 will not apply to disputes in relation to decisions that are subject to appeal against a selection decision
in accordance with clause 13.8.1 or are proscribed from appeal by clause 13.8.2.
63.5.5 Subject to 63.5.6, in all matters coming before it, the AIRC is requested to make such determination or recommendation in the
matter as it considers appropriate having regard to equity, good conscience, and the substantial merits of the case.
63.5.6 Pursuant to this subclause, no determination or recommendation may be made which is inconsistent with the terms of this Agreement.”
A s.170LW application cannot be pursued after the employment relationship has been terminated; in this case some four (4) years after
termination, unless the employee had commenced to deal with the grievance or dispute in accordance with the appropriate agreement
provision whilst still employed. Clause 63,
Prevention and Resolution of Disputes,
is the provision in the agreement.
I am of the view that the applicant was not party to any agreement at the time of lodging this application and therefore the application
cannot be dealt with by this Commission.
Does the applicant have an accrued right to pursue the application?
The applicant argued that despite the third agreement having ceased to operate pursuant to
of the Act, the right to invoke the Commission’s jurisdiction remains. The applicant relies on the provision at clause 7.1.1
in the current agreement which states:
“This agreement from the date of its commencement rescinds and replaces the ABC Employees Agreement 2003-2006, but no right,
obligation or liability accrued or incurred under that agreement shall be affected hereby.”
And further:
“This Agreement must be read in conjunction with the ABC policies, procedures and codes as advised and amended from time to
time. In the event of inconsistency, the Agreement will prevail.”
A similar provision is found at clause 8.1.1 of the third agreement.
And at clause 8.1.5 the third agreement provides:
“This Agreement must be read in conjunction with the ABC policies, procedures and codes as advised and amended from time to
The applicant submitted:
“The 2003-2006 Agreement was replaced by the ABC Employment Agreement 2006-2009 (the Current Agreement) and the power under
which notification can be made is contained in
Application of Certified Agreement - clause 7.1.1, which asserts: “This Agreement rescinds and replaces the ABC Employment
Agreement 2003-2006, but no right, obligation or liability accrued or incurred under that agreement shall be affected hereby.”
A similar clause was also included in the 2003-2006 Agreement in
Application of a Certified Agreement – clause 8.1.1, reading: “This Agreement from the date of its commencement rescinds
and replaces the ABC Employment Agreement 2000-2002, but no right, obligation or liability accrued or incurred under the agreement
shall be affected hereby.”
It is reasonable to expect that the ABC are aware, or ought to be aware, of clause 7.1.1 and clause 8.1.1 of the relevant ABC Agreements
and that the existence of those clauses are the main facts that distinguish Ms. de Jonge’s complaint from John Coochey v Department
and R v Hamilton Knight; Ex parte Commonwealth Steamship Owners Association
[1952] HCA 38
(1952) 86 CLR 283.
The rights, obligations and liabilities that exist between Ms. de Jonge and the ABC exist because all of the issues Ms. de Jonge is
seeking to have resolved were raised directly with the ABC, either expressly or implicitly, during the course of her employment with
the ABC. That these issues remain unresolved, stems entirely from the ABC’s actions and Ms. de Jonge’s resultant psychological
As such, there is no basis for the ABC’s claim that the Commission lacks the jurisdiction to conciliate or arbitrate the dispute
on the grounds that the Agreements have been terminated. All rights, liabilities and obligations accrued or incurred from those
Agreements still exist.” [Applicant’s written submission, page 6, paragraphs 34-38]
As the applicant is not party to the current agreement there are no rights, liabilities and obligations which can be accrued to her.
The agreement can only apply to current ABC employees.
Do the claims by the applicant pertain to the application of the agreement?
The applicant submitted that this “claim relates entirely to the bullying and harassment she experienced whilst working at the
ABC, the resultant psychological injury that Ms de Jonge incurred whilst working at the ABC and the areas of the certified agreements
that were breached by the ABC. There is nothing in application C2009/2628 to suggest anything to the contrary.” [Applicant’s
written submission, page 7. paragraph 40]
The respondent argued that the issues raised by the applicant do not have sufficient nexus with a dispute over the application of
the agreement nor are the issues incidental to a dispute over the agreement. The respondent cited the decision of the Full Bench
CPSU v Seven Network (Operations) Limited
, at paragraph 32] where it was said:
“There is a need to characterise the dispute and then to decide whether the dispute, thus characterised, has nexus or sufficient
nexus to the provisions of the agreement itself. If a dispute is found to exist over the application of the agreement, the terms
of any arising order must be reasonably incidental to the application of the agreement to which the dispute relates.”
The grievances, allegations and claims by the applicant in respect to due process and denial of natural justice relate to specific
clauses found in the agreement. Accordingly, in my view, they are matters pertaining to the application of the agreement. However
those matters have been processed according to the relevant agreement provision and are not the subject of this application.
The Personal Grievance Resolution provision deals with
“personal grievances between employees or between employees and their manager.”
The agreement provision enunciates some principles but relies on the ABC Personal Grievance Policy for resolution. The allegations
of bullying and harassment were considered by reference to that provision and the provision relies on the ABC Personal Grievance
Policy for settlement. It is unlikely therefore that the dispute in respect to bullying and harassment is a dispute about the application
of the agreement. It is more likely a disagreement about the application of ABC policy.
As noted previously I am of the view that all of the grievances, claims and allegations by the applicant have been addressed by reference
to the appropriate clause of the agreement.
The fact that the applicant chooses not to accept the outcome of her grievances, claims and allegations does not mean they have not
been appropriately addressed by the respondent.
The applicant submitted:
“The ABC agrees that, consistent with the Full Bench’s decision in ING Administration Pty Ltd v Jajoo Ramsin
(2005) 158 IR 239
, the Commission has the power to progress a dispute under the relevant dispute settlement procedures where the issues had remained
unresolved at the time the employee’s employment was terminated. Ms. de Jonge’s issues were raised directly with the
ABC whilst she worked at the ABC
. Ms. de Jonge’s issues have never been resolved because the ABC has never taken reasonable steps to resolve them. Ms. de
Jonge submits that she does have the right to pursue a dispute resolution process in relation to this matter.” [Applicant’s
written submission, page 8, paragraph 50]
The majority decision of the Full Bench in
said at paragraphs 59 and 60:
“In our view the dispute settlement process should be viewed as a single process agreed by the parties to resolve disputes,
rather than a series of separate rights and obligations which should be viewed conjunctively. That being so, an employee who had
commenced to deal with a grievance or dispute while employed is not precluded, in our view, from continuing to progress that matter
if it remains unresolved, notwithstanding that in the interim period they may have ceased to be employed by the employer.
In reaching this conclusion, we acknowledge that parties to agreements are entirely free to draft disputes procedures in any number
of different ways. Agreements may limit rights to resolve matters under disputes procedures to persons who are current employees
and many agreements may be properly construed as doing so. In the circumstances of this case. We believe that the Agreement empowers
the Commission to determine the dispute notwithstanding that prior to the matter being resolved and prior to Mr Jajoo referring the
dispute to the Commission) his employment was terminated by ING.”
The decision in
was an appeal against a decision of SDP Drake [
] where Her Honour found that the applicant in that matter continued
“…..to have the benefit of the DRP of the Agreement for the resolution of the matter that was in dispute at the time of
his termination of employment but only if it was already being dealt with in accordance with that clause.”
And further
“I believe that the test is whether the applicant was an employee at the time the dispute arose and the dispute resolution process
was commenced.”
In this matter neither the applicant, nor the respondent, suggests that there is, or ever was, an application
“..already being dealt with in accordance with..”
clause 63 [Prevention and Resolution of Disputes] “…
for the resolution of the matter that was in dispute at the time of
[the applicant’s]
termination of employment..”
The applicant has over the period of her employment lodged many grievances, claims and allegations.
Most of those grievances, claims and allegations are about process and have been addressed, and resolved, by reference to provisions
found in the certified agreement.
Two (2) personal grievances were filed alleging bullying and harassment and have been considered by reference to the Personal Grievance
provision of the agreement which relies on the ABC Personal Grievance policy document which provides that:
“The decision of the Director of Human Resources (or delegate) is final.”
Accordingly those matters have been addressed and resolved.
The applicant also pursued allegations of bullying and harassment in an application to HREOC, the same issues were alluded to in the
application alleging unfair/unlawful termination lodged with this Commission.
Both of those applications were withdrawn or discontinued by the applicant. The reasons why they were withdrawn or discontinued are
not relevant; to do so was the decision and action of the applicant.
The claim to Comcare also alleging bullying and harassment as the cause of the applicant’s
‘depression’
was rejected by Comcare.
The applicant argues that none of the grievances, claims or allegations she has raised have been
appropriately
dealt with by the respondent and remain unresolved, including one claim which was settled in the applicant’s favour.
I disagree; all of the issues raised have been considered
appropriately
and in accordance with the provisions of the agreement.
The applicant chooses to ignore the processes which have been undertaken as they do not provide the outcome she desires, that does
not mean the grievances, claims and allegations have not been addressed, only that the applicant disagrees with the conclusions.
I find that the Commission lacks the jurisdiction to conciliate or arbitrate this dispute notification.
The application is dismissed.
BY THE COMMISSION:
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Final written submissions:
Respondent: Submissions 29 July 2009
Applicant: Submissions 5 August 2009
Respondent: Submissions 26 August 2009
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code G, AC303551 PR991794>
No downloadable files available