E v Insurance Company [2011] PrivCmrA 5 (3 May 2011)
Case Citation:
E v Insurance Company
[2011] PrivCmrA 5
Subject Heading:
Disclosure of personal information.
National Privacy Principle 2.1 in Schedule 3 of the
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner (the Commissioner)
prior to 1 November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the
powers of the
Commissioner under the
were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
The complainant's car was insured by an insurance company. A relative
of the complainant was driving the car and was involved in
an accident. The
driver of the other vehicle in the accident was also insured by the insurance
company and lodged a claim. That
claim identified the car and provided
some details for the driver of the complainant's car.
The insurance company attempted to identify the driver of the complainant's
vehicle and contacted a member of the complainant's family,
with similar
initials, to ask whether they were the driver. In a conversation with that
person, the insurance company revealed details
policy including the policy number.
The complainant alleged the insurance company had inappropriately disclosed
this information to the family member.
NPP 2.1 says an organisation must not use or disclose personal information
purpose of collection,
unless an exception in NPP 2.1(a)-(h) applies.
The Commissioner investigated the matter under
section 40(1)
The insurance company provided evidence about the conversation between it and
the third party. That evidence supported the view that
the insurance
company disclosed the complainant's name, policy details and policy number as
The Commissioner formed the view that the disclosure of the complainant's
personal information to the family member, who was uninvolved
in either the
accident or the insurance claim, was not permitted under NPP 2.1.
The insurance company acknowledged its error, and apologised to the
complainant for the way it had handled their personal information.
As there was no evidence that supported a compensation claim by the
complainant, the Commissioner was satisfied that the insurance
response adequately dealt with the complaint and closed the matter on that basis
section 41(2)(a)
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
RTF format (38 KB)
Signed PDF/A format