Australian Education Union and Health Services Union [2025] FWCFB 242 (28 October 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 242 [Note: A copy of the agreements to which this decision
is available on our website.]
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Act 2009
Sch. 3, Item 20A(4) - Application to extend default period for
agreement-based transitional instruments
Australian Education Union and
Health Services Union
(AG2025/1739 and Ors.)
Educational services, health and welfare services.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT ROBERTS
DEPUTY PRESIDENT SLEVIN
COMMISSIONER
SYDNEY, 28 OCTOBER 2025
Applications to extend default periods for agreement-based transitional
instruments – consent of the parties – whether
reasonable in the
circumstances to extend – default periods extended
This decision concerns 14 separate applications (together, the
Applications) to extend the default periods of 15 agreement-based transitional
instruments pursuant to Schedule 3, Item 20A(4) of the
Fair Work (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Act
the Transitional Act
). Four of the applications are made by the
Health Services Union (
). Ten are made by the Australian Education
). One of the applications is made in respect of two
agreements.
The applications are to extend the default periods for the following
agreements:
AG2024/4805
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian Branch
Milparinka Inc Disability Services Victoria (Part 1)
Enterprise Agreement 2005 (
AG2025/1739
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian
George Gray Centre Disability Services Victoria Part 1
Collective Agreement 2008 (
George Grey
AG2025/1742
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian
Distinctive Options Day Services Collective Agreement 2006
Distinctive Options
);and Noweyung Ltd Disability Services
Victoria (Part 1) Collective Agreement 2008
Noweyung Part
AG2025/1744
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian
Whittlesea District ATSS Disability Services Vic
Collective Agreement (
AG2025/1746
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian
Windarring ATSS Disability Services Victoria (Part 10)
Enterprise Agreement 2005 (
AG2025/1748
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian
Murray Valley Centre Disability Services Victoria (Part 1)
Collective Agreement 2008 (
Murray Valley
AG2025/1752
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian Branch
Life Skills Community Centre Disability Services Victoria (Part 1) Collective
Agreement 2008 (
AG2025/2408
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian
McCallum Disability Services Disability Services Victoria
(Part 1) Collective Agreement 2008 (
AG2025/2409
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian
Mirridong Services Inc Disability Services Victoria (Part
1) Enterprise Agreement 2005 (
AG2025/2410
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian
Asteria Services Disability Services Victoria (Part 1)
Collective Agreement 2008 (
AG2025/1749
- Application by Health Services Union
Murdoch Community Services
Inc and HSU Disability Services Union Collective Agreement 2006 – 2009
AG2025/1750
- Application by Health Services Union
McCallum Disability
Services Inc and HSU Disability Services Union Collective Agreement 2006 - 2009
McCallum HSU
AG2025/1751
- Application by Health Services Union-Victoria No. 2 Branch
Life Skills Community Centre HSU Disability Services Union Collective Agreement
2006-2009 (
AG2025/1753
- Application by Health Services Union
Noweyung Ltd and HSU Disability
Services Collective Agreement 2006-2009 (
Noweyung HSU
This is the third application for an extension to the default period
sought in respect of each agreement save for one agreement, the
Inc Disability Services Victoria (Part 1) Enterprise Agreement
Milparinka Agreement
) which has been extended once.
Initially, a Full Bench of the Commission in two separate decisions,
Applications by Health Services Union
HSU decision
Applications by Australian
Education Union
AEU decision
) extended the default periods for each of
the agreements to 6 December 2024.
A further round of applications was determined on 31 March
That decision
extended, by consent, the default periods for each of the agreements, except the
Milparinka Agreement, to 6 June 2025.
The application to extend the Milparinka
Agreement was not consented to and was, for that reason, held over for later
determination.
Each of the Applications has been made against the background of
another proceeding in which the AEU and HSU sought a supported bargaining
authorisation (
the SBA proceeding
). The decision in the SBA proceeding
was delivered on 1 July 2025 (
differently constituted Full Bench there determined to grant a supported
bargaining authorisation sought by the AEU and HSU in
respect of each of the
employers to whom these Applications relate.
On 8 August 2025 a directions hearing was conducted before Deputy
President Slevin to consider the implications of the SBA decision
Applications. The parties were directed to indicate following that hearing
whether, in the circumstances, they consented
to a further extension of the
default periods
In response, a consent position for a further 12-month extension was
expressed in respect of the following agreements: Distinctive
Options, Noweyung
Part 1, Moe, Asteria, Moe HSU and Noweyung HSU.
The extension applications are opposed for the remaining agreements
being: Milparinka, George Gray, Whittlesea, Windarring, Murray
Valley, McCallum,
McCallum HSU, Mirridong and Murdoch.
For the reasons that follow, we have decided to extend the term of
each of the agreements for the maximum period permissible under
the Transitional
Act, to 6 December 2027.
Should the default periods be extended?
Applicable provisions
Item 20A within Schedule 4 to the Transitional Act sets out the
grounds upon which an extension to the default period may be granted.
(6) – (9) provide that:
Extension of default period
(6) If an application is made under subitem (4), the FWC must extend the default
period for the agreement-based transitional instrument
for a period of no more
than 4 years if the FWC is satisfied that:
(a) Subitem
(7), (8) or (9) applies and it is otherwise appropriate in the circumstances to
reasonable in the circumstances to do so.
(7) This subitem applies if:
application is made at or after the notification time for a proposed enterprise
agreement; and
proposed enterprise agreement will cover:
application relates to an individual agreement-based transitional
instrument—the employee covered by the individual
agreement-based
transitional instrument; or
(ii) if the
application relates to a collective agreement-based transitional
instrument—the same, or substantially
the same, group of employees as the
collective agreement-based transitional instrument; and
(c) bargaining
for the proposed enterprise agreement is occurring.
(8) This subitem applies if:
application relates to an individual agreement-based transitional instrument;
employee covered by the instrument would be an award covered employee for the
instrument under subitem (10) if the
instrument were a
collective agreement-based transitional instrument; and(c)it is likely that, as
at the time the application
is made, the employee would be better off overall if
the instrument applied to the employee than if the relevant modern award
to in that subitem applied to the employee.
(9) This subitem applies if:
application relates to a collective agreement-based transitional instrument;
likely that, as at the time the application is made, the award covered employees
for the instrument under subitem (10),
viewed as a group, would be better off
overall if the instrument applied to the employees than if the relevant modern
award or awards
referred to in that subitem applied to the employees.
The AEU and HSU positions
In large part the HSU and AEU repeat the submissions made in respect
of the earlier extension applications. Both unions point to the
supported bargaining
and suggest
that process would be detrimentally affected if the employees reverted to award
conditions during bargaining. They both
raise the level of award dependence in
the disability sector as a factor weighing against a reversion to the award
which would follow
from any decision to dismiss the extension
applications.
The AEU refer to a series of conditions across the agreements said
to be more favourable than the
Social, Community, Home Care and Disability
Services Industry Award 2010
however it confines the basis of the
applications by submitting “the sole basis that these applications are
pressed is s.(6)(b)
of item 20A of the Transitional
submit there has been no material change in circumstance since the earlier HSU
decision and for that reason also rely on
their submissions in those
applications. Consequently, we take it that the HSU makes their applications on
the basis that subitem
6(b) is satisfied and it is reasonable in all the
circumstances to extend the default periods.
In each application the extensions were sought for a period of 12
Employer submissions in opposition
Mirridong oppose any extension to the
Mirridong Services Inc
Disability Services Victoria (Part 1) Enterprise Agreement 2005.
Essentially, they contend that where the agreement no longer applies to any
staff it is redundant and ought to be terminated
They explain that since
the agreement was struck in 2005 the nature of work conducted by Mirridong has
changed substantially and is
no longer reflected in the agreement.
Their submissions describe a process whereby all staff previously
covered by the Mirridong agreement “were formally transitioned
SCHADS Award through the Equal Remuneration Order (ERO)
sits uneasily with their submission that “employees signed individual
agreements to move across while retaining above-award
entitlements”.
George Gray
The George Gray Centre oppose extension of the default period of the
George Gray Centre Disability Services Victoria Part 1 Collective Agreement
They accept that leave entitlements are more beneficial under the
agreement than the award but submit these are outweighed by a series
entitlements.
highlight that a substantial portion of their workforce (42%) are casual staff
and for that reason are disadvantaged by less
beneficial casual loading rates
under the agreement than the award. They also point to their funding
arrangements being tied to the
Determination of this second application for extension of the
Milparinka agreement was deferred by the Full Bench pending the resolution
the SBA proceeding. Its submissions are in largely identical terms to those of
George Gray. They contend that employees are better
off under the Award than the
agreement, relying also on a comparison between casual loading entitlements.
Murray Valley
Community Accessibility Incorporated (CA) is the employer covered by
Murray Valley Centre Disability Services Victoria (Part 1) Collective
Agreement 2008
. CA acquired Murray Valley Centre Incorporated in 2023.
CA oppose the extension asserting that employees would be better off
under the Award than the agreement (subitem 9). They also advance
the broader
submission with regard to subitem 6(b) that it would not be reasonable in the
circumstances to extend the agreement.
They rely on the witness statement of Rick Lawford dated 10
September 2025. Mr Lawford is the CEO of CA. He explains that CA employs
staff, of whom 11 are covered by their agreement. He sets out the rostering
arrangement across the organisation and the work
patterns of a number of those
covered employees.
McCallum, McCallum HSU & Murdoch
McCallum Disability Services Inc (MDS) is the employer covered by
three of the agreements in question. In addition to its submissions,
on the statement of Mr. Peter Lamb dated 9 September 2025. Mr Lamb is the
General Manager Corporate Services of MDS.
Mr Lamb makes reference to the evidence previously provided by MDS
and explains changes in the circumstances of the business and its
workforce in
the time since the earlier extension decisions.
Windarring and Whittlesea
No submissions were filed by the relevant employer in respect of the
Windarring and Whittlesea agreements.
Consideration
The common argument across the opposed Applications is that there
are certain respects in which the covered employees are better off
Award than the agreements. This argument was considered in the earlier decisions
where it was found to be finely balanced
but not determinative. It may be that
the passage of time has further moved that balance in one way or the other.
In any event, that balance is not determinative where the
Applications are not pressed on the better off overall ground pursuant to
subitem (6)(a) and subitem (9).
In earlier decisions we extended the default periods under subitem
6(b) as we considered it reasonable in all the circumstances to
do so. The SBA
proceeding was an important factor in those decisions. The SBA decision
continues to loom large in our consideration.
The Full Bench in the SBA decision
concluded that:
[332] In circumstances where the Respondents covered by
zombie agreements have not initiated bargaining for a single-enterprise
agreement and at least some of their employees will disadvantaged by the
zombie agreements terminating, we find it is appropriate
Respondents who are covered by at least one zombie agreement bargain together
having regard to all of the matters in s.243(1)(b)
We respectfully agree with that observation. To disrupt bargaining
by reverting some or all of the parties to the supported bargaining
authorisations to the Award would be an unhelpful and unnecessary disruption to
the bargaining process now underway.
We note that each of the present applications was filed prior to the
SBA decision and the commencement of bargaining. Subitem (7)
only applies where
the applications for extension are made
the notification time for a
proposed agreement
Subitem (7) of the
Transitional Act does not
contemplate the present circumstances. However, subitem 6(b) provides for a
broad discretion to extend default
periods where it is “reasonable in the
circumstances to do so’.
We note the observation of the Full Bench in
Suncoast Scaffold
that “Subitem 6(b) of item 20A constitutes an independent
pathway to the grant of an
extension”.
Describing that discretion, the Full Bench noted:
The ‘reasonable’ criterion in the subitem should, in
our view, be applied in accordance with the ordinary meaning of the
–that is, “agreeable to reason or sound judgment”.
Reasonableness must be assessed by reference to the circumstances
of the case,
that is, the relevant matters and conditions accompanying the case. Again, a
broad evaluative judgment is required to
We consider that in the circumstances described, where the unions
have been pursuing bargaining as a means of consolidating terms
and conditions
for the employees covered by the agreements, where those efforts have been met
with resistance, where significant
and lengthy proceedings were necessary in the
Commission to address that resistance, and a Full Bench of the Commission has
that bargaining should proceed, it is reasonable to extend the
default period for each agreement. To do otherwise would undermine
the force of
the SBA Decision. Consequently, we will extend the default period for each
For how long should the default periods be extended?
Each of the applications seek an extension for a further 12 months.
The last extensions were granted to 6 June 2025. These extensions
sought to 6 June 2026.
We have noted the protracted path to bargaining to date. Since the
SBA decision, it is tolerably clear on the materials filed that
bargaining has
not progressed very far. We attribute no responsibility for that state of
affairs to any particular party. Nonetheless
we are of the view that the time
has come for the parties to focus their energies more constructively on
progressing and concluding
bargaining.
We are not satisfied that, given the history of these matters and
the materials before us, an extension for a further 12 months –
practically 8 months – will be sufficient to conclude the supported
bargaining process.
Suncoast Scaffold
the Full Bench observed at [18]
Although the Commission is required to grant an extension to the
default period if the conditions of paragraph (a) or (b) of subitem
satisfied, it has a discretion as to the length of the extension, subject to the
limitation that the extension cannot be
for more than four years. The Commission
is not obliged to grant the period of extension sought in the application: s 599
Section 599 of the Fair Work Act is in the following terms:
599 FWC not required to decide an application in
terms applied for
Except as provided by this Act, the FWC is not required to make a decision in
relation to an application in the terms applied for.
The effect of s 599 is, as observed in
Suncoast Scaffold,
that we are bound neither by the period consented to, nor the period sought in
the Applications.
This proceeding has been the third occasion on which some of the
arguments in opposition have been ventilated. No party would be assisted
fourth. We are of the view that the best way of focusing the parties on
bargaining is to clarify the basis for that bargaining
and remove the
opportunity for further disputation in respect of the default periods. Extending
each agreement for the maximum permissible
term will achieve, in our view, both
of those aims.
For the foregoing reasons we will extend the default period in
respect of each agreement for the maximum permissible length. The default
periods will be extended to 6 December 2027.
We have, pursuant to subitem 20A(6)(b), decided to extent the
default periods for the agreements in each of the Applications to 6
2027. The agreements are published, in accordance with subitem 20A(10A)(c), on
the Fair Work Commission’s website
and can be accessed through the
hyperlinks in Schedule 1 to this decision.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
AEU applications
AG2024/4805 (
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian Branch
Milparinka Inc Disability Services Victoria (Part 1) Enterprise
Agreement 2005
AG2025/1739 (
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian Branch
Gray Centre Disability Services Victoria Part 1 Collective Agreement
AG2025/1742 (
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian
Distinctive Options Day Services Collective Agreement 2006
Noweyung Ltd Disability Services Victoria (Part 1)
Collective Agreement 2008
AG2025/1744 (
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian
Whittlesea District ATSS Disability Services Vic Collective
AG2025/1746 (
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian
Windarring ATSS Disability Services Victoria (Part 10)
Enterprise Agreement 2005
AG2025/1748 (
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian Branch
Valley Centre Disability Services Victoria (Part 1) Collective Agreement
AG2025/1752 (
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian Branch
Life Skills Community Centre Disability Services Victoria (Part 1) Collective
Agreement 2008
AG2025/2408 (
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian Branch
Disability Services Disability Services Victoria (Part 1) Collective Agreement
AG2025/2409 (
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian Branch
Services Inc Disability Services Victoria (Part 1) Enterprise Agreement
AG2025/2410 (
- Application by Australian Education Union-Victorian Branch
Services Disability Services Victoria (Part 1) Collective Agreement
HSU applications
AG2025/1749 (
- Application by Health Services Union
Murdoch Community Services Inc
and HSU Disability Services Union Collective Agreement 2006 - 2009
AG2025/1750 (
- Application by Health Services Union
Mccallum Disability Services
Disability Services Victoria (Part 1) Collective Agreement 2008
AG2025/1751 (
- Application by Health Services Union-Victoria No. 2 Branch
Skills Community Centre HSU Disability Services Union Collective Agreement
AG2025/1752 (
- Application by Health Services Union-Victoria No. 2 Branch
Skills Community Centre Disability Services (Part 1) Collective
AG2025/1753 (
- Application by Health Services Union
Noweyung Ltd And HSU
Disability Services Collective Agreement 2006-2009
HSU Submissions,
[11]-[13]; AEU Submissions, [19], [21].
Submissions, [9].
Submissions, [3].
George Gray
Submissions [9]-[10].
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (2.19 MB)
Signed PDF/A format