Gender-based undervaluation - priority awards review - Social, Community, Home Care and Disability Services Industry Award 2010 [2025] FWCFB 238 (24 October 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 238
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
—FWC may vary etc. modern awards if necessary to achieve modern
awards objective
Gender-based undervaluation — priority awards
Social, Community, Home Care and Disability Services Industry
(AM2024/21)
JUSTICE HATCHER, PRESIDENT
VICE PRESIDENT ASBURY
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
DEPUTY PRESIDENT SLEVIN
DEPUTY PRESIDENT GRAYSON
SYDNEY, 24 OCTOBER 2025
Gender-based undervaluation – priority awards review – Social,
Community, Home Care and Disability Services Industry Award
proposed conferencing process.
matter is listed for hearing on 27, 28 and 29 October 2025 to finalise the
gender-based undervaluation review of the
Social, Community, Home Care and
Disability Services Industry Award 2010
(SCHADS Award). The main issue
remaining in contention concerns the establishment of a new classification and
minimum wages structure
for the SCHADS Award that addresses the findings we made
in our decision of 16 April
(April 2025
decision), including that ‘the minimum wage rates prescribed by the SCHADS
Award for employees within the classifications
in Schedules B, C and E do not
properly reflect the value of the work to which those classifications apply and
that this is the case
for reasons related to gender’: [376].
In the April 2025 decision, we expressed a
provisional
to the design of a new integrated and simplified classification structure for
the SCHADS Award which would address the identified
gender-based undervaluation.
In subsequent conferences, and in submissions filed for the purpose of next
week’s hearing, the
parties have identified various problems with respect
provisional
view and have advanced proposed modifications or
alternatives. In particular, in submissions filed on 15 October 2025, the
Services Union (ASU) advanced a comprehensive proposal for an
alternative classifications structure.
At a directions hearing conducted on 20 October 2025, the President
invited the parties to consider participation in a conference
process, to occur
prior to the matter being determined, to endeavour to reach a consensus as to
the new classification structure.
On 22 October 2025, the ASU sent an email to
other parties, which was copied to the President’s chambers, indicating
its preparedness
to engage in a conference process and proposing a program by
which such a process might occur.
We continue to invite the parties to engage in a conference process,
without prejudice to their respective positions in next week’s
hearing, to
endeavour to reach a consensus as to a new classification structure. The
principles upon which the new classification
structure must be constructed are
as follows:
(1) The gender-based undervaluation identified in the April 2025
decision at [376]–[378] must be remedied. This will require,
at least, the
Caring Skills benchmark wage of $1314.30 to apply to all employees requiring a
Certificate III qualification or an
equivalent qualification or experience and
the C1(a) benchmark wage rate of $1579.30 for degree-qualified employees or
equivalent qualifications or experience: see [389]. Consequentially,
this will require the incorporation of the
rates into the
SCHADS Award to avoid any unintended escalation in wage rates (since the ERO
operates to apply percentage increments
to the current wages structure).
(2) The defects in the current classification structures identified in the
April 2025 decision which render them not fit for purpose
must also be remedied.
These defects are twofold. First, at [379], it was found that ‘the
division of the coverage of the SCHADS
Award into different classification
streams with different rates of pay sourced from different pre-modern awards has
resulted in
an outcome which is complex, does not value work equally across the
classification streams, and is conducive of disputation and potential
non-compliance.’ Second, at [381]–[382], it was found that
‘the classification structures in Schedules B and C
are expressed in terms
which makes it very difficult to determine at what level an employee should be
classified and paid’
resulting in ‘the widespread misclassification
of employees’. The preferable course to remedy these defects is to
‘a single new classification structure for the SCHADS Award
which rectifies gender-based undervaluation, is simple and easy
to understand,
and which provides common minimum wage rates for work of equal or comparable
value that apply to all of the types
of work covered by the award’:
(3) The new classification structure should also ‘appropriately
recognise the acquisition of relevant qualifications at each
level, whilst
making allowance for the recognition of equivalent experience and training,
obtained for example through “lived
experience” which is a
particular feature of SACS work’: [390].
(4) The substantive outcome for home care employees in the aged care sector
determined in the
Stage 3 Aged Care
not be disturbed.
(5) Employees covered by the SCHADS Award should not go backwards as a result
of the new classification structure and pay rates. This
includes preservation of
employees’ existing wage rates and comparable opportunities for pay
progression, noting that transition
to a new integrated and simplified
classification structure may result in some anomalies.
(6) Wages costs to employers should, as far as practicable, not be increased
beyond that which is necessary to rectify gender-based
undervaluation.
Any consensus reached by the parties as to a new classification
structure that is consistent with the above principles, while not
binding on us,
will obviously be given significant weight.
Accordingly, we request the parties to advise the Commission by
close of business on Tuesday, 28 October 2025
whether they are prepared
to engage in a conference process on the basis outlined in the ASU’s email
or on some other basis.
If there is agreement that such a process should be
undertaken, a member of the Expert Panel will be made available for that
If there is not broad agreement to such a process or no consensus is
reached through a conference process, we will determine the
outstanding issues
on the basis of the evidence and submissions to be advanced at the listed
hearing. The intention of the Expert
Panel is to finalise this matter before the
end of 2025.
Community and Disability Services Industry Equal Remuneration Order
Care Award 2010; Nurses Award 2020; Social, Community, Home Care and Disability
Services Industry Award 2010
, 331 IR 137.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (384 KB)
Signed PDF/A format