Massalski & Riley (No. 2) [2021] FamCAFC 152 (19 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Massalski & Riley (No. 2)
FamCAFC 152
Appeal from:
Massalski & Riley
[2019] FamCA 1013
Appeal number(s):
EAA of 14 of 2020
File number(s):
SYC 496 of 2015
Judgment of:
RYAN, ALDRIDGE & WATTS JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – COSTS
– Party/party costs – Where the wife was wholly unsuccessful in the
appeal – Consideration
of factors in
Family Law Act
(Cth) – Costs ordered in a fixed sum.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) Sch 3
Cases cited:
Buckley & Buckley
[2013] FamCAFC 150
Dickson and Dickson
(1999) FLC 92-857
[1999] FamCA 768
Duff and Duff
(1977) FLC 90-217
[1977] FamCA 24
Massalski & Riley
[2019] FamCA 1013
Massalski & Riley
[2021] FamCAFC 116
Mullane v Mullane
(1983) 158 CLR 436
[1983] HCA 4
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
By way of written submissions
In Chambers
The Appellant:
Litigant in person
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Russell C Byrnes Solicitor
SYC 496 of 2015
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
MS MASSALSKI
RYAN, ALDRIDGE & WATTS JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The appellant wife pay the respondent husband’s costs of the appeal
fixed in the amount of $30,000 within twenty-eight (28)
2. The appellant wife’s application for costs of and in relation to the
appeal be dismissed.
Note: The form of the
order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to
remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules 2004
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
has been approved by the Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
RYAN, ALDRIDGE & WATTS JJ:
INTRODUCTION
1 On 13 July 2021, this Court dismissed an appeal by
Ms Massalski (“the wife”) from property settlement and related
made on 24 December 2019. Mr Riley (“the husband”) seeks his
costs of resisting the unsuccessful appeal. The wife opposes
the husband’s
application for costs and, it would seem, seeks that the husband pays her costs
of the appeal. At paragraph 13
of the wife’s costs submissions filed by
leave on 12 August 2021, the wife explains her position thus:
13. [The wife] seeks an order that [the husband’s]
application for costs be dismissed, and an order be made that [the husband]
[the wife’s] costs of this appeal, according to the application made on 28
Oct 2020, or alternatively, that the [the wife]
be allowed to re-submit her
application for costs after the proceeding in the Family Court in respect of the
Application pursuant
, are finalised.
2 However, the wife’s final submission is
63. It is submitted that the
circumstances do not justify the making of an order for costs and therefore each
party ought to bear
their own costs in accordance with
of the Act.
3 Given that the wife asks that we take into account her submissions filed in
the appeal on 28 October 2020 by which the wife claimed
costs against the
husband, her position is inconsistent with her submission at paragraph 63. The
effect of this is that each of the
parties submits that an order for costs
should be made and the questions to be answered concern whether an order should
against whom and the amount. It is to these issues that these reasons
4 At the appeal hearing, so as to avoid the trouble and expense of a further
hearing in relation to the questions of costs, we adopted
the Full Court’s
usual practice and invited submissions on the point. Brief submissions were made
following which directions
were made for the parties to file costs statements.
However, the wife subsequently reopened the appeal and the costs consequences
that application also required consideration. Thus, directions were made to
enable the question of costs to be determined without
an oral hearing and by
written submissions. If either party sought to have the question of costs dealt
with by an oral hearing, they
were required to give written notice within the
stated timeframe. Notice has not been given and it is clear that the parties are
content that the costs questions are dealt with by written submissions.
5 As to the written submissions, the husband filed his submissions in time
(on 27 July 2021 and 12 August 2021). The wife did not
and, at her request, she
was given an extension of time to file her submissions by 12 August 2021, which
was given and with which
she complied.
6 The husband seeks his costs of the appeal, including the wife’s
application to reopen the appeal, in the amount of $30,000
plus GST which is
slightly less than his total party/party costs which are in the vicinity of
$36,000. He pursues the lesser amount
on the basis that it reflects “an
appropriate ‘discount’ for the avoidance of further costs for both
having costs assessed” (Husband’s Costs Submissions filed
27 July 2021, paragraph 14). Be that as it may, party/party
costs are to be
calculated in accordance with Sch 3 of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth). As the
item amounts in Sch 3 are inclusive of GST we will not fix an amount for costs
which is exclusive of GST and that aspect
of the husband’s claim for costs
can be rejected at the outset.
7 By her application filed on 28 October 2020, the wife sought costs against
the husband in the amount of $17,919.77. These costs
primarily relate to counsel
and solicitors fees incurred for the wife’s Notice of Appeal, the appeal
books and advising her
in relation to the appeal. As the wife was
self-represented in the appeal and her application to reopen the appeal, her
not include appearance costs.
Section 117
8 An application for costs falls to be determined
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”).
Section 117(1)
provides that each party to a proceedings under the Act should
bear his or her own costs unless the court is of the opinion that
circumstances that justify making a costs order
(s 117(2)).
Section 117(2A)
out matters to which the court should have regard to in determining whether
there are circumstances which justify an order for
costs, and if so, what, if
any, order should be made. As well as the matters listed in
s 117(2A)(g)
enables the court to take into account such other matters that
are relevant.
THE HUSBAND’S COSTS APPLICATION
9 In this application, the relevant factors are:
parties’ financial circumstances
(s 117(2A)(a))
the conduct of
the parties to the proceeding
(s 117(2A)(c))
whether a party
to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful
(s 117(2A)(e)
other matters
which the wife says are relevant
(s 117(2A)(g)).
The parties’ financial circumstances
10 The parties’ financial circumstances are
set out in the trial reasons (
Massalski & Riley
[2019] FamCA 1013)
including under the consideration of
s 90SF(3)(b)
of the Act. Stated broadly,
the effect of these findings is that the parties are each in paid employment.
The wife’s failure
to fully disclose her financial circumstances impeded
the Court’s capacity to make certain findings in relation to some of
property and financial resources. However, as is set out in our reasons for
Massalski & Riley
[2021] FamCAFC 116)
, each of the parties
owns real estate and has superannuation. Otherwise, the wife’s assertion
that the Supreme Court of Victoria
has made an order for costs against her in
favour of the husband in the amount of approximately $209,000 is not disputed.
the wife’s equity in her property at F Street is more than
sufficient to enable her to satisfy that costs order as well as
the amount that
the husband seeks here.
11 Although we do not understand either party to suggest that they cannot
afford to pay the costs sought by the other party, we are
satisfied that they
each have the capacity to pay the costs sought by the other. Even if that was
not the case, impecuniosity is
no bar to an order for costs being made where it
is otherwise warranted (
Buckley & Buckley
[2013] FamCAFC 150).
application of the subsection is moot.
The conduct of the proceedings
12 It needs to be understood that the reference to
“the proceedings” in
s 117(2A)(c)
is to the appeal and not, for
example, the action in the Supreme Court of Victoria, the trial, proceedings
initiated by the wife
in the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(“NCAT”) or her recently filed application for orders purportedly
of the Act (
Dickson and Dickson
[1999] FamCA 768
(1999) FLC 92-857).
to the conduct of the appeal, the husband contends that the wife’s grounds
of appeal were hopeless and that her applications
in the appeal were
misconceived and doomed to fail. This is another way of saying that the wife was
wholly unsuccessful in the appeal.
It is more appropriate that the question of
success is addressed under
s 117(2A)(e).
13 The wife has been wholly unsuccessful in the
appeal and thus, the husband has incurred unnecessary legal expenses. These
strongly support an order for costs in his favour.
Other matters
14 In opposing the husband’s application for
costs, the wife repeats much of what she said at trial and in the appeal.
the wife had read our reasons for judgment but for whatever reason she
is unwilling to accept that the proceedings between her and
the husband are a de
facto financial cause, that her arguments have failed and principles of
finality. It is difficult to come to
any view other than the wife’s
recently filed
application (or its allied provision under
no reasonable prospects of success and that it is no more than a strategy which
is designed to delay enforcement of the orders
mounting up against her as long
as possible. The information contained in what the wife says are the recently
discovered loan application
and development application made in relation to
husband’s renovation of the Suburb E property is irrelevant and does not
a basis for varying or setting aside the property settlement orders.
As to this being recently discovered, the renovations were discussed
trial reasons and, assuming for the moment that the wife did not have the
documents sooner, they were obtainable with little
effort. If they were somehow
relevant it was incumbent on the wife to present them at trial and it is too
late to raise the issue
15 The fact that the husband has discharged the Commonwealth Bank mortgage is
similarly irrelevant. After all, his doing so is consistent
with the orders by
the primary judge designed to give the wife clear title to Unit 1 of the F
Street property and for the husband
to be responsible for the mortgage due to
the Commonwealth Bank.
16 As to the NCAT proceedings, the gravamen of the wife’s submissions
are captured by the following assertions:
53. [The husband] obtained
orders to subdivide the Suburb G property by registering a strata plan which
require certain actions to
be taken in compliance with the Strata Scheme
Management Act (“the Act”), while he had no intention to comply with
54. The new proceedings commencing in NCAT, were provoked by [the husband]
declaring that he is not going to allow [the wife] to
perform any function in
the Owners’ Committee or vote on any matters which needs to be resolved by
the Owners’ Corporation,
which is in blatant denial of [the wife’s]
right under the Strata Schemes Management Act.
55. Now, [the wife] only has some arguable right to seek a transfer one of the
units in a non-compliant strata scheme, which is
affected by building defects,
to her. It is arguable that such a property does not fit a definition of an
‘asset’, as
it is rather an unfinished development project. To
settle the property by accepting unit in a non-compliant strata scheme, would
further extend [the wife’s] financial vulnerability, while she is exposed
to costs obtained in effect of the presumed success,
which was an effect of
arguable abuse of court process.
(Wife’s Costs Submissions filed 12 August 2021)
17 The wife’s assertion that her interest in her F Street unit is not
property is wrong. Reference need only be made to cases
Duff and Duff
(1977) FLC 90- 217 and
Mullane v Mullane
[1983] HCA 4
to establish the point.
18 The effect of these matters is that none of the other matters which the
wife submits are relevant to whether an order for costs
should be made in favour
of the husband withstand even gentle scrutiny and they are plainly
irrelevant.
Conclusion on the husband’s application
19 The wife’s lack of success in the appeal
justifies an award of costs in favour of the husband. He has incurred legal
unnecessarily and the circumstances amply justify departure from the
provision that a party to proceedings under the Act should bear
20 As to the quantum of the husband’s costs, we agree that it is
appropriate that his costs are fixed and this issue is brought
to a close so
that it does not become another piece of satellite litigation. When regard is
had to the large volume of material filed
in the appeal, the challenges made by
the wife to the trial reasons which, as we said in our principal judgment, too
often misstated
what had occurred, it was necessary for those appearing for the
husband to undertake an intricate review of the trial record and
provide highly
detailed submissions. It was plainly necessary and easily comes within the realm
of party/party costs.
21 Furthermore, the wife’s claim for costs provides some guidance as to
the reasonableness of the amount sought by the husband.
Taking into account the
fact that the husband’s costs include the costs of appearances on the
appeal, it can be seen that there
is a broad comparability of their legal
expenses incurred prior to the appeal hearing. As to the wife’s complaint
husband has failed to give a copy of his cost agreement this does not
advance her position. It was only necessary for him to do so
if he sought
indemnity costs, which he does not. Finally, the wife’s submission that
the husband “has engaged silk in
an ‘essentially
straightforward’ matter” (Wife’s Costs Submissions filed 12
August 2021, paragraph 21) is
risible. Although this should have been a
relatively straightforward de facto property case, the nature and breadth of the
discussed in the trial reasons and in the appeal which emanated from
the wife made it anything but and more than justify the husband’s
to retain senior counsel.
22 It is our assessment that the husband’s party/party costs should be
fixed in the amount of $30,000. The wife will be ordered
to pay this amount
within 28 days.
THE WIFE’S APPLICATION FOR COSTS
23 The wife’s application for costs filed on
28 October 2020 proceeded on the assumption that she would succeed in the appeal
in every respect which has not happened. The only other justification for an
award of her costs in her favour is said to be:
21. The case was prolonged
and complicated by [the husband], acting in disregard of the interim Family
Court orders. The final judgment
contained errors that were the effect of denial
of the contributions of [the wife], made without proper legal basis.
22. [The wife] contends that by making false statements and misleading
submissions, [the husband] disentitled himself from seeking
costs orders in this
23. [The wife] asks for the costs to be granted on the basis that 50% of the
costs incurred on preparing the appeal, was related
to the decision related to
the matter transferred from Victoria, which was affected by the false evidence
and misleading submissions
and this conduct was in breach of the overarching
obligations. The remaining 50% to be considered as costs related to the errors
made by the trial judge.
(Wife’s Application for Costs filed 28 October
24 The findings made in relation to the husband’s application for costs
weigh heavily against an order for costs in favour of
the wife. Furthermore, not
only did the wife fail to establish error in the approach taken by the primary
judge, it was statements
and submissions made by her that misstated the facts.
There is no justification for an order for costs in favour of the wife and
application will be dismissed.
OTHER MATTERS
25 Finally, we feel it is incumbent on us to
encourage the wife to take legal advice in relation to her s 79A application and
to carefully
consider whether the application should be withdrawn. She is
already at risk of an adverse costs order in relation to it and the
continues (even if she withdraws and files afresh under Pt VIIIAB) and the
husband’s costs mount, so too does the
potential costs consequences for
I certify that the preceding twenty five (25) numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Justices
Ryan, Aldridge
Dated: 19 August 2021
RTF format (445 KB)
Signed PDF/A format