Witthahn & Ors v John Wakefield in his capacity as Chief Executive of Hospitals and Health Services and Director General of Queensland Health & Ors [2025] HCADisp 272 (14 November 2025)
WITTHAHN & ORS
JOHN WAKEFIELD IN
HIS CAPACITY AS CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICES AND DIRECTOR
GENERAL OF QUEENSLAND HEALTH &
[2025] HCADisp
applicants seek an order under
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) that the whole of the cause pending in the Court of Appeal of the
Supreme Court of Queensland, being proceeding numbered CA
3666/2025 , be
removed to this Court.
applicants were paramedics in the Queensland Ambulance Service. The first
applicant is one of the representative parties who
instituted a representative
proceeding in the Supreme Court of Queensland under
Proceedings Act 2011
(Qld) in relation to employment directions given by the
first respondent to Queensland Ambulance Service staff requiring the employees
to obtain a COVID-19 vaccination. One of those directions was determined to be
of no effect. In the representative proceeding, the
applicants make claims
arising out of action taken against them based on the employment directions,
alleging breach of contract and
the tort of misfeasance in public office against
certain public office holders, and seeking relief under the
Relations Act 2016
(Qld) in the form of payment of compensation and lost
remuneration and reinstatement.
representative proceeding was stayed by the Supreme Court on the basis that the
proper forum for the dispute is the Queensland
Industrial Relations Commission
("the QIRC"). The applicants unsuccessfully opposed the stay on the basis that
the proceeding falls
within the scope of
Constitution
and therefore invokes federal jurisdiction, and federal
appeal is listed for hearing before the Court of Appeal on 21 November 2025. The
parties have filed their written submissions.
The applicants contend that the
respondents, by a notice of contention, have raised a new argument in the Court
of Appeal which concerns
the second limb of
Constitution
, which was not a ground relied upon by the primary judge.
The applicants contend that this argument raises constitutional issues
fundamental importance concerning this Court's original jurisdiction under
and seek leave to reopen this Court's decision in
Godfrey v Cameron
[1928] HCA 4
(1928) 40 CLR 446.
the light of the complexity of the procedural history, the applicants have not
identified sufficient reason to warrant this Court's
interference with the
ordinary progression of the proceeding in the Court of Appeal. An order removing
the proceeding would deny
this Court the benefit of the reasons of the Court of
Appeal on the constitutional issues:
Bienstein v Bienstein
(2003) 195 ALR
at 234 [45]. It is also possible that the appeal will be determined on a
basis that will render it unnecessary to decide the issues
the applicants seek
to agitate in this Court. Accordingly, the applicants have not shown sufficient
cause for the removal of the
proceeding to this Court.
application for removal is refused with costs.
Beech-Jones J
RTF format (138 KB)
Signed PDF/A format