Fair Work Ombudsman v TKN Civil Works 2019 Pty Ltd [2021] FCCA 2153 (27 August 2021)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Ombudsman v TKN Civil Works
2019 Pty Ltd
[2021] FCCA 2153
File number(s):
BRG 115 of 2021
Judgment of:
JUDGE JARRETT
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
INDUSTRIAL LAW
– Commonwealth –
compliance and enforcement – civil remedies – pecuniary penalty
orders – assessing
penalty – contravention deemed to be
INDUSTRIAL LAW
– Commonwealth – compliance
and enforcement – civil remedies – pecuniary penalty orders –
penalty – particular cases.
Legislation:
Fair Work Act 2009
Federal Circuit Court Rules 2001
(Cth) r 13.03A(2),
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Office of the Fair Work Ombudsman
The Respondent:
No appearance
BRG 115 of 2021
FAIR WORK OMBUDSMAN
TKN CIVIL WORKS 2019 PTY
JUDGE JARRETT
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT DECLARES THAT:
1. Upon the admission that the respondent is taken to have made consequent
upon its default pursuant to r.13.03(2) of the
Federal Circuit Court Rules
(Cth), that the respondent contravened
Fair Work Act
(Cth) by failing to comply with the compliance notice given by the
applicant to the respondent on 22 November, 2020.
THE COURT ORDERS
2. Pursuant to
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth), that within 28 days
of the date of these orders, the respondent take the steps required by the
compliance notice given 22
November, 2020 by:
(a) calculating the entitlements that the respondent was
required to pay to Mr Brett Backhouse, the relevant employee as specified
compliance notice;
(b) preparing and producing to the applicant a schedule outlining the
calculation of the outstanding entitlements that the respondent
was required to
(c) providing evidence to the applicant that said entitlements were paid to Mr
3. Pursuant to
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) that the
respondent pay interest to Mr Backhouse at the applicable pre-judgment rate on
the amount calculated in accordance
with order 2(a) above within 28 days of the
date of these orders.
4. Pursuant to
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) that the
respondent pay a pecuniary penalty of $20,000 to the Commonwealth within 28 days
of the date of this order.
REASONS FOR
JUDGE JARRETT:
1 On 26 March this year, the applicant, the Fair Work Ombudsman, commenced
proceedings against the respondent, TKN Civil Works 2019
Pty Ltd for a
contravention of the
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth). The contravention alleged
was that the respondent did not comply with a compliance notice issued by the
applicant pursuant
of the Act. To not comply with such a notice is
a contravention of
Fair Work Act
2 When she commenced the proceedings, the applicant filed a statement of
claim setting out the facts upon which the applicant sought
the relief set out
in the application. The proceedings were served on the company on 12 May, 2021
in the way in which service upon
companies is permitted: see the affidavit of
Michael Todd filed on 17 May, 2021. The matter came before me on 21 May. There
no appearance by the respondent. The application was adjourned to today.
At no time has the respondent filed a notice of address
for service or a
response or a defence to the statement of claim. There was no appearance on the
last occasion.
3 Today, a person who says that she is a representative of the company but
not a director of the company has answered the call when
the company was called
in these proceedings. She is not a lawyer and she says that she simply wants to
find out how much the company
needs to pay and to come to an agreement with the
other side. I have not given her leave to appear for the company. There is no
evidence before me, by way of affidavit or otherwise, that would allow me to
make the requisite findings upon which I might exercise
the discretion to grant
leave. So I intend to proceed with the application before me for default
judgment this morning.
4 It will be tolerably clear from the facts that I have already set out in
these reasons that the respondent is in default for the
purposes of the
Federal Circuit Court Rules 2001
of the Rules is
engaged. The Court is, upon being satisfied of the default, able to grant the
applicant the relief that the Court
thinks the applicant is entitled to, having
regard to the statement of claim. Because there is a statement of claim, no
is necessary.
5 The statement of claim and the facts alleged in it reveal these things.
The respondent is a company and at the relevant time it
operated a business
providing civil works within the construction industry, such as earthmoving. In
October, 2020 there was an investigation
into the respondent by the applicant
through her authorised fair work inspector. That investigation was prompted by
a request for
assistance by an employee. After the investigation, the fair work
inspector formed a belief that the respondent had contravened
Fair Work Act
by failing to pay the employee accrued but untaken annual leave on
termination.
6 The inspector gave to the respondent a compliance notice under
the Act. That notice was given to the company on 22 November, 2020. The notice
required the respondent to do certain things
and in particular, it required the
company to calculate and pay to the employee his unpaid annual leave by 16
December, 2020. It
also required the company to provide to the inspector a
schedule of calculations and payments and evidence that the payment had been
made to the employee by 23 December, 2020. The statement of claim alleges that
the respondent did not do those things. It did not
do them by the date
specified in the notice and has not done them at all.
7 Some further opportunities to comply with the notice were extended to the
company, but the company did not take up those opportunities
proceedings are the result. Evidence that has been filed for the purposes of
this application indicates that on 19 May
this year, the applicant received an
email from the respondent’s then sole director, a Mr Northcott, who stated
that the respondent
“will not file a defence” and that the
respondent’s liquidation “will only follow in a matter of
There has been no further correspondence with the applicant,
according to the evidence, since that contact and as I have already
the respondent has not participated in these proceedings.
8 It is appropriate to grant the relief sought by the applicant in the
statement of claim insofar as it consists of declaratory relief.
Accordingly, I
declare that upon the admissions which the respondent is taken to have made,
consequent upon its default pursuant
to r. 13.03A(2) of the
Federal Circuit
Court Rules
, the respondent contravened
Fair Work Act
failing to comply with a compliance notice given to the respondent on 22
November, 2020.
9 The applicant also seeks the imposition of a pecuniary penalty on the
respondent. The non-compliance with
is the type of non-compliance that
enlivens the Court’s power to make a pecuniary penalty order. The
circumstances here demonstrate
that the respondent has paid no attention to the
compliance notice. As I have been given to remark in a number of cases now, the
compliance notice regime is an important aspect of the enforcement regime
established under the
Fair Work Act
10 It provides the regulator with an appropriate mechanism to effectively and
efficiently call upon employers to remedy non-compliance
with the Act. It has
advantages for the recipients of such notices. Those advantages are that if the
notice is complied with, court
proceedings cannot be brought against the
recipient of the notice. The recipient is not taken to have contravened the
subject of the notice if the notice is complied with. Put shortly,
if the notice is complied with, that is the end of the matter,
but if the notice
is not complied with, as this case demonstrates, it is not the end of the
11 The evidence shows that the respondent was given a number of opportunities
to meet its obligations under the compliance notice
but has failed to do so.
There is no evidence before me about the respondent or its business or anything
of that nature. It has
not participated in these proceedings.
12 The maximum penalty that might be imposed for a contravention in the
present case is $33,300. The applicant submits that I ought
to impose a penalty
which is 80 per cent of the maximum, or $26,640.
13 I decline to impose a pecuniary penalty of that amount. In my view, an
appropriate penalty, having regard to the matters to which
I have referred, is
ORDERS DELIVERED
I certify that the preceding thirteen (13)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge Jarrett
on 27 August, 2021.
Dated: 17 September 2021
RTF format (292 KB)
Signed PDF/A format