Mikus v Chief of Army [2020] ADFDAT 1 (22 December 2020)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Mikus v Chief of Army
[2020] ADFDAT 1
Appeal from:
Defence Force Magistrate
File number:
DFDAT 1 of 2020
Judgment of:
LOGAN J (President), BRERETON jA (deputy
president) AND BARR J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
DEFENCE AND WAR
– appeal from a
Defence Force Magistrate (
) – where the appellant was found
guilty of assaulting a subordinate –
Defence Force Discipline Act
– whether the reasons of the DFM for
conviction were adequate – nature and source of obligation of a DFM to
give reasons
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
– DFDA, s 135 –
Court Martial and Defence Force
Magistrates Rules 2020
(Cth), r 52 – whether the DFM’s decision
was unsafe or unsatisfactory – whether the DFM’s decision was
unreasonable
and could not be supported by the evidence – where the
prosecution alleged the appellant Lieutenant Colonel had slapped a subordinate
Private on her buttocks on the dance floor at a function at an Other Ranks Club
– conflict in evidence between eyewitnesses
and that given by the
appellant –
Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
Legislation:
Constitution
(Cth) Ch III
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Evidence Act 1995
Court Martial and Defence Force Magistrate Rules 2020
Australian Military Regulations 1916
(Cth) reg 494
Australian Military Regulations 1927
(Cth) reg 203
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Regulation 2016
(Cth) reg 8
Defence Force Discipline Regulations 2018
Army Act 1881
Army Discipline and Regulation Act 1879
Cases cited:
Betts v Chief of Army
[2018] ADFDAT
[2017] NSWCCA 253
Boyson v Chief of Army
[2019] ADFDAT 2
[2010] NSWCCA 303
Commonwealth v Welsh
[1947] HCA 14
(1947) 74 CLR 245
Coutts v Commonwealth
[1985] HCA 40
(1985) 157 CLR 91
Dickson v R
[2017] NSWCCA 78
(2017) 94 NSWLR 476
Douglass v R
[2012] HCA 34
(2012) 290 ALR 699
DW v The Queen
[2004] ACTCA 22
(2004) 150 A Crim R 139
Fleming v The Queen
(1998) 197 CLR 250
Hodge v Chief of Navy
[2015] ADFDAT 4
IMM v The Queen
[2016] HCA 14
(2016) 257 CLR 300
Leith v Chief of Army
(2013) 234 A Crim R 259
Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
Libke v The Queen
[2007] HCA 30
(2007) 230 CLR 559
Low v Chief of Navy
[2011] ADFDAT 3
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
Marks v Commonwealth
[1964] HCA 45
(1964) 111 CLR 549
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
Murdoch (A Pseudonym) v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 272
(2013) 40 VR 451
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
(2020) 94 ALJR 394
Pettitt v Dunkley
[1971] 1 NSWLR 376
Private R v Cowen
[2020] HCA 31
(2020) 94 ALJR 849
Public Service Board (NSW) v Osmond
(1986) 159 CLR 656
R v Barrowman
[2007] SASC 28
(2007) 96 SASR 294
(a pseudonym)
[2018] HCA 40
(2018) 266 CLR 56
[2016] NSWCCA 78
(2016) 97 NSWLR 706
(2000) 78 SASR 68
[2014] NTSC 52
[2003] SASC 77
(2003) 141 A Crim R 203
[2016] NTSC 14
Randall v Chief of Army
(2018) 335 FLR 260
Re Manion’s Appeal
(1962) 9 FLR 91
Re Tracey; Ex parte Ryan
[1989] HCA 12
(1989) 166 CLR 518
SKA v The Queen
[2011] HCA 13
(2011) 243 CLR 400
[2014] VSCA 31
(2014) 42 VR 64
Sorby v The Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
The Queen v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
Velkoski v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 121
(2014) 45 VR 680
White v Director of Military Prosecutions
[2007] HCA 29
(2007) 231 CLR 570
Woolmington v Director of Public Prosecutions
[1935] AC 462
Yewsang v Chief of Army
[2013] ADFDAT 1
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr T Berkley
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Darwin Family Law
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr S Whybrow
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Office of the Director of Military Prosecutions
DFDAT 1 of 2020
JEREMY THOMAS MIKUS
CHIEF OF ARMY
LOGAN J (PRESIDENT), BRERETON JA (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
AND BARR J (MEMBER)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
as the same may be necessary, having regard to the grounds pleaded in the notice
of appeal, the appellant be granted leave
appeal be dismissed.
REASONS FOR
THE TRIBUNAL:
the Australian Army, it has never been lawful for a superior to strike a
subordinate.
present appeal offers a useful opportunity to recall just how longstanding this
prohibition is, and the reason for it.
Unsurprisingly,
given Australia’s constitutional inheritance from the United Kingdom,
including with respect to the governance
of its army, this Australian
prohibition reflects the position in the United Kingdom as at the time of
Federation. Immediately before
Federation, the discipline of the British Army
was governed by the
Army Act 1881
). The 1881 Act
also applied either generally to the various Australian colonial military forces
or at least when they were called
out for active service:
, B Oswald and J Waddell (Eds) (Big Sky Publishing, 2014), p 2. After
Federation and following the assumption of control of the former
military forces by the Commonwealth, the 1881 Act, to the extent modified by the
Australian Military Regulations and Orders,
remained applicable to the
Australian Army when on active service until the commencement of the
Force Discipline Act 1982
, the 1881 Act
37. Ill – treating solider
Every officer or non-commissioned officer who commits any of the following
offences; that is to say:
(1.) Strikes or otherwise ill-treats any soldier; or
shall on conviction by court-martial be liable, if an officer, to be cashiered
or to suffer such less punishment as is in this Act
mentioned, and if a
non-commissioned officer, to suffer imprisonment or such less punishment as is
in this Act mentioned.
from the prohibition applicable via the application of the 1881 Act to active
service duty, a like prohibition was applicable
after Federation to members of
the Australian Army when not on active service: reg 494(xli) of the
Australian Military Regulations 1916
(Cth) and, later,
reg 203(lvi)(a),
Australian Military Regulations 1927
1881 Act consolidated the many reforms to British military law made by the
Army Discipline and Regulation Act 1879
amended. However, all that it did in relation to the prohibition on the striking
of a subordinate by a superior was to declare
the position in law which had
existed prior to the 1879 Act. In the
Articles of War
(1873), promulgated
in 1873 by Queen Victoria, in amplification of the provision made by the annual
Mutiny Acts for the discipline
of the British Army, Article 100 provided,
materially:
officer or non-commissioned officer who shall strike or ill-treat any soldier;
SHALL, if an officer, on conviction ... be LIABLE to be CASHIERED – or
suffer such other punishment, according to the nature
and degree of the offence,
as by the judgement of a general court martial may be awarded
[Charles Clode, The Administration of Justice under
Military And Martial Law: As Applicable to the Army, Navy, Nerines and Auxiliary
Forces, 2nd edition, 1873, pp 179-180.]
turn, as Mr E Samuel demonstrates in his work, “An Historical Account of
the British Army, and of the Law Military, as declared
by the Ancient and Modern
Statutes, and Articles of War for its Government: with a Free Commentary on the
Mutiny Act, and the Rules
and Articles of war; Illustrated by Various Decisions
of Courts Martial” (1816) (
), at p 348 and following, the
prohibition on the striking by a superior of a subordinate, found in the
Articles of War, long antedated
even the formation of a standing English Army in
the aftermath of the Restoration. It may be traced back at least to a like
prohibition
found in a charter issued by King Richard I to govern the behaviour
of his army on their voyage to the Holy Land.
to Samuel, at p 348, the purpose of the prohibition is as follows:
As strife and quarrels might prove more dangerous, in
their consequences, from the circumstance of closer association, from the ready
recourse to arms, and from the constant habit of using them, in a military
community, than in the civil ranks of life; so the aim
of the framers of our
military code has been on all occasions most conspicuous, in the ordinances
declared by them for the prevention
and repression of the conduct and actions of
soldiers, having a tendency to a breach of the peace, or to the interruption of
quiet of the camp or garrison.
As will be seen, two hundred years after Samuel made that observation, the
prohibition remains relevant in relation to “the
quiet of the camp or
of the heritage just related is evident in the present Australian prohibition,
found in s 34 of the DFDA:
34 Assaulting a subordinate
(1) A defence member commits an offence if:
(a) the member assaults or ill-treats a
person; and
(b) the person is a member of the Defence Force who is of subordinate rank to
the member.
Maximum punishment: Imprisonment for 2 years.
(2) Strict liability applies to paragraph (1)(b).
strict liability
, see section 6.1 of the
(3) It is a defence if the member proves that he or she neither knew, nor could
reasonably be expected to have known, that the other
person was a member of the
Defence Force of subordinate rank to the member.
Note: The defendant bears a legal burden in relation to the matter in subsection
(3). See section 13.4 of the
the provision also serves the function of prohibiting abuses of authority by
appellant, Lieutenant Colonel (
) Jeremy Thomas Mikus, was charged
with the following offence against s 34(1) of the DFDA:
Being a defence member at the Gordon Club, Borneo
Barracks, Cabarlah, in the state of Queensland, on or about 7 November 2019, did
assault [service number] [Private] Jamie Bicsak, who was subordinate to him in
rank, by slapping her on the buttocks.
COL Mikus pleaded not guilty to this charge. On 5 August 2020, following a trial
before a Defence Force Magistrate (Group Captain
S M Geeves) (
three days the preceding month, LT COL Mikus was found guilty. The following
day, the DFM convicted him of the offence and
ordered that he be fined the sum
of $6,500.00 and severely reprimanded.
COL Mikus has appealed to the Tribunal against his conviction. As pleaded in the
notice of appeal, the grounds of appeal are:
the conviction is unreasonable, or cannot be supported, having regard to the
evidence; and/or
as a result of a wrong decision on a question of law, or of mixed law and fact,
the conviction was wrong in law and that a substantial
miscarriage of justice
has occurred; and/or
in all the circumstances of the case, the conviction is unsafe or
unsatisfactory.
grounds of appeal correspond with permissible grounds of appeal as respectively
specified in
ss 23(1)(a)
, (b) and (d) of the
Defence Force Discipline Appeals
Appeals Act
). They were amplified in paragraph 3 of
the notice of appeal and further in the outline of submissions as filed on
behalf of LT COL
Mikus by direction in advance of the hearing and in later oral
submissions.
oral submissions made on behalf of LT COL Mikus confirmed a position evident
from his outline and paragraph 3 of the notice of
appeal. That was that one
basis of challenge was an alleged inadequacy of the reasons given by the learned
DFM for his convicting
LT COL Mikus. It was pointed out by the Tribunal in the
course of oral submissions that this particular basis of challenge might
aptly be characterised as “a material irregularity in the course of the
proceedings” and hence one falling within
s 23(1)(c) of the Appeals Act.
Upon inquiry by the Tribunal as to whether he had any objection, in light of the
pleading of the notice
of appeal, to a challenge on this basis, the Chief of
Army, by his counsel, with the consummate fairness an appellant defence member
and the Tribunal are entitled to expect of a service chief respondent, indicated
that he had no objection to treating the appeal
as if there were also a ground
advanced under s 23(1)(c) of the Appeals Act.
were well satisfied, having regard to the outlines of submissions respectively
filed in advance by each of the parties, that permitting
the point to be raised
entailed no procedural unfairness to the Chief of Army. Further, even if, as the
appellant’s written
outline seemed to assume, a failure to give adequate
reasons might be said to be a wrong decision on a question of law (as opposed
exposing the same) and fall under s 23(1)(b) of the Appeals Act, both
s 23(1)(b) and s 23(1)(c) of the Appeals Act additionally
appellant to persuade the Tribunal that a substantial miscarriage of justice has
occurred. We therefore proceeded to hear,
and now determine, the appeal on the
basis that the appeal also raises a ground under s 23(1)(c) of the Appeals Act,
as mentioned.
appellant’s outline of submissions refers to and expands upon the pleaded
grounds of appeal as follows:
Ground of Appeal No. 1 – that the conviction is
unreasonable, or cannot be supported, having regard to the evidence, in that
learned [DFM] rejected the evidence of the appellant without cogent reasons
showing a chain of logical reasoning that would allow
the DFM to do so.
Ground of Appeal No. 2 – that as a result of a wrong decision on a
question of law, or mixed law and fact, a substantial miscarriage
of justice has
occurred, in that the DFM failed to find that there was a reasonable possibility
of collusion, concoction or/or contamination
between the prosecution witnesses
Bicsak, Harrison-Wolff, Shannon and Callum Edwards.
Ground of Appeal No. 3 – that, in all the circumstances of the case, the
conviction is unsafe or unsatisfactory, in that the
DFM made the following
There followed, in paragraphs 10-15 of the appellant’s outline, a list of
the asserted errors. We shall return to a consideration
of those when we deal
with the grounds of appeal in detail.
The Prosecution Case
prosecution case may be summarised as follows.
at Thursday, 7 November 2019, LT COL Mikus was the Commanding Officer of 1st
Combat Signal Regiment. In November 2019, the annual
week-long series of events
known as the Caduceus Cup [Caduceus was the official staff carried in Roman
mythology by Mercury and,
similarly in Greek Mythology, by Hermes, the messenger
of the gods, usually represented with two snakes entwined around it. There
unfairness to either party in taking notice that the Caduceus features in the
badge of Royal Australian Corps of Signals],
in which members of various Royal
Australian Corps of Signals regiments participate, was held at Borneo Barracks,
Cabarlah in Queensland.
Members of 1st Combat Signal Regiment participated in
the Caduceus Cup. On the evening of 7 November 2019 and at the conclusion of
competitive events, a function was held for the other ranks at the Gordon VC
Club at Borneo Barracks (the other ranks club at the
barracks), starting at
approximately 1800 hrs. The attendees included Signalman (
Bicsak (the complainant and a member of 1st Combat Signal Regiment), her
fiancé SIG Callum Edwards (a member of 1st
Combat Signal Regiment),
) Corina Edwards and SIG Benjamin Shannon (a member of 1st
Combat Signal Regiment). Sergeant (
) Christian Smith was the bar
manager and RSA (responsible service of alcohol) supervisor at the Gordon VC
Club on the night. PTE
Jacob Tennant was the disc jockey at the function.
the same time, a formal cocktail function was being held at the Borneo Barracks
Officers’ Mess for officers and senior non-commissioned
officers. In
keeping with the formal nature of the function, attendees wore Mess Dress. The
attendees at that function included LT
COL Mikus, Major (
) Dreu (the
executive officer of 1st Combat Signal Regiment), Warrant Officer, Class 1
) Douglas (the then Regimental Sergeant Major (
Combat Signal Regiment) and Captain (
) Alexandra Harrison-Wolff (an
officer then posted to 1st Combat Signal Regiment).
in the evening, after the cocktail function ended, MAJ Dreu, WO1 Douglas and
CAPT Harrison-Wolff moved to the function at the
Gordon VC Club. LT COL Mikus
was not with them at that stage, but arrived at the Gordon VC Club approximately
one hour later.
prosecution alleged that a number of officers and senior non-commissioned
officers went to the Gordon VC Club where they continued
to drink alcohol and
socialise with the signallers and junior non-commissioned officers. The
socialising included conversation in
groups and dancing.
prosecution case entailed the following further allegations. Prior to the
alleged offending conduct, LT COL Mikus was dancing
and enjoying himself amongst
the soldiers at the Gordon VC Club. He appeared to be quite intoxicated. He
behaved in a way which was
quite different to his normal behaviour in the
presence of subordinates. When approximately 20 to 25 persons were dancing in a
circle [the “formation” of those dancing was described by some
eyewitnesses as a circle. CAPT Harrison-Wolff described
it as “a sort of
ill-formed accidental circle shape ... a sort of semicircle with various groups
breaking off from each side
of it”. SIG Shannon described it as
“kind of a horseshoe shape”], LT COL Mikus veered very quickly
towards the
complainant and slapped her with an open hand on her buttocks.
her evidence in chief, SIG Bicsak said that she felt a slap on her
“bum” while she was dancing in a circle of people.
She did not know
whether the appellant was in the circle at the time. In cross-examination, she
explained that she had moved in towards
the centre of the circle. She described
the contact as “a quick slap on the bottom”. However, it was a
firm slap”. Although she felt the slap, she did not see who
had slapped her. About 30 seconds to a minute after the slap, SIG
Callum Edwards
(her fiancé) pulled her away and said to her, “That was the CO that
just slapped your arse”.
Callum Edwards stated that he witnessed the alleged slap. After being referred
to a drawing which he had provided to investigators
showing the relative
positions (prior to the alleged slap) of himself, SIG Shannon, CAPT
Harrison-Wolff and the appellant, SIG Callum
Edwards gave the following
PROSECUTOR: From identifying that drawing, you’ve
indicated where [the appellant] was positioned. What was he doing at that
time?---He had a drink in his hand. Everyone in the circle was all kind of just
dancing, having a good time. As ... SIG Jamie Bicsak
was in the centre of the
circle with her back towards us she was dancing for approximately about a minute
and then [the appellant]
stepped in and slapped her on the buttocks with his
right hand.
How did he slap her on the buttocks? --- Just with a big like flat hand and with
a quite loud slap.
Did you hear anything?---I remember hearing the sound of the slap. So to me,
that felt like it must have been very firm.
How clear was your view of what you say you saw happen?---I could definitely see
– from myself to [the appellant] I could completely
see him, see his face.
I could see CAPT Harrison-Wolff. I could see SIG Jamie Bicsak and I could see
SIG Ben Shannon.
What was the distance between where [the appellant] was standing and where SIG
Bicsak was?---Probably about 1 to 1.5 metres. The
circle was not large, not
small, kind of in the middle. So must have been 1.5 metres, ma’am.
Shannon and CAPT Harrison-Wolff also said that they observed LT COL Mikus slap
SIG Bicsak.
Shannon said in evidence that the people dancing at the relevant time were in
something of a horseshoe formation. By reference
to a rough sketch which he had
prepared for investigators, he identified the relative positions of himself, SIG
Callum Edwards, SIG
Bicsak, CAPT Harrison-Wolff, WO1 Douglas and LT COL Mikus.
SIG Shannon was standing next to CAPT Harrison-Wolff. He placed himself
to 2.5 metres from the complainant and 1.5 to 2 metres from LT COL Mikus. After
SIG Bicsak stepped from the right of the
horseshoe into the centre, SIG Shannon
saw LT COL Mikus reach out and slap SIG Bicsak on the buttocks with an open
right hand [in
cross-examination, and when asked whether the contact could have
been with the back of the appellant’s hand, he said it was
an open right
palm]. LT COL Mikus was so close to SIG Bicsak that he was able to simply lean
and strike her without needing to take
a step. In an apparently immediate
reaction, SIG Bicsak turned to her right [in cross-examination, SIG Shannon said
the touch “was
hard enough for Jamie to have noticed”. When then
asked how he knew that the complainant had noticed, he replied, “Because
she turned instantly, sir”].
Harrison-Wolff said in giving evidence simply that she saw LT COL Mikus slap the
complainant on the bottom with an open palm,
using his right hand. In order to
carry out the slap, he took a step forward and “kind of leant over to
reach out for where
SIG Bicsak was standing”. She gave the following
description of the appellant’s movements in cross-examination: “A
step forward ... almost I suppose like a lunge to reach forward and then stepped
who was standing next to
her, said to her almost immediately, “Well, that was inappropriate”
[CAPT Harrison-Wolff later
conceded that the statement attributed to SIG Shannon
was not a direct quote but something very similar]. When cross examined to
effect that she had not seen any slap, CAPT Harrison-Wolff answered, “I
unequivocally saw a slap, sir”. When further
questioned as to whether the
slap was with the back of the hand or the front of the hand, she answered,
“Front of the hand,
open palm”. She could not say precisely where
the slap struck the complainant’s bottom.
Harrison-Wolff had served with LT COL Mikus in 1st Combat Signal Regiment since
January 2019. She had enjoyed a good professional
relationship with him. Indeed,
she liked him. As she was leaving the Gordon VC Club, after the alleged
incident, LT COL Mikus picked
her up and carried her for about 10 metres. She
agreed with defence counsel that this had probably occurred after she had
incident in [89] below.
prosecution case was thus supported by the evidence of SIG Bicsak as to having
received a slap to her bottom, and the evidence
of three apparently reliable
eyewitnesses who had actually seen LT COL Mikus slap the complainant’s
bottom. Given the close
proximity of the eyewitnesses to the event described,
there is no real issue as to the accuracy of their observations, notwithstanding
evidence of deficiency in lighting and the operation of a smoke machine. There
was no evidence of ill-feeling or other bias on the
part of any of those four
witnesses towards LT COL Mikus prior to the alleged assault. In particular, SIG
Bicsak was a reluctant
witness who had expressed concern about the possible
consequences to LT COL Mikus’ career if she were to make a complaint and
who did not want the matter to go any further [for example, when MAJ Mathieson
conveyed the appellant’s apology to her, she
said that she accepted the
apology and simply wanted the appellant to be aware that it was unacceptable].
CAPT Harrison-Wolff was
in a most unenviable situation, having to give evidence
against her Commanding Officer, whom she respected and liked. Indeed, she
experienced feelings of guilt for a considerable period of time because she had
not taken steps to extract LT COL Mikus from
a situation in which he was
becoming increasingly inebriated, drawing attention to himself while dancing,
and where those present
were starting to make comments about his behaviour.
addition to the eyewitness evidence, the prosecution relied on evidence of
conversations which took place in the days after the
alleged offending between
LT COL Mikus and CAPT Harrison-Wolff; LT COL Mikus and SIG Callum Edwards;
and LT COL Mikus and a MAJ Mathieson.
evidence of various witnesses was to the effect that, when spoken to about the
matter the following day, LT COL Mikus said he
had no recollection of the
alleged incident. By implication, he did not deny the possibility that conduct
of the kind alleged might
have occurred.
COL Mikus gave evidence. His evidence included a statement that, when he spoke
with SIG Callum Edwards the following day, having
been informed by the RSM that
soldiers were spreading rumours that he had slapped the complainant, he told SIG
Callum Edwards that
he had “absolutely no memory of anything like that
from the evening”. He further said, “It is not something that
would do, and I’m really sorry that you’ve had to hear that, but it
is absolutely not something that I would do”.
other words, he did not deny to SIG Callum Edwards that he had slapped the
complainant, but rather said he had no recollection
of having done it and that
it was not something that he would do. The irony in LT COL Mikus’ evidence
is that if one accepts,
as the DFM did, that SIG Callum Edwards had actually
witnessed the slap, he was not someone who had simply heard rumours to that
effect spread by the soldiers.
COL Mikus’ evidence before the DFM entailed what is capable of being
regarded as a significant “shift” from not
remembering to outright
denial of the alleged incident [see the discussion of the evidence by the DFM in
his reasons]. In relation
to the allegation that he had slapped SIG Bicsak on
her bottom with his open right hand, he replied during his examination in chief,
“That did not occur”. He accepted the possibility that he had come
into (physical) contact with SIG Bicsak, but only
because “the room was
heavily populated and so people were quite tightly packed in”. He did not
recall having any contact
with SIG Bicsak. He denied the evidence of CAPT
Harrison-Wolff that he left the perimeter of the circle and moved in about 2 or
metres with his arm extended [CAPT Harrison-Wolff’s evidence was in
cross-examination]. He denied the incident described in
the evidence of SIG
Liberato and the reasons of the DFM
the DFM reserved his decision, that decision and the reasons for it were
. As delivered, the reasons were lengthy but much of
the reasons entailed a summary of the evidence given by the various witnesses.
The analysis of that evidence and the explanation as to why the evidence of
particular witnesses was or was not accepted is to be
found in the concluding
few pages of the transcript.
DFM’s reasons disclose, appropriately in the circumstances, recognition of
a need to give himself a so-called “
direction”. The
direction takes its name from
Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
). The usual occasion for the giving of a
direction” is in a case which turns on the
conflicting evidence of one or more prosecution witnesses and one or more
witnesses. Such a direction is to the effect that, even if the tribunal
of fact (jury or judge or magistrate sitting alone) does
not positively believe
the defence witness(es) and prefers the evidence of the prosecution witness(es),
the tribunal of fact should
not convict unless satisfied that the prosecution
has proved the defendant’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt. The direction
the DFM gave himself was as follows:
In a criminal trial it is not a question of my making a
choice between the evidence of the prosecution and the evidence of the accused
and LTCOL Schurmann and LTCOL Anderson. The proper approach is to understand
[that] the prosecution case depends upon my accepting
that the evidence of the
complainant and other credible witnesses was true and accurate beyond reasonable
doubt, despite the sworn
evidence by the accused and the two other Lieutenant
I have directed myself that I do not have to believe the accused is telling the
truth before he is entitled to be found not guilty.
Here it is often said that usually, one of three possibilities results, that is,
where there is defence evidence.
First, I may think that the accused’s evidence is credible and reliable
and that it provides a satisfying answer to the prosecution’s
case. If so,
my verdict would be not guilty.
Second, “I might think that [although] all the accused’s evidence
was not convincing, it leaves me in a state of reasonable
doubt as to what the
true position was. If so, my verdict will be not guilty, or thirdly; I might
think that the accused’s
evidence should not be accepted.
If that is my
view, I must be careful not to jump from that view to an automatic conclusion of
guilt. If I find the accused’s
evidence unconvincing, I must set it to one
side and go back to the rest of the evidence and ask myself whether, on
consideration
of such evidence as I do accept, I am satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the prosecution has proved each of the elements of the
[emphasis added]
DFM returned to
later in his reasons when analysing the evidence
of the various witnesses. He stated:
I have directed myself in accordance with the directions
I have set out at the commencement of these reasons. In particular, I have
reminded myself of a relevant direction. It is often referred to as the
direction. It applies to when an accused gives or calls
evidence, as is the case here. In this case I find the accused’s evidence
unconvincing. Therefore, I will set his evidence to one side and go back to the
rest of the evidence and ask myself whether on consideration
of such evidence as
I do accept, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt the prosecution has proved
each of the elements of the offence.
as there was a need, flowing from
, for the DFM to remind himself
of the overarching need for the prosecution to prove its case beyond reasonable
doubt, even in a case
of evidentiary conflict and where, materially, he had not
accepted evidence given by LT COL Mikus, the reminders which he gave himself
satisfied this need.
reminders engage with a fundamental principle applicable to any charge before a
service tribunal that a service offence has
been committed. That is that the
onus is on the prosecution to prove beyond reasonable doubt each and every
element of the offence
charged. An accused is not obliged to prove his
innocence, for that is presumed, and bears no onus at all save to the extent
there is express statutory provision in relation to a particular defence.
In relation to the civilian criminal justice system, this
has been described as
“a cardinal principle of our system of justice”: see,
The Commonwealth
[1983] HCA 10
(1983) 152 CLR 281
, at 294 (Gibbs CJ). Both before and
after the enactment of the DFDA, this principle, the root authority for which is
Woolmington v Director of Public Prosecutions
[1935] AC 462, at 481
– 482, has been held by the Tribunal to be applicable to the trial of
service offences: see, respectively,
Re Manion’s Appeal
, at 103 – 104, and
Randall v Chief of Army
(2018) 335 FLR
Unsurprisingly therefore, this principle was at the forefront of the oral
submissions made on behalf of LT COL Mikus. It must inform
our consideration of
each of the pleaded grounds of appeal. It also supplies the occasion for an
examination of the adequacy of the
reasons given by the DFM for why he found the
offence charged proved.
The obligation of a DFM to give reasons
this case, irrespective of whether he was under an obligation so to do, the DFM
gave reasons. Further, the submissions of each
of the parties assumed the
existence of such an obligation. That does not render the question of whether
there is such an obligation
wholly academic, because the nature and extent of
any obligation is necessarily relevant to whether or not the reasons given are
the past, the Tribunal has regarded the common law as the source of an
obligation on the part of a DFM to give reasons:
Yewsang v Chief of Army
[2013] ADFDAT 1
), at [11] – [12]. This year, there
have been two developments in relation to service tribunals which make it
opportune to reconsider
that subject. Important observations have been made by
the High Court in
Private R v Cowen
[2020] HCA 31
(2020) 94 ALJR 849
Private R v
) about the nature of the power exercised by service tribunals,
including thus a DFM. Also, the Judge Advocate General has made the
Martial and Defence Force Magistrate Rules 2020
under s 149A of the DFDA.
Ascertaining
the source, nature and extent of an obligation of a DFM to give reasons is not
straightforward.
is no provision in the DFDA which expressly provides that a DFM must give
reasons either for a decision to dismiss a charge
of the commission of a service
offence or to convict the accused person of that charge.
by a DFM is governed by s 135 of the DFDA. By s 135(1), a DFM is required to try
a charge in accordance with the provisions
of that section. Those provisions
require a DFM to dismiss a charge if the DFM rules that the prosecution evidence
is insufficient
to support the charge (s 135(1)(c), DFDA), to acquit the accused
person if the DFM finds that person not guilty (s 135(1)(e), DFDA)
convict the accused person if the DFM finds that person guilty (s 135(1)(f),
DFDA). However, s 135 of the DFDA does not expressly
state that a DFM must give
reasons for any such ruling or, as the case may be, any of those findings.
are corresponding provisions in s 132 of the DFDA to those mentioned in s 135 in
relation to trial by court martial, save that
dismissal for insufficient
evidence is a sequel to a ruling by the judge advocate appointed to the court
martial: s 132(1)(c), DFDA.
149A of the DFDA empowers the Judge Advocate General, by legislative instrument,
to make rules, to be known as the Court Martial
and Defence Force Magistrate
Rules, providing for the practice and procedure to be followed by a court
martial or a DFM. At the time
when the trial of the present charge occurred in
July 2020, the 2020 Rules, as so made, had recently come into force. Within the
2020 Rules, r 52, which governs the record of proceedings before a court martial
or a DFM, does not, in terms, require a DFM to give
reasons. It does, in r
52(1), contain an overarching requirement that, “Where the proceedings
before a court martial or Defence
Force magistrate are not recorded
electronically, they shall be recorded in sufficient detail
to enable the
course of the proceedings to be followed, and the merits of the case to be
, from the record ...” (emphasis added). Rule 52 also makes
alternative provision for the “proceedings” before a
court martial
or DFM to be recorded electronically: r 52(2). The term,
“proceedings” is not defined in the 2020 Rules.
However, read in
context and having regard to purpose, it is no great stretch of language to
construe “proceedings” as
extending to the recording of reasons. To
record reasons is one thing, to be obliged to give them is another.
5 of the 2020 Rules is a “fail safe” provision, looking in the first
instance to “the established course that
would, in the particular case,
have applied in a trial by jury in a civil court in the Jervis Bay Territory in
its criminal jurisdiction”
(r 5(a)) and “if there is no such
established course, such course shall be adopted as the interests of justice
(r 5(b)). In a trial by jury in a civil court in the Jervis Bay
Territory in its criminal jurisdiction, the jury is not obliged to
give reasons
either for a finding of not guilty or a finding of guilty.
Defence Force Discipline Regulations 2018
(Cth), also made under the
DFDA, contain no provision requiring a DFM to give reasons.
further afield, and materially, reg 8(1)(a) of the
Defence Force Discipline
Appeals Regulation 2016
(Cth), made under the Appeals Act, requires the
Registrar of Military Justice, on request by the Tribunal’s Registrar, to
to the Tribunal, “a record of the proceedings of the court martial or
Defence Force magistrate”. Once again, “proceedings”
sufficient to embrace any reasons given by a DFM but it is, likewise to r 52 of
the 2020 Rules, difficult to regard this
provision as the source of an
obligation to give reasons.
absence of any explicit statutory obligation for a DFM to give reasons takes one
to the common law. As the Tribunal observed in
Leith v Chief of Army
(2013) 234 A Crim R 259
, at [101], by reference to
Marks v Commonwealth
[1964] HCA 45
(1964) 111 CLR 549
Commonwealth v Welsh
[1947] HCA 14
(1947) 74 CLR 245
Coutts v Commonwealth
[1985] HCA 40
(1985) 157 CLR 91
, at 108, “There is
longstanding authority that legislation concerning the armed forces should be
considered against the background
of the common law”.
DFM is not a judge appointed under Ch III of the
Constitution
. Rather, a
DFM is an officer in the Australian Defence Force (
) appointed from
the judge advocates’ panel by the Judge Advocate General to be a DFM: s
127, DFDA. Necessarily therefore, a
DFM is, like all members of the ADF, a
member of the executive branch of government established under Ch II of the
Constitution
. That status might be thought to suggest that a DFM has no
obligation to give reasons because, at common law, an administrator is
obliged to give reasons for a decision:
Public Service Board (NSW) v
(1986) 159 CLR 656
Public Service Board (NSW) v
a much more nuanced position, than a bare conclusion that administrative power
is exercised, is applicable in relation to
a service tribunal, constituted by a
DFM, as in the present instance. Though it is unequivocally the position that a
DFM does not
exercise the judicial power of the Commonwealth under Ch III of the
Constitution
, that is not to say that a DFM is not obliged to act
judicially. In
Private R v Cowen
, at [56], Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ
Whether service tribunals exercise judicial or
administrative power,
the power is required to be exercised judicially
that is to say,
in accordance with the requirements of reasonableness and
procedural fairness to ensure that discipline is just
. This Court is
invested with jurisdiction by
Constitution
to supervise
the exercise of power by officers of the Commonwealth to ensure that their
powers are exercised judicially in that sense.
[emphasis added]
so doing, their Honours took up and applied this observation, made by Mason CJ,
Wilson and Dawson JJ in
Re Tracey; Ex parte Ryan
[1989] HCA 12
(1989) 166 CLR 518
Re Tracey; Ex parte Ryan
), at 540 – 541, which, at [46]
they endorsed as “clearly correct”:
... the defence power is different because the proper
organization of a defence force requires a system of discipline which is
administered
judicially, not as part of the judicature erected under Ch III, but
as part of the organization of the force itself.
This observation was also, at [95(b)], regarded as correct by Gageler J in his
separate judgment in
Private R v Cowen
the other judges in
Private R v Cowen
, Nettle J went beyond just stating
that the power of a service tribunal is required to be exercised judicially. His
Honour opined,
Previous decisions of this Court establish that
power exercised by service tribunals is judicial power
, albeit of a kind
that is placed outside the “law of the land” and thus outside the
requirements of Ch III of the
Constitution
[emphasis added]
her separate judgment, Gordon J, at [133], referred to service tribunals as
having, “disciplinary powers to be exercised
judicially by members of the
armed forces” with the nature of that power being “
”, a description which had earlier commended itself to Gleeson
White v Director of Military Prosecutions
[2007] HCA 29
(2007) 231 CLR 570
[14]. For his part, Edelman J, at [171], considered that, “the weight of
authority and principle supports the conclusion
of Mason CJ, Wilson and Dawson
Re Tracey; Ex parte Ryan
that service tribunals exercise judicial
power”. His Honour further opined, at [188]:
Provided that a service tribunal is constituted in a
manner that is broadly consistent with its core historical antecedents it will
not infringe the constitutional implication that the judicial power of the
Commonwealth can only be exercised in accordance with
Ch III of the
Constitution
is neither necessary nor appropriate for the Tribunal to set out, much less
itself analyse, the detailed examinations of authority
which underpinned the
various observations made in
Private R v Cowen
power exercised by a service tribunal. The point of present relevance is that
there is nothing in the judgments
delivered in
Private R v Cowen
would support a conclusion that the function consigned to a DFM is to be
assimilated with a mere exercise of executive power
such that it is in any way
apt to draw an analogy with
Public Service Board (NSW) v Osmond
conclude that, at common law, a DFM is under no duty to give reasons; rather
they support the reverse conclusion.
Service Board (NSW) v Osmond
does, however, also bring with it the reminder
given by Gibbs CJ, at 666 – 667, that the giving of reasons for a decision
an accepted aspect of the judicial function.
, at [11], the need for a judicial officer sitting alone to expose
reasons for the order made in a way sufficient to permit an effective
moved the Tribunal to regard the following principle expounded by Asprey JA in
Pettitt v Dunkley
[1971] 1 NSWLR 376
Pettitt v Dunkley
at 382, in relation to a judicial officer sitting without a jury in the civil
courts, as equally applicable to a DFM:
In my respectful opinion the authorities to which I have
referred and the other decisions which are therein mentioned establish that
where in a trial without a jury there are real and relevant issues of fact which
are necessarily posed for judicial decision, or
where there are substantial
principles of law relevant to the determination of the case dependent for their
application upon findings
of fact in contention between the parties, and the
mere recording of a verdict for one side or the other leaves an appellate
in doubt as to how those various factual issues or principles have been
resolved, then, in the absence of some strong compelling
reason, the case is
such that the judge’s findings of fact and his reasons are essential for
the purpose of enabling a proper
understanding of the basis upon which the
verdict entered has been reached, and the judge has a duty, as part of the
exercise of
his judicial office, to state the findings and the reasons for his
decision adequately for that purpose. If he decides in such a
case not to do so,
he has made an error in that he has not properly fulfilled the function which
the law calls upon him as a judicial
person to exercise and such a decision on
his part constitutes an error of law.
Public Service Board (NSW) v Osmond
, at 666, Gibbs CJ remarked of this
observation in
Pettitt v Dunkley
that it “may have broken new
ground”. However, in
Fleming v The Queen
(1998) 197 CLR 250
[22], in the joint judgment of Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Callinan
JJ, their Honours expressly refrained from accepting
that this was so. Further
and in any event, their Honours regarded the reasoning in that case, that it was
subversive of the statutory
right of appeal conferred in respect of the order
made by the judge sitting alone not to regard that right, as necessarily
with it an obligation to give reasons.
the same conclusion, and for the same reasons, ought to be drawn in relation to
a DFM, having regard to the right of appeal
to the Tribunal conferred by s 20 of
the Appeals Act and the grounds upon which, by s 23 of that Act, an appeal may
be brought. As
, in relation to
Pettitt v Dunkley
as having “broken new ground” in relation
to a conclusion that, at common law, a DFM was under an obligation to give
reasons, having regard to the nature of the function consigned to a DFM. We
consider that the later observations in
Private R v Cowen
nature of the power exercised by service tribunals support that conclusion. But
in any event, it would be subversive of
the statutory right of appeal to this
Tribunal against a conviction in respect of a service offence by a DFM to
conclude that a DFM
has no obligation to give reasons. Further, we consider
that, in its application to a DFM, this conclusion is reinforced by r 52
2020 Rules, in the specification of the requirement that proceedings be recorded
in sufficient detail, “to enable the
course of the proceedings to be
followed, and the merits of the case to be judged”. The clear purpose of
this rule is not just
to enable the effective review, under Pt VIIIA of the
DFDA, of proceedings before a service tribunal (including a DFM) but also the
effective exercise of the right of appeal conferred by the Appeals Act. The
reasons given by a DFM must be adequate and sufficient
to explain the finding
under s 135 of the DFDA made by that DFM.
conclusion in relation to the existence of an obligation to give reasons, even
in the absence of an express statutory obligation,
also accords with the
approach of the ACT Court of Appeal in
DW v The Queen
[2004] ACTCA 22
(2004) 150 A Crim R
DW v The Queen
), at [24] – [26], and of Doyle CJ,
(Wicks J agreeing) in
(2000) 78 SASR 68
DW v The Queen
, at [27], it was stated:
... Any grounds of appeal based upon an alleged
inadequacy of the reasons that have been provided must obviously be determined
reference to the issues that arose at the trial, the nature of the evidence,
the scope of the appeal and other relevant circumstances.
However, the general
scope of the duty should be noted: it is a duty to explain his or her decision;
not to write an exhaustive treatise
on every aspect of the trial
The same applies in relation to the reasons of a DFM. Whether they are delivered
orally, as in the present case, or in writing, there
is no requirement for them
to be lengthy or elaborate. However, where more than one conclusion is open on
the evidence, it will generally
be necessary for those reasons at least to
explain why one conclusion was preferred to another.
is not a case where no reasons were delivered. For the reasons given, a failure
to give reasons by a DFM would constitute a material
irregularity in terms of s
23(1)(c) of the Appeals Act, if not also a wrong decision on a question of law
in terms of s 23(1)(b)
of that Act. Rather, this is a case where, as the passage
quoted from
DW v The Queen
highlights, the adequacy of the DFM’s
reasons must be judged by reference to “the issues that arose at the
nature of the evidence”. Against this background, we turn to
consider ground 1.
Ground 1 – were the DFM’s reasons
inadequate?
this case, the major issue confronting the DFM, as his reasons disclose he
plainly recognised, was that he had conflicting accounts
on the evidence as to
whether the event charged had occurred at all. Appropriately, and as we have
mentioned, the DFM gave himself
direction” and
also reiterated his understanding of the ramifications of that case.
for LT COL Mikus focussed on these passages in the DFM’s reasons so as to
ground a submission that the DFM had “simply
[preferred] one account over
another” and proceeded to convict upon it applying a standard less than
proof beyond reasonable
In this case I find the accused's evidence unconvincing.
Therefore, I will set his evidence to one side ....
Conversely, I cannot say that I found the accused as
impressive a witness as the complainant and the three other eyewitnesses when
giving evidence. I carefully observed him in the witness box whilst giving his
evidence-in-chief and under cross-examination: I accept,
however, that he was
not shaken under cross-examination.
vice in this submission is that it proceeds from a reading of these passages in
isolation from a reading of the reasons as a whole.
In the first of the passages
relied upon, having stated he would put the evidence given by LT COL Mikus to
one side, the DFM stated
that he would therefore “go back to the rest of
the evidence and ask myself whether on consideration of such evidence as I
accept, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt the prosecution has proved each
of the elements of the offence”.
turn, this qualification cannot be read in isolation from the
direction the DFM gave himself and the later reminder he gave himself by
reference to
. It was after he gave himself a
direction that the DFM proceeded to scrutinise and evaluate the evidence of each
of the “critical” prosecution witnesses.
Of these, the DFM
In terms of findings of credit based on her demeanour, I
found the complainant, PTE Bicsak, to be an honest and impressive witness.
not perceive her as attempting to embellish her evidence and in my view she made
concessions when appropriate. The complainant
was not shaken under
cross-examination. I have referred in detail to portions of her
cross­examination in my summary of the
evidence. Under cross-examination
she recalls feeling a pretty firm slap while dancing and that it was her
partner, Callum, who told
her what had happened.
The same can be said, in my view, particularly of the following eyewitnesses, of
the alleged conduct of the accused. I found CAPT
Harrison­Wolff, SIG
Shannon and SIG Edwards to be honest and impressive witnesses. I did not
perceive them as attempting to
embellish their evidence. They also made
concessions where appropriate. They were not shaken under cross-examination.
Again, I have already referred to some portions of CAPT Harrison-Wolff's
evidence whilst under cross-examination. She unequivocally
saw the accused slap
the complainant on her backside. She saw him do that. It was not something that
SIG Shannon had told her had
happened and she saw the accused lunge forward, as
she described it. The flashing lights and smoke did not interfere with her
acuity. It was not some form of trickery involving light or smoke. She
was not confused about what she says she saw. She had no doubt
SIG Shannon, under cross-examination, confirmed that smoke and lights did not
affect his visual acuity. He saw the accused slap the
complainant on her
backside. When confronted by the learned defending officer, he was certain that
he knew what he saw. His evidence
was that he was very clear on what he saw.
Similarly, SIG Edwards, whilst under cross-examination and whilst despite
consuming alcohol, was very clear also on what he saw.
When confronted by the
learned defending officer, he confirmed that he saw the accused slap his
fiancée on the backside with
his own eyes.
DFM expressly adverted to, and discounted, a risk of collusion between the
eyewitnesses, noting similarities and also differences
in detail between their
respective accounts. The DFM also expressly took into account, in relation to
reliability of observation
and recollection, that the three eyewitnesses, and LT
COL Mikus, had consumed alcohol on the evening in question. The DFM
Whilst the complainant and three eye witnesses did
indeed have something by way of alcohol to consume on the evening, I do not
their levels of intoxication to be such as to affect their overall
ability to recall what occurred.
He continued:
Turning to the charge itself, I accept the evidence of
the complainant and the three eye witnesses as to what occurred on the dance
floor of the Gordon Club. I accept the evidence of the critical witnesses that
the accused assaulted the complainant, that the assault
was intentional, the
complainant did not consent to the assault, and that the assault was unlawful.
Such conduct on the part of the
accused is probably and most likely explained
away by his level of intoxication but, nevertheless, it is conduct that
satisfies the
elements of the charge.
In doing so, I reject the accused’s denial that the alleged conduct did
not take place or was otherwise accidental, that is
not intentional touching, in
the course of a dance routine. The best evidence in my view in relation to an
assault occurring, the
element of intention and the issues of consent and
unlawfulness comes from the critical witnesses in this case.
was only after this that he ultimately concluded:
I therefore accept the evidence of the complainant and
the three eye witnesses beyond reasonable doubt that the accused did engage
the conduct particularised in the charge on the charge sheet
Undoubtedly,
an assessment of demeanour played a role in the acceptance by the DFM of the
evidence of SIG Bicsak and the three eyewitnesses.
the question is one of accepting and rejecting the evidence of a witness on
demeanour-based grounds, little may be required,
and there is no requirement for
a judge to give a detailed explanation for a decision to prefer the evidence of
one witness against
that of another:
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
, at 280 (McHugh JA);
, at [56] (Doyle
[2003] SASC 77
(2003) 141 A Crim R 203
, at [57], [59], [63] – [65];
DW v The Queen
R v Barrowman
[2007] SASC 28
(2007) 96 SASR 294
Douglass v R
[2012] HCA 34
(2012) 290 ALR 699
, does not contradict that
proposition, though it held that as a criminal trial depends on whether the
evidence as a whole proves
the elements of the offence beyond reasonable doubt,
reasons which record no finding about the accused’s evidence will be
insufficient
if they do not suffice to exclude the possibility that the judge
simply preferred the complainant’s evidence and proceeded
to convict upon
it, applying a standard less than proof beyond reasonable doubt: at [14].
in context and as a whole, but taking into account in particular the passage
quoted above, it is manifest that the DFM’s
reasons do indeed exclude the
possibility that he has “simply preferred [the complainant’s]
evidence and proceeded to
convict upon it, applying a standard less than proof
beyond reasonable doubt”.
is true that the DFM did not explicitly state why he found LT COL Mikus’
evidence to be “unconvincing” –
by which he meant, in the
context of the explanation earlier given, that he did not accept it. However,
reading his reasons as a
whole, his reasons for so finding can be discerned. The
DFM’s conclusion that the charge was proved beyond reasonable doubt
from his satisfaction that there was consistent, credible and corroborated
direct evidence, from four witnesses, to the contrary
of that given by LT COL
Mikus. In addition, as we have mentioned, demeanour played a role. In this
respect, the reasons for rejecting
the evidence of a witness need not be sourced
in that witness’s evidence, nor in the manner in which it was given; they
be founded on extraneous circumstances, including the strength of evidence
to the contrary. The objection, posed by LT COL Mikus’
counsel, that the
appellant had not been told what more he could have done, is not to the point.
As counsel for the Chief of Army
submitted, although another sentence or two in
the judgment might have made it clearer, the reader of the judgment would not be
any misapprehension as to why LT COL Mikus’ evidence had not been
any event, there has been no substantial miscarriage of justice. We refer to our
observations in relation to the evidence in the
prosecution case at [29] and
that of the Defence at [32] – [33] above. There was consistent, credible,
corroborated direct
evidence from four witnesses. The reported reactions of the
participants – including that SIG Bicsak was not particularly
that SIG Shannon observed “that was inappropriate” – have the
ring of truth. There was contemporaneous
complaint. Most of the critical
prosecution witnesses were, to a greater or lesser extent reluctant to
incriminate their Commanding
Officer, and none had any apparent motive so to do.
There was a conspicuous shift in LT COL Mikus’ position from when he was
confronted in the days following the incident, when his response was to the
effect “I don’t remember” (as attested
to by numerous
witnesses, including even his RSM), to one of categorical denial at trial. It is
also clear that the DFM’s rejection
of the appellant’s evidence was
partly based on demeanour.
these reasons, we reject appeal ground 1.
Ground 2 – Failure to find a reasonable possibility of
concoction, collusion or contamination
the ground of appeal as formulated was that the DFM erred in law in failing to
find that there was a reasonable possibility
of concoction, collusion or
contamination, in the course of argument it was reformulated as a submission
that the DFM ought to have,
but did not, warn himself (under
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
)) that the evidence of the
four direct witnesses might be unreliable because of the risk of concoction,
collusion or contamination.
appellant’s submission seeks to import into this context a principle which
is applicable to the
admissibility
of similar fact or tendency evidence,
where there are multiple complainants who give evidence of similar acts by an
accused against
each of them. At common law, similar fact evidence was not
admissible if joint concoction, collusion or contamination could not be
excluded, as the evidence would not possess the requisite probative value.
[2014] NTSC 52
), at [34], Riley
[34] In order to determine the admissibility of the
tendency evidence it is necessary to consider the possibility of joint
in relation to the evidence of each of the complainants. If joint
concoction cannot be excluded, the evidence will not possess the
same probative
value as would otherwise be the case. It is the possibility of concoction, not
the probability or a real chance of
concoction, which will lead to the evidence
being excluded.
[footnote references omitted]
as Blokland J observed in
[2016] NTSC 14
having referred to
Murdoch (A Pseudonym) v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 272
(2013) 40 VR 451
[2014] VSCA 31
(2014) 42 VR 64
, at [178];
[2010] NSWCCA 303
), at [123]; and
Velkoski v The Queen
[2014] VSCA 121
(2014) 45 VR
, at [173(c)], it was not the risk of any contamination whatsoever which
necessarily required the exclusion of tendency evidence,
but a risk of
contamination going to the substance of the evidence and not merely to the
incidental details:
, at [37]. Her Honour explained (
, at [16]):
The Crown must exclude “a real chance of
contamination going to the substance of the evidence” to enable the
evidence to be admitted. There must be an identified basis found in
the evidence for a conclusion that it is reasonably possible
that there may have
been concoction, collaboration or contamination. It is not enough the
opportunity existed; a mere speculative
suggestion of concoction, collusion,
collaboration or contamination is not sufficient.
[footnote references omitted]
Evidence Act
, tendency evidence is inadmissible unless the court
thinks that the evidence will, either by itself or in combination with other
evidence, have significant probative value. Under
of that Act, such
evidence is not to be admitted in a criminal proceeding against a defendant
unless its probative value substantially
outweighs any prejudicial effect it may
have on the defendant. Initially, a similar view was taken in respect of the
admissibility
of tendency evidence, so that it would not be admitted unless the
prosecution excluded “a real chance of contamination going
substance of the evidence”. Thus in
, Hodgson JA (with whom
Price and Fullerton JJ agreed) said:
my view, it is not a risk of any contamination whatsoever that would necessarily
require the exclusion of evidence: it must be
a risk of contamination that goes
to the substance of the evidence, and not merely to incidental details of no
materiality. I accept
that, unless the Crown negates a real chance of
contamination going to the substance of the evidence, then the evidence of other
witnesses should not be admitted as tendency evidence. However, the risk of
unconscious influence as to incidental details would
not in my view necessarily
require the evidence to be excluded.
(a pseudonym)
[2018] HCA 40
(2018) 266 CLR 56
), the High Court noted, at [68], that in
[2016] NSWCCA 78
(2016) 97 NSWLR 706
, the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal held that,
despite the decision in
IMM v The Queen
[2016] HCA 14
(2016) 257 CLR 300
possibility of contamination, concoction or collusion remained a relevant
consideration in the determination of whether tendency
evidence has significant
probative value for the purposes of s 97 because the risk of contamination,
concoction or collusion may
give rise to a “competing inference”
sufficient to render the evidence inherently implausible. The High Court in
also noted that in
[2017] NSWCCA 253
, the New South
Wales Court of Criminal Appeal said that, until and unless the High Court said
otherwise, the possibility of contamination,
concoction or collusion remained
relevant to admissibility. In
, the High Court stated that those
statements now required qualification, as follows:
[69] In this context, reference to competing inferences
is unhelpful, and likely to lead to error. Relevantly, the only sense in which
competing inferences are of significance in the assessment of the probative
value of evidence is in the determination of whether
the evidence could
rationally affect the assessment of the probability of the existence of a fact
in issue. As was established in
, that is a determination to be
undertaken taking the evidence at its highest. Accordingly, unless the risk of
contamination, concoction
or collusion is so great that it would not be open to
the jury rationally to accept the evidence, the determination of probative
excludes consideration of credibility and reliability. Subject to that
exception, the risk of contamination, concoction or
collusion goes only to the
credibility and reliability of evidence and, therefore, is an assessment which
must be left to the jury.
To the extent that
otherwise, it should not be followed.
, which predated
, the Victorian Court of Appeal
stated that, in determining the admissibility of tendency evidence given by two
complainants against
an accused, if a trial judge determines that the similarity
in the complainants’ accounts is capable of reasonable explanation
basis of contamination, concoction or collusion, the evidence cannot possess
sufficient probative value for the purposes of
Evidence Act
In light of
, that approach must be taken as overruled. At common law,
there is a need for separate judicial consideration of the risk of
contamination,
concoction or collusion, and a requirement that evidence be
excluded if there is a reasonable possibility of it being affected by
contamination, concoction or collusion. That requirement exists because of the
common law rule of exclusion that, because tendency
evidence is inadmissible
unless there is no reasonable view of it consistent with innocence, tendency
evidence is not admissible
if there is a realistic possibility of it being
affected by contamination, concoction or collusion. Under the
, the position is different. The replacement of the
the less demanding
criterion of significant probative value means that that
common law rule of exclusion has no application. Under the
Evidence Act
provided evidence is rationally capable of acceptance, the possibility of
contamination, concoction or collusion falls to be assessed
by the jury as part
of the ordinary process of assessment of all factors that may affect the
credibility and reliability of the evidence.
[footnotes and citations omitted]
principles are simply not relevant to this case. First, they are concerned with
the threshold for the admissibility of similar
fact or tendency evidence. No
question of the admissibility of such evidence arises in the present case.
Secondly, in any event,
establishes, the rule that tendency
evidence is excluded where a real possibility of contamination, concoction or
collusion is not
negated, does not apply in proceedings to which the
, or its equivalents, apply.
confirms that “the possibility of contamination, concoction
or collusion falls to be assessed by the jury as part of the ordinary
assessment of all factors that may affect the credibility and reliability of the
evidence”, this does not involve
any such proposition as contended for by
the appellant, to the effect that the prosecution must negative any real
possibility of
contamination, concoction or collusion. Conformably with that
position, and as we have already highlighted, the DFM did consider,
and reject,
the suggestion of contamination, concoction or collusion.
evidence does not indicate that there was any significant risk of collusion,
concoction or contamination. The main indicium invoked
on behalf of LT COL
Mikus was that all the direct witnesses gave consistent evidence of the main
event, namely the slap on the buttocks
with an open right hand. However, it is
entirely unsurprising that such a signal event would be accurately and precisely
by those who saw it, even if their recollections of some of the
surrounding circumstances were less clear and consistent. No suggestion
made to any of the witnesses in cross-examination that their evidence had been
affected or influenced by anything that anyone
else had said. In fact, although
CAPT Harrison-Wolff (whose conduct, in what would have been a most difficult
position, demonstrated
a high order of moral courage) spoke to three female
soldiers together on the following day, including SIG Bicsak, the others present
were not eyewitnesses, and she did not speak to eyewitnesses together. What she
did say to them, on the evidence, was non-specific,
and in particular did not
refer explicitly to a slap, let alone to a slap with an open right hand. There
is no reasonable basis
for supposing that there was coaching, collusion or
contamination. The following words of the High Court, in
equally applicable here:
[71] Counsel for the respondent submitted that, even so,
there remained a real possibility of contamination, concoction or collusion
which rendered the tendency evidence inadmissible. That submission must be
rejected. As both the trial judge and the Court of Appeal
concluded, there was
“thin support” for any suggestion of contamination, concoction or
collusion, and nothing submitted
by counsel before this Court throws any doubt
on that conclusion.
[footnote references omitted]
these reasons, appeal ground 2 fails.
Ground 3 – Unsafe and unsatisfactory
principles applicable to an appeal on the ground that a conviction is
“unsafe or unsatisfactory”, as derived from
cases such as
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
M v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
Libke v The Queen
[2007] HCA 30
(2007) 230 CLR 559
SKA v The Queen
[2011] HCA 13
(2011) 243 CLR 400
The Queen v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
Dickson v R
[2017] NSWCCA 78
(2017) 94 NSWLR 476
), have been explained in their application in this
Tribunal, in
Hodge v Chief of Navy
[2015] ADFDAT 4
[31] – [36];
Betts v Chief of Army
[2018] ADFDAT 2
, at [74]; and
Boyson v Chief of Army
[2019] ADFDAT 2
– [53]. There is nothing in the more recently decided
[2020] HCA 12
(2020) 94 ALJR 394
) which would occasion calling
into question these explanations.
present purposes, in the context of an appeal to this Tribunal from a conviction
by a DFM, those principles may be stated as follows:
(1) First, the question for the Tribunal is whether it
thinks that, upon the whole of the evidence, it was open to the DFM to be
beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty [
, at [66]].
(2) Secondly, to address that question, the Tribunal must make its own
independent assessment of the sufficiency and quality of the
, at 492 – 494;
, at [14] (French CJ, Gummow and
Kiefel JJ);
, at [57] – [59]].
(3) Thirdly, it will not suffice to set aside the conviction if it appears only
that it was possible on the evidence for the DFM
to reach a different
conclusion, but the conviction must be set aside if the Tribunal decides that
the DFM should have had a reasonable
doubt about the appellant’s guilt (in
the sense that it must, as distinct from might, have entertained such a doubt),
if there was sufficient evidence in law to support it [
, at 493 – 495;
, at [113];
Low v Chief of Navy
[2011] ADFDAT 3
, at [70] – [74]].
(4) Fourthly, a doubt experienced by the Tribunal will generally be a doubt
which the DFM ought also to have experienced and if,
after giving full weight to
the primacy of the DFM, the Tribunal is left in reasonable doubt, it is only
where the DFM’s advantage
in seeing and hearing the evidence is capable of
resolving the doubt that the Tribunal can conclude that there was no miscarriage
of justice [
M v The Queen
under this ground LT COL Mikus pointed to a number of specific matters, to which
reference will be made, his submissions
rightly acknowledged that under this
ground it was essentially for this Tribunal to consider whether, on the
evidence, the DFM ought
to have entertained a reasonable doubt as to the
appellant’s guilt, and that for that purpose a doubt entertained by the
will generally be one which ought to have been entertained by the DFM.
issue before the Tribunal is therefore whether it was open (in the sense
described in
), on the whole of the evidence, for the
DFM to be satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that the appellant had, as
alleged, slapped
the complainant’s buttocks. For the reasons set out
above for concluding that there has been no substantial miscarriage of
was submitted that the inherent unlikelihood of a Commanding Officer, who had a
reputation of being reserved, engaging in the conduct
alleged was a significant
factor weighing against its probability. That may be, but four witnesses gave
direct, consistent evidence
of it. It is also clear that LT COL Mikus was
disinhibited on this occasion: he had, on his own evidence, consumed seven
eight alcoholic drinks, immediately following a lengthy flight from the
Middle East via Darwin and Sydney to Brisbane and then a
two-hour road trip from
Brisbane to Cabarlah (all in company with his RSM); he asked SIG Callum Edwards
whether he was planning to
“hook up” with either of the Edwards
twins; he was prevailed upon to remove his mess jacket and wear a hi-vis jacket,
and to dance with his soldiers; perhaps most tellingly, he was prepared to pick
up and carry his female subordinate CAPT Harrison-Wolff
out of the room when
leaving, in response to her complaint that she had sore feet. The argument that
this was highly improbable conduct
for a Commanding Officer is countered by the
direct evidence, and the evidence of his disinhibition. In making these
observations,
we have expressly taken into account the evidence, mentioned by
the DFM in his
direction, that LT COL Mikus was, for a time,
engaged in conversation with fellow Lieutenant Colonels at the Gordon VC Club.
evidence did not include any contradiction by direct observation of the
incident on the dance floor as related by the prosecution
Tribunal recognises that, in this day and age, there may be occasions when it is
appropriate for officers, including a Commanding
Officer, to attend all ranks
social functions, notwithstanding the longstanding prudent practice of separate
messing arrangements
for officers, senior non-commissioned officers and other
ranks. However, on the evidence, the situation on the dance floor that
for officers, who had already been at a separate Officers’ Mess function,
was truly fraught.
Chief of Army rightly submitted that in distinction to
, this was not a case in which, despite credible evidence
supporting the prosecution case, there was such evidence pointing to its
improbability as to raise a reasonable doubt. It was well open on the whole of
the evidence for the DFM to be satisfied, beyond
reasonable doubt, that LT COL
Mikus had, as alleged, slapped the complainant’s buttocks. This is not a
case in which the DFM
ought to have had a reasonable doubt.
3 therefore fails.
to appeal (which is required, at least for the “unsafe and
unsatisfactory” ground), should be granted, but the appeal
I certify that the preceding ninety-three (93)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of the
Honourable Justices
Logan (President), Brereton (Deputy President) and Barr
Dated: 22 December 2020
RTF format (481 KB)
Signed PDF/A format