Leesa Zaicos v Tamworth Dementia Respite Service Inc [2025] FWCFB 231 (17 October 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 231
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
—Appeal of decisions
Tamworth Dementia Respite Service Inc
(C2025/8264)
JUSTICE HATCHER, PRESIDENT
VICE PRESIDENT GIBIAN
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
SYDNEY, 17 OCTOBER 2025
Appeal against decision in transcript and order
of Deputy President Boyce at Sydney made on 4 August 2025 in matter number
U2025/5143 – application for unfair dismissal remedy
– objection on
grounds that the dismissal was a case of genuine redundancy – compliance
with obligation to consult about
redundancy – whether Social, Community,
–award applied to dismissed employee – employer did not
comply with consultation requirements – not relevant to
consider whether
consultation would have resulted in a different outcome – dismissal was
not a case of genuine redundancy –
permission to appeal granted –
appeal allowed.
Introduction
The Tamworth Dementia Respite Service Inc (the
social service providing support for carers of people aged 65 years and over
with dementia. Leesa Zaicos commenced employment
with the TDRS in March 2021 in
the position of Managing Coordinator of Operations. At the time Ms Zaicos
commenced employment, the
TDRS had a manager and four staff members and serviced
20 clients and carers. By 2025, there were either eight or nine staff members
and around 12 volunteers providing services to approximately 90 high-needs
dementia clients and their carers.
During 2024, Ms Zaicos became aware of financial issues affecting the
operations of the service. The TDRS was considerably behind
superannuation contributions and taxation payments. Ms Zaicos says that a new
accountant was obtained who was working on
arranging a payment plan with the
Australian Taxation Office and that she had engaged in discussions with the
Commonwealth funding
manager for the service . Notwithstanding these steps being
taken, Andrew Barnden was appointed as the voluntary administrator of
on 8 April 2025 by its executive committee members under
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth). Mr Barnden is a director of Rodgers Reidy, a
registered liquidator and trustee in bankruptcy.
Mr Barnden says that, following his appointment as administrator, he
undertook a review of the operations of the TDRS and took immediate
ascertain the state of the business which included taking control of the
Association’s business and assets, conducting
a strategic review of the
service, including its financial position and cashflow, and continuing to trade.
Mr Barnden says that,
based on his review of the financial position of the
service and in order to maximise the chance of the business continuing in
he made the decision that the TDRS was not in the position to
maintain Ms Zaicos’ employment.
After making this decision, Mr Barnden issued a letter to Ms Zaicos
dated 23 April 2025 advising her of his decision. The letter states:
As you are aware, I was appointed Voluntary Administrator of the
Association by a resolution of the Association’s Executive
Members on 8 April 2025 pursuant to
Section 436A
Corporations Act
Following an urgent strategic review of the Association’s financial
position, I am implementing a restructure of its financial
affairs. As part of
this restructure, the Association is unfortunately not in a position to maintain
your employment effectively
from 23 April 2025. Accordingly, your last date of
employment in the Association is 23 April 2025.
letter of termination further stated that Ms Zaicos would be paid a payment in
lieu of notice of termination in accordance with
Social, Community, Home
Care and Disability Services Industry Award
SCHADS Award
). The letter stated:
Based upon the Social, Community, Home Care and Disability Services
Industry Award, your notice period is three (3) weeks. As this
notice is given
to you on 23 April 2025, you are entitled for three (3) weeks of Payment in Lieu
of Notice of termination.
During April 2025, Ms Zaicos was on a period of what she described as
‘work cover leave’ as a result of a workplace injury.
In her witness
statement filed in the proceedings at first instance, Ms Zaicos said:
I was never consulted about any structural changes, redundancy,
or potential adjustments to my role. I was not offered reduced hours,
redeployment, or the opportunity to return to my core operational duties later.
I would have happily accepted such an arrangement
if it had been proposed. The
dismissal occurred without warning, during my Workcover leave, and without any
attempt at procedural
Ms Zaicos was not cross-examined in relation to this evidence. In his
witness statement, Mr Barnden does not suggest that any form
of consultation
occurred prior to him sending the letter dated 23 April 2025 informing Ms Zaicos
that her employment was terminated
with immediate effect. Mr Barnden’s
submissions in reply to Ms Zaicos’ witness statement assert that:
Due to the Voluntary Administration process and the bona-fide
restructuring, there was no requirement for any consultation, warnings
reduction in her hours.
Mr Barnden indicates that he provided a detailed report to creditors
on 16 May 2025, and a meeting of creditors took place on 26 May
2026 at which
the creditors voted in favour of a motion to execute a deed of company
arrangement. The deed of company arrangement
was executed on 11 June 2025, at
which time Mr Barnden became the deed administrator and control of the TDRS
reverted to its existing
committee members. It appears that the TDRS continues
to operate.
Decision of the Deputy President
On 25 April 2025, Ms Zaicos applied to the Commission for an unfair
dismissal remedy under
Fair Work Act 2009
). On 6 May 2025, the TDRS filed a ‘Form F3 Employer response
to unfair dismissal application’. In answer to the question
award or an enterprise agreement apply to the Applicant?’, the TDRS
indicated that the SCHADS Award applied to
Ms Zaicos. The response indicated
that the TDRS objected to the application on the ground that the dismissal was a
case of genuine
redundancy. The response stated that ‘after a review of
the Association’s financial position, it is not in the position
maintain Ms Zaicos[’] employment based upon a bona fide restructure of the
Association as part of the Voluntary Administration
Deputy President issued directions in relation to the matter on 18 June 2025.
The directions required the parties to file and
serve submissions and evidence
in support of or in opposition to ‘the genuine redundancy jurisdictional
objection’. The
directions provided that the matter was listed for hearing
on 4 August 2025 ‘in regard to the Respondent’s genuine redundancy
objection (only)’. The hearing took place as foreshadowed on 4 August
2025. At the commencement of the hearing, the Deputy
We are down to hear the respondent’s jurisdictional objection
of whether the applicant was dismissed for reasons of genuine
redundancy within
the meaning of
section 389
Fair Work Act
Neither Ms Zaicos nor Mr Barnden was formally cross-examined at the
hearing, but both made some supplementary oral submissions. The
Deputy President
then gave his decision
at the conclusion of the hearing. The
reasons of the Deputy President are recorded in the transcript of the
Deputy President commenced by summarising the submissions made by the parties.
Relevantly to the grounds of appeal, the Deputy
President recorded that Ms
Zaicos made the following
submission:
The applicant says that there was no procedural fairness in her
dismissal in the sense that she wasn’t consulted about the relevant
changes that were happening and that she would have been happy to accept any
she hadn't been
consulted. She says her dismissal occurred without warning during WorkCover
leave and without any attempt at procedural
Deputy President noted that
of the Act provides the statutory
definition of what constitutes a genuine redundancy. He observed that, having
, there are three questions the Commission needs to
Firstly, was the applicant's job no longer required to be performed
by anyone because of changes in the operational requirements of
the respondent's
enterprise? Secondly, did the respondent comply with any obligation under a
modern award or enterprise agreement
that applied to the applicant’s
employment to consult the applicant about a redundancy? Thirdly, would it have
been reasonable
in all the circumstances for the applicant to have been
redeployed within the respondent’s enterprise or an associated entity
the respondent?
Deputy President found that TDRS, or Mr Barnden as the administrator, no longer
required Ms Zaicos’ job to be performed
by anyone because of changes in
the operational requirements of the enterprise having regard to its financial
position and the decisions
that had to be made at the relevant
President then turned to the second question, namely, whether the TDRS had
complied with any obligation under a modern
award or enterprise agreement to
consult about the redundancy. The Deputy President’s reasons in relation
to that question
The second issue I must consider is whether the respondent complied
with an obligation of a modern award or enterprise agreement that
applied to the
applicant to consult about the redundancy. No submissions were made on this
point. It is not apparent to me that the
applicant was covered by a modern award
or enterprise agreement.
It follows that under
section 389(1)(b)
of the Act, there was no
requirement for the respondent to engage in consultations about redundancy.
I point out that if a modern award applied to the applicant, consultation
provisions in the award would have applied. That said, the
question in relation
to consultation is whether there would have been any different position arrived
at had the consultation occurred.
On the evidence, there is no evidence that
such different position would have been arrived at in terms of Mr Barnden. Mr
was not subject to cross-examination about any alternative position. As
far as Mr Barnden was concerned in making his decision, the
applicant’s
wages were a significant cost that he needed to remove from the business, and he
did so accordingly.
It follows that
section 389(1)(b)
of the Act is either not relevant to
my considerations today or I consider it otherwise satisfied having regard to
the evidence before
Deputy President also concluded that there was no basis upon which he could find
that it would have been reasonable in all the
circumstances to redeploy Ms
the conclusion of his reasons, the Deputy President summarised his findings. In
relation to
s 389(1)(b)
, the Deputy President
There either were no consultation obligations under a modern award
or enterprise agreement that applied to the applicant’s employment,
they did, any such consultation could not have produced a different result. It
follows that
section 389(1)(b)
of the Act is either not a relevant consideration
or does not otherwise weigh against any finding as to the applicant’s
being made redundant.
As such, the reasoning of the Deputy President in relation to the
question of consultation contains two components. First, the Deputy
asserted that it was not apparent that Ms Zaicos was covered by a modern award
or enterprise agreement and, as such, there
was no requirement for the TDRS to
consult. Second, the Deputy President concluded that, even if a modern award did
apply to Ms Zaicos’
employment, consultation would not have produced a
different result. In light of those two findings, the Deputy President concluded
s 389(1)(b)
was either irrelevant or did not ‘weigh against any
finding as to [Ms Zaicos’] position being made redundant’.
the conclusion of the hearing, the Deputy President stated that the dismissal
met the definition of genuine redundancy under
of the Act and
‘this is not a case in which the Commission has power to proceed any
further with the applicant’s unfair
application’.
The Deputy President made an
on the same
day dismissing Ms Zaicos’ unfair dismissal application.
Grounds of appeal and permission to appeal
Ms Zaicos’ notice of appeal contains four grounds, each of
which concerns the question of whether the Deputy President erred
s 389(1)(b)
of the Act was either not relevant or satisfied. The first
ground is that the Deputy President erred in finding that no modern award
applied to her employment. The second and third grounds are that the Deputy
failed to correctly apply
s 389(1)(b)
in circumstances in which the
consultation obligations in the SCHADS Award were not met and in stating that,
even if consultation
had occurred, it may not have changed the outcome. The
fourth ground is that the Deputy President denied Ms Zaicos procedural fairness
by failing to acknowledge that she was covered by the SCHADS Award and that TDRS
had consultation obligations under that award.
of the Act, a person aggrieved by a decision of
the Commission may appeal the decision only with permission. In the case of an
from a decision made in unfair dismissal proceedings under
provides that the Commission may only grant permission to
appeal if it considers it is in the public interest to do so. We are satisfied
it is in the public interest to grant permission to appeal in this matter. As we
explain below, the Deputy President erred in his
application of
s 389(1)(b)
and was wrong to find that Ms Zaicos’ dismissal was a case of genuine
redundancy. The decision demonstrates a misunderstanding
of the operation of
s 389(1)(b)
that should be corrected. The decision also involved an unjust
outcome in that Ms Zaicos’ unfair dismissal application was
dismissed at a
preliminary stage even though her dismissal was not a case of genuine
redundancy.
What is a case of genuine redundancy?
significance of whether a dismissal is a case of genuine redundancy is that
of the Act provides that, leaving to one side the other
requirements, a person has been ‘unfairly dismissed’ only if
Commission is satisfied that the dismissal was not a case of genuine
redundancy.
person’s dismissal was a case of genuine redundancy, the person has not
been unfairly dismissed, and no unfair dismissal
remedy can be ordered under
Section 389
defines when a person’s dismissal is ‘a case
of genuine redundancy’ in the following terms:
389 Meaning of
genuine redundancy
(1) A person’s dismissal was a case of
genuine redundancy
person’s employer no longer required the person’s job to be
performed by anyone because of changes in the operational
requirements of the
employer’s enterprise; and
employer has complied with any obligation in a modern award or enterprise
agreement that applied to the employment to consult
(2) A person’s dismissal was not a case of
if it would have been reasonable in all the circumstances for
the person to be redeployed within:
employer’s enterprise; or
enterprise of an associated entity of the employer.
Deputy President described the question of whether Ms Zaicos’ dismissal
was a case of genuine redundancy as a ‘jurisdictional
objection’. As
Full Bench authority has previously made clear, the contention of a respondent
to an unfair dismissal application
that a dismissal was a case of genuine
redundancy is not a matter which goes to the jurisdiction of the Commission to
hear and determine
the application. It is simply one of the matters about which
the Commission must be satisfied in order for a person to have been
dismissed. In
McKerlie v RateIt Australia Pty
), the Full Bench
The Commission certainly has the jurisdiction to entertain and
determine an unfair dismissal application if the application has been
accordance with
and the applicant is a person protected from unfair
dismissal as defined in
The substantive determinative functions of
the Commission in respect of an application that is within jurisdiction are to
whether the dismissal the subject of the application was unfair and, if
so, what if any remedy should be granted. As
makes clear, the
substantive elements of an unfair dismissal (apart from the fact of the
dismissal itself) about which the Commission
must be satisfied are threefold:
(1) the dismissal must be harsh, unjust or unreasonable; (2) the dismissal must
not be consistent
with the Small Business Fair Dismissal Code; and (3) the
dismissal must not be a case of genuine redundancy. The power to grant a
cannot be exercised absent the Commission reaching the requisite state of
satisfaction about these three matters.
Section 396, which is located within Div 5, Procedural matters, of Pt 3-2 of
the FW Act, requires that certain matters, including
whether the dismissal was a
case of genuine redundancy, be determined before ‘
considering the
merits of the application
’. This meaning of the italicised expression
is not pellucidly clear, but it presumably refers to the question of whether the
dismissal is harsh, unjust or unreasonable and perhaps also to the question of
remedy. However this requirement to decide issues
in a certain order of priority
does not mean they need to be the subject of a separate, preliminary hearing
and, because the facts
relevant to whether a dismissal is a case of genuine
redundancy will usually be interwoven with those concerning whether the
is harsh, unjust or unreasonable, it will not generally be a
convenient and efficient course of action to hold a preliminary hearing
concerning the question of genuine redundancy. Not all the ‘initial
matters’ identified in s 396 are jurisdictional matters.
Determining
whether a dismissal is a genuine redundancy (as defined) precedes and may
obviate the need to determine other questions
(‘merits’). In that
sense it is commonly referred to as a ‘preliminary matter’.
Nonetheless, it is a matter
to be decided by exercising arbitral power on an
application that is otherwise within jurisdiction.
The fact that s 396(d) of the Act provides that the Commission
must decide whether a dismissal was a case of genuine redundancy ‘before
considering the merits of the application’ does not mean the requirement
is jurisdictional. It also does not require that a
separate hearing be conducted
in relation to that matter.
Whether a separate hearing should be conducted in relation to the
genuine redundancy question is a matter that will depend on an assessment
what procedural course is most convenient to the parties and the Commission.
However, as was observed in
, where a person is dismissed
purportedly on grounds of redundancy, there is likely to be a high degree of
overlap between the factual
and other issues which arise in relation to the
genuine redundancy question and the question of the fairness of the dismissal.
agree that it will rarely be convenient and efficient to hold a separate
hearing concerning the question of genuine redundancy. The
errors that Ms Zaicos
has identified in the decision under appeal are, in part, attributable to the
Deputy President considering
issues that could only have been relevant to the
question of fairness when determining, following a separate hearing, whether the
dismissal was a case of genuine redundancy.
Modern award coverage
The first appeal ground contends that the Deputy President erred in
finding that no modern award or enterprise agreement applied to
employment. There is no suggestion that any enterprise agreement applied to Ms
Zaicos. However, Ms Zaicos points
out that a range of documents that were before
the Deputy President expressly record that the parties conducted their
relationship
on the basis that the SCHADS Award applied to her employment. Those
documents include:
(a) The letter
of termination dated 23 April 2025 which specifies the period of notice of
termination to which Ms Zaicos was entitled
as being based on the SCHADS
(b) A pay slip
dated 9 April 2025 which recorded Ms Zaicos’ classification as being
‘SCHADS L8.1’.
‘Form F3 Employer response to unfair dismissal application’ which
stated that the SCHADS Award applied to Ms Zaicos
in answer to the question
‘Did an award or an enterprise agreement apply to the
Applicant?’.
(d) The witness
statement of Mr Barnden which set out various entitlements to which Ms Zaicos
was entitled under the SCHADS Award,
including with respect to annual leave
loading and superannuation on the payment she received in lieu of notice.
(e) The minutes
of the meeting of creditors held on 26 May 2025 which recorded that Ms Zaicos
had a claim with respect to various
entitlements under the SCHADS Award which
the chairperson advised should be admitted.
Mr Barnden confirmed at the hearing of the appeal that there is no
dispute between the parties that the SCHADS Award applied to Ms
parties were correct to have conducted themselves on the basis that the SCHADS
Award applied to Ms Zaicos’ employment. A
modern award applies to an
employer and employee if it covers the employer and employee, it is in operation
and no provision of the
Act provides, or has the effect, that it does not
award covers an employer and employee if it is ‘expressed to cover’
the employer and
Clause 4.1 of the SCHADS Award provides that it is an industry award
which covers employers throughout Australia in, relevantly, the
and community services sector’ and their employees in the classifications
listed in Schedule B to Schedule F.
The ‘social and community services
sector’ is defined in clause 3.1 as follows:
social and community services sector
means the provision
of social and community services including social work, recreation work, welfare
work, youth work or community
development work, including organisations which
primarily engage in policy, advocacy or representation on behalf of
organisations
carrying out such work and the provision of disability services
including the provision of social, community or disability services
the provision of personal care including therapeutic care and domestic and
lifestyle support to a person with a disability
in a community and/or
residential setting including respite centre and day services.
There is, and could be, no dispute that the services provided by the
TDRS mean that it is an employer in the ‘social and community
Ms Zaicos’ pay slip identified her classification as being
‘SCHADS L8.1’. Clause B.8.1 of Schedule B to the SCHADS
identifies the characteristics of a ‘social and community services
employee level 8’. In general terms, a level
8 employee is ‘subject
to broad direction from management/the employer and will exercise managerial
responsibility for an organisation’.
Other characteristics which may be
present in a position at this level include the ‘initiation and
formulation of extensive
projects or programs which impact on the
organisation’s goals and objectives’, providing ‘financial,
specialised,
technical, professional and/or administrative advice on policy
matters within the organisation and/or about external organisations
government policy’ and the development and implementation of techniques,
work practices and procedures in all facets
of the work area.
Ms Zaicos described her responsibilities as including overseeing
operations at Tamworth for staff, clients and carers, ensuring the
organisation’s compliance with outputs and reports to the Commonwealth,
following all aged care policies, procedures, guidelines
and standards, liaising
with referring agents, My Aged Care and other allied health professionals and
reporting on operational activities
to the governing committee. We are
comfortably satisfied that Ms Zaicos’ role as Managing Coordinator of
Operations falls within
the social and community services employee level 8
classification in the SCHADS Award. That is the classification specified on Ms
Zaicos’ pay slips and in accordance with which she was paid. The TDRS was
correct to have classified Ms Zaicos as falling within
that classification.
The consequence is that Ms Zaicos was covered by the SCHADS Award
and the SCHADS Award applied to her employment. Clause 8.1 of the
Award requires an employer to give notice to and engage in discussions with
affected employees if it has made a definite decision
to make major changes in
production, program, organisation, structure or technology that are likely to
have significant effects on
employees. Clause 8.2 requires that the
employer must give all relevant information about the changes in writing to
affected employees.
‘Significant effects’ are defined in
clause 8.5 to include termination of employment. Those obligations applied
TDRS. The Deputy President was wrong to find that there was no
requirement for the TDRS to engage in consultation about redundancy.
Whether consultation would have produced a different
The second and third appeal grounds in the notice of appeal contend
that the Deputy President failed to correctly apply s 389(1)(b)
in circumstances in which the consultation obligations in the SCHADS Award were
not met and in stating that, even if consultation
had occurred, it may not have
changed the outcome.
The evidence made plain that the TDRS did not give notice to Ms
Zaicos of the decision to restructure its operations, engage in any
discussions
in relation to the effect of the changes on Ms Zaicos or provide relevant
information to Ms Zaicos or any representative.
It did not comply with
clause 8 of the SCHADS Award. Indeed, it did not consult at all. However,
the Deputy President’s conclusion
that Ms Zaicos’ dismissal was a
case of genuine redundancy had a second basis. The Deputy President reasoned
that consultation
would not have resulted in a different outcome and, therefore,
s 389(1)(b) was either satisfied or did not weigh against his conclusion
that Ms Zaicos was redundant.
reasoning misunderstands s 389(1)(b). Section 389(1) is definitional. It
defines what constitutes a ‘genuine
redundancy’.
Unless the requirements of the subsection are met, the dismissal is not a case
of genuine redundancy. The requirements in s 389(1)
are cumulative. A
person’s dismissal is a case of genuine redundancy only if the
person’s employer no longer required
the person’s job to be
performed by anyone because of changes in the operational requirements of the
employer’s enterprise
the employer has complied with any
obligation in a modern award or enterprise agreement that applied to the
employment to consult
with an obligation in a modern award or enterprise agreement to consult about
the redundancy for the purposes of s 389(1)(b), then the dismissal is not a
case of genuine redundancy even if s 389(1)(a) is satisfied.
Deputy President’s suggestion that Ms Zaicos’ position was redundant
despite a failure to consult, or that the failure
to comply with consultation
obligations in a modern award does not weigh against a finding that her position
was redundant, is misconceived.
The question was not whether Ms Zaicos’
position was redundant in a general sense, but whether her dismissal was a case
genuine redundancy as defined. In
Livingstones Australia v ICF (Aust) Pty
... s 389(1)(b) evinces a legislative intent to ensure that
statutory consultation rights are upheld in cases where an employer decides
there are genuine operational reasons to make an employee or employees
redundant. The existence of genuine operational reasons
justifying the
redundancy is not enough. The employer must also comply with consultation
obligations imposed by an award o[r] enterprise
agreement before a termination
based on those operational requirements can be ‘a case of genuine
redundancy’ for the
purposes of the FW Act, and s 385(d) in
particular.
In short, an employer must comply with consultation obligations
imposed by a modern award or enterprise agreement. If it does not,
the dismissal
is not a case of genuine redundancy.
further inquiry is warranted to answer the question posed by s 389(1)(b).
In particular, whether the Commission believes that compliance
consultation obligation would have produced a different outcome is irrelevant to
the genuine redundancy question. The question
is only whether the employer
complied with an obligation to consult imposed by a modern award or enterprise
agreement or it has not.
Whether consultation is likely to have produced a
different result might be relevant to the subsequent assessment as to whether
dismissal was harsh, unjust or unreasonable for the purposes of
assessing if a dismissal was harsh, unjust or unreasonable, that matter would
need to be considered together with the other factors
in s 387. The failure
of the employer to comply with its consultation obligations is itself a matter
which the Commission may consider
relevant for the purposes of s 387(h) and
would have to be considered as part of the overall assessment of
In this matter, the Deputy President’s decision concerned only
the preliminary question of whether Ms Zaicos’ dismissal
was a case of
genuine redundancy and not whether her dismissal was harsh, unjust or
unreasonable. The Deputy President was wrong
to regard speculation as to whether
consultation could have produced a different result to be relevant to whether
the dismissal was
a case of genuine redundancy. The TDRS failed to comply with
the obligation to consult imposed by clause 8 of the SCHADS Award. The
consequence is that Ms Zaicos’ dismissal was not a case of genuine
redundancy.
Other grounds and contentions
In circumstances in which we are satisfied that the appeal should be
allowed on the bases set out in grounds 1 to 3, it is unnecessary
ground 4 which complains of a denial of procedural fairness. Ms Zaicos’
written submissions raise various other
issues, including whether the Deputy
President should have accepted Mr Barnden’s claim that her redundancy was
required for
financial reasons, whether it would have been reasonable for her to
be redeployed and that her dismissal was unfair because she was
dismissed whilst
on leave as a result of a workplace injury. Those submissions are not directed
at any ground contained in the notice
of appeal. It is, in any event, not
necessary or appropriate for the Full Bench to consider those submissions in
circumstances in
which the issues raised may be relevant to whether Ms
Zaicos’ dismissal was harsh, unjust or unreasonable. That question will
need to be considered by a member of the Commission.
For these reasons, the TDRS did not comply with its obligations
under the SCHADS Award to consult about Ms Zaicos’ redundancy
purposes of s 389(1)(b). Permission to appeal should be granted, the appeal
allowed and the decision of the Deputy President
quashed. The objection made by
the TDRS on grounds that the dismissal was a case of genuine redundancy must be
dismissed. It will
be necessary for a member of the Commission to determine
whether the dismissal was harsh, unjust or unreasonable. In circumstances
which the Deputy President has expressed a view as to whether consultation was
likely to produce a different outcome, the better
course is that Ms
Zaicos’ application should be remitted to another member of the
Commission.
The Full Bench makes the following orders:
(a) Permission
to appeal is granted;
(b) The appeal
is allowed;
decision and order of Deputy President Boyce issued on 4 August 2025 in matter
number U2025/5143 are quashed;
objection made to Ms Zaicos’ unfair dismissal application on the basis
that her dismissal was a case of genuine redundancy
is rejected; and
application in matter number U2025/5143 is remitted to be determined by another
member of the Commission.
Appearances
, the applicant, in person.
, of Rodgers
Reidy, appeared for the respondent in his role as Deed Administrator.
Hearing details:
Sydney (in person):
13 October.
Transcript,
4 August 2025 PN5.
PNs 137–140.
Helensburgh
Coal Pty Ltd v Bartley
[2025] HCA 29
(2025) 99 ALJR 1185
[59] (Edelman J)
(2020) 301 IR 271.
Work Act 2009
explained in
[2025] HCA 29
(2025) 99 ALJR 1185
[30] (Gageler CJ,
Gordon and Beech-Jones JJ).
(2014) 240 IR 448.
Maswan v Escada Textilvertrieb (t/as ESCADA)
Arnold v Real Estate Mt Hawthorn Pty Ltd (t/as Oxford
Property Group)
, 289 IR 164 [89]–[90].
(Int’l) Pty Ltd v Harvey
, 215 IR 263 [47]–[49].
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (526 KB)
Signed PDF/A format