Australian Federation of Air Pilots [2024] FWCD 1069 (20 December 2024)
[2024] FWCD 1069
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
—Alteration of other rules of organisation
Federation of Air Pilots
(R2024/174)
CHRIS ENRIGHT
MELBOURNE, 20 DECEMBER 2024
Alteration of other rules of organisation.
On 20 November 2024 the Australian Federation of Air Pilots (AFAP)
lodged with the Fair Work Commission (the Commission) a notice
and declaration
setting out particulars of alterations to its rules. Further information in
support of the alterations was provided
on 16 December 2024.
The AFAP seeks certification of the alterations under section 159 of
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
On the information contained in the notice, declaration and
additional information supplied, I am satisfied the alterations have been
under the rules of the organisation.
The particulars set out alterations to Sub-rules 1.15, 6.5, 7.1,
7.4, 7.8, 8.5, 12.7, 21.29 and 26.3, and to Rule 13.
The amendments (except those to Sub-rule 1.15 and Rule 13) are made
clarify the
voting rights of Trustees and allow them to sit on the Convention;
consistency of language;
provision of electronic notice for certain special meetings of the Convention
and Executive Committee;
procedural motions and who can vote for them;
change the time
frame for returning ballot papers in federal elections; and
clarify the
deadline for providing nomination and recommendation reports for the Harold
Rowell Award for Airmanship.
The above alterations are uncontroversial. They do not require
comment beyond expressing my opinion about the matters set out in subsection
159(1) of the Act.
Workplace delegates
The amendments to Sub-rule 1.15 and Rule 13 introduce new provisions
in relation to workplace delegates. The changes appear to have
been made in
connection with the newly introduced legislative provisions regarding workplace
delegates, contained at
sections 350A
Fair Work Act
(FW Act). The FW Act defines the term ‘workplace
delegate’ and sets out the rights and protections for these delegates.
Among other things, I am required to consider whether the alterations comply
with and are not contrary to the FW
In three recent decisions I have considered rules regarding workplace
delegates and the relevant provisions in the FW
decisions, I determined that:
• the word ‘delegate’ in a rulebook can have a different
meaning to the definition of a ‘workplace delegate’
as contained in
the FW Act, depending on the context of the
• the meaning and application of the proposed rules regarding delegates
must be confined to the relevant statutory
• rules regarding workplace delegates must not undermine the statutory
scheme set out in the FW Act;
• a workplace delegate (as defined in the FW Act) must be interpreted as a
person who works in the enterprise or regulated
• rules must not purport to extend workplace delegate rights or
obligations to persons who would not be so entitled under the
• rights endowed by a union on workplace delegates can only be rights
regulating their relationship with the union, and cannot
extend to parties
external to the union.
While keeping these principles in mind, I turn to the proposed
alterations.
Proposed new Rule 13 sets out the definition of a workplace delegate
(being a financial and eligible member of the AFAP appointed
to represent
interests of members in their workplace) and the procedures for their
appointment, revocation and resignation. The rule
also details the
responsibilities around maintaining the list of current workplace delegates.
Sub-rule 1.15 has been amended to include
workplace delegates among the group of
people who are afforded financial indemnity.
The definition of a workplace delegate in these alterations aligns
with the definition in FW Act, in so far as the delegate represents
their workplace. The alterations do not extend the rights and obligations
contained in the FW Act to persons who would
not be so entitled under the FW Act
itself. The rights and obligations endowed on the Delegates in these
alterations regulate their
relationship with the AFAP and do not extend to
parties external to the union.
In my opinion, the alterations to Sub-rule 1.15 and Rule 13 do not
undermine the statutory scheme regarding workplace delegates, and
are therefore
not contrary to the FW Act.
In my opinion, the alterations comply with and are not contrary to
the Act, the FW Act, modern awards and enterprise agreements, are
not otherwise
contrary to law and were made under the rules of the organisation. I certify
accordingly under subsection 159(1) of
DELEGATE OF THE GENERAL MANAGER
Subsection 159(1)
of the Act provides that:
alteration of the rules (other than the eligibility rules) of an organisation
does not take effect unless particulars of the alteration
have been lodged with
the FWC and the General Manager has certified that, in his or her opinion, the
alteration:
(a) complies with, and is not contrary to, this Act, the
Fair Work Act
, modern awards and enterprise agreements; and
(b) is not otherwise contrary to law; and
(c) has been made under the rules of the organisation.
Re Independent
Education Union of Australia
Re Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services
Re National Tertiary Education Union
Re Australian
Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
Re National
Tertiary Education Union
Independent Education Union of Australia
Ibid at [37].
Ibid at [18].
Re Australian
Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (2.16 MB)
Signed PDF/A format