Upcodes Inc [2025] ATMO 225 (31 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: International Registration
Designating Australia number 2485751 (International Registration number 1811735)
(class 42) –
– in the name of UpCodes Inc.
Justin Williams
REPRESENTATION:
Clayton Utz
2025 ATMO 225
Trade Marks Regulations 1995
reg 17A.24 final decision on examination – ground for rejection under
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) considered – trade mark has no
ordinary signification – trade mark inherently adapted to distinguish
– extension
of protection granted.
4 April 2024, UpCodes Inc (‘Holder’) applied for an extension of
protection to Australia for international registration
1811735. This application
is referred to as an International Registration Designating Australia
(‘IRDA’). Details of
the IRDA are set out below:
mark number: 2485751
International registration number: 1811735
Trade mark: UPCODES (‘Trade Mark’)
Filing date: 4 April 2024
Class 42: Providing non-downloadable software for assisting users with
research on building codes, code compliance, and information
relating to the
design, construction, or occupancy of buildings (‘Designated
1 October 2024, the Holder was issued a Notification of Total Provisional
Refusal outlining a ground for rejecting the Trade Mark
Trade Marks Act 1995
examiner found that the letters UP were a well-known acronym for urban planning,
and that the Trade Mark, as a whole, signified
that the Designated Services
related to urban planning codes. Because of this descriptive meaning, other
traders would have a legitimate
desire to use the Trade Mark, or a sign so
nearly resembling it, in relation to the Designated Services. Consequently, the
Mark was not prima facie capable of distinguishing the Designated Services
from those of other traders.
12 May 2025, the Holder filed submissions addressing the ground for rejection.
The Holder claimed that the Trade Mark was an invented
word with no ordinary
signification. Additionally, it proposed that if a consumer did see the Trade
Mark as two conjoined words,
the letters UP had a variety of meanings, and
therefore consumers would not instantly know what the Designated Services were.
such, the Trade Mark was only suggestive. The Holder also drew the
examiner’s attention to a lack of similar objections in
the European
Union, the United States of America, the United Kingdom, and India when the
Trade Mark was filed in those jurisdictions.
29 May 2025, the examiner issued correspondence disagreeing with the
‘multiple meanings’ argument, while also providing
links to online
resources in support of the contended meaning of the letters UP. The examiner
maintained the ground for rejection.
26 July 2025, the Holder requested to be heard. In line with directions issued
by this office on 30 July 2025, the Holder filed
written submissions on 25
August 2025 together with supporting material.
matter will be considered afresh, and I am not bound to follow the
examiner’s decision. My decision is also subject to
the presumption of
registrability, in that unless I am satisfied there are grounds for rejecting
the IRDA or the IRDA has not been
made in accordance with the Regulations, I
must accept it.
- Trade Mark not distinguishing applicant’s
goods or services
relevantly states:
(1) An application for the registration
of a trade mark must be rejected if the trade mark is not capable of
distinguishing the applicant’s
goods or services in respect of which the
trade mark is sought to be registered (the
designated goods or
) from the goods or services of other persons.
(2) A trade mark is taken not to be capable of distinguishing the
designated goods or services from the goods or services of other
persons only if
either subsection (3) or (4) applies to the trade mark.
(3) This subsection applies to a trade mark if:
(a) the trade mark is not to any extent inherently adapted to
distinguish the designated goods or services from the goods or services
persons; and
(b) the applicant has not used the trade mark before the filing
date in respect of the application to such an extent that the trade
mark does in
fact distinguish the designated goods or services as being those of the
(4) This subsection applies to a trade mark if:
(a) the trade mark is, to some extent, but not sufficiently,
inherently adapted to distinguish the designated goods or services from
goods or services of other persons; and
(b) the trade mark does not and will not distinguish the
designated goods or services as being those of the applicant having regard
the combined effect of the following:
(i) the extent to which the trade mark is inherently adapted to
distinguish the goods or services from the goods or services of other
(ii) the use, or intended use, of the trade mark by the applicant;
(iii) any other circumstances.
Clark Equipment Co v Registrar of Trade
Kitto J outlined that
the question of whether a sign is inherently adapted to distinguish
[T]ested by reference to the likelihood that other persons,
trading in goods of the relevant kind and being actuated only by proper
- in the exercise, that is to say, of the common right of the public to make
honest use of words forming part of the common
heritage, for the sake of the
signification which they ordinarily possess - will think of the word and want to
use it in connexion
with similar goods in any manner which would infringe a
registered trade mark granted in respect of it.
Cantarella Bros Pty Limited v Modena Trading Pty Limited
the High Court structured the above question into two stages. The majority
As shown by the authorities in this Court, the consideration
of the "ordinary signification" of any word or words (English or foreign)
constitute a trade mark is crucial, whether (as here) a trade mark consisting of
such a word or words is alleged not to be
registrable because it is not an
invented word and it has "direct" reference to the character and quality of
goods, or because it
is a laudatory epithet or a geographical name, or
because it is a surname, or because it has lost its distinctiveness, or because
it never had the requisite distinctiveness to start with. Once the
"ordinary signification" of a word, English or foreign, is established
enquiry can then be made into whether other traders might legitimately need to
use the word in respect of their
the first stage of the enquiry is to establish the ordinary signification of the
sign in Australia to those concerned with
the relevant goods or services. The
second stage of the enquiry is to gauge whether other traders might be likely to
desire to use
the sign in respect of their own goods or services for the
ordinary signification established in the first stage of the enquiry.
Written submissions
Holder’s written submissions set out that UPCODES is inherently adapted to
distinguish the Designated Services because it
is an invented word, is not in
common parlance, and does not appear in the dictionary. It submits the Trade
Mark provides, at most,
an allusive reference to the Designated Services that
‘requires consumers to conduct an emotive mental search of the potential
services that may be offered’. The Holder states that as far as the second
stage of the test outlined in
is concerned, there is no
evidence of other traders using the Trade Mark for their own software services.
It claims that the lack
of a similar objection being raised in relation to its
trade mark applications for UPCODES in international jurisdictions supports
finding of distinctiveness.
Holder has provided additional material for my consideration including records
of registration of the Trade Mark in the United
States of America, protection
notices from the European Union and the United Kingdom, and a notification of
provisional refusal from
India. The provisional refusal is not related to the
distinctiveness of the Trade Mark. Examples of the Trade Mark’s online
usage were also provided.
Designated Services use the word ‘codes’ and ‘code’ in a
context where their normal meaning in English
as ‘rules or
regulations’ is self-evident. For this reason, when used in the context of
the Designated Services, I expect
consumers will see UPCODES as a conjunction of
the words (or letters) UP and CODES, rather than as an invented word.
issue turns on whether the letters UP in the Trade Mark would be taken to
signify ‘urban planning’, such that a consumer
would understand the
Trade Mark, as a whole, to signify that the Designated Services relate to
‘urban planning codes’,
meaning the rules and regulations relevant
to urban planning.
this matter is considered afresh, it is useful to consider the information which
first led to the conclusion that this Trade
Mark is not sufficiently
adapted to distinguish the Designated Services.
examiner’s finding that the letters UP signify ‘urban
planning’ primarily relies on the online database, ‘Acronym
Finder’ (https://www.acronymfinder.com). Acronym Finder is a free
Finder may contain an entry which illustrates an ordinary signification
somewhere in the world and in some context. However,
the mere existence of an
entry on this database does not automatically mean a sign has an ordinary
signification in Australia, in
the context of a given good or service.
entry for the ‘urban planning’ definition of UP contains a section
called ‘Samples in periodicals archive’.
This appears to show
examples of the acronym used in text, with a view to supporting the definition
provided in the entry. Six entries
exist for UP (urban planning).
six entries are from Pakistan, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Lithuania, and
Bahrain. Only the example from Pakistan and the
two from the UAE show UP as an
abbreviation for ‘urban planning’. These are dated from 2010 to
2013. In the UAE examples,
the letters are used within an abbreviation for a
longer organisation name (the Abu Dhabi Urban Planning Council, shortened to
rather than being a general abbreviation of ‘urban planning’.
Additionally, none of the examples are relevant to the
Australian market. In my
view, the Acronym Finder entry does not support that UP is generally understood
as being an acronym for
‘urban planning’, or would be perceived as
such, in the Australian market.
the second adverse report, additional supporting evidence was provided to the
Holder in the form of links to websites.
(https://www.woollahra.nsw.gov.au/Council/Meetings-and-committees/Commit
tees/up) shows the letters UP appearing to
abbreviate the words ‘Urban
Planning Committee’ in its entirety. Considering the other abbreviations
on this page, such
as C&W (abbreviation of Corporate & Works Committee),
and C&E (abbreviation of Community & Environment Committee),
context appears to be an arbitrary internal name, rather than reflecting an
established ordinary signification.
second (https://reg.msu.edu/Read/DescCourses/2021-22/up.pdf) and third
(https://bullet ins.wayne.edu/courses/up/) links appear
to be, or were, links to
the websites of two North American universities. These are not Australian
resources, not directed to Australians,
nor necessarily in relation to the
Designated Services. Additionally, while universities may abbreviate longer
course names, it does
not automatically follow that an abbreviated course name
at an overseas university demonstrates an ordinary signification generally,
in the Australian market.
fourth and fifth links (both https://www.scribd.com/document/520922464/Report)
discuss urban planning with reference to the letters
UP. Reading this resource,
the letters UP signify the state of Uttar Pradesh in India. UP is not used to
abbreviate or signify the
words urban planning.
Considering
the information available to me, I am not satisfied that the letters UP signify
urban planning in context of the Designated
Services in Australia. Therefore, I
am not satisfied that the Trade Mark, as a whole, has an ordinary signification.
As the first
stage of the test in
has not been met, there is
no need to engage with the second stage
17A.24 states:
(1) The Registrar must, after the examination, accept the IRDA unless he or
she is satisfied that:
(a) it is not in accordance with this Division; or
(b) there are grounds for rejecting it.
(2) The Registrar may accept the IRDA subject to conditions or
limitations.
(3) The Registrar must reject an IRDA, in whole or in part, if the Registrar
is satisfied that:
(a) it is not in accordance with this Division; or
(b) there are grounds for rejecting it, in whole or in part.
I am not satisfied there are grounds for rejecting this IRDA under
accept the IRDA for protection in Australia.
Hearing Officer
Delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks
October 2025
Unless stated otherwise,
references to sections or regulations in this decision are references to
sections of the
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) (‘Act’) or
regulations of the
Trade Marks Regulations 1995
(‘Regulations’), respectively.
Regulation 17A.24(1).
[1964] HCA 55
[2014] HCA 48, (French
Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Gageler JJ).
Ibid [71] (French CJ, Hayne,
Crennan and Kiefel JJ) (citations omitted).
RTF format (232 KB)
Signed PDF/A format