Application by New South Wales Minerals Council [2021] ACompT 2 (20 May 2021)
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
Application by New South Wales Minerals
[2021] ACompT 2
Decision of the Designated Minister under
Competition and
Consumer Act
(Cth) not to declare services at the Port of
Newcastle made on 16 February 2021
File number:
ACT 1 of 2021
O'Bryan J (Deputy President)
Date of Determination:
Catchwords:
TRADE PRACTICES
– review under
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth) of a decision not
to declare services – application for intervention by the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission
– consideration of the procedural
powers of the Tribunal in a review under
– nature of a review under
– whether the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission has an
interest in the review that warrants the grant of leave
to intervene –
application dismissed
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Trade Practices Amendment (Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
Competition and Consumer Regulations 2010
(Cth) regs 22, 22B, 28K,
Cases cited:
Application for Authorisation of Acquisition of Macquarie Generation by
AGL Energy Limited
[2014] ACompT 1
Applications by Tabcorp Holdings Limited
[2017] ACompT 5
Auskay International Manufacturing & Trade Pty Ltd v Qantas Airways
[2010] FCA 521
BUSB v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 39
(2011) 80 NSWLR 170
Glencore Coal Assets Australia Pty Ltd v Australian Competition
[2020] FCAFC 145
(2020) 382 ALR 331
Grassby v The Queen
[1989] HCA 45
(1989) 168 CLR 1
John Fairfax & Sons Ltd v Police Tribunal of New South Wales
(1986) 5 NSWLR 465
Managing Director, New South Wales Technical and Further Education
Commission v Fines
(1993) 32 NSWLR 385
Melway Publishing Pty Ltd v Robert Hicks Pty Ltd
(2001) 205 CLR
Pelechowski v Registrar, Court of Appeal (NSW)
[1999] HCA 19
(1999) 198 CLR
Pilbara Infrastructure Pty Ltd v Australian Competition Tribunal
[2012] HCA 36
(2012) 246 CLR 379
Queensland Wire Industries Pty Ltd v BHP Proprietary Co Limited
[1989] HCA 6
(1989) 167 CLR 177
Re Fortescue Metals Group Ltd
[2006] ACompT 6
Re Freight Victoria Ltd
[2002] ACompT 1
; ATPR 41-884
Re Herald & Weekly Times Ltd
(1978) 17 ALR 281
Re Lakes R Us Pty Ltd
[2006] ACompT 3
200 FLR 233
Roadshow Films Pty Ltd v iiNet Limited
[2011] HCA 54
(2011) 248 CLR 37
Date of hearing:
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for New South Wales Minerals Council:
Solicitor for New South Wales Minerals Council:
Clifford Chance LLP
Counsel for Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd:
C Moore SC with D Roche
Solicitor for Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd:
Clayton Utz
Counsel for National Competition Council:
C Van Proctor
Solicitor for National Competition Council:
Johnson Winter & Slattery
Counsel for Australian Competition and Consumer Commission:
S Parmenter QC with C Dermody
Solicitor for Australian Competition and Consumer Commission:
DLA Piper Australia
IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
ACT 1 OF 2021
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW LODGED BY NEW SOUTH WALES
MINERALS COUNCIL UNDER
SUBSECTION 44K(2)
COMPETITION AND CONSUMER ACT
(CTH) OF THE DECISION OF THE DESIGNATED MINISTER UNDER
SUBSECTION 44H(1)
COMPETITION AND CONSUMER ACT 2010
NEW SOUTH WALES MINERALS COUNCIL
JUSTICE O’BRYAN (Deputy President)
THE TRIBUNAL DIRECTS THAT:
application of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission dated 21 April
2021 seeking leave to intervene in the proceeding
REASONS FOR
DETERMINATION
Introduction
23 July 2020, the New South Wales Minerals Council (
) applied to the
National Competition Council (
Competition
and Consumer Act 2010
) asking the NCC to recommend that a
service at the Port of Newcastle (
) provided by Port of Newcastle
Operations Pty Ltd (
) be declared. The service comprises the provision
of the right to access and use all the shipping channels and berthing facilities
required for the export of coal from the Port, by virtue of which vessels may
enter a Port precinct and load and unload at relevant
terminals located within
the Port precinct, and then depart the Port precinct (
18 December 2020, the NCC provided its final recommendation to the designated
Minister, the Hon Josh Frydenberg MP, Treasurer of
the Commonwealth of Australia
). The NCC recommended that the relevant service not be
declared on the basis that the criteria in paragraphs 44CA(1)(a) and (d) of
Act had not been satisfied.
16 February 2021, the Treasurer decided under
of the Act not to declare
the relevant service on the same basis, namely that the criteria in paragraphs
44CA(1)(a) and (d) had not
been satisfied.
this proceeding, NSWMC has applied to the Tribunal under
of the Act for
a review of the Treasurer’s decision.
application dated 21 April 2021, the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission (
) seeks leave to intervene in this proceeding. In support
of its application, the ACCC relies on an affidavit of Sarah Maryjean Proudfoot,
Executive General Manager, Infrastructure Regulation Division, affirmed on 21
April 2021. The ACCC filed written submissions in support
of its application on
21 April 2021, and submissions in reply on 5 May 2021.
filed written submissions supporting the ACCC’s application on 28 April
filed written submissions opposing the ACCC’s application on 28 April
the request of PNO, I conducted a hearing of the application on 13 May
ACCC’s application raises two questions for determination: first, whether
the Tribunal has power to permit a third person
to intervene in a proceeding of
this kind (being a review under s 44K(2) of the Act); secondly, if the
Tribunal has power, the principles
that govern the exercise of that power and
whether, applying those principles, the ACCC should be granted leave to
the reasons given below, I consider that the Tribunal has implied power to
permit a third person to intervene in a review under
s 44K of the Act, but that
the ACCC does not have an interest in the subject of the proceeding to warrant
the grant of leave to intervene.
The ACCC’s application
its application, the ACCC applied for leave to intervene in the proceeding
pursuant to s 109(2) of the Act, alternatively s 44K(5)
of the Act, or pursuant
to the Tribunal’s implied powers in respect of matters of procedure in
proceedings before the Tribunal.
her affidavit, Ms Proudfoot summarised the functions and powers of the ACCC
under the Act. Ms Proudfoot also deposed that the ACCC
participated in the
process before the NCC with respect to the application by NSWMC for a
recommendation that the relevant service
be declared. The ACCC lodged two
written submissions with the NCC in that process, being:
(a) a written submission to the NCC dated 26 August 2020
in response to the NCC's invitation for interested parties to make submissions
on the application for a declaration recommendation; and
(b) a written submission to the NCC dated 23 November 2020 in response to the
NCC's invitation for interested parties to make submissions
in response to the
NCC's draft recommendation.
those submissions, the ACCC indicated that it disagreed with the approach taken
by the NCC to the construction of declaration criterion
(a), and the application
of declaration criteria (a) and (d), being the criteria set out in s 44CA(1) of
Proudfoot deposed that the ACCC applies to intervene in this proceeding in order
to make written and oral submissions regarding
the issues raised in the
application for review lodged by the NSWMC, in particular in connection with the
proper construction and
application of criteria (a) and (d). The ACCC seeks to
make submissions regarding the matters the subject of its previous submissions
to the NCC, without duplicating the submissions of the existing parties to this
proceeding. Ms Proudfoot submitted that, having regard
to its significant
expertise as a competition regulator, the ACCC will bring a different
perspective to the Tribunal's consideration
of the application of those criteria
to that of NSWMC, PNO and the NCC.
The first issue: the question of power
The parties’ contentions
question of the Tribunal’s power to grant leave to intervene in a
proceeding of this kind was addressed by the ACCC and
PNO. As noted above, the
ACCC put its application for leave to intervene on three alternative bases:
under s 109(2) of Act, under
s 44K(5) of the Act, or pursuant to the implied
powers of the Tribunal.
109(2) is located within Division 2 of Part IX of the Act which is titled
“Review by Tribunal of Determinations of Commission”.
empowers the Tribunal to review certain categories of determinations made by the
ACCC. Division 2 is titled “Procedure
and Evidence” and confers
various powers on the Tribunal “in proceedings before the Tribunal”.
While the powers
conferred by Division 2 are not expressly limited to Tribunal
proceedings under Division 1, a long-standing question is whether the
so limited by implication. Within Division 2, s 109(2) provides that: “The
Tribunal may, upon such conditions as
it thinks fit, permit a person to
intervene in proceedings before the Tribunal”.
respect of s 109(2), the ACCC relied on a decision of the Tribunal in
Fortescue Metals Group Ltd
[2006] ACompT 6
) in which Goldberg J decided (at [22]) that s 109(2) provides a
basis for an application by a party to intervene in or participate
hearing of a review under s 44K of the Act. The ACCC acknowledged that the
decision of the High Court in
Pilbara Infrastructure Pty Ltd v Australian
Competition Tribunal
[2012] HCA 36
(2012) 246 CLR 379
Pilbara case
“appears to be inconsistent” with the conclusion of Goldberg J in
Fortescue Metals
, but the ACCC submitted that the majority judgment of
the High Court did not consider Goldberg J’s decision and did not say
the decision was incorrect. PNO submitted that, in the
Pilbara case
High Court determined that s 109(2) does not apply to a proceeding of the
Tribunal under s 44K of the Act.
44K(5) is located within Division 2 of Part IIIA of the Act titled
“Declared Services”. This proceeding concerns
the powers conferred
by that Division and has been instituted under s 44K(2). Accordingly, there is
no question that s 44K(5) applies
to this proceeding. Section 44K(5) provides:
“For the purposes of the review, the Tribunal has the same powers as the
respect of s 44K(5), the ACCC relied on statements of Goldberg J in
to the effect that, in determining whether to declare a service under
s 44H, the designated Minister was entitled to consider whether
there was any
person who may be able to provide assistance to the Minister in respect of the
decision and was entitled to invite
such a person to make submissions and, by
virtue of s 44K(5), the Tribunal had the same powers. The ACCC also drew
attention to s
44K(6B)(a)(iv) of the Act which assumes that persons other than
the applicant for review, the provider of the service and the person
originally applied for the declaration recommendation may be made a party to the
proceeding. Relying on observations of the High
Court in the
, PNO submitted that it is implicit in the statutory provisions within
Division 2 of Part IIIA that the designated Minister is only
empowered to seek
assistance from the NCC and not from any other person.
respect of implied powers, the ACCC submitted that the Tribunal has the powers
which are necessary to enable it to act effectively
within its jurisdiction, and
those powers are derived by implication from the statutory provisions which
confer jurisdiction upon
it, relying on
Grassby v The Queen
[1989] HCA 45
) at 16-7 per Dawson J;
Pelechowski v Registrar,
Court of Appeal (NSW)
[1999] HCA 19
(1999) 198 CLR 435
Pelechowski
[50]-[51] per Gaudron, Gummow and Callinan JJ;
John Fairfax & Sons Ltd v
Police Tribunal of New South Wales
(1986) 5 NSWLR 465
) at 476 per McHugh JA; and
Managing Director, New South Wales
Technical and Further Education Commission v Fines
(1993) 32 NSWLR 385
NSW Tafe Commission
) at 394-5 per Handley JA. PNO submitted that
the authorities establish that the test of necessity does not extend to what is
desirable or useful, relying on
BUSB v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 39
(2011) 80 NSWLR
) at [32] per Spigelman CJ (with whom other members of
the Court of Criminal Appeal agreed). PNO submitted that, in the context of
review under s 44K, where the Tribunal is empowered to obtain assistance from
the NCC under s 44K(6), it is not necessary for the
Tribunal to have a power to
permit intervention by other interested parties such as the ACCC.
Consideration of the first issue
The legislative framework
is unfortunate that the procedural powers of the Tribunal in conducting
proceedings are legislated in a piecemeal manner under
the Act and the
Competition and Consumer Regulations 2010
Regulations
pursuant to the Act. In part, this has come about by the expansion (and
contraction) of the Tribunal’s review jurisdiction
over time. The
piecemeal legislative framework creates unnecessary disputation and accompanying
legal expense as illustrated by the
present application.
Tribunal is created by
of the Act and its powers derive from the Act.
provides for the appointment of presidential members of the Tribunal
who must be judges of the Federal Court and the appointment
of other members who
are qualified for appointment by virtue of their knowledge of, or experience in,
industry, commerce, economics,
law or public administration.
the constitution of the Tribunal into a “Division” to hear and
determine a particular matter under the Act. The
section refers to such matters
as “proceedings” and provides that:
The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of hearing and
determining proceedings, be constituted by a Division of the Tribunal consisting
of a presidential member of the Tribunal and two members of the Tribunal who are
not presidential members.
empowers the President of the Tribunal to give directions as to the
arrangement of the business of the Tribunal and the constitution
of Divisions of
the Tribunal. Thus,
contemplates that the Tribunal will exercise its
powers under the Act by being constituted into a Division and conducting a
proceeding.
The Act does not empower the Tribunal to be constituted or exercise
its powers in any other manner. In this context, it is apparent
that the word
"proceeding" takes its ordinary meaning as the formal process by which a matter
is determined by the Tribunal.
number of other provisions of Part III regulate a “Division” of the
Tribunal so constituted. Section 41 provides that
the presidential member who is
a member of a Division must preside at proceedings of that Division. Section 42
provides that a question
of law arising in a matter before a Division of the
Tribunal must be determined in accordance with the opinion of the presidential
member presiding, but otherwise a question arising in proceedings before a
Division of the Tribunal must be determined in accordance
with the opinion of a
majority of the members constituting the Division. Part III of the Act does not
otherwise contain provisions
governing the procedural powers of the
the Act was first enacted (as the
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth)), the
powers of the Tribunal were confined to the review of determinations of the ACCC
relating to authorisations granted under
of the Act. Those powers of
the Tribunal continue to be governed by
of the Act. Division 1 confers
the powers of review, while Division 2 addresses procedure and evidence. The
matters addressed by
Division 2 include:
(a) the procedure to be applied by the Tribunal in
conducting a proceeding including the rules of evidence
(b) the making of regulations to govern certain procedural matters including
production of documents, witnesses and representation
before the Tribunal
(c) the conduct of hearings in a proceeding, including the power to close a
hearing to the public to maintain confidentiality
(d) the manner in which evidence may be given in a proceeding
(e) the participants in a proceeding and the grant of leave to a person to
intervene in a proceeding
(f) the representation of persons in a proceeding
regulations have been made pursuant to
In particular,
regulation 22
mirrors the terms of
and provides as follows:
22 Directions by the Tribunal as to certain
(1) Without limiting the generality of the powers of the Tribunal under the Act
or these Regulations, the Tribunal may, in any proceedings
before the Tribunal,
give directions:
(a) for securing, by means of preliminary
statements of facts and contentions, and by the production of documents, that
all material
facts and considerations are brought before the Tribunal by all
persons participating in any proceedings before the Tribunal; and
(aa) with respect to evidence in proceedings before the Tribunal, including the
appointment of persons to assist the Tribunal by
giving evidence (whether
personally or by means of a written report); and
(b) with respect to the representation in any such proceedings of persons
having a common interest in the
proceedings.
(2) The powers of the Tribunal to give directions under
subregulation (1):
(a) may be exercised by the Tribunal
constituted by a presidential member; and
(b) are subject to
subsections 102(8)
to (10) of the Act.
time, as the scope of administrative decision making under the Act expanded, so
did the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to review
such administrative decisions. It
is unnecessary to trace the history of such expansions and, in recent years,
contractions of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction. It is relevant, though, to
refer to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to review certain decisions
under the powers conferred by
of the Act (Access to Services),
particularly declaration decisions of the designated Minister under s 44H and
arbitration determinations
of the ACCC under s 44V.
Tribunal is empowered by s 44K to review declaration decisions of the designated
Minister under s 44H. Section 44K provides as
44K Review of declaration
(1) If the designated Minister declares a service, the provider may apply in
writing to the Tribunal for review of the declaration.
(2) If the designated Minister decides not to declare a service, an application
in writing for review of the designated Minister’s
decision may be made by
the person who applied for the declaration recommendation.
(3) An application for review must be made within 21 days after publication of
the designated Minister’s decision.
(4) The review by the Tribunal is a re‑consideration of the matter based
on the information, reports and things referred to
in section 44ZZOAA.
Note: There are limits on the information to which the Tribunal may have regard
(see section 44ZZOAA) and time limits that apply
to the Tribunal’s
decision on the review (see section 44ZZOA).
(5) For the purposes of the review, the Tribunal has the same powers as the
designated Minister.
(6) The member of the Tribunal presiding at the review may require the Council
to give assistance for the purposes of the review
(including for the purposes of
deciding whether to make an order under section 44KA).
(6A) Without limiting subsection (6), the member may, by written notice,
require the Council to give information, and to make reports,
specified in the notice, within the period specified in the notice, for the
purposes of the review.
(6B) The Tribunal must:
(a) give a copy of the notice
(i) the person who applied for
review; and
(ii) the provider of the service; and
(iii) the person who applied for the declaration recommendation; and
(iv) any other person who has been made a party to the proceedings for review
by the Tribunal; and
(b) publish, by electronic or other means,
the notice.
(7) If the designated Minister declared the service,
the Tribunal may affirm, vary or set aside the declaration.
(8) If the designated Minister decided not to declare the service, the Tribunal
may either:
(a) affirm the designated Minister’s
decision; or
(b) set aside the designated Minister’s decision and declare the service
in question.
(9) A declaration, or varied declaration, made by the
Tribunal is to be taken to be a declaration by the designated Minister for
purposes of this Part (except this section).
44K(6) assumes that, in a review under s 44K, the Tribunal will be constituted
with a presiding member, thereby invoking
and its reference to a
proceeding.
noted earlier, subs 44K(6B)(a)(iv) assumes that the Tribunal has power to make a
person, other than the applicant for review, the
provider of the service and the
person who originally applied for the declaration recommendation, a party to the
proceeding for review.
Subsection 44K(6B) was inserted in the Act by the
Trade Practices Amendment (Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
same assumption underpins a number of related amendments that were made at that
time, including:
(a) under s 44KA, a person who has been made a party to
the proceedings for review of a declaration decision may apply to the Tribunal
for an order staying the declaration;
(b) under s 44KB, the Tribunal may order that a person who has been made a party
to proceedings for a review of a declaration decision
pay all or a specified
part of the costs of another person who has been made a party to the
proceedings;
(c) under s 44ZZOAAA, if the Tribunal gives a written notice to a person
requesting that person to provide specified information
for the purposes of a
review under
, the Tribunal must give a copy of the notice to any
person who has been made a party to the proceedings for review;
(d) under s 44ZZOA, if the Tribunal gives notice to the designated Minister
extending the period of time for it to make a decision,
the Tribunal must give a
copy of the notice to any person who has been made a party to the proceedings
for review.
review by the Tribunal under s 44K is also governed by provisions within
Division 8 of
Relevantly, s 44ZZOAAA governs the provision of
information to the Tribunal. Broadly, subsection (3) requires the decision maker
to give the Tribunal all of the information that the decision maker took into
account in making the decision. Subsection (4) empowers
the Tribunal to request
such additional information that the Tribunal considers reasonable and
appropriate for the purpose of making
its decision on the review. Section
44ZZOAA defines the information to which the Tribunal must have regard under the
review. Section
44ZZOA stipulates a time limit for the conduct of the review.
Each of ss 44ZZOAAA, 44ZZOAA and 44ZZOA were enacted by the
Trade Practices
Amendment (Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
(Cth). Section 44ZZP states that
regulations may be made about certain matters in relation to the functions of
the Tribunal under
, including (relevantly) procedure and evidence.
Very few regulations have been made under that power with respect to a review of
a declaration decision under s 44K. Regulation 20A prescribes the form to be
used in filing an application for review in the Tribunal
under s 44K, while
regulation 22B stipulates that:
(a) in a review under s 44K of a declaration of a
service, the person who applied for the declaration recommendation may
participate
in the review, in addition to the provider (of the service); and
(b) in a review under s 44K of a decision not to declare a service, the provider
(of the service) may participate in the review,
in addition to the person who
applied for the declaration recommendation.
are no other provisions of the Act or the Regulations that expressly govern the
procedure of a review under s 44K.
nature of the power of the Tribunal to review a declaration decision under s 44K
was the subject of detailed analysis by the High
Court in the
, which is considered below. However, the High Court’s decision
concerned the Act as it stood prior to the amendments made by
Practices Amendment (Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
(Cth) (although the
High Court was cognisant of that enactment when it made its decision).
Accordingly, it will be necessary to consider
whether and to what extent those
amendments affect the conclusions reached by the High Court.
provisions governing the review of a declaration decision under s 44K can be
contrasted with the power of the Tribunal to review
an arbitration determination
of the ACCC under s 44V. The Tribunal is empowered to conduct such a review
by s 44ZP which provides
as follows:
44ZP Review by Tribunal
(1) A party to a final determination may apply in writing to the Tribunal for a
review of the determination.
(2) The application must be made within 21 days after the Commission made the
final determination.
(3) A review by the Tribunal is a re‑arbitration of the access dispute
based on the information, reports and things referred
to in section 44ZZOAA.
Note: There are time limits that apply to the Tribunal’s decision on the
review: see section 44ZZOA.
(4) For the purposes of the review, the Tribunal has the same powers as the
Commission.
(5) The member of the Tribunal presiding at the review may require the
Commission to give assistance for the purposes of the review.
(5A) Without limiting subsection (5), the member may, by written notice,
require the Commission to give information, and to make
reports, of a kind
specified in the notice, within the period specified in the notice, for the
purposes of the review.
(5B) The Tribunal must:
(a) give a copy of the notice
(i) the person who applied for
review; and
(ii) the other party or parties to the final determination; and
(iii) any other person who has been made a party to the proceedings for review
by the Tribunal; and
(b) publish, by electronic or other means,
the notice.
(6) The Tribunal may either affirm or vary the
Commission’s determination.
(7) The determination, as affirmed or varied by the Tribunal, is to be taken to
be a determination of the Commission for all purposes
of this Part (except this
(8) The decision of the Tribunal takes effect from when it is made.
can be seen that the above provision is framed in similar terms to s 44K.
However, there is an additional provision that applies
to the Tribunal’s
review of an arbitration determination of the ACCC under s 44V which is not
replicated in respect of the
Tribunal’s review of a declaration decision
of the designated Minister under s 44K. Section 44ZQ provides as
44ZQ Provisions that do not apply in relation to a
Tribunal review
Sections 37, 39 to 43 (inclusive) and 103 to 110 (inclusive) do not apply in
relation to a review by the Tribunal of a final determination
made by the
Commission.
might be thought implicit by the express exclusion of ss 103 to 110 (being
Division 2 of
that those provisions would otherwise apply to a review
of an arbitration determination of the ACCC under s 44V. In turn, that might
raise an implication that those provisions would ordinarily apply to a review of
a declaration decision of the designated Minister
under s 44K. However, in the
Pilbara case
the High Court unanimously concluded that Division 2 of
is not applicable to a review under s 44K.
44ZZOAAA, 44ZZOAA, 44ZZOA and 44ZZP, referred to above, also apply to a review
of an arbitration determination of the ACCC
under s 44V. Significantly, having
regard to s 44ZQ, the Regulations contain a separate part, being
regulating the procedure to be applied in a review of an arbitration
determination of the ACCC under s 44V. Similar to Division
matters addressed by
include the following:
(a) that the review hearing is to be conducted in
private (reg 28K);
(b) representation of persons at the review hearing (reg 28L); and
(c) the procedure to be applied by the Tribunal in conducting the review
hearing, including the manner in which evidence may be given
Decisions pre-dating the Pilbara case
a number of decisions pre-dating the
Pilbara case
, the Tribunal assumed
or concluded that Division 2 of
was applicable to the conduct of a
review of a declaration decision under s 44K:
Re Freight Victoria Ltd
[2002] ACompT 1
(Goldberg J presiding);
Re Lakes R Us Pty Ltd
[2006] ACompT 3
200 FLR 233
(French J presiding); and
at [19]-[22] (Goldberg J presiding). In
Fortescue Metals
Goldberg J considered that the heading to Division 2 of
generality of its terms, indicated a legislative intention that Division 2 of
would apply to all proceedings before the Tribunal brought under the
provisions of the Act from time to time (at [19]). His Honour
also considered it
significant that the express exclusion of Division 2 of
in respect of
reviews of arbitration determinations by s 44ZQ did not apply to reviews of
declaration decisions.
Fortescue Metals
, Goldberg J also concluded that there was an alternative
source of power for the Tribunal to grant leave to intervene grounded in
44H(1), 44K(4) and (5) of the Act. His Honour reasoned that (at [23] –
23 I also consider that there is an alternative basis
on which an application for leave to intervene, or participate, in such a
may be made. That basis is grounded in s 44H(1) and s 44K(4) and (5)
of the Act. The re-consideration of the matter by the Tribunal,
possessing the
same powers as the designated Minister, is a re-consideration of the decision,
having received a declaration recommendation
from the Council, whether to
declare or not to declare the service.
24 When the Minister received the declaration recommendation from the Council
and pursuant to s 44H(1) he had to decide, in the light
of that recommendation,
whether to declare the service or not to declare the service, the Minister was
obliged to consider whose
rights or interests might be affected by his decision
one way or the other and then to give a person whose rights or interests might
be so affected the opportunity to make submissions to him. He was also entitled
to consider whether there was any person who may
be able to provide assistance
to the Minister in respect of his decision and, in particular, in respect of the
matters specified
in s 44H(4).
25 There is considerable learning on the issues of procedural fairness and the
obligation of an administrative decision-maker to
give a person who may be
affected by the decision a right to be heard. For example, in
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
Brennan J said (at 619):
If a power is apt to affect the interests of
an individual in a way that is substantially different from the way in which it
to affect the interests of the public at large, the repository of the
power will ordinarily be bound or entitled to have regard to
the interests of
the individual before he exercises the power. No doubt the matters to which the
repository is bound or is entitled
to have regard depend upon the terms of the
particular statute and, if there be no positive indications in its text, the
subject-matter,
scope and purpose of the statute must be looked at to determine
whether the repository is bound or is entitled to have regard to
interests [citations omitted]. When the repository is bound or is entitled to
have regard to the interests of an individual,
it may be presumed that
observance of the principles of natural justice conditions the exercise of the
power, for the legislature
can be presumed to intend that an individual whose
interests are to be regarded should be heard before the power is
Those observations when applied to the present
circumstances, mean that the Minister had to turn his mind to a consideration of
interests might be affected by his decision and who may be able to assist
him in respect of his decision-making process.
26 The Tribunal has to give consideration to the same issues as are addressed by
the Minister as well as exercising the same powers
as the Minister. The Tribunal
must therefore ask whose rights or interests may be affected by its decision and
who may be able to
assist it in its decision-making process. If a person whose
rights or interests may be affected by the Tribunal’s decision
make submissions to the Tribunal, ordinarily he should be allowed to do so, so
long as he can demonstrate a right or interest
which may be affected.
The Pilbara case
nature of a review by the Tribunal of a declaration decision of the designated
Minister under s 44K, and the powers of the Tribunal
in the conduct of such a
review, were considered by the High Court in the
Pilbara case
earlier, the provisions of the Act considered by the High Court were those in
force prior to amendments made by the
Trade Practices Amendment
(Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
number of issues arose for consideration in the
Pilbara case
, including
the proper construction of certain of the declaration criteria (now found in s
44CA) (see at [26]). However, the High
Court also considered a further question,
raised for the first time in the High Court, concerning the nature of a review
of a declaration
decision, and particularly whether the Tribunal’s powers
of review contemplated the Tribunal conducting a
hearing on new
evidence. The plurality (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ)
framed the question as follows (at
Late in the argument of the appeals to this Court, there
emerged an issue which had not previously been raised by any party or by
NCC, whether in the Tribunal, the Federal Court or this Court. What was the
nature of the task which the Tribunal was required
to perform when asked to
review the Minister’s decision? Was it, as the Tribunal and those who were
represented before the
Tribunal took it to be, a fresh hearing on new evidence
of whether a service should be declared? Or was the task more limited?
question is not the same question as arises before the Tribunal on this
application. The question presently before the Tribunal
concerns the power of
the Tribunal to grant leave to a person to intervene in the proceeding and, if
there be power, the scope of
that power. Nevertheless, the conclusions stated by
the High Court in the
Pilbara case
have a bearing on that question.
respect of the further question raised in the High Court, the judgment of the
plurality stated the following conclusions.
the “matter” to be reviewed by the Tribunal under s 44K(4) is the
Minister’s decision to declare or not to
declare the service, not the
NCC’s recommendation to the Minister. The plurality stated (at
37 The “matter” referred to in s 44K(4) was
identified in s 44K(1) and (2). In a case where the Minister has declared
service, the “matter” is “the declaration” made by the
Minister. In a case where the Minister decided not
to declare a service, the
matter is “the designated Minister’s decision” not to make a
declaration. In both cases,
the hinge about which the identification of the
“matter” turns is what the Minister has done, not what the NCC did
it made its declaration recommendation. The requirement of s 44K(4) –
that the Tribunal review the matter and that the review
re-consideration of the matter” – necessitates identification of the
Minister’s task. It is that task,
and the result of its performance, which
is to be subject to “re-consideration” by the Tribunal.
the Minister’s decision, which is the subject of review by the Tribunal,
was defined by s 44H(1). Upon receiving a recommendation
from the NCC, the
Minister was required to “either declare the service or decide not to
declare it”. The plurality stated
(at [45]-[47]):
45 The Minister had only a short time to decide how to
respond to a declaration recommendation. While the NCC could extend (s 44GA)
time for making its recommendation about an application for a declaration, the
Minister was given sixty days after receiving
the NCC’s declaration
recommendation to decide whether to declare the service. Section 44H(9) provided
that, if the Minister
did not publish his or her decision on the declaration
recommendation within sixty days after receiving it, the Minister was taken,
the end of that period, to have decided not to declare the service and to have
published that decision. In such a case, the Minister
would publish no reasons
for decision but the NCC’s reasons for recommending a declaration would be
published pursuant to s
44GC. If the Minister made a decision, the Act obliged
(s 44HA(1)) the Minister to publish that decision and the reasons for it.
46 There is one other aspect of the Act’s treatment of the
Minister’s task to which attention should be drawn. The Minister,
the Tribunal (s 44K(6)), was given no express power to request any further
information, assistance or report from the NCC.
The statutory supposition
appears to have been that the Minister could and would make a decision on the
NCC’s recommendation
without any need for further information from the
47 The content of those provisions of
to which reference has been made
suggests that it was expected that, armed with a recommendation from an expert
and non-partisan
body (the NCC), the Minister would make a decision quickly and
would do so according to not only the Minister’s view of the
interest but also the expert advice given by the NCC about the more technical
criteria of which the Minister had to be satisfied
before a declaration could be
made. And it is the Minister’s decision, not the NCC’s
recommendation, that was the matter
that was to be reviewed by the
the provisions of Division 2 of
are only applicable to Tribunal
proceedings under Division 1 of
The plurality stated (at
51 Division 2 of
) made more particular
provision for the procedure of and evidence before the Tribunal in reviews by
the Tribunal of determinations
of the Commission. Section 103 made general
provision for the procedure of the Tribunal including a provision (s 103(1)(c))
the Tribunal was not bound by the rules of evidence. Section 105(1) gave
the Tribunal power to take evidence on oath or affirmation
and for that purpose
permitted a member of the Tribunal to administer an oath or affirmation. Both by
their location as a division
, and in their terms, the provisions of Div
regulating the procedure of and evidence before the Tribunal were apt
to apply only to the particular kind of proceeding for which
provided – an application under s 101(1) for a review of a determination
by the Commission regarding authorisation.
a review of the Minister’s decision under s 44K(4) “neither permits
nor requires a quasi‑curial trial between
the access seeker and the
facility provider as adversarial parties, on new and different material, to
determine whether a service
should be declared” (at [48]). In contrasting
a “re-hearing” by the Tribunal under
of the Act and a
“re-consideration” by the Tribunal under s 44K(4), the plurality
stated (at [60] and [65]):
60 When s 101(2) of the Act used
“re-hearing” to describe the task of the Tribunal reviewing a
determination of the Commission,
it was using “re-hearing” in a
context wholly divorced from the exercise of judicial power. And when s 44K(4)
to “re-consideration”, it too used that word in a context
divorced from the exercise of judicial power. Nonetheless,
some different
meaning must presumably be intended by the use of the different words in
identifying the review to be undertaken by
the Tribunal. The contrast is best
understood as being between a “re-hearing” which requires deciding
an issue afresh
on whatever material is placed before the new decision maker and
a “re-consideration” which requires reviewing what the
decision maker decided and doing that by reference to the material that was
placed before the original decision maker (supplemented,
in this kind of case,
only by whatever material the NCC provides in answer to requests made by the
Tribunal pursuant to s 44K(6)).
65 As has already been noted, the Tribunal treated its task as being to decide
afresh on the new body of evidence and material placed
before it whether the
services should be declared. That was not its task. Its task was to review the
Minister’s decisions by
reconsidering those decisions on the material
before the Minister supplemented, if necessary, by any information, assistance
given to the Tribunal by the NCC in response to a request made under s
the power given to the Tribunal by s 44K(5), being the same powers as the
designated Minister, is for the “purposes of
the review” and the
scope of such power depends on the nature of the review function conferred on
the Tribunal by s 44K. The
plurality observed (at [63]):
63 Rio Tinto and the NCC also drew attention to s
44K(5), which provides that “[f]or the purposes of the review, the
has the same powers as the designated Minister”. It was said that
the Minister, in deciding whether to declare a service, has
“incidental” or “implied” power to request additional
information beyond the NCC’s recommendation.
And, the argument continued,
it followed by reason of s 44K(5) that the Tribunal also had extensive
incidental or implied power to
obtain information. Whether, or to what extent,
the Minister has an incidental or implied power to obtain additional information
need not be decided. Any such power that is given to the Tribunal by s 44K(5)
must be “[f]or the purposes of the review”.
The scope of any such
incidental or implied power depends upon first identifying the nature of the
Tribunal’s review, which
in turn depends upon construing s 44K.
the amendments made to s 44K by the
Trade Practices Amendment (Infrastructure
Access) Act 2010
(Cth) did not assist in the proper construction of that
provision prior to the amendments. The plurality stated (at [61], footnote
61 Contrary to the submissions of the respondents, the
amendments that were made to s 44K in 2010 by the
Trade Practices Amendment
(Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
(the 2010 Act) shed no light on the
proper construction of that section as it stood before those amendments were
made. It may be
accepted that, as was submitted, the amendments proceeded on the
assumption that, when conducting a review under s 44K, the Tribunal
otherwise proceed in the manner in which it did in these matters. But that
assumption was based upon what the Tribunal had
done in the past. It was not
based upon any authoritative consideration of the question of construction that
now arises.
a separate judgment, Heydon J reached materially the same conclusions as the
plurality in relation to the further question raised
on the appeal, being the
nature of the review power under s 44K and, particularly, the power of the
Tribunal to receive new evidence
from the participants before it. In the course
of reasoning, His Honour expressed a conclusion on the nature of a review under
44K that was not expressed by the plurality: that there are no
“parties” in a s 44K review (at [133]-[134]). His Honour
that conclusion on the observation that there were no “parties” as
such in the context of an application to the
NCC for a declaration
recommendation, nor in the Minister’s consideration of the recommendation.
From those observations, his
Honour stated (with respect to the NCC’s
argument to the contrary): “The Council did not explain how review of a
that was not
inter partes
by a Tribunal having the same powers
as the decision-maker became
inter partes
.” His Honour stated that
the terms of regulation 22B, which gave rights of “participation” in
a review under s
44K to the access seeker (the person who applied for the
declaration recommendation) and the service provider, “did not suggest
right of participation so extensive as to permit the Tribunal to enlarge the
field of material that the Minister considered”.
Implied powers of the Tribunal
has long been recognised that inferior courts, lacking express powers to perform
a function entrusted to them by statute, have
implied powers that are necessary
for the performance of the function, upon the principle that “a grant of
power carries with
it everything necessary for its exercise”:
at 16 per Dawson J (with whom other members of the Court agreed). His Honour
stated the applicable test in the following terms (at
Recognition of the existence of such powers will be
called for whenever they are required for the effective exercise of a
which is expressly conferred but will be confined to so much as can
be “derived by implication from statutory provisions conferring
same principle is applicable to tribunals: see
John Fairfax
McHugh JA (as a judge of the NSW Court of Appeal, Glass JA in agreement);
TAFE Commission
at 394-5 per Handley JA (Mahoney JA and Shellar JA in
agreement).
Pelechowski
, the High Court applied the
test to the
District Court of New South Wales. The majority stated (at [51], citations
The term “necessary” in such a setting as
this is to be understood in the sense given it by Pollock CB in
Attorney-General v Walker
, namely as identifying a power to make orders
which are reasonably required or legally ancillary to the accomplishment of the
remedies for enforcement provided in Div 4 of Pt 3 of the District
Court Act. In this setting, the term “necessary” does
not have the
meaning of “essential”; rather it is to be “subjected to the
touchstone of reasonableness”.
, Spigelman CJ (with whom other members of the Court of Criminal
Appeal agreed) stated (at [32]) that “...a test of necessity
stretched to encompass what is merely desirable or useful”.
Resolving the question of the Tribunal’s procedural
question that arises in this proceeding is not the same as the question resolved
Pilbara case
. The question raised in this proceeding concerns the
procedural power of the Tribunal to permit a person to intervene to make
submissions
to the Tribunal in the course of a review under s 44K; expressed
differently, the question concerns the procedural power of the Tribunal
confer a right to be heard on persons in the conduct of the review. In the
Pilbara case
, the High Court determined whether, in a review under s 44K,
the Tribunal was required or permitted to consider the matter again
on evidence
that was not before the designated Minister. The High Court answered that
question in the negative, concluding that a
review under s 44K required the
Tribunal to review what the Minister decided by reference to the material that
was placed before
the Minister, supplemented only by whatever material the NCC
provides in answer to requests made by the Tribunal pursuant to s 44K(6).
Nevertheless,
a number of the conclusions reached by the High Court are relevant in answering
the present question and, of course,
are binding on the Tribunal. First, the
High Court determined that the provisions of Division 2 of Part IX have no
application to
a review under s 44K. Accordingly, the Tribunal’s
procedural powers in conducting such a review must be found in the express
powers conferred on it in Part IIIA of the Act and any powers to be implied from
the nature of the Tribunal and the review function
conferred on it by s 44K.
Second, the High Court also determined that the express power given to the
Tribunal by s 44K(5), being
the same powers as the designated Minister, is
confined by the requirement that the power is given for the “purposes of
review”. The power is thereby limited by reference to the nature of
the review function conferred on the Tribunal by s 44K.
For the reasons outlined
earlier, the power did not permit the Tribunal to seek or receive new evidence
(beyond seeking the assistance
of the NCC under s 44K(6)).
my view, the answer to the present question lies in answering a related
question: who, if anyone, is entitled to participate in
a review under s 44K by
making submissions to the Tribunal? Is the Tribunal to conduct the review
without receiving submissions from
anyone or, if the Tribunal is empowered to
receive submissions from the access seeker and service provider, is it also
to receive submissions from other interested persons?
some statements made by the High Court in the
Pilbara case
suggest that a
review under s 44K is not an
inter partes
proceeding, I do not consider
that the statements are intended to convey that there are no participants in a
review under s 44K and
no-one is entitled to make submissions to the Tribunal.
The statement of the plurality (at [48]) that the review “neither permits
nor requires a quasi-curial trial between the access seeker and the facility
provider as adversarial parties, on new and different
material, to determine
whether a service should be declared” must be read in context. The
conclusion of the plurality (expressed
at [60] and [65]) is that the review
required the Tribunal to reconsider the Minister’s decision on the
material before the
Minister. The plurality did not decide that the access
seeker and the service provider had no right to be heard on the review; the
plurality decided that they had no right to conduct a quasi-curial trial on new
material. In so far as Heydon J went further when
concluding that there are no
“parties” in a s 44K review (at [133]-[134]), I respectfully
consider that that conclusion
is not supported by the judgment of the plurality
and is inconsistent with a number of features of the Act, including amendments
made by the
Trade Practices Amendment (Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
(Cth). The following features of the Act and the amendments can be noted.
for each proceeding to be heard and determined, the Tribunal is constituted by a
presidential member, being a judge of the
Federal Court, and two lay members
(per s 37). As noted earlier, there is no other provision of the Act that allows
for the constitution
of the Tribunal in a given matter that is to be determined
the Tribunal. It follows that, under the Act, all matters to be determined
the Tribunal are described as “proceedings” which are to be heard
and determined. Further, the proceedings are to
be heard and determined by a
three member Tribunal, the presiding member of which is a judge of the Federal
Court. A proceeding is
not “heard” by the Tribunal unless persons
interested in the determination of the proceeding have been given an opportunity
to make submissions to the Tribunal.
the Tribunal is under a duty to act judicially; that is, with fairness and
detachment:
Re Herald & Weekly Times Ltd
(1978) 17 ALR 281
While that conclusion was stated by the Tribunal (Deane J presiding) in the
context of a review conducted under
of the Act, the conclusion follows
from the nature of the Tribunal as established under
of the Act and is
generally applicable to the performance by the Tribunal of the various functions
entrusted to it.
regulation 22B stipulates that, in a review under s 44K, the person who applied
for the declaration recommendation and the
provider of the service may
participate in the review. Regulation 22B is made under s 44ZZP, which
stipulates that the regulations
may make provision about certain matters in
relation to the function of the Tribunal under
including determining
questions before the Tribunal and procedure and evidence. There is no reason to
think that regulation 22B is
beyond power. To the contrary, the regulation is
consistent with the nature of the Tribunal and confirms that the persons most
affected by a declaration decision, the access seeker and the service
provider, may participate in the review.
the amendments made by the
Trade Practices Amendment (Infrastructure Access)
(Cth) confirm what is already apparent from the legislative
framework: that in performing its review function, the Tribunal must
interested persons an opportunity to be heard. Each of ss 44K(6B), 44KA, 44KB,
44ZZOAAA and 44ZZOA assume that the Tribunal
has power to make a person, other
than the applicant for review, the provider of the service and the person who
originally applied
for the declaration recommendation, a party to the proceeding
for review.
my view, it follows from the foregoing that the Tribunal has an implied power to
grant leave to a person to participate in the
review so as to be heard on the
review. Such a power is necessary in the sense of being reasonably required or
legally ancillary
to enable the Tribunal to perform its review function under s
44K in the manner contemplated by the Act as a whole (including the
Regulations). Such an implied power does not conflict with or alter the nature
or scope of the review as explained by the High Court
. The task remains to review the decision of the Minister on the
material before the Minister, and not to review the recommendation
of the NCC.
It is therefore necessary to consider further the principles that govern the
exercise of that implied power and whether,
applying those principles, the ACCC
should be granted leave to intervene in the review.
The second issue: the question of discretion
The parties’ contentions
ACCC submitted that the applicable test for the grant of leave to intervene is
that stated by Goldberg J in
Fortescue Metals
, that it is necessary for
the applicant to “show that some interest touching and concerning it can
be demonstrated” (at
[43]). The ACCC also placed reliance on cases in
which the ACCC was granted leave to intervene such as
Melway Publishing Pty
Ltd v Robert Hicks Pty Ltd
(2001) 205 CLR 1
Auskay International Manufacturing & Trade Pty Ltd v Qantas Airways
[2010] FCA 521
Glencore Coal Assets
Australia Pty Ltd v Australian Competition Tribunal
[2020] FCAFC 145
382 ALR 331
Glencore Coal
). The ACCC submitted that it should be
permitted to intervene in the review because it has a unique contribution to
make: it is the
repository of many of the powers and responsibilities conferred
under the general access regime in
and the telecommunications access
As a consequence of its statutory role, the ACCC has
significant experience, knowledge and expertise not possessed by any party
in the review proceeding. The ACCC submitted that it has a
contribution to make in respect of the proper construction and application
declaration criteria (a) and (d). These criteria, relating to promotion of
competition and the public interest, were amended in
2017 and have not yet been
the subject of detailed consideration by the Tribunal or the Court in their
present form. The ACCC seeks
to make submissions regarding the matters the
subject of its previous submissions to the NCC, without duplicating the
submissions
of the existing parties to the
supported the application by the ACCC, but did not add to the ACCC’s
submissions.
submitted that the test to be applied for the grant of leave to intervene is
that stated by the High Court in
Roadshow Films Pty Ltd v iiNet Limited
[2011] HCA 54
(2011) 248 CLR 37
Roadshow Films
): whether the person’s
interests would be directly affected by the decision (at [2]). PNO submitted
that the ACCC has failed to demonstrate the unique
contribution it would make to the proceedings, relying on
PNO argued that the fact that the
ACCC has expertise regarding the access regime in
, or competition
issues more generally, is insufficient because the Tribunal already has such
expertise itself and, to the extent
it needs further assistance, it can seek it
from the NCC which is “an expert and non-partisan body” (referring
description of the NCC given by the plurality in the
Pilbara case
at [47]). PNO observed that
the ACCC does not have a
role under the Act in relation to declaration, or the interpretation or
application of the declaration criteria
(which role is given to the NCC). The
ACCC therefore has no specialist role in relation to the matters the subject of
the present
proceeding.
Consideration of the second issue
a curial setting, the grant of leave to intervene in a proceeding is usually
confined to persons who can demonstrate that they
have an interest that would be
directly affected by a decision in the proceeding. The applicable principles
were restated by the
High Court in
Roadshow Films
as follows (at [2]
– [4], citations omitted):
2 In determining whether to
allow a non-party intervention the following considerations, reflected in the
observations of Brennan
Levy v Victoria
, are relevant. A non-party
whose interests would be directly affected by a decision in the proceeding, that
would be bound by the decision, is
entitled to intervene to protect the interest likely to be affected. A non-party
whose legal interest,
for example, in other pending litigation is likely to be
affected substantially by the outcome of the proceedings in this Court will
satisfy a precondition for leave to intervene. Intervention will not ordinarily
be supported by an indirect or contingent affection
of legal interests following
from the extra-curial operation of the principles enunciated in the decision of
the Court or their effect
upon future litigation.
3 Where a person having the necessary legal interest
can show that the parties to the particular proceedings may not present fully
the submissions on a particular issue, being submissions which the Court should
have to assist it to reach a correct determination,
the Court may exercise its
and conditions as to costs
as between all parties as it sees fit to impose.
4 The grant of leave for a person to be heard as an amicus curiae is not
dependent upon the same conditions in relation to legal
interest as the grant of
leave to intervene. The Court will need to be satisfied however, that it will be
significantly assisted
by the submissions of the amicus and that any costs to
the parties or any delay consequent on agreeing to hear the amicus is not
disproportionate to the expected assistance.
may be accepted, as the ACCC submitted, that courts have granted the ACCC leave
to intervene in proceedings concerning the application
of provisions of the Act:
see for example
in which leave was granted, but contrast
Queensland Wire Industries Pty Ltd v BHP Proprietary Co Limited
[1989] HCA 6
167 CLR 177
in which leave was refused. In 2001, s 87CA was inserted into the
Act conferring an express power on the courts to grant the ACCC
intervene in proceedings brought under the Act. Cases such as
Glencore Coal
concerned the grant of leave under s 87CA. Broadly, leave
has been granted to the ACCC where the proceeding concerns a provision
Act in respect of which the ACCC is given statutory powers (typically powers of
enforcement), where the case raises a question
of construction of the provision
and the ACCC is able to make a contribution to the issue in question which
differs from the parties
to the proceeding.
s 109(2) (within Division 2 of
, the Tribunal is given express power to
permit a person to intervene in proceedings before the Tribunal. In
, the Tribunal made the following observations about the grant of
leave under s 109(2):
30 There is no “sufficient” or “real
and substantial” interest requirement found in s 109(2) and the discretion
to grant leave to intervene reposed in that subsection is not limited by the
connotation of such expressions. The discretion is not
constrained by any
limitation and it is not easy, nor is it appropriate, to define or delimit the
categories of persons who may be
given leave to intervene under s 109(2). It
does not follow that in exercising its discretion pursuant to s 109(2) of the
are no limitations or restrictions on the persons who wish to
intervene or participate in reviews by the Tribunal.
35 ... an applicant for leave to intervene or participate under s 109(2) ...
must, as a minimum, be able to establish some connection
with, or interest in,
the subject matter of the proceeding which discloses that it is not merely an
officious bystander. What the
nature of that connection or interest must be,
will vary from case to case. It is not necessary that an applicant be required
establish that its business interests or business activities or prospects may
be detrimentally affected by the subject matter of
the proceeding or its
outcome. ... However, the connection should usually be one that discloses that
the applicant for leave to intervene
has some interest which is ignited by the
proceeding, which is an interest other than that found in members of the general
43 Although s 109(2) is not couched in terms of any particular
“interest” being required to be demonstrated before leave
granted, I consider that it is necessary for some connection with the subject
matter of the application for review to be
demonstrated. Obviously an officious
bystander would not be given leave to intervene, but it is necessary to show
some particular
interest in the subject matter of the application. I do not
consider that it is necessary for an applicant for intervention to go
to show that it may be affected in some way by the declaration but it is
necessary, as I have noted earlier, to show that
some interest touching and
concerning it can be demonstrated.
the reasons explained above, s 109(2) is not applicable to a review under s 44K.
In my view, the nature of the review to be conducted
by the Tribunal under s
44K, as explained in the
Pilbara case
, strongly suggests that leave to
intervene should be granted only to persons who can demonstrate, at the least,
an interest of the
kind referred to in
Roadshow Films
. The Tribunal is
required to review the decision of the Minister based on the material considered
by the Minister. As explained by
the High Court in the
Pilbara case
statutory supposition is that the Minister could and would make a decision on
the recommendation of the NCC, an expert and non-partisan
body. The statute
contemplates that the Minister would make a decision quickly and would do so
according to the Minister’s
view of the public interest and the expert
advice given by the NCC about the more technical criteria of which the Minister
be satisfied before a declaration could be made. Further, the Tribunal is
given express power in s 44K(6) to require the NCC to give
assistance for the
purposes of the review. That provision reinforces the primary role given to the
NCC by the legislature in declaration
decisions. Not only is the Minister to
make a decision on receiving a recommendation from the NCC, but on review of the
decision the Tribunal is empowered to seek assistance from the
the nature of the review to be conducted by the Tribunal under s 44K is
confined, it is understandable that the access seeker
and the service provider
are entitled to participate in the review (as per regulation 22B). Their
interests are directly affected
by a decision in the review proceeding. While
the Tribunal should be regarded as having an implied power to hear from other
in order to act fairly, such a power need only extend to persons whose
interests would be directly affected by a decision.
the context of a review under s 44K, the ACCC is not a person whose interests
are affected by a decision, whether directly or indirectly.
In contrast to the
position of the NCC, the ACCC has no statutory power with respect to the
declaration of services under
of the Act. It may be accepted that the
ACCC has knowledge and expertise about the Act and the economic concepts that
underpin the
Act including particularly competition and economic efficiency.
However, the possession of such knowledge and expertise is not an
interest in
the review proceeding that supports the grant of leave to intervene.
is also appropriate to consider whether leave can and should be given to the
ACCC to make submissions to the Tribunal in the nature
amicus curiae
In that regard, I note that, in certain types of review proceedings, the
Tribunal has given third parties the right to make submissions
to the Tribunal
without granting leave to intervene and making the person a party to or
participant in the proceeding: see for example
Application for Authorisation
of Acquisition of Macquarie Generation by AGL Energy Limited
[2014] ACompT 1
(at [151], [272] and [392]) and
Applications by Tabcorp Holdings Limited
[2017] ACompT 5
(at [53]). However, such proceedings involved
hearings on evidence adduced before the Tribunal, in contrast to the confined
task required by s 44K. In circumstances where the
Tribunal is expressly
empowered to receive such assistance from the NCC under s 44K(6), in my view it
is neither necessary nor appropriate
for the Tribunal to grant leave to the ACCC
to perform a supplementary role.
a final consideration, the ACCC has not persuaded me that the person who applied
for the declaration recommendation, the NSWMC,
who is a participant in the
review, is unable to advance all necessary submissions concerning the proper
construction of declaration
criteria (a) and (d), including the construction
advocated by the ACCC before the NCC. To the extent necessary, it is open to the
NSWMC to seek to place the ACCC’s submissions to the NCC before the
Tribunal (by asking the Tribunal to exercise its powers
under s 44K(6) to
request the submissions from the NCC, or its powers under s 44ZZOAAA(5) to
request the submissions from the ACCC).
This is a further reason to refuse the
ACCC’s application as a matter of discretion.
conclusion, for the reasons given above, I refuse the ACCC’s application
for leave to intervene in this proceeding.
I certify that the preceding seventy-five (75)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination herein of
Honourable Justice
Dated: 20 May 2021
RTF format (525 KB)
Signed PDF/A format