Transport Workers' Union of Australia v Linfox Australia Pty Ltd [2012] FWAFB 8958 (26 October 2012)
Note: Judicial review of this decision [FCA-NSD1918/2012] pending.
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Act 2009
- Appeal of decisions
Transport Workers' Union of Australia
Linfox Australia Pty Ltd
(C2012/4034)
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT DRAKE
DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
COMMISSIONER GOOLEY
SYDNEY, 26 OCTOBER 2012
Appeal against decision
[2012] FWA 4076
of Commissioner Harrison at Sydney on 11 May 2012 in matter number C2011/6363.
This is an appeal pursuant to
section 604
Fair Work Act 2009
(the Act) arising from a decision of Commissioner Harrison
Section 604
of the Act is set out below:
“(1) A person who is aggrieved by a decision:
(a) made by FWA (other than a decision of a Full Bench or the Minimum Wage Panel); or
(b) made by the General Manager (including a delegate of the General Manager) under the
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
may appeal the decision, with the permission of FWA.
(2) Without limiting when FWA may grant permission, FWA must grant permission if FWA is satisfied that it is in the public interest
Note: Subsection (2) does not apply in relation to an application for an unfair dismissal (see section 400).
(3) A person may appeal the decision by applying to FWA.”
It is agreed that permission to appeal is not required in relation to this application.
The principles applicable to an appeal pursuant to s604 of the Act are:
An appeal under s.604 of the Act may only be pursued with the permission of FWA. This would normally require an appellant to demonstrate
an arguable case of appealable error and refer to other considerations which would justify the granting of permission to appeal.
Subsection 604(2) requires FWA to grant permission to appeal if it is satisfied that it is in the public interest to do so. Where
permission to appeal is granted,
the appeal proceeds by way of rehearing, with the powers of the Full Bench being exercisable only if there is error on the part of
the primary decision-maker
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
(our emphasis)
We heard this appeal in Sydney on 31 August 2012. Mr Adam Hatcher of Senior Counsel appeared for the Transport Workers’ Union
of Australia (TWU). Mr John Murphy of Counsel appeared for Linfox Australia Proprietary Limited (Linfox).
The decision under appeal arose from the notification of a dispute regarding the application of Clause 55 of the Linfox Road Transport
and Distribution Centres National Enterprise Agreement 2011 (the Agreement). The Agreement is a national agreement. We do not intend
to repeat the history of this dispute. Resolution of the issue by Commissioner Harrison required a consideration of Clause 26.2 of
the Road Transport and Distribution Award 2010 (the Modern Award) and Clause 8.2.1 of the Transport Industry (State) Award (the State
The Commissioner identified the issue as follows:
“The TWU submitted:
‘The issue currently before the Tribunal is whether, on the proper construction of the
Linfox Road Transport and Distribution Centres Agreement 2011
, overtime meal breaks should be paid for at single time, as contended for by the applicant company, or as time worked, as contended
for by the respondent union.’
[6] The issue which gave rise to the dispute is the rate of pay to apply to overtime meal breaks and the TWU correctly characterise
the dispute as one of determining the rate to apply during overtime hours, Sundays and public holidays. There is no argument about
the payment to apply during ordinary hours being single time.”
The Commissioner made it clear that he used the terms “crib break”, “overtime meal break” and “overtime
rest break” as meaning one and the same thing. He said:
“[10] ....Clause 55 of the Agreement is silent on the payment to apply to meal breaks prior to or during overtime. The purpose
of clause 55 is to combine the time of taking legislative driver fatigue breaks with overtime meal breaks as far as practicable.
[11] Clause 26.2 of the Modern Award is also silent as to the rate of pay applying to an overtime rest break however, it makes clear
that an employee must have a break before beginning overtime and after completing four hours of overtime.”
Commissioner Harrison decided that the payment for a crib break, before commencing overtime and thereafter upon completing each four
hour period, should be paid at the ordinary rate and not the overtime rate.
The Grounds of Appeal are set out in the Amended Notice of Appeal.
They are set out below.
“2.1 The Commissioner incorrectly construed the overtime rest break provisions of the
Linfox Road Transport & Distribution Centres National Enterprise Agreement 2011
Linfox Agreement
), including the incorporated terms being clause 26.2 and 27.1 of the
Road Transport & Distribution Award 2010 (
the Modern Award
and clause 8.2.1 of the
Transport Industry (State) Award (
the State Award
2.2 The Commissioner erred by failing to consider the text of the relevant provisions in the Linfox Agreement, the Modern Award and
the NSW Award.
2.3 The Commissioner erred by having regard to previous federal award provisions, which were different to the relevant provision of
the Modern Award and which were entirely irrelevant to the NSW Award, as determinative of the outcome.
2.4 The correct interpretation, namely that overtime crib breaks are paid at the then applicable overtime penalty rate, was not determined
by the Commissioner.”
This Bench has had to consider the construction of Clause 55 of the Agreement reached by Commissioner Harrison and decide whether
or not he was in error. We are satisfied that the Commissioner was in error in his conclusion.
Clause 55 of the Agreement is set out below.
“55. MEAL BREAKS
55.1 The existing practice of taking meal breaks during ordinary hours to meet operational requirements shall continue to apply.
55.2 All legislated driver breaks will be taken in conjunction with scheduled meal breaks unless the driver is otherwise advised,
or where it is agreed it is impractical to do so.”
Clause 8.2.1 of the State Award, which was incorporated into the Agreement for all NSW and ACT employees, is set out below.
“8.2.1 An employee who is required to work overtime on any week day for a period of two hours or more after the employee’s
normal finishing time shall be allowed a paid crib break of 20 minutes not later than 5 hours after the end of the lunch break and,
shall, unless notified the previous day or earlier that the employee would be required to work such overtime, be paid a meal allowance
of the amount specified in Table 9 of Part B. Where notification to work overtime has been given on the preceding day or earlier
and such overtime is then cancelled on the day such overtime was to be worked, an employee shall be paid a meal allowance of the
same amount.”
Clause 26.2 of the Modern Award, which was incorporated into the Agreement for all other employees, is set out below.
“26.2 Overtime rest break
An employee required to work overtime for two hours or more after working ordinary hours must be allowed a paid break of 20 minutes
before commencing overtime work and thereafter upon completing each four hour period until the overtime work is finished.”
Mr Hatcher criticised the Commissioner’s decision as having given insufficient consideration to the text of the Agreement.
He submitted that if the Commissioner had given proper consideration to the relevant instruments he would have been inevitably persuaded
to the contrary conclusion. We agree with this submission.
Mr Hatcher submitted that consideration of historical award provisions cannot substitute for a consideration of the actual provisions
which require interpretation. He also submitted that the provisions of the federal awards which were predecessors of the Modern
Award were not determinative. The actual provisions of the Agreement were determinative.
Further, Mr Hatcher submitted that the Linfox submission that the words "shall be paid at the ordinary rate" in the previous
federal award should be relied upon was misplaced. What took place in the creation of the Modern Award was the omission of the words
"shall be paid for at the ordinary rate". The omission was deliberate, and consideration should be given to that omission
as indicating the opposite of the Linfox submission.
It was Mr Hatcher’s submission that the federal award provisions are in this case irrelevant to the terms and conditions of
NSW and ACT employees. They had no relationship to the incorporation of the State Award.
We are persuaded by Mr Hatcher’s submission regarding the interpretation of Clause 55. We can see no reason to paraphrase it.
It is extracted below.
“4. The Correct Interpretation
In respect of both clause 26.2 of the Modern Award and clause 8.2.1 of the NSW Award, as incorporated into the Agreement, the correct
interpretation was that the rate to be paid for an overtime crib break was the overtime penalty rate applicable at the time that
the break was taken.
The incorporated provisions need to be read in the context of the awards from which they were derived. In the case of the Modern Award,
clause 26.2 concerns paid breaks that are taken
after the completion of ordinary hours
(i.e. hours paid at ordinary time). That would,
prima facie
, indicate that payment for the break is to be at the rate which applies after the completion of ordinary hours – i.e. the overtime
rate. Clause 27.1 supports this approach:
27. Overtime
27.1 For all work done outside ordinary hours the rate of pay will be time and a half for the first two hours and double time thereafter...
Linfox submitted before the Commissioner that clause 27.1 did not apply because time spent on breaks is not “work” within
the meaning of clause 27.1. This should be rejected for the following reasons:
The company’s approach confuses the notion of “
” with the Modern Award’s various provisions for payment for work and requires an impermissibly narrow and technical reading
of the phrase “
for all work done
”. The preferable view is that a meal break is part of work done, and certainly so for the purposes of clause 27.1. The judgment
of Menzies J in
Commonwealth v Oliver
[1962] HCA 38
(1962) 107 CLR 353
at 363 demonstrates that a wide meaning to “
” in the context of meal breaks is to be taken:
[The] authorities... do seem to me to establish that a worker who is having lunch at his employer’s premises with his employer’s
sanction is, save in exceptional cases, “doing something which he was reasonably required, expected or authorised to do in
order to carry out his duties”, to use the words of Dixon J. in
Humphrey Earl Ltd. v. Speechley
[1951] HCA 75
(1951) 84 CLR 126...
The position is
where the break is a paid break in the nature of a crib break. The conception of crib breaks involves employees being restricted in
their movement and required to be available to deal with contingencies. In
Duncans Holdings Ltd v Cross
Wilcox J pointed out that:
The difference between the two [unpaid meal and crib] breaks extends beyond duration. A “lunch break” is a period of time
during which employees are free, not only to eat a meal, but to leave their immediate workplace – in this case the boiler room
– and socialise with other workers elsewhere in the establishment, or even leave the employer’s premises altogether on
business of their own. A “crib break” by contrast, is a period during which the employee may “down tools”
and eat but must remain in the immediate workplace and available in case of any emergency... the crib break provided by cl 30(d)(ii)
time; that is because the employee remains on duty throughout.
The evidence as to what Linfox employees actually do during paid overtime breaks is consistent with this conception. As outlined in
the evidence of Messrs Waltis
, drivers are required to remain with their vehicles, answer phones and truck radios, move trucks up in queues, open and close tautliners
and generally attend to any exigencies arising during their breaks.
Other decisions are consistent with the above analysis, including
ALHMWU v Manilla RSL & Ex-Servicemens’ Club Limited
[2000] NSWIRComm 122
, where the parties proceeded on the assumption that payment would be made at penalty rates, and
AWU v Lifese Engineering Pty Ltd
[2006] AIRC 61
, where the debate was confined to the question of whether crib breaks were payable at time and a half or double time in respect of
a ten hour shift.
The position is the same with respect to clause 8.2.1 of the NSW Award. The breaks are taken under that clause after the completion
of ordinary time paid at ordinary hours, with the
prima facie
result that the rate applicable for work after the completion of ordinary hours would be applicable. Contextual interpretation requires
clause 8.2.1 to be read in conjunction with clause 5.1 of the NSW Award, which relevantly provides as follows:
5. OVERTIME
5.1 Overtime at the rate of time and one-half for the first two (2) hours and double time thereafter shall be paid to all employees,
including casuals, as follows :
5.1.1 For all time worked within the spread of ordinary hours referred to in clause 3.3 in excess of the ordinary hours of work in
5.1.2 For all time worked within the spread of ordinary hours referred to in clause 3.3 in excess of the daily limitations on working
of hours prescribed in clause 3 or before the fixed commencing time or after the fixed finishing time.
For the purpose of clause 5.1, “
all time worked
” should be interpreted as including paid breaks for the reasons earlier stated.
The construction advanced above is consistent with the actual practice which existed at the time the Agreement was entered into –
namely, in nearly all cases, to pay overtime breaks at the relevant overtime penalty rate.”
Whatever the past practice has been regarding payment for these breaks at different Linfox sites, we are satisfied that the proper
construction of Clause 55 is that crib breaks which occur after ordinary hours, and in overtime hours, are required to be paid at
overtime rates. That is the plain meaning of the clause and it should be complied with. We are not persuaded that there is any significance
to be attached to any other practice at other worksites. To the extent that there were or are different practices, those practices
were and are in error.
There was nothing before the Commissioner, and no submissions were made to us, which provided any justification for distinguishing
the crib break which occurs in overtime hours from the balance of work performed in overtime. An employee on overtime may be required
by either an industrial instrument or legislation to take a break. In such circumstances the hourly rate payable for the period
during which the break occurs is the overtime rate. We are not satisfied that there is any objectively reasonable basis on which
to distinguish the period of the crib break from that of the balance of the time spent at work outside ordinary time.
Mr Murphy submitted that the Modern Award dictates that overtime rates are to be paid for "...all work done outside ordinary
hours" and that, by definition, when an employee is on a meal, rest or crib break, that employee, although at work, is not doing
work. We reject this submission. An employee on a crib break of the kind which is the subject of this application may be required
to be at work during that break. They may be required to perform duties if the need arises. They are not entitled to leave the
workplace. They are not at large to do what they please during that period. They are at work and required to stay at work.
In our view it is not open to the employer to seek to “release the employee” for the period of the break so as to limit
payment to ordinary time.
The entitlement to payment is prescribed. The correct payment is at overtime rates, because the employee remains available for duty
in excess of ordinary hours, which is an inherent requirement in a request to work overtime hours. Irrespective of other functions
that may be required of the employee the first task is to prepare for the extra duties by resting and taking a meal. The need to
prepare in this way arises only from the imposition of the employer requirement for the employee to work overtime.
We also consider it relevant that the modern award was not created after consideration of one pre-existing federal award. It was
the result of a detailed consideration of a very large number of awards with differing conditions.
We reject the submission that the fact that the Modern Award is silent on the rate of pay supports payment at ordinary time. On the
contrary, we are persuaded that this silence supports the TWU’s submission that the rate of payment should be at overtime rates.
We are satisfied and find that breaks occurring outside ordinary hours should be paid at overtime rates for the reasons we have provided.
The appeal is allowed. The decision of Commissioner Harrison is quashed.
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
Mr A Hatcher
, Senior Counsel instructed by
for Transport Workers’ Union of Australia
Mr J Murphy
, Counsel instructed by
Mr B Belling
for Linfox Australia Pty Ltd
Hearing details:
[2012] FWAFB 1891
Boulton J, Harrison SDP, Deegan C
at [5] and [6]
[2012] FWA 4076
Exhibit TWU1
Endnote 5 - 8 extracted from original document ‘Exhibit TWU2’ -
Duncan Holdings v Cross
(1997) 76 IR 261
at 263 – 264.
See also the discussion and cases cited in AMWU v Holden Limited re Holden Limited Consolidated Award 1998
[2003] AIRC 387
930370) and the discussion in Australian Workers Union v Department of Primary Industries and Resources SA
[2007] SAIRC 60
where the South Australian IRC held that a crib break did not require a period of twenty consecutive uninterrupted minutes.
AB 159 paragraphs 4-5
AB 158 paragraph 4
Exhibit TWU2 at para 4 - 4.6
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR530424>
No downloadable files available