Vargas & Clarke [2021] FCCA 1950 (30 August 2021)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Vargas & Clarke
[2021] FCCA
File number(s):
BRC 10951 of 2011
Judgment of:
JUDGE LAPTHORN
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– parenting –
application to vary final orders – consideration of
– consideration of loner term supervision – application
to restrain a party from bringing further proceedings
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Evidence Act 1995
Cases cited:
[1988] FamCA 46
[1988] FLC 91-957
[1990] FamCA 148
(1991) FLC 92-191
Betros & Betros
[2017] FamCAFC 90
Champness v Hanson
[2009] FamCAFC 96
(2009) FLC 93-407
[1995] FamCA 146
(1995) FLC 92-581
Donaghey & Donaghey
[2011] FamCA 13
Fitzpatrick & Fitzpatrick
[2005] FamCA 394
George & Nichols
[2016] FamCA 519
Godfrey v Sanders
[2007] FamCA 102
Goode v Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346
(2007) 36 Fam LR 422
, (2006) FLC 93-286
Harridge & Harridge
[2010] FamCA 445
Heath & Hemming (No. 2)
[2011] FamCA 749
King and Finneran
[2001] FamCA 344
[1988] FLC 91-979
[2006] FamCA 1408
(2007) FLC 93-313
Marsden and Winch
[2009] FamCAFC 152
Mazorski v Albright
[2007] FamCA 520
(2008) 37 Fam LR 518
Moose & Moose
[2008] FamCAFC 108
; (2008) FLC 93-375
[2010] HCA 4
Rice & Asplund
[1978] FamCA 84
(1979) FLC 90-725
Rilak & Tsocas
[2020] FamCA49
Searson & Searson
[2017] FamCAFC 119
Sigley v Evor
[2011] FamCAFC 22
(2011) 44 Fam LR 439
(2008) FLC 93-363
[2008] FamCAFC 16
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
9, 10 and 11 February, 31 May and 8 June 2021
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Sterling Law (Qld)
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Whitehead Payne
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms Pendergast
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Lyrene Wiid Lawyer & Migration Agent
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
BRC 10951 of
JUDGE LAPTHORN
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS:
the father’s Initiating Application filed 6 December 2018 be dismissed.
the mother’s application for a restraint on the father’s ability to
bring proceedings without leave of the court
be dismissed.
Section 121
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in very limited circumstances, to publish
proceedings that identify persons, associated persons,
or witnesses involved in
family law proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment under the pseudonym
Vargas & Clarke
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
JUDGE LAPTHORN:
INTRODUCTION
parents of ten year old C, have been in dispute as to his parenting arrangements
all of his life. C was only eight months old
when the first application was
made to the Federal Magistrates Court. There have, in total, been 33
applications filed by his parents,
including five Initiating Applications, 17
Applications in a Case, 10 Applications Contravention and one Appeal.
current operative orders were made by Bell J in the Family Court of Australia on
28 February 2014 (the 2014 orders). These orders
provide for the child to
live primarily with his mother and spend supervised time with his father at a
The mother has sole parental responsibility for the
child. X’s father, Mr Vargas, has asked the court to make new parenting
orders that would see the child live primarily with him. To succeed in his
application, the father will need to establish that there
has been a material
change in circumstances since the making of the 2014 orders. The relevant
principle is commonly referred to
as the rule in
A previous attempt by
the father to have the 2014 orders varied was dismissed by Hogan J in 2015 and
her Honour’s decision
was upheld on appeal the following year.
mother, Ms Clarke, argued that there has not been any significant change in
circumstances and opposed any change in the
child’s primary residence.
She wants the father’s time with X to remain supervised. She also wants
Mr Vargas restrained
from bringing any more applications without first getting
leave of the court to do so. In the event the court was persuaded that
has been a significant change in circumstances the mother argued that the only
change needed was to impose on the father the
full cost of the supervision.
Independent Children’s Lawyer (ICL) was appointed for X. She sought an
order that the father’s application be dismissed
on the basis that there
has not been any significant change of circumstances since the making of the
2014 orders. In the alternative
the ICL sought orders that would provide for
the mother to have sole parental responsibility for C and for him to continue to
with the mother. She supported orders for the father’s time to be
supervised at a contact centre. She did not support the
application restraining the father’s ability to bring a fresh
application.
these reasons I will refer to Mr Vargas as the father and Ms Clarke as the
mother. I will also refer to C as the child.
I mean no disrespect in doing
way of brief background, the father is 60 years of age and the mother, 43. The
father has a 31 year old daughter, Ms W Vargas,
who has children of her own.
The mother has a child S who is 15 years of age. His father died in 2007. The
parties commenced a
relationship in 2009 and C was born in 2011. They separated
on a final basis in October of that year. After an incident between
the parties
in July of 2011 a family violence protection order issued naming the mother as
the protected person and the father as
the respondent. There are no current
protection orders in place between the parties. The child has always lived with
and his brother.
parties live about an hour and a half drive from each other with the father in
Region LL, and the mother in Town MM. In his affidavit,
the father described
himself as a construction worker, but I have no evidence as to his current
working arrangements. In the 2019
interviews for the family report, he told the
report writer that he works as a professional for a government body, Monday to
The job involved some travel and long hours. He alluded to the report
writer that he does not have any financial concerns. The
mother has been on a
disability support pension for over 20 years. She does some training but does
not earn an income from such.
The father does not pay her child support and is
in arrears in excess of $17,000. He does however provide supermarket gift cards
to the child from time to time.
the history of the litigation the father has expressed concern for the safety of
the child whilst in the mother’s
care. Leading up to the 2014 proceedings
before Bell J, the father had withheld the child from the mother on at least two
He was concerned about the welfare of the child in the
mother’s care. He believed the mother had mental health issues, was
drinking alcohol to excess, and had physically harmed the child. He also
claimed the mother’s other child had physically hurt
C. The father would
frequently take photos of the child and take him to doctors when he was spending
unsupervised time with him.
has been diagnosed with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD),
Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD) and Anxiety with Tic
Disorder. His
conditions are managed through medication (Ritalin 10mg) and by withdrawal from
mainstream school.
father asserted that he no longer held the view that the mother is currently
physically abusing the child but was concerned about
her ability to meet his
needs, particularly his educational needs. C is currently being home schooled
after experiencing difficulties
with his behaviour at school. It is the
father’s view that the child needs to live in his primary care to properly
these needs.
respectfully accept and adopt the ICL’s submission that the issues for
determination are as follows:
(a) Has there been a significant change in circumstances, which warrants a
change to the final orders made 28 February 2014?
(b) If a significant change in circumstances is established:
(i) Does the father pose an unacceptable risk to the child, if he spends
unsupervised time with the child?
(ii) Is it in the child's best interest to live primarily with the mother or the
(iii) Should the mother or the father have sole parental responsibility for the
(iv) What time should the child spend with the parent with whom he does not
primarily reside?
other issue for determination is the mother’s application that the father
be prohibited from instituting proceedings in
relation to the child without
first obtaining leave of the Court.
THE EVIDENCE
support of his application the father relied on:
(a) His Initiating Application filed 6 December 2018;
(b) His Notice of Risk filed 7 December 2018;
(c) His Affidavit filed 11 January 2021; and
(d) His Case Outline filed 29 January 2021.
mother relied on:
(a) Her Response filed 1 March 2019;
(b) Her Notice of Risk filed 1 March 2019;
(c) Her Affidavit filed 22 December 2020; and
(d) Her Case Outline filed 5 February 2021.
Independent Children’s lawyer relied on:
(a) The Family Report of Ms NN filed 21 August 2019;
(b) The Updated Family Report of Ms NN filed 25 September 2020; and
(c) Her Case Outline filed 5 February 2021.
were also tendered into
determining this matter, I have had regard to all the written evidence referred
to above along with the oral evidence given. Both
parents were cross-examined.
Ms OO and Mr PP provided written statements which were received into evidence
and were cross-examined.
Ms OO was a teacher and Mr PP the former deputy
principal at C’s previous school. The family report writer was also
cross-examined.
To avoid repetition and limit the length of this judgment,
apart from setting an informative background, I will not repeat the evidence
save that which is necessary for me to determine disputed issues and carry out
my assessments in accordance with the legislative
framework. Therefore,
throughout these reasons I will refer to a number of facts. Any such reference
should be regarded as a finding
of fact unless a contrary intention is clear
from the context. In determining disputed questions of fact the court is
required to
assess the evidence on the balance of
probabilities.
found the father to be a less than focussed witness. He was fixated on the past
and was unable to look at alternative viewpoints.
He struggled to answer many
questions directly, preferring to give commentary rather than answering the
questions asked. However,
I am satisfied that was not necessarily an avoidant
tactic, but indicative of his obsession with his main concerns about how the
child has been cared for by the mother. This obsession appears to have impacted
his ability to objectively consider what has been
said or written by others. He
also used language that did not necessarily fit with his position. For example,
he described a former
family report writer from one of his earlier proceedings
as corrupt. However, it appeared that he has not made a complaint against
report writer and the reason for the allegation of corruption was his belief she
did not have regard to or make enquiries as
to the number of times the mother
took the child to the doctor when she highlighted the number of times he took
the child to the
doctor and considered that the child was at risk of emotional
harm in doing so.
mother on the other hand presented as a more objective witness although at times
defensive, particularly around her long-standing
mental health issues and her
views on vaccinations. Given the father’s unrelenting criticism of her I
am not surprised. After
considering all the evidence and observing the parties
in the witness box, I have come to the conclusion that the mother is a better
historian than the father and therefore where their evidence differed, I
preferred the evidence of the mother.
December 2011, not long after their separation in October 2011, the mother filed
an Initiating Application for parenting orders.
This application was dismissed
in April 2012 as neither party attended court. The following month however, the
father filed an
Initiating Application for parenting orders. On 2 August 2012
interim orders were made for the child to live with the mother and
alternate weekends as well as Wednesdays with the father. In February 2013 the
father failed to return the child to the mother
in accordance with those orders
citing concerns as to the deterioration of the child’s mental state. C
was not quite two years
of age. The father filed an Amended Initiating
Application seeking orders for sole parental responsibility, for the child to
with him and to have supervised time with the mother. The mother brought
an Application for a Recovery order which was granted on
6 March 2013.
11 May 2013 the father took the child to a hospital after seeing bruising on him
which the father believed was consistent with
previous bruising he had seen on
the child. In July 2013 the father again withheld the child requiring the
mother to once again
file for a Recovery Order. The father’s time has
been supervised ever since. On 28 February 2014 Bell J made final parenting
orders. The father subsequently filed an Application in a Case seeking to vary
those orders but was not successful. He did not
appeal the orders.
June 2014 the mother filed an Initiating Application seeking property orders
which were finalised the following month. In August
2014 just six months after
the making of the final orders, the father again filed an application for
parenting orders. This application
was dismissed by Hogan J under the
principles in April 2015. The father’s appeal against
her Honour’s decision was dismissed in February 2016.
2015 the father filed two Contravention Applications both of which were
dismissed. He filed four further Contravention Applications
the following year
all of which were dismissed. From August 2016 to January 2018 there were no
proceedings before the courts. However,
in January 2018 the father commenced
these proceedings.
his Notice of Risk filed 7 December 2018 the father alleged the mother had
abused the child physically and that she has a substantial
history of mental
health issues, alcohol related violence, child abuse and criminal history
involving drugs. In his trial affidavit
however, he said that he no longer
believed that the mother or any other person is physically abusing the child.
However, he maintained
his belief that it has happened in the past. He said he
had no intention of taking the child for medical appointments to demonstrate
physical abuse of the child by the mother.
cross-examination by Counsel for the mother, the father conceded he may have
told the report writer during the first family report
interviews in August 2019
that the child was at risk of harm with the mother. He went on to say that he
may have been taken out
of context and that he had no current concerns.
Notwithstanding this, in response to a question posed by me he said that still
that the child should be removed from his mother’s primary care
to live with him. His primary focus, at this point in time,
appears to be his
belief that the child’s educational needs are not being met in the
mother’s care. In relation to the
child’s education, he said in
cross-examination that
I would be relentless without limitation to get him
back on track.
He said he would employ a qualified teacher at $60 an hour
to initially assess him and then tutor him. When it was put to him that
mother’s evidence was that she spends between three to five hours a day
the mother replying:
That’s her evidence but whether it is the truth or not I don’t
When it was put to him that he would have to pay $810 a week for his
planned tutoring he responded to counsel:
I am happy with your mathematics,
Notwithstanding
he is in arrears of child support by at least $17,000 he was prepared to pay
$810 for private tutoring. I note he
has never offered the mother to pay for
tutoring in her home. He told the report writer that he would not give money to
because she would use it on horse feed and alcohol. He does however
provide gift cards for the local supermarket. He obfuscated
in giving evidence
This sum was garnisheed by the
Child Support Agency from a tax refund due to the
father and paid to the mother.
the father asserted that he no longer holds the view that the mother is
physically harming the child he still holds a negative
view of her ability to
meet the child’s needs. His expressed attitude in the witness box was
clearly negative towards the
mother. I have no confidence he has changed his
views of her. All he has done is shifted his focus to another aspect of
that he can be negative about, this time it is the child’s
father did not attend the updating family report interviews in 2020. He
conceded in cross-examination that he did not respond
to requests to attend. He
believed that he was being bullied by being asked to attend. He considered the
process was designed to
malign and disparage him. In the first report, prepared
in 2019, the report writer noted that the father spoke extensively throughout
his interview about the earlier proceedings and in particular complained that
incontrovertible evidence of case fixing
by the then report
writer, Ms E. He said that the report writer and Dr F, who undertook a
psychiatric assessment, were influenced
by the mother and the ICL. He was also
critical of an investigation conducted by Ms O from the child welfare
department. He said
that Ms E and Ms O should
face the DPP
their reports had resulted in C becoming
another stolen generation.
went on to allege that when the child was a toddler the mother beat him
the point of amnesia.
Bell J in the 2014 proceedings rejected the
father’s claims.
report writer opined that the father was motivated in seeking a change of
residence in order to have access to the child so he
could have him assessed by
various professionals to create evidence that would validate his long-held view
that the mother had abused
him. The father did not provide the report writer
with any information that would enable her to conclude that the child had been
emotionally or physically abused or neglected by the mother. He did not provide
any evidence of same to the court. I find no evidence
that this child has been
or is at risk of any harm in the mother’s care.
issue of the mother’s ability to attend to the child’s educational
needs will be addressed later in the judgment when
I consider parental
LEGAL PRINCIPLES
parenting proceedings are governed by the provisions of Pt VII of the
. In determining their outcome, the Court is required to
have regard to the objects and principles that underlie that
and must consider the best
interests of the child as the paramount
consideration.
are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by
both parents having a meaningful involvement in their children’s
that the children are protected from physical or psychological harm; that they
receive adequate and proper parenting; and
the parents fulfil their duties and
meet their parental
responsibilities.
Section 60B(2)
sets out the principles underlying those objects. Unless it would be contrary
to a child’s best interests the principles are:
(a) Children have a right to know and be cared for by both their parents;
(b) Children have a right to regularly spend time and communicate with both
their parents and other persons significant to their
care, welfare and
development;
(c) Parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care,
welfare and development of their children;
(d) Parents should agree about the future parenting of their children; and
(e) Children have a right to enjoy their culture.
legislative framework which must be followed in all parenting
mandates that when making a
parenting order the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best
interests of the child for
the parents to have equal shared parental
responsibility.
This presumption
does not apply in cases of child abuse and/or family violence or may be rebutted
when the evidence establishes
that it is not in the child’s best interests
for it to apply.
the purposes of
, parental responsibility means all the duties, powers,
responsibilities and authority which, by law, parents have in relation to
Unless there is a
court order to the contrary each of a child’s parents has parental
responsibility for that child until they
reach the age of 18
When a court has made an
order for two (or more) people to share parental responsibility for a child any
decision involving a major
long-term issue must be made jointly by those people
after consulting each other.
major long-term issue in relation to a child means an issue:
includes (but is not limited to) issues of that nature
(a) the child’s education (both current and future); and
(b) the child’s religious and cultural upbringing; and
(c) the child’s health; and
(d) the child’s name; and
(e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly
more difficult for the child to spend time with a
the event that the court orders the parties to have equal shared parental
responsibility the court must apply the provisions of
section 65DAA
provide for a consideration of the child spending equal time with the parents.
In determining this issue the court must be
satisfied that it is both in the
child’s best interests and reasonably
practicable.
If the court finds
that equal time is not in the child’s best interests or that it is not
reasonably practicable then the
court must consider the child spending
substantial and significant time with the parents and in doing so must again be
that such an arrangement is both in the child’s best interests
and reasonably practicable.
the father is the applicant in these proceedings, I am asked by the mother and
the ICL to dismiss the father’s application
on the basis that there has
not been any significant change of circumstances warranting a revisiting of the
current parenting orders.
This argument is known as the rule in
Although the court has the power to vary or set aside parenting
, a court is usually
reluctant to entertain a fresh application for parenting arrangements because it
is rarely in a child’s
best interest to have ongoing litigation about his
or her care and wellbeing. The Full Court of the Family Court in
[The court] should not lightly entertain an application to reverse an earlier
custody order. ... the court would need to be satisfied
by the applicant that
... there is some changed circumstance which will justify such a serious step,
some new factor arising, or,
at any rate, some factor which was not disclosed at
the previous hearing which would have been material. ... These are not
necessarily
matters for a preliminary submission, but they are matters that the
judge should consider in his reasons for
is for the court to exercise its discretion in deciding whether to embark upon a
full hearing of a matter or to determine the ‘threshold’
discreet point by way of preliminary
determination.
Warnick J in
the term ‘threshold’ in this context to mean:
... ‘the first question to be determined’ and which, depending on
the answer to it, may be dispositive of an application
for parenting orders,
irrespective of when in a hearing it is posited and
King and Finneran
To apply the test in
Rice v Asplund
is to make an assessment on the
material then available to the court as to whether or not the matters raised in
that material make
it necessary or proper in the best interests of the children,
the subject of the litigation, to allow further proceedings. In arriving
such a decision, the court will give consideration to the importance or
seriousness of the issues raised, both individually and
where necessary
collectively, and the impact that they may have on the
Honour also said:
The rule in
Rice v Asplund
is a rule evolved to protect children from
involvement in further unnecessary litigation. To require a court to make a
determination of the matters set out in section 68F would defeat the
purpose of that protection.
J in the Full Court decision of
endorsed the
approach taken by Warnick J and considered a number of authorities relative to
the consideration of the
Rice & Asplund
argument being considered as
a preliminary point. It is worth repeating this analysis of these
authorities:
[8] It is well settled that the “rule in
Rice & Asplund
can be applied at the outset of a hearing or proceedings or at the end of a
[9] In the important decision of
”) Warnick J held that the discussion of the rule in the
various authorities had “not always used consistent terminology”.
His Honour noted, in particular, that the term “threshold” has had
different connotations. His Honour went on to say
that he would in that judgment
“refer to the situation arising when the question is posed and answered at
the outset of a hearing
as treatment of the question as a ‘preliminary
that sense that the expression is used in these reasons of mine. As it seems
abundantly clear to me, the treatment of the
rule in that manner is what was
contemplated and undertaken by the parties and by her Honour in the
proceedings below.
, Warnick J went on to
... At whatever stage of a
hearing the rule is applied, its application should remain merely a
manifestation of the “best interests
principle”.
The application of the rule is closely connected with the nature of, and degree
of, change sought to the earlier order.
[11] His Honour went on to say
... [I]n my view when the
threshold question described in
Rice and Asplund
is determined as a
preliminary matter, it remains a determination “on the merits”.
Where an application is dismissed
at a preliminary stage, it is not dismissed
for some technical reason, such as the failure of a party to appear or some lack
of compliance
with form and procedure but rather because, assuming the evidence
of the applicant is accepted, there is an insufficient change of
circumstance
shown to justify embarking on a hearing. Though sometimes unstated, the
underlying conclusion will or ought be that
the interests of the child in not
being the subject of further litigation is more powerfully in the child’s
welfare than to
allow the application to
[12] Yet, as his Honour was at pains to point out, the rule is not the
application of some esoteric principle but rather, the practical
application of
a principle designed to avoid “endless litigation” to the detriment
of the relevant children in circumstances
where otherwise the principles of res
judicata do not apply.
[13] Thus, for example, Nygh J said in
McEnearney &
... the principle that there be
an end to litigation has equal force in custodial disputes and in some respects
may have even greater
force in custodial disputes. The last thing, of course,
that this court would wish to see would be a perennial football match between
parents who because the strict principles of res judicata are not applicable
might seek to canvass again and again the question of
custody of a child with
the enormous psychological harm which they would be inflicting not only upon
each other but especially upon
[14] To similar effect, Warnick J said in
Another end served by the rule
is that it avoids one judge substituting his or her opinion of what is in the
best interests of a child
for that of another judge, though both opinions are
based on the same or similar facts. This “evil” is avoided by a
requirement
that the previous order should not be altered unless there has been
a change of circumstances sufficient to justify that result.
[15] The “evil” referred to is the undoubted harm to children of
“a perennial football match between parents”
and the canvassing
“again and again” of issues relating to their best interests. That
situation can in my view be distinguished
from circumstances in which the
parties express their agreement about parenting arrangements in a consent order
but are now no longer
in agreement and where it is said that the now absence of
agreement is due to circumstances that have changed since the making of
consent orders.
Marsden and Winch
[48] In summary, the best interests issue arises because there are so many
changes in the lives of families that the changed circumstances
permissibly allow re-litigation of a decision must be circumscribed, otherwise
there would exist in some cases the spectre
of endless litigation finalising
only when the child attains 18 years of age and the courts no longer have
[49] However, even that simple formulation must be subservient to the nature of
the application itself. This is the genesis of
the “rule” in
Rice & Asplund
and as Warnick J says it is founded on the notion that
continuous litigation over the child or children is not generally in their
interests. It is usually hoped that the determination of a controversy
concerning children by a court will result in at least a
reasonable period of
stability of those arrangements and freedom from the stressful and conflictual
effects of litigation on both
parents and children. In addition, recent
research demonstrates that conflict between parties is itself harmful to
[50] Nevertheless, there are significant changes that occur and which do
require a court to reconsider decisions previously made.
Whether in a
particular case a court should be willing to embark upon another hearing
concerning the child and parent, or whether
to do so would itself be
demonstrably contrary to the best interests of the child, is a decision to be
made in each particular case.
How is that decision to be made? The court must
(1) The past circumstances, including the reasons for the decision and the
evidence upon which it was based.
(2) Whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way,
as a result of a new hearing.
(3) If there is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be
weighed against the potential detriment to the child
or children caused by the
litigation itself. Thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient
benefit to compensate for
the disruption caused by significant re-litigation.
the numerous applications that have been heard over the years this matter went
to a full hearing after the preparation of
a family report. Nonetheless I am
satisfied that the question of whether the father has established a significant
change of circumstances
should be determined. In
[72] ... While I have said that the rule needs to be re-formulated if applied
at the end of a hearing, and may also carry less force,
I do not think that the
Rice and Asplund
should be cast aside at the end of a hearing to
change a previous order, even if the trial Judge has come to the conclusion that
on all considerations other than the rule, the best interests of the child
require change.
[73] There are two matters of public policy that support the application of the
threshold question even at the end of a hearing.
Namely, that it is important
for one judge not simply to substitute his or her conclusion for another judge,
unless there has been
a change of circumstance sufficient to justify that
course. Secondly, albeit the particular litigation has run, if no such rule
even considered, in a general sense litigation will not be discouraged.
HAS THERE BEEN A MATERIAL CHANGE IN CIRCUMSTANCES?
the orders were made in 2014 the child was about to turn three years of age. He
is now aged 10. The father argued that this
age difference is a relevant factor
and one of the material changes in circumstances warranting a re-opening of the
litigation.
He also argued that the child has experienced problematic behaviour
at school whilst in the mother’s care and has been removed
from a school
environment into home schooling. The father held the view the mother would not
be able to meet the child’s educational
needs and he is subject to neglect
in her care.
was submitted on the father’s behalf that he no longer held negative views
of the mother or that she was currently physically
abusing the child. He gave
evidence that he would not take the child to different doctors. I do not accept
the submission, nor
do I have any confidence in the father’s assertion
that he would not take the child to different doctors.
father was unable to hide his negative views of the mother whilst giving
evidence. I accept the submissions of the mother and
ICL that the father has
not changed his views of the mother. Indeed, he conceded that in
cross-examination. He continued to express
concerns as to the way the earlier
proceedings had been concluded and he currently holds the view that the child
is in the position he is in
because of the mother. The report writer
expressed the view that rather than moving on from his previously stated views
of the mother
the father had in fact hardened his negative views. In his
affidavit he annexed child safety material and medical documents dating
2012 in support of his view that the child had been at risk with the mother. He
clearly considered that evidence to be relevant
to these proceedings. In
cross-examination he said that all of the child’s current challenges could
be attributed to the way
he has been abused by his mother and the ongoing
neglect by her. I respectfully share the view of the report writer that the
has hardened his views rather than softened them.
the 2014 orders, the father was required to complete certain counselling. He
attended upon a psychologist but it appears from
his evidence he did not
actually engage in any fruitful sessions of counselling. He said in
cross-examination that he did not need
the counselling and believed that this
was confirmed by the counsellor he saw so he just went through the process of
ticking the boxes.
issue of the child’s schooling is one that has been of concern to both
parents. When the father filed his application C
had been suspended from school
on several occasions and his schoolwork had deteriorated. The mother arranged
for home schooling and
has personally tutored him. This change in his schooling
has seen the child’s behavioural issues settle and has led to significant
improvements in his overall educational performance. The change in the
child’s schooling is, in my view, insufficient to meet
the criteria of a
significant change of circumstances. I make this finding having regard to the
mother’s evidence as to her
attention to the child’s home schooling
and his improved grades. The 2014 orders provided for the mother to have sole
responsibility for the child which includes decisions about his
schooling. The father’s criticism of the mother is without
merit, although
I am satisfied that he would have been concerned about the child’s welfare
upon hearing of his suspensions
and ultimate withdrawal from school. That is a
legitimate concern for any parent. The problem lies in the father’s
that the mother is the cause of the problem and his inability to see
that she has risen to the challenge, followed advice and attended
child’s needs appropriately.
passage of time since the making of the 2014 orders does mean that the child is
now a lot older than when the earlier orders were
made. That in and of itself
is not a significant change of circumstance although it is a relevant
consideration.
have come to the view that there has not been a significant change of
circumstances warranting a re-opening of the litigation.
Given this matter has
proceeded on the basis that the preliminary issue would be decided after a
contested hearing, I have taken
into account the relevant
coming to that decision. They will be addressed below.
the event I am wrong in that conclusion, I have also turned my mind to what
would be in the child’s best interests having
regard to those same factors
as if I was determining this matter independent of the
Rice & Asplund
issue. In doing so, I have come to the conclusion that there should be no
change to the current parenting orders.
DETERMINING THE BEST INTERESTS OF THE CHILD – THE
CONSIDERATIONS
legislative framework sets out a number of considerations the court is required
to assess in determining the best interests of
the child. In order to limit
duplication, I propose to group together these
factors thematically.
THE CHILD’S
RELATIONSHIPS
child has been primarily cared for by his mother all his life. He has a close
and loving relationship with her. Notwithstanding
his time with the father has
been supervised for over eight years he has a loving relationship with him. The
report writer in her
oral evidence said that she observed the child to delight
in spending time with his father.
term supervision is often contra-indicated, but in this case, it has enabled the
child to maintain and develop a relationship
with his father. There can be no
doubt however, that such an arrangement puts limits on the ability of both the
father and the child
to develop the relationship further. This has long been
the complaint of the father and I well understand his frustration. He is
able to take the child to his home or visit his daughter and her children or to
explore in a practical sense his Aboriginality.
These are very important
considerations. The father argued that the current orders do not enable the
child to have a sufficiently
meaningful relationship with him as such time is
not substantial and significant as defined in
s.65DAA(3).
There is no question
that the time arrangements fall outside definition of substantial and
significant time. In
[26] ...I proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations
and the application of the object and principles,
a meaningful relationship or a
meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to
the child. It is a
qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one.
Quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering
consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental
responsibility and the requirement for time with
children to be, where possible
in their best interests, substantial and significant.
Full Court in
approved this approach.
The Full Court also affirmed the jurisprudence that the legislation requires the
court to promote a meaningful
relationship not an optimal
The Full Court also went
on to hold that "meaningful relationship" is a legal construct, not a
psychological one and therefore it
is for the court, not an expert, to determine
what constitutes a meaningful
relationship.
the current arrangement cannot be said to be ideal in that the child does not
get to spend time with his father free of the
constraints of supervision,
determining the quality of time requires a consideration of risk of harm issues
that will be discussed
below. As will be seen from that discussion below I have
concluded that there is a real risk that the child’s relationships
his father and/or his mother will be compromised unless his time with his father
is supervised. Whilst the current arrangement
is not ‘optimal’, it
is meaningful for the child as it has enabled him to maintain a relationship
with his father. It
is a positive relationship and brings him joy.
father has long complained that the mother has sought to alienate the child from
him. I found no evidence of that at all. If
she has been, she has failed.
This child has a positive relationship with his father despite the impediments
of supervision. To
her credit the mother acknowledged there would come a time
when the supervision would have to cease but she was unable to set a timeframe.
I respectfully agree with her.
also want to pay some credit to the father. The father has not walked away from
his son these last eight years. Many parents would
have. He has continued to
spend time with C despite his complaint about the need for supervision. Although
it is disappointing that
I have come to the conclusion that ongoing supervision
is necessary, I am confident the father will continue to spend time with his
as, in his own way, he is committed to ensuring he has a relationship with
father’s primary case was however that the child live with him. Given the
father’s undisguised dislike, and distrust
of the mother, and his failure
to change his view of her, despite his assertions to the contrary, I have no
confidence he would promote
a relationship between C and his mother. There
would be ongoing conflict between the parents to which the child would be
and his parent/child relationships would be significantly compromised.
The father’s primary proposal would be a disaster for
this young boy.
these reasons the mother’s proposal is to be preferred over that proffered
by the father.
are no current family violence protection orders between the parties although
one issued in 2011 just prior to their final separation.
The mother was the
protected person. I accept her evidence that she remains frightened of the
father but apart from the father
occasionally leaving gift cards in her letter
box there have not been any recent incidents that would suggest the child would
exposed to family violence between the parents.
the mother and the ICL have asked me to find that there would be an unacceptable
risk of harm to this child if he was to spend
unsupervised time with their
father. ‘Unacceptable Risk’ has been considered by a number of
authorities.
proffered a list of inquiries in relation to assessing the level of
(1) What harmful outcome is potentially present in this situation?
(2) What is the probability of this outcome coming about?
(3) What risks are probable in this situation in the short, medium, and long
(4) What are the factors that could increase or decrease the risk that is
(5) What measures are available whose deployment could mitigate the risks that
are probable?
was argued that the supervision remains necessary, notwithstanding the passage
of eight years, because the child would be exposed
to emotional harm in the
father’s primary care or during unsupervised periods of time. It was
submitted that father would
resume exposing the child to significant negativity
towards the mother, take him to unnecessary medical appointments, and generally
undermine the mother’s parenting.
accept the submissions of the ICL and the mother in this regard. Although the
father asserted he would not take the child to see
medical professionals with
the aim of gathering evidence against the mother I do not accept he will be able
to refrain from doing
so. He has not been able to do so over the last eight
years because his time has been supervised. However, when he attended upon
RR in October last year, he used the time to provide his version of historical
information in an attempt to level blame for the
child’s behavioural
difficulties on the mother and possibly to undermine the child’s
diagnosis. The ICL submitted:
The father's actions show a father who, if allowed to spend unsupervised time
with the child, may again expose the child to doctors,
and treating
professionals inappropriately. Given the child's already complex behavioural
issues, which appear to have improved,
this may in fact further exacerbate such
issues, and cause emotional harm, to the child.
accept that submission.
family report writer opined:
In my opinion based on the totality of information C would likely be exposed to
his father's negative schema of the mother should
he be permitted to have
unsupervised time with his father. In my view, the risks identified by Justices
Forrest and Bell remain
current; risk to C's relationships with both of his
parents and risk to his emotional and physical health and wellbeing. As such,
in my opinion, the ongoing supervision of C's time with the Father continues to
be warranted.
the question of supervision is one for the court rather than the expert witness,
I have respectfully come to the same view
for the reasons expressed in her
report. The father remains obsessed with the mother’s care of the child.
He will not be able
to resist taking opportunities to gather evidence that he
perceives would establish and confirm his long-held views of the mother’s
parenting. The only way to mitigate the risk of him doing so is for his time
with C to be supervised. To do otherwise would expose
the child to an
unacceptable risk of harm.
considering this issue I need to look at the implications of a long-term
supervision order. In
Boland J commented on
the general undesirability of long-term supervised arrangements for time and
expressed concern about orders
not providing for their own review.
Fitzpatrick &
Fitzpatrick
May J opined
that in cases where the court is considering indefinite supervision it is also
necessary to consider the effect on the
child’s emotional well-being under
such an arrangement.
Betros & Betros
Full Court said:
[13] It has long been recognised that the permanent imposition of supervision
upon the interaction between children and a parent
is undesirable, though
sometimes warranted (see
Slater & Light
[2013] FamCAFC 4
(2013) 48 Fam LR 573
Champness & Hanson
[2009] FamCAFC 96
(2009) FLC 93-407
Moose & Moose
(2008) FLC 93-375 at [119]; H & K
[2001] FamCA 687
[1993] FamCA 143
(1993) FLC 92-357
). Consideration
should usually be given to whether orders can be created to avoid the permanence
of the supervision or, if that is
not practicable in the circumstances of the
case, whether the orders for permanent supervision are instead best made
unconditionally,
leaving the supervised party to decide if and when he or she
might bring fresh proceedings to vary the orders upon proof of changed
circumstances, in the manner envisaged by
Rice and Asplund
[1978] FamCAFC 128
of the Act ordinarily allows (see
Gorman & Huffman
[2016] FamCAFC 174).
I readily accept long-term supervision should be avoided whenever possible, I do
not consider that to be the case here. I
am satisfied that the child has a
positive relationship with the father despite the eight years of supervision. I
am confident the
father will remain in the child’s life, even if
disappointed by my decision to continue the supervision. By continuing the
supervision the child will be able to maintain a relationship with his father
without the risk of ongoing emotional harm.
leaving the issue of risk of harm, the father submitted that there was an
unacceptable risk of neglect if the child remained
in the mother’s care
because in his view, she is unable to meet his educational needs. On the
contrary I found the mother to
have been pro-active in ensuring the
child’s educational needs have been met by having him enrolled in distance
education through
SS School. If the father was so concerned he would have
arranged for the payment of extra tutoring for C but was not prepared to
whilst the child lived with the mother. He would only do so if the child lived
with him. I reject the father’s submission.
father also submitted that the mother had been neglectful in failing to have C
fully vaccinated. She held religious beliefs in
relation to the ethics of some
vaccines and was also concerned about possible adverse effects. Whilst I was
disappointed to hear
the mother’s evidence in this regard, I readily
acknowledge many in society share her views. I found the mother to be motivated
to ensure the child received proper medical care notwithstanding her views in
relation to vaccinations. The father was sincere in
his concern about this
issue, but I do not accept the position taken by the mother can be said to be
neglectful in the context of
her overall approach to ensuring the child’s
medical needs have been met. Her decisions in this regard do not amount to an
unacceptable risk of harm to the child.
THE CHILD’S
is ten years of age. There was no dispute that he is currently behind
developmentally and academically. I am not satisfied that
he has the requisite
level of maturity to understand fully the implication of his stated wishes.
Notwithstanding this finding I
am satisfied that it is appropriate to have
regard to them, albeit not in a determinative way.
his interview with the report writer for the last family report it is
C said that his visit with his father are going "
", stating that
recently they have been playing sport together at the contact centre. He told
animated stories about the time they
spend together. He suggested that their
time used to be monthly and has recently increased to fortnightly. He said
I really like it when its once a fortnight
accept that the child enjoys his time with his father and wants it to continue
in the current fortnightly format.
DIFFICULTIES
significant practical difficulty in this case under the current arrangement is
the cost to the parties of the child’s time
taking place at a contact
centre. This centre is situated in Town A requiring each party to undertake
some travel but not such that
imposes a significant burden on them. I accept
the mother’s financial circumstances are very much more modest than the
This has been made worse by the father’s failure to pay
child support. The mother argued that if the court found that there
change of circumstances the court would impose on the father the whole of the
costs of supervision. This was not supported
by the ICL or the father. The
mother did not however press such an order if the court was to accept her
primary case that there
should be no change to the orders.
the father’s time was to occur without supervision the cost associated
with the contact centre would be alleviated but this
consideration does not
outweigh the earlier finding as to unacceptable risk. I am satisfied that whilst
there is a financial imposition
on both parents, but one that impacts the mother
more, this is not a major consideration that would affect my overall
determination.
PARENTAL CAPACITY AND
RESPONSIBILITY
father was highly critical of the mother’s ability to meet the
child’s needs, particularly his educational needs.
There was no dispute
that C exhibited significant behavioural difficulties at his primary school
leading to suspensions. I heard
evidence from his 2018 teacher, Ms OO and the
former Deputy Principal of that school. They did not have a good working
relationship
with the mother. Ms OO, was at the time of her evidence, on leave
of absence from her employment which she attributed in part to
her interactions
with C. She gave evidence of C physically assaulting her when he was in grade
two and being oppositional and destructive.
She was unaware that the child had
been diagnosed with ODD and ADHD. She denied the suggestion that her evidence
critical of the
mother was motivated by a poor view of the mother. I do not
accept her denial. She clearly had a view that the mother was not doing
anything to help the situation.
evidence before the court established that the mother was in fact pro-active in
making arrangements for the child by withdrawing
him from mainstream school and
enrolling him in distance education through P School. The mother spends a
number of hours tutoring
him at home and he receives support from a visiting
teacher each week. His report card from 2020 showed he had been making pleasing
progress and was benefiting from the weekly support sessions. He was recorded
as being eager to learn and was highly creative.
His grades were quite
reasonable in the circumstances. I find that, contrary to the father’s
assertions, the mother has been
able to meet this boy’s needs in relation
to education.
has also been able to meet his medical needs by following up with his treating
medical professionals. She maintains his medication
as prescribed. The Court
would accept that the mother has the capacity to provide for the child's
her modest financial means she is also able to ensure the child is properly fed,
clothed and housed. I have no concerns about
the mother’s ability to meet
this child’s needs including his emotional needs.
I have no doubt the father would be able to meet the child’s day to day
needs if he lived with him or was spending
time with him, I remain concerned,
for the reasons set out when considering the risk of harm issues, about his
ability to meet the
child’s emotional needs.
father complained that he has been excluded from making decisions about the
child’s needs, particularly his educational
needs. This is so, given the
mother has the benefit of a sole parental responsibility order pursuant to the
2014 orders. Whilst
I fully accept the father would like to contribute to the
discussions around such issues, these parents have no ability to communicate
effectively. They cannot work together to make decisions jointly and therefore
to alter the current arrangement would not be in
the child’s best
mother has met all her responsibilities for the child but unfortunately the
father has not. His is in arrears of child support
to the extent of around
$17,000. He denies such and says that the mother owes him money that was
garnished from his last tax return
by the Child Support Agency. He believes that
the mother would use cash to buy horse feed or alcohol rather than use the money
support their son. This is yet a further indication of his negative view of
the mother. I reject his view. The mother has prioritised
the needs of both her
children despite the difficulties she has had in doing so financially. I accept
the submission made by the
ICL that by giving the child gift cards rather than
paying child support the father is being controlling in his behaviour towards
the mother.
father submitted that the child, being a boy, would want to spend more time with
him particularly as he grows older and this could
be achieved by significant and
substantial unsupervised time. I am not satisfied that it necessarily follows
that this child will
want to spend more time with his father simply because they
are of the same gender. I however accept the father would view positively
chance for them to share their time together as father and son.
more significant import however is the child’s Aboriginality. The father
is a BB People man with his ancestral lands around
Town TT. He wants an
opportunity to more fully engage C with his aboriginal culture. It is without
question that the father would
be in the best position, as between the parents,
to enable the child to experience life as a BB People youth. I accept the
evidence that she is supportive of C identifying as Aboriginal
and learning more about his culture, although she would not be able
with a lived experience of it. I note though that the mother has engaged with
Aboriginal services to assist the child.
in anyway wanting to be critical of the father he appeared to lack any deep
understanding of his own culture, but I readily
accept that it is important to
him that C gets to know other B people, learns more of his culture and develops
an attachment to his
ancestral land. This would of course be more easily
achieved if the child is either living primarily with the father or spending
unsupervised time with him. This is an important factor but not one that
overrides the risk of harm issues.
LIMITING FURTHER
PROCEEDINGS
the beginning of this judgment, I highlighted the significant number of
applications brought before the courts in relation to this
family. There is a
risk, no matter what orders I make, that these parties will find themselves in
further litigation. I implore them
to consider the effect on their son before
launching any further applications, no matter how aggrieved they may personally
mother has sought an order restraining the father from bringing any further
proceedings without first obtaining the leave of the
court to do so for a period
of three years. I will address this issue separately later in this judgment.
PRESUMPTION OF EQUAL SHARED PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
the last family violence protection order was made in 2011, I am satisfied given
the history of family violence, the presumption
of equal shared parental
responsibility does not apply. Further I am satisfied that it is not in this
child’s best interests
for such to be made. The parents have no ability
to communicate in any effective way. That is unlikely to ever change given it
has been this way for over 10 years. I am satisfied there has been no
significant change in circumstances in this regard warranting
a departure from
the sole parental responsibility order that was made in 2014.
CONSIDERATION OF EQUAL TIME OR SUBSTANTIAL AND SIGNIFICANT
have earlier in this judgment found that there has been no significant change of
circumstances warranting a review of the 2014 orders.
However, when I take into
account my assessment of the best interests considerations above, I have also
concluded that it would
not be in this child’s best interests to change
his primary residence or to spend unsupervised time with the father.
Accordingly,
I find that it would not be in this child’s best interests to
live with the parents in an equal time arrangement or to spend
time with the
father in a substantial and significant arrangement.
THE MOTHER’S APPLICATION PURSUANT TO
102QB(2)(B)
mother has asked the court to make an order that would restrain the father from
bringing further proceedings without first obtaining
the leave of the court to
do so. She said this restraint should be for a period of three years. In her
oral submissions, counsel
for the mother argued that she should be relieved from
continually having to face court.
relevant provisions are to be found in
ss 102QB(1)
and (2) which provide:
(1) This section applies if a court exercising jurisdiction in proceedings
under this Act is satisfied:
(a) a person has frequently instituted or conducted vexatious proceedings in
Australian courts or tribunals; or
(b) a person, acting in concert with another person who is subject to a
vexatious proceedings order or who is covered by paragraph
(a), has instituted
or conducted vexatious proceedings in an Australian court or tribunal.
(2) The court may make any or all of the following orders:
(a) an order staying or dismissing all or part of any proceedings in the court
already instituted by the person;
(b) an order prohibiting the person from instituting proceedings, or proceedings
of a particular type, under this Act in a court
having jurisdiction under this
(c) any other order the court considers appropriate in relation to the person.
proceedings include:
(1) In this Part:
"vexatious proceedings" includes:
(a) proceedings that are an
abuse of the process of a court or tribunal; and
(b) proceedings instituted in a court or tribunal to harass or annoy, to cause
delay or detriment, or for another wrongful purpose;
(c) proceedings instituted or pursued in a court or tribunal without reasonable
ground; and
(d) proceedings conducted in a court or tribunal in a way so as to harass or
annoy, cause delay or detriment, or achieve another
wrongful purpose.
list is not exhaustive.
well understand the frustration of the mother in having to deal with legal
proceedings brought by the father. Although I have found
there has been no
significant change in circumstances warranting a change in the parenting orders
I have also found that the father
would have been legitimately concerned about
the welfare of C upon hearing of his suspensions from school and then his
ultimate withdrawal
from school. Given the parties’ inability to talk
through issues when they arise it is again not surprising that the father
resorted to legal action in an attempt to address his concerns.
order to make the order sought by the mother I would need to be satisfied that
the father’s proceedings were brought vexatiously
and that he has done
this frequently.
For the reasons
outlined in the previous paragraph, I am not satisfied that at the time the
father brought his application he was
acting vexatiously. Although, when the
contravention applications are taken into account it can be said that there have
been frequent
proceedings, I am not satisfied that the father has brought
Initiating proceedings frequently. The first set of parenting proceedings
brought by the mother in 2011 but this application was not prosecuted. The
father then brought parenting proceedings the following
year which led to the
2014 orders. In 2015 the father’s application to vary those orders was
dismissed and an appeal was dismissed
the following year. The father did not
bring any further substantive proceedings until these, filed in December
the litigation has appeared to be never ending for the mother, I am not
satisfied that it can be said to be frequent. Having
said that it is important
for both parents to appreciate the negative effects on children of ongoing
litigation. This will be even
more pronounced for a child, C’s age. The
ICL submitted:
This is, however, a matter that needs to end for C. As previously outlined, he
has spent the majority of his life, with his parents
engaged in parenting
proceedings. This has had a significant impact on C, and it will continue to do
so, should the parties be unable
to cease the constant litigation between them.
share that view. Despite my sympathies for the mother’s request for the
making of a restraint on further litigation, I am
not satisfied the criteria for
the making of such an order has been established.
the reasons set out above I dismiss the father’s application filed 6
December 2018 and the mother’s application for
restraint on the
father’s ability to bring proceedings without leave of the
I certify that the preceding one hundred (100)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 30 August 2021
[1978] FamCA 84
6 Fam LR 570
F1 Statement from Ms OO
Exhibit F2 Statement from Mr PP
ICL1 Tender Bundle
Exhibit M1 Minute of order sought by mother
F3 Father’s fallback position minute
Exhibit M2 QQ Medical Centre (Town
MM) medication certificate dated 8 February 2021
Exhibit M3 Email
correspondence regarding Covid test outcome dated 10 February 2021
Table of indebtedness to the City B Children’s Contact Centre dated 27
Exhibit M5 Child Support Agency email dated 26 May 2021
M6 Child Support Agency letter dated 26 May 2021
Exhibit ICL 2 Student
Progress Report, Year 4, Semester 1,
Section 140
Section 60B lists the
objects and principles for
Goode v Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346
, (2006) FLC 93-286
Section 61DA
Section 61DA(2)
Section 65DAA(1)(a) &
Section 65DAA(2)(c) &
[1978] FamCA 84
(1979) FLC 90-725
[1978] FamCAFC 128
6 Fam LR 570
[1990] FamCA 148
(1991) FLC 92-191
[1995] FamCA 146
(2008) FLC 93-363
[2008] FamCAFC 16
[2001] FamCA
Ibid at [41]. His
Honour’s reference to s.68F was to the
Family Law Act
as it was prior to
the 2006 amendments. See
[2017] FamCAFC 119
Kent and Loughnan JJ agreed with the decision of
[1978] FamCAFC 128
(1979) FLC 90-725
[2008] FamCAFC 16
(2008) FLC 93-363
Marsden & Winch
(2009) 42 Fam LR 1;
Miller & Harrington
[2008] FamCAFC 150
(2008) FLC 93-383
[2008] FamCAFC 16
approved in
Marsden & Winch
(2009) 42 Fam LR 1;
& Harrington
[2008] FamCAFC 150
(2008) FLC 93-383
Walter & Walter
at 78,905 per Evatt
[1980] FamCA 43
(1980) FLC 90-866
[2009] FamCAFC
Bryant CJ, Finn and
See for example
Jennifer McIntosh ‘Enduring conflict in parental separation: Pathways of
impact on child development’
Journal of Family Studies
and Jennifer McIntosh and Richard Chisholm ‘Cautionary notes on the shared
care of children in conflicted parental separation’
of Family Studies
(2008) FLC 93-363
[2008] FamCAFC
Section 60CC(2)(a):
benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the
child’s parents.
Section 60CC(3)(b):
The nature of the relationship of
the child with: (i) each of the child’s parents; and (ii) other
persons (including any grandparent
or other relative of the child).
60CC(3)(c):
The extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or
failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making
decisions about
major long-term issues in relation to the child; and (ii) to spend time with the
child; and (iii) to communicate
with the child.
Section 60CC(3)(d):
likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstance, including the
likely effect on the child of any separation from:
(i) either of his or her
parents; or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or
other relative of the
child), with whom he or she has been
[2007] FamCA 520
(2008) 37 Fam LR 518
[2011] FamCAFC
(2011) 44 Fam LR 439
[2006] FamCA 1408
(2007) FLC 93-313
Godfrey v Sanders
[2007] FamCA 102
Champness v Hanson
[2009] FamCAFC 96
& Hemming (No. 2)
[2011] FamCA
Section 60CC(2)(b):
need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family
60CC(3)(j):
Any family violence involving the child or a member of the
child’s family.
Section 60CC(3)(k):
If a family violence order
applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s
family-any relevant inferences
that can be drawn from the order, taking into
account the following: i) The nature of the order; ii) The circumstances
the order was made; iii) Any evidence admitted in proceedings for the
order; iv) Any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings
for, the order;
v) Any other relevant
[1988] FamCA 46
[1988] FLC 91-957
Donaghey & Donaghey
[2011] FamCA 13
George & Nichols
[2016] FamCA
[2010] FamCA
[2008] FamCAFC 108
(2008) FLC 93-375
(2005) FLC 93-227
[2017] FamCAFC 90
per Thackray, Murphy and Austin
Section 60CC(3)(a):
views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity
or level of understanding) that the Court thinks
are relevant to the weight it
should give to the child’s
Section 60CC(3)(e):
The practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and
communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or
expense will
substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and
direct contact with both parents on
a regular basis.
Section 60CC(3)(m):
other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is
60CC(3)(f):
The capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents; and (ii)
any other person (including any grandparent or other relative
of the child); to
provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual
Section 60CC(3)(ca):
The extent to which each of the child’s
parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to
Section 60CC(3)(i):
The attitude to the child, and to the
responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s
S.60CC(3)(g):
maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and
traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s
parents, and any
other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are
S.60CC(3)(h):
If the child is an Aboriginal child or Torres Strait
Islander child: (a) the child’s right to enjoy his or her Aboriginal
Torres Strait Islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with
other people who share that culture); and (b)
the likely impact any proposed
parenting order under this Part will have on that right. See also
S.60CC(3)(l):
Whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to
lead to the institution of further proceedings in
relation to the child.
[2020] FamCA49
RTF format (571 KB)
Signed PDF/A format