Jalal & Malki [2021] FamCA 637; (27 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
JALAL & MALKI
[2021] FamCA 637
PROPERTY SETTLEMENT – Just and
Family Law Act 1975
Bevan & Bevan
(2013) FLC 93-545
[2013] FamCAFC 116
Hepworth v Hepworth
(1963) 110 CLR 309
Lovine & Connor and Anor
(2012) FLC 93-515
[2012] FamCAFC
Mallet v Mallet
(1984) 156 CLR 605
[1984] HCA 21
(2012) 247 CLR 108
[2012] HCA 52
Steinbrenner &
Steinbrenner
[2008] FamCAFC 193
RESPONDENT:
DATE DELIVERED:
PLACE DELIVERED:
PLACE HEARD:
JUDGMENT OF:
HEARING DATE:
1 and 2 March 2021 and by way of written submissions filed 9 March
2021 and 15 March 2021
REPRESENTATION
THE APPLICANT:
In person and then by way of written submissions
filed 9 March 2021
COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENT:
Mr MacDonald and by way of written submissions in
reply filed 15 March 2021
SOLICITOR FOR THE RESPONDENT:
Stuart Percy & Associates
ORDERED BY WAY OF FINAL ORDER THAT
(1) All previous Orders
are discharged.
(2) Within fourteen (14) days of them having been provided to her by the
Respondent, the Applicant shall sign such documents as are
necessary to cause
her to resign from and otherwise cease to have any involvement in the following
(a) the W Trust, being the discretionary trust established by Deed dated 28
November 2008 between Ms X as settlor and W Pty Ltd as
trustee; and
(b) the D Investments Trust, being the discretionary trust established by
Deed dated 15 July 2004 between Ms X as settlor and D Pty
Ltd as trustee;
(c) the C Family Trust, being the discretionary trust established by Deed
dated 6 August 2003 between Mr V as settlor and W Pty Ltd
as trustee; and
(d) the E Trust, being the discretionary trust established by Deed dated 3
February 2006 between Ms X as settlor and E Pty Ltd as
trustee; and
(e) F Pty Ltd ACN ...; and
(f) G Pty Ltd ACN ...; and
(g) W Pty Ltd ACN ...; and
(h) H Pty Ltd ACN ...; and
(i) J Pty Ltd ACN ...; and
(j) K Pty Ltd ACN ...; and
(k) L Pty Ltd ACN ...; and
(l) E Pty Ltd ACN ...; and
(m) D Pty Ltd ACN ....
(3) For the purposes of Order (2) herein:
(a) the Applicant shall, within fourteen (14) days of being provided with the
same by the Respondent, sign all such documents as may
be required to:
(i) transfer or otherwise assign to the Respondent all shareholdings or
interest of any nature whatsoever she has in any of the entities
listed in Order
(ii) facilitate the appointment of the Respondent, or a person nominated in
writing by him, as a director and/or secretary of any
of the entities listed in
Order (2) in her place; and
(iii) do all such acts and things and sign all necessary documents to
transfer to the Respondent, or his nominee, all of her interests
of any nature
whatsoever, including any credit loan accounts or unpaid present entitlements,
in all of the trusts listed in Order
(iv) assign to the Respondent any loan account standing to her credit or
debit in any of the entities or trusts listed in Order (2)
and provide to him a
full release and discharge from and against any claim, right, entitlement or
interest in any such loan account
in the listed entities or trusts; and
(v) renounce and forego any power, right, interest or entitlement (legal and
beneficial) in or to the entities or trusts listed in
Order (2); and
(vi) ensure her removal as a guarantor of any commercial facilities related
to any of the entities and trusts listed in Order (2).
(b) the Respondent shall, within twenty-eight (28) days, do all things
necessary to have the Applicant released as a guarantor of
any commercial
facilities related to any of the entities and trusts listed in Order (2).
(4) Upon compliance with the terms of Orders (2) and (3), the Applicant and
the Respondent do all things and sign all documents necessary
to cause Davidson
& Sullivan Lawyers to pay the funds held in trust on behalf of the parties,
being the balance of the nett sale
proceeds of the sale of real property
situated at M Street, C Town in the State of Queensland, and more particularly
described as
Lot ... on Survey Plan ..., Title reference ... and any interest
accumulated on the same, in the following manner:
(a) to the Respondent: the sum of $200,000.00 if he has already been paid
$20,000.00 in accordance with the Order made on 6 August
2020 or $220,000.00 if
this payment has not yet been made; and
(b) to the Applicant: the balance.
(5) The Applicant shall make the motor vehicle owned by W Pty Ltd available
for collection by the Respondent within seven (7) days
of the payment to her of
the funds referred to in Order (4).
(6) Except as otherwise provided for in this Order, the Applicant retain as
her absolute property and is entitled to be the sole legal
and beneficial owner
of and to retain sole use and control of:
(a) the funds paid to her pursuant to Order (4); and
(b) the $20,000.00 paid to her pursuant to Order 7e of the Orders made by
consent on 6 August 2020; and
(c) any other funds held in all bank accounts in her sole name; and
(d) the furniture, household contents and other chattels currently in her
name or possession in both Australia and Country Q; and
(e) her superannuation entitlements, including her interests with O Super
Fund and P Super Fund, and
(f) all other proprietary interests of whatsoever nature in her current
possession or under her control.
(7) The Applicant retain sole liability for and indemnify the Respondent with
respect to:
(a) her student loan, HECS or HELP debt; and
(b) her credit card liabilities; and
(c) any other loan, lease or credit card liability held or registered in her
sole name in both Australia and Country Q.
(8) Except as otherwise provided for in this Order, the Respondent retain as
his absolute property and is entitled to be the sole
legal and beneficial owner
of and to retain sole use and control of:
(a) the funds paid to him pursuant to Order (4); and
(b) the $20,000.00 paid to him pursuant to Order 7f of the Orders made by
consent on 6 August 2020; and
(c) all entities and trusts listed in Order (2) and any and all income,
investments, assets and tax credits (if any) therefrom; and
(d) the funds held in all bank accounts in his sole name; and
(e) the furniture, household contents and other chattels currently in his
name or possession; and
(f) his superannuation entitlements, including his interests with R Super
(g) all other proprietary interests of whatsoever nature in his current
possession or under his control.
(9) The Respondent be solely liable for and indemnify the Applicant
absolutely in relation to:
(a) his credit card liabilities; and
(b) any and all liabilities of whatsoever kind and all actions and claims
whenever made in relation to or arising from those entities
and trusts listed in
Order (2), including those arising for her as a consequence of any loan shown in
the books of account of any
listed entity or trust as being owed by the
Applicant to the same or from any unpaid present entitlements recorded as owing
Applicant by any entity or trust listed in Order (2); and
(c) any other loan, lease or credit card liability held or registered in his
(10) Other than as is specifically provided for in these Orders, the parties
are solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to
all other property and
chattels of whatsoever nature and kind in the possession of each of the parties
as at the date of the making
of these Orders.
(11) The Applicant and the Respondent shall execute all deeds, instruments or
documents and do all acts and things necessary to give
effect to these Orders
within fourteen (14) days of a written request to do the same.
(12) In the event that either party refuses or neglects to do any act or sign
any document required to be done or executed in compliance
with the provisions
of these Orders fourteen (14) days after being requested to do so, and any such
refusal, failure or neglect is
proved by affidavits filed and served by or on
behalf of the party alleging this, then, pursuant to
(Cth), a Registrar of the Family Court of Australia at Brisbane is
hereby appointed to execute all deeds and documents in the name
defaulting party and do all acts and things necessary to give validity and
operation to these Orders.
AND IT IS FURTHER ORDERED THAT
(13) In the event that any party seeks an order that the other party pay his
or her costs:
(a) if thought necessary by a party, that party has leave to file a further
affidavit by that party containing any evidence relevant
to the issue of costs
and one other affidavit in support of the same, provided that such affidavits
are filed within seven (7) days
of the date of this Order; and
(b) any such party shall file and serve any written submissions in support of
such application for costs within seven (7) days of
(c) the party against whom an order for costs is sought shall, within a
further seven (7) days thereafter, file and serve any brief
written submissions
in answer to the submissions filed and served by the party seeking costs;
(d) the party seeking an order for costs shall file and serve any brief
further written submissions within seven (7) days of its service,
strictly in
reply to the submissions served by the party against whom an order for costs is
and any such application for costs shall be considered in Chambers.
AND IT IS FURTHER ORDERED THAT
(14) Save as is otherwise ordered herein, no party is permitted to use any
documents provided to them in the course of this proceeding
for any purpose
other than this proceeding or any appeal in respect of these Orders.
(15) All outstanding Applications are dismissed.
(16) This matter be removed from the Pending Cases List.
Note: The form of the order is subject to the entry of the order in the
Court’s records.
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this
judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
been approved by the Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for
Judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a
variation to the order pursuant to r 17.02
Family Law Rules 2004
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA AT BRISBANE
FILE NUMBER:
BRC 2053 of 2016
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
1. Ms Malki (the Applicant), who was born in 1965, and Mr Jalal (the
Respondent), who was born in 1971, started to live together
in about September
1997 and married in 1997. They have no children together. They separated in
to agree about how to finalise their
property adjustment proceedings.
2. The Applicant is qualified to PhD level; the Respondent is a professional. In
the lead up to the trial, the Applicant was financially
supported by a
combination of casual work and Centrelink benefits, whilst the Respondent
remained self- employed.
3. One of the consequences of the parties’ voluntary separation in late
2011 is that they no longer enjoy the common use of
property in which their
existing legal and equitable interests were acquired during their cohabitation
and subsequent marriage. Another
consequence is the cessation of any
“assumption that any adjustment to those interests could be effected
consensually as needed
I accept that, in
the circumstances of this case, it is just and equitable within the meaning of
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) that, pursuant to
Act, orders altering the interests in property owned by each of them are
4. Given this conclusion, it is necessary to resolve the conflict between the
parties about the terms of the orders which are appropriate
to reflect properly
those matters which, by
of the Act, must be considered.
The competing proposals
The Applicant
5. The Applicant proposed that
it was just and equitable that orders be made to ensure that she receive and/or
retain the following
property: the entirety of the nett sale proceeds obtained
from the sale of real property located at M Street, C
(likely to be in the amount of
); the entirety of
her entitlement to superannuation held with P Super Fund and O Super Fund
(of $338,428.00); the real property owned
by her in Country Q (valued at
possession or under
her control, whether in Australia or in Country Q; and that
the Respondent pay her funds in whatever amount is necessary to see her
property valued at 60 per cent of the nett value of the total property of the
6. The Applicant proposed that the Respondent receive and/or retain: the real
property located at B Road, C Town
(likely to have a nett value of about $341,355.00); his entitlement to
superannuation with R Super Fund (of $77,658.00); the shares
he owns in the
various corporate entities which constitute the Jalal Group; the shares she owns
in some of the corporate entities
included within the Jalal Group; the
$20,000.00 paid to him as a consequence of the 6 August 2020
; and all chattels and
property currently owned by him and in his possession or under his control. She
also proposed that he indemnify
her in respect of all liabilities, of whatever
nature and whenever arising, associated with the various corporate entities for
she has previously been a director or in which she remained a shareholder
as at the date of trial.
The Respondent
7. The Respondent proposed that it was just and
equitable that orders be made to ensure that he receive a payment of
$220,000.00
from the nett sale
proceeds of the M Street property (with the Applicant to receive the balance of
the same); that he receive and/or
retain all of the entities and trusts
constituting the Jalal Group (which would effectively see him receive
property valued at no
less than about
$341,355.00
); that he retain his
entitlement to superannuation ($77,658.00) and all chattels and property
currently owned by him and in his possession
or under his control and that the
Applicant return to him a motor vehicle owned by W Pty Ltd. He proposed that he
indemnify the Applicant,
generally as she sought.
The property of the parties and related issues
8. I find the property of the parties and their
respective entitlements to superannuation to be as set out in the table below. I
so based on: the parties’ agreement about the manner in which I should
arrive at the value to be attributed to various chattels
in the absence of
expert evidence about the same; my decision, given the very significant time
that has passed since the parties
separated, to exclude those liabilities each
party has as at the date of the trial from consideration in arriving at the nett
of the property of the parties; my determination that, in attributing
value to the various entities and trusts which the Respondent
has referred to
collectively as constituting “the Jalal Group”, the most appropriate
course is simply to take in the
nett value of the real property situated at B
Road, C Town
as it is the only
asset of any significant value held within the
M Street property
Sold and nett sale proceeds held in trust
$330,823.00
B Road, C Town
D Pty Ltd atf D Investments Trust [part of the Jalal Group]
$407,616.00
Vacant land in Country
Ride On Mower
Household contents
Husqvarna edge trimmer
Household contents
Vintage engine
Diamond engagement ring
Coin collection
Stamp collection
Australia Post album stamp collection
Vintage tractors and engines
D Investments Trust
BB Family Trust
Superannuation
P Super Fund
$338,024.00
O Super Fund
R Super Fund
Total non superannuation property
$823,929.00
Total superannuation
$416,086.00
$1,240,015.00
9. The Respondent contended that the property of the parties for the purpose of
this aspect of the approach to determining those
orders which are just and
equitable should include the following as being in the Applicant’s
possession or under her control:
livestock (at an asserted total value of
$8,313.00); a tractor (at an asserted value of $8,500.00); Howard slasher (at an
value of $2,000.00); and a Honda generator (an asserted value of
$150.00). However, I accept the Applicant’s evidence to the
effect that,
in the time since the September 2011 separation, she has sold these items for a
total of about $14,650.00,
she has applied to her financial support.
10. The Respondent also contended that the Applicant continued to own a
one-third share in an apartment in Country Q which had been
bought in December
2011 for approximately $17,040.00. Whilst he also ultimately accepted the value
attributed by the Applicant at
one stage to this apartment (in the amount of
her interest in the apartment for about $17,446.00 and had applied the
funds she received to her living expenses and maintenance
costs associated with
the M Street property. Whilst Counsel for the Respondent submitted that, in the
absence of documentary evidence
corroborating the Applicant’s account, I
should reject her evidence and find that she continues to own a one-third
in the apartment, I have, on balance, decided to proceed on the basis
of an acceptance of the Applicant’s evidence about the
apartment. My
acceptance of her evidence about her disposal of it and the use to which she has
put the funds she received from it
does not derogate from the facts that it was
bought by funds which had been accumulated by the parties during their
cohabitation
and that only she received the benefit of the same after
separation.
11. In the exercise of what has been referred to as the “discretion within
a discretion” to determine the manner in which
the issue of notional
add-backs are to be treated within the exercise of the overarching discretion of
determining just and equitable
orders under s 79 of the
I decline to notionally add
back the amounts discussed above for the purpose of calculating the nett value
of the property of the
parties. Rather, I will have regard to the fact of the
Applicant’s receipt of these funds from the sale of property after
pursuant to s 75(2)(o) of the
I will similarly take into
account the Respondent’s assertion that the Applicant should, in essence,
bear the entirety of the
$25,000.00 reduction in the price obtained for the M
Street property because of her failure in the time since September 2011 to
that the property did not suffer termite damage.
12. Whilst I accept that the Respondent caused W Pty Ltd to pay salary and bonus
payments to his partner and that various of her
educational, travel and personal
expenses have been met from the same source in the period following the
September 2011, I am not
persuaded that these payments have
“depleted” the value of the property of the parties for the purpose
of these proceedings,
especially given the quantum of the payments the
Respondent caused W Pty Ltd to make for the Applicant’s support and
during the same period.
The s 79(4) considerations
13. In considering the relevant matters mandated by s
79 of the Act, it must be remembered that:
of ownership arising from marriage has no place in the common
is no presumption of equality of contribution between parties to a marriage,
irrespective of the length of their
exercise of the discretion conferred must not proceed on an assumption that the
parties’ interests in the property are or
should be different from those
determined by common law and
14. I accept the submission made by Counsel for the Respondent to the effect
that, despite the passage of time since separation,
it is appropriate and just
in the circumstances of this case that the Court approach the assessment of the
parties’ respective
contributions to the property of the parties on a
global basis, rather than on an asset by asset basis. I do so because, despite
the time that has passed since the parties separated in September 2011, the
assets of relatively significant value which remain for
consideration are assets
which existed at the time of separation and I consider it more likely than not
that any increase in the
value of the same (for example, in the value of the M
Street property, the B Road property and in each of the parties’
entitlements to superannuation) has been the result of market
influences rather than any particular or specific contribution by a
The parties’ contributions until
15. It is, I consider, unnecessary to specifically
particularise all of the myriad contributions, financial and non-financial, made
by each party prior to their separation in September 2011. I accept that each
of them, on occasions, made greater financial contribution
than the other; I
accept that the Applicant initially supported the Respondent financially when he
left paid employment to commence
the business ultimately run through W Pty Ltd;
I accept that funds earned by the Applicant from her paid
and funds earned by
the Respondent via his operation of W Pty Ltd were applied to meet the
parties’ general living expenses,
including mortgage repayments, and
toward other maintenance costs; I accept that both parties contributed to and
supported each other
during the course of their relationship in varying ways; I
accept that both made contributions to the development and operation of
business operated via W Pty Ltd and that both contributed to the operation of
their household and maintenance of the properties
in which they lived at various
16. Insofar as the Applicant’s inheritance is concerned, I generally
accept that, of the $47,000.00 she obtained following
the sale by her of
inherited property, $32,881.00 was applied to the November 2009 purchase of the
M Street property
$505,000.00, with the balance of the purchase price being met by borrowings of
$404,000.00 and joint savings) and the balance
was applied to, and for, the
parties’ joint endeavours and/or their support.
17. I accept generally that, save for the contribution by the Applicant of
approximately $47,000.00 received by her as a consequence
of inheritance, the
parties contributed equally until their separation.
The parties’ contributions from separation until
18. It is uncontentious that the Applicant remained
living in the M Street property after separation until its sale earlier this
19. I accept that, after separation, the mortgage repayments for the loan
secured over the M Street property continued to be made
by W Pty Ltd until 22
February 2018 and that the total amount paid after separation was about
$201,780.00.
20. I also accept that after separation, the Applicant made the following direct
financial contributions in relation to the M Street
property in which she
by way of mortgage repayments; and
drawn from her superannuation in June and July 2020; and
in relation to meet costs associated with fixing fences, lantana control and
mowing; and
towards insurance for the property; and
toward rates; and
to fix and have underground power lines installed; and
to pay for utilities.
21. I accept that, the Applicant used a redundancy payment of $73,129.00 she
received in January 2013 to support herself and meet
some of the ongoing
maintenance costs associated with the M Street property whilst she undertook
further study she started in 2014.
22. I accept that, after separation, the Respondent, via entities under his
control, continued to be responsible for ensuring that
the mortgage repayments
relating to the B Road property (in an amount of about $330,958.00) continued to
be made and that the other
costs associated with the retention of that property
continued to be met.
23. I accept that, from separation until 21 February 2017, the Respondent caused
W Pty Ltd to continue to deposit funds into a bank
account used by the Applicant
and that these funds were used by her to pay for electricity, rates at times,
car expenses, food, medical
expenses and other household bills. Whilst the
Respondent contended that the total of the funds made available for the
Applicant’s
use was in the amount of $142,718.00, the Applicant accepted
only that a total of about $110,342.00 had been provided. On either
scenario, it
is clear that the Applicant received the benefit of relatively significant
financial support in this manner from W Pty
Ltd in the period from separation in
September 2011 until early 2017.
24. I accept that, having received an inheritance of about $179,983.00 in early
November 2017, the Respondent applied the same to
Conclusions about contributions
25. In assessing the contributions made by the parties,
the Court embarks upon a process involving the exercise of a broad discretion
respect of which reasonable minds may differ. Whilst this process is neither an
accounting or mathematical exercise, it does involve
a movement from a
“qualitative evaluation of contributions to a quantitative reflection of
such evaluation” – that
is, a “leap” from words to
26. As noted earlier, I consider that, but for the application by the Applicant
of her inheritance to joint purposes, the contributions
of the parties to
separation were equal. I also consider it undeniably clear that, in the period
since separation, the Respondent
has made the overwhelming contributions to the
conservation and maintenance of the property the subject of consideration in
proceedings. These contributions enabled the Applicant to live in
accommodation without having to make any direct financial contribution
costs of the same for about six years after the parties separated – during
which time she was able to undertake and
complete further study; in addition,
she was provided with funds from which she was able to meet many of her
day-to-day living expenses.
27. Even taking into account the financial and other contributions made by the
Applicant to the M Street property (including those
made following her receipt
of an inheritance) and the fact that it is more likely than not that the
Respondent gained some benefit
from not having to bring the parties’
financial inter-relationship to an end earlier than is the case (for example, by
able to continue to operate the Jalal Group as he had prior to separation
without having to take steps to have the Applicant –
the sole legal owner
of the M Street property – removed as a guarantor of various financial
accommodations extended to the
Jalal Group), the quantum of the financial
contributions made by the Respondent after the September 2011 separation are
persuade of the conclusion that the quantification of contributions
favour him.
28. Given the orders sought by the Respondent, it is, I consider, unnecessary
that I further quantify further the significant post-separation
contributions he made.
29. None of the orders proposed by either party will have any effect on the
earning capacity of either party.
Relevant s 75(2) matters and conclusions about the same
30. I consider that it is more likely than not that the
Applicant’s future financial situation will be significantly more
than that faced by the Respondent. Whilst she is very qualified, I
accept that she has faced significant difficulty in obtaining
paid employment;
given her age, I think it more likely than not that she will continue to face
such difficulties into the future.
I accept that she was supported by receipt of
Jobseeker payments between the end of April 2020 until she started paid
on a casual and temporary basis in mid-November 2020. I accept
that since about mid-November 2020, she has worked for anywhere between
36 hours per week, for which she has been paid $36.00/hour (gross).
31. I also accept that the Applicant has various liabilities which will need to
be met, including a HELP loan of $27,200.00, funds
borrowed from her mother and
the amount of $5,000.00 (which she borrowed to pay toward the costs of the
forensic report in these
proceedings). I accept that, given the car she has been
using is owned by W Pty Ltd and will need to be returned to that entity,
will have to purchase a car for her own use.
32. Whilst the Applicant has superannuation entitlements totalling $338,428.36,
she will not be able to access the same (absent meeting
a condition of release
prior to then) until early 2025.
33. I accept that, since the September 2011 separation, the Applicant has
obtained the sole benefit from the funds received from
the sale of the property
discussed in paragraphs 9 and 10 above.
34. Whilst I accept that the self-employed Respondent has, more recently,
suffered a financial set-back as a consequence of difficulties
associated with a
project undertaken with Company N, the evidence suggests that he has a secondary
income stream available to him
– namely, that associated with him acting
as an expert witness in litigation. On balance, as noted above, I consider his
financial circumstances to be likely to be superior to those of the
Applicant. I note that he is financially responsible for a soon-to-be
old child, has the liabilities about which he has given evidence and has some
medical issues – although, given the
gross receipts from the same
demonstrated in the accounts exhibited to his affidavit, the same do not seem to
me to have adversely
impacted his capacity to undertake work as an expert
35. The Respondent asserted that the Applicant’s failure to agree to sign,
in her capacity as a director of D Pty Ltd, an extension
of a commercial lending
facility meant that he was denied the cash flow that would have enabled him to
continue in his venture with
Company N – and thereby caused him financial
loss – and exposed him to additional fees and a higher interest rate on
the borrowings. Even if that was the case, I am not persuaded that the
Applicant, a guarantor of such borrowings, acted unreasonably,
particularly
given the concurrence of the cessation of W Pty Ltd making the mortgage
repayments for the M Street loan and the request
to execute the extension, the
absence of any knowledge about the Respondent’s intended use of the funds
to be made available
by an extension of the facility and the fact that it
appears to have been the Respondent’s intention to have the same loaned
an entity in which she had no interest.
WHAT ORDERS ARE JUST AND EQUITABLE?
36. On the basis of the conclusions outlined above and
having regard to the parties’ respective contributions to trial and the
relevant s 75(2) matters, I consider that those orders which are just and
equitable are orders which will result in:
Applicant receiving a cash payment of about $110,000.00 (inclusive of the
$20,000.00 already payable to her by virtue of the 6
August 2020 Order) and
retaining her entitlement to superannuation and the chattels and property in her
possession and under her
control (other than the shares which it is agreed she
should transfer to the Respondent) and being indemnified by the Respondent
the manner particularised; and
Respondent receiving a cash payment of $220,000.00 (inclusive of the $20,000.00
already payable to him by virtue of the 6 August
2020 Order) and retaining his
entitlement to superannuation and the chattels and property in his possession
and under his control
and will receive a transfer of the Applicant’s
shares in the relevant entities within the Jalal Group and the assignment of
of her other entitlements and/liabilities in respect of the same.
37. The consequence for the parties of the orders to be made is that the
Applicant will receive property and entitlement to superannuation
having a total
value of about $469,718.00 (representing about
per cent of the nett value
of the total property of the parties), whilst the Respondent will receive
property and entitlement to
superannuation having a total value of $769,474.00
(representing about 62.05 per cent of the nett value of the total property of
the parties). The conclusion that this is just and equitable in the
circumstances of this case also takes into account that the Applicant
already had the benefit of the receipt of about
$32,096.00,
the s 75(2)
considerations discussed above and a consideration of the issue of the
$25,000.00 reduction in the sale price of the
M Street property consequent on
termite damage.
38. It is, I consider, just and equitable and appropriate that the Respondent
receive a payment in cash from the remaining nett sale
proceeds of the sale of
the M Street property rather than by way of a superannuation-splitting order
because: he has the obligation
to support a young child; receiving a cash
payment will enable him to apply the same to the ongoing operation of the
business he
operates through the Jalal Group; and he will be unable to access
any entitlement to superannuation until about mid-2023.
39. Whilst Counsel for the Respondent submitted that orders should be made to
ensure that the funds currently held in the solicitors’
trust account are
preserved pending the filing of any application for an order for costs, I
consider that the terms of the orders
made are such as to allow any application
for an order for costs to be considered before the likely payment out by the
of the funds held in trust.
40. For the reasons outlined above, I consider that the orders set out at the
commencement of these Reasons will, as far as practicable
determine the
financial relationships between the parties and are the orders which are just
and equitable appropriate to be made.
I certify that the
preceding forty (40) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of
the Honourable Justice Hogan delivered
on 27 August
Date: 27 August 2021
Stanford v Stanford
[2012] HCA 52
(2012) 247 CLR 108
Ibid at [42].
More particularly described as
Lot ... on Survey Plan ..., Title reference ....
An indicative amount only and
exclusive of the deduction of the costs of sale but inclusive of the payment to
each party of the
$20,000.00 provided for by the order made by consent on 6
August 2020.
Owned by D Pty Ltd atf D
Investments Trust.
Inferred given that no
submissions were made about this issue.
I infer, in addition to the
$20,000.00 he is to receive pursuant to the terms of the 6 August 2020 consent
order, although no submissions
were made about this issue to clarify whether the
Respondent sought to receive $220,000.00 in total (inclusive of the $20,000.00
ordered by the August 2020 Order) or $240,000.00.
Being the nett value of B Road
C Town, owned by D Pty Ltd atf D Investments Trust.
Owned by D Pty Ltd atf D
Investments Trust.
On the basis that I have
notionally added back the $20,000.00 each party is entitled to have been paid
upon the settlement of the
sale of the M Street property as provided for in the
6 August 2020 Order.
See S Report 24 February
2021: using WBC liability and Y Valuers valuation of $650,000.00 as at
5 February 2021.
Remaining balance of
inherited land following sale of a portion of the same to realise funds applied
toward the purchase of the
M Street property.
Applicant’s Balance
Sheet filed 5 February 2021; Respondent’s Balance Sheet filed 28 February
Applicant’s Balance
Sheet filed 5 February 2021; Respondent’s Balance Sheet filed 28 February
Applicant’s Balance
Sheet filed 5 February 2021; Respondent’s Balance Sheet filed 28 February
Respondent’s
Balance Sheet filed 28 February 2021.
Valued by method agreed
during the trial.
Valued by method agreed
during the trial.
Valued by method agreed
during the trial.
Applicant’s Balance
Sheet filed 5 February 2021; Respondent’s Balance Sheet filed 28 February
Valued by method agreed
during the trial.
Applicant’s Balance
Sheet filed 5 February 2021; Respondent’s Balance Sheet filed 28 February
Valued by method agreed
during the trial.
Valued by method agreed
during the trial.
Given: the value
attributed to the Jalal Group in the 24 February 2021 S Report of $399,100.00;
that the primary asset of the Group
is the real property at B Road, C Town and
the Respondent’s acceptance of the approach of using the equity in that
as the value of the Group.
Applicant’s Balance
Sheet filed 5 February 2021; Respondent’s Balance Sheet filed 28 February
Applicant’s Balance
Sheet filed 5 February 2021; Respondent’s Balance Sheet filed 28 February
Applicant’s Balance
Sheet filed 5 February 2012; Respondent’s Balance Sheet filed 28 February
Comprising: about $4,000.00
for the cattle; $8,500.00 for the tractor; $2,000.00 for the slasher and $150.00
for the generator.
Lovine & Connor and
[2012] FamCAFC 168
(2012) FLC 93-515
See, for example:
[2013] FamCAFC 116
(2013) FLC 93-545
per the plurality at [79] and per Finn J at
Stanford v Stanford
[2012] HCA 52
(2012) 247 CLR 108
Hepworth v Hepworth
[1963] HCA 49
, 317 per Windeyer J.
Mallet v Mallet
(1984) 156 CLR 605.
Bevan & Bevan
[2013] FamCAFC 116
(2013) FLC 93-545
I note that the Respondent
accepted that the Applicant had contributed about $800,000.00, sourced in her
earnings and inheritance,
to the acquisition and maintenance of property and to
the financial support of the parties during their cohabitation.
Held in only the
Applicant’s name for asset protection reasons.
Steinbrenner &
Steinbrenner
[2008] FamCAFC 193
per Coleman J at [234].
Noting that the requirement
is to make orders which are just and equitable, not to express conclusions in
percentage terms.
Depending on the actual
nett sale proceeds – see footnote No. 4.
See: paragraphs 9 and 10
RTF format (322 KB)
Signed PDF/A format