URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1975/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Amoco Australia Pty Ltd v Rocca Bros. Motor Engineering Co Pty Ltd (No 2) [1975] UKPCHCA 1; (1975) 133 CLR 331 (27 January 1975)
PRIVY COUNCIL
AMOCO AUSTRALIA PTY. LTD. v. ROCCA BROS. MOTOR ENGINEERING CO. PTY. LTD.
[1975] UKPCHCA 1
(1975) 133 CLR 331
Restraint of Trade
Privy Council
Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest(1), Lord Cross of Chelsea(1), Lord Kilbrandon(1),
Lord Salmon(1) and Lord Edmund-Davies.(1)
Restraint of Trade - Lease - Unenforceable covenants - Severance - Exclusive
supply agreement - Service station business - Lease
by owner of land to
supplier of petroleum products - Underlease back to owner - Covenant by owner
to acquire all supplies from supplier
for term of underlease - Certain
covenants in underlease declared unenforceable as in restraint of trade -
Whether severable - Whether
distinction between condition in contract and
covenant in lease - Whether covenants of underlease wholly unenforceable -
lease affected by unenforceability of underlease - Lease purporting to
embody whole agreement between parties and to be independent
of any other
transaction - Assertion by owner of interdependence of lease and underlease -
Whether estopped.
1974, October 29-31; 1975, January 27. 27:1:1975
APPEAL from the Supreme Court of South Australia.
1975, January 27.
LORD CROSS OF CHELSEA delivered the judgment of their Lordships as follows:
This is an appeal by special leave from a judgment of the Full Court of the
2. The appellant Amoco Australia Pty. Limited is a company incorporated in
the Australian Capital Territory which carries on business
in the Commonwealth
as a refiner and distributor of petroleum products. The respondent Rocca Bros.
Motor Engineering Co. Pty. Ltd.
was incorporated in South Australia in
February 1964 with the object of carrying on business in that State as a
service station proprietor.
On 19th June 1964 the respondent and the appellant
entered into an agreement in writing under which:
(a) The respondent was to build a service station on vacant land at Para
Hills (at that time a newly developing suburb north of
Adelaide) in accordance
with agreed plans and specifications.
(b) The building was to be constructed at the respondent's expense (save for
certain painting which was to be carried out by the
appellant) but the
appellant was to equip the service station by providing and installing plant
and equipment at the appellant's
expense which were to be lent to the
respondent on the terms of an equipment loan agreement to be executed by the
(c) Upon completion of the service station the respondent was to grant to the
appellant a lease of the premises for a term of fifteen
years from the date of
such completion or 31st March 1965 (whichever should be the earlier) with a
right for the appellant to terminate
on notice at the expiration of the first
ten years of the term at a rent of $2 per annum plus a sum calculated at the
rate of 3d.
per gallon for all petrol delivered for sale to the premises by
the appellant.
(d) The appellant was to grant an underlease of the premises to the
respondent for the said term less one day at a yearly rent of
(e) The lease and underlease were to be in the forms annexed to the agreement
with such modifications as the parties should agree
upon. (at p333)
3. The service station, which was built by the respondent at the cost of
previously installed its equipment thereon at the cost of $7,775. (at p333)
4. The land on which the station was built had been purchased before the date
of the agreement by one of the members of the Rocca
family. It was
transferred by him into the name of the respondent in July 1965 and on 19th
May 1966 the lease and underlease contemplated
by the agreement were executed
by the parties substantially in the terms of the forms annexed thereto. (at
5. By the lease the respondent leased to the appellant the land on which the
service station was built "together with all buildings,
improvements,
equipment, fixtures and appliances owned or controlled by the Lessor and
located thereon or on some part thereof or
to be erected or installed by the
Lessor thereon" for a term commencing on 30th November 1964 and ending on 30th
November 1979 subject
to the "powers, provisos, conditions, covenants,
agreements and restrictions" thereinafter set out. Clause 1 provided that the
should pay to the lessor as rental for the demised premises (A) $2 a
year and (B) a sum equal to 3d. per gallon on all petrol delivered
lessee to the demised premises for sale. By cl. 3 the lessee covenanted to
pay the rent thereby reserved and to yield up
the demised premises at the
determination of the lease. The lease further provided by cl. 4 (h) that the
lessee should have power
at any time without the consent of the lessor to
assign or sublet the demised premises; and by cl. 9 that the lessee could
the lease after the expiry of the first ten years of the term on
giving the lessor three months notice in writing. Clauses 18 and
the following terms:
"18. The Lessor and the Lessee agree that this Lease is not
in consideration for or dependent or contingent in any manner
upon any other contract, lease or agreement between them and
that the term, rental or other provisions of said Lease are not
intended by said parties to be tied in with any other such contract,
lease or agreement, but on the contrary this Lease and all
of its provisions are entirely and completely independent of any
other transaction or relationship between the parties.
19. The Lease embodies the entire agreement between the
parties hereto relative to the subject matter hereof, and shall not
be modified, changed or altered in any respect except in writing
and in the event of any termination of this Lease pursuant to
any right reserved by the Lessee herein, all liability on the part
of the Lessee for payment of rent shall cease and determine
upon payment of rent proportionately to the date of such termination
of this Lease." (at p334)
6. By the underlease the appellant subleased the premises demised by the
lease to the respondent for the term of fifteen years less
one day from 30th
November 1964 at the rental therein provided and subject to the powers,
provisos, conditions, covenants, agreements
and restrictions therein
contained. Clause 1 provided that the respondent should pay the appellant as
rent $2 a year. Clause 3
contained a number of covenants by the respondent; 3
(a) was a covenant to pay the rent; 3 (e) a covenant not to assign or sublet;
3 (g) (h) and (i) were in the following terms:
"(g) To carry on and conduct in a proper manner in and
upon the demised premises during all lawful trading hours the
business of a petrol service station only and not to use same for
any other business or purpose whatsoever and not during the
continuance of this lease to cease to carry on the said business
without the prior written consent of the Lessor.
(h) To purchase exclusively from the Lessor all petrol, motor
oil, lubricants and other petroleum products required for sale on
the demised premises and not directly or indirectly to buy,
receive, use, sell, store or dispose of or permit to be bought,
received, used, sold, stored or disposed of at or upon the
demised premises or any part thereof any petroleum products
not actually purchased by the Lessee from the Lessor provided
that the Lessor is able to supply same.
(i) To purchase at least 8,000 gallons of petrol and at least
140 gallons of motor oil from the Lessor in every month during
the term of this lease."
Clause 4 contained a number of further agreements between the parties
including the following:
"4. (a) The Lessor agrees to sell to the Lessee and deliver to
the demised premises at the Lessor's usual list prices to resellers
at the time and place of delivery, the Lessee's entire requirements
of petroleum products. Delivery shall be made in quantities
of not less than the Lessee's average weekly requirements
calculated over the immediately preceding six weeks. Deliveries
may be made at any such time or times as the Lessor may in its
absolute discretion determine and the Lessee shall pay the
Lessor in cash for products delivered at the time of delivery of
such products.
(b) In the event of the Lessor being unable for any reason
whatsoever which is, in the sole opinion of the Lessor, beyond its
control to supply petroleum products as required under this
lease, the obligation to supply such petroleum products shall be
suspended for the period during which the Lessor is unable so to
supply and the Lessee shall be at liberty to supply himself from
other sources with sufficient petroleum products but only until
such time as the Lessor shall notify him that it is prepared to
resume such supply and the Lessee shall not hold out or offer for
sale such other petroleum products as the products of the
(c) Nothing in this lease shall impose any obligations upon
the Lessor to sell or supply any such petroleum products to the
Lessee until he shall have paid for any such products already
supplied to him by the Lessor and otherwise observed and performed
the terms and conditions of this lease, nor shall a refusal
on the part of the Lessor so to supply products be deemed a
breach of this lease so as to release the Lessee from his obligations
hereunder to purchase exclusively from the Lessor.
(f) That the Lessee may, upon the expiration of this lease or
upon its sooner termination or cancellation, remove any and all
equipment, tools, containers or machinery belonging to the
Lessee and placed or installed by the Lessee upon the leased
(h) That this lease and the rights of the Lessee hereunder are
subject to all the terms and conditions of the lease under which
the Lessor is entitled to the demised premises and the Lessee
will not do or suffer to be done upon the demised premises any
act, matter or thing which if done or suffered to be done by the
Lessor would constitute a violation of any of the said terms and
conditions and if for any reason whatsoever the Lessor's tenure
of the demised premises is determined or surrendered, cancelled
or otherwise terminated, this lease and the term hereby
created shall automatically determine simultaneously therewith
without notice or further act of the Lessor or the Lessee and
without any liability on the part of the Lessor." (at p335)
7. The lease and underlease were duly registered under the Real Property Act
(S.A.). By two agreements made between the parties
on 15th September 1969 it
was provided that in consideration of the appellant making at its expense
certain additions and alterations
to the demised premises and increasing the
rebate provided for in the lease from 3d. - that is to say 2.5 cents - per
gallon to 4
cents per gallon the terms of the lease and underlease should each
be extended for a further five years. (at p336)
8. In 1971 the respondent having tried unsuccessfully to re-negotiate the
terms of its agreement with the appellant entered into
negotiations with a
rival oil company and on 12th November wrote a letter to the appellant
requiring it to remove its pumps and signs
from the premises by 11 a.m. on
15th November 1971, stating that in default it would remove them itself. On
16th November the respondent
began to repaint the service station and to
replace the appellant's petrol pumps with pumps belonging to the rival company
the same day the appellant issued a writ against the respondent
claiming injunctions restraining the respondent from breaking various
covenants in the underlease in particular those imposing the trade tie. The
appellant took out a summons for interlocutory relief
and on 18th November
Wells J. made an order based on various undertakings so as to maintain the
state of affairs existing before
16th November pending the determination of
the question whether or not the trade tie was enforceable. In December he
made a further
order dispensing with pleadings and directing that the action
should proceed on the basis of the following agreed issues:
1. Is the defendant entitled to assert that the covenants contained in
memorandum of underlease no. 2775160 or any of them are
in restraint of trade,
and unenforceable?
2. Are the covenants contained in memorandum of underlease no. 2775160 or
any of them an unreasonable restraint of trade and unenforceable?
3. If the covenants in memorandum of underlease no. 2775160 or any of them
are unenforceable is the whole of the said memorandum
of underlease void?
4. If the said memorandum of underlease is void is memorandum of lease no.
2775159 also void?
5. All questions of consequential relief for either party arising from the
resolution of the above issues shall be referred for
later consideration. (at
9. In a full and careful judgment delivered on 12th April 1972 Wells J.
reviewed the law as to restraint of trade and the evidence
which had been
called on each side. Applying the law to the facts as he found them the
conclusion at which he arrived was that even
assuming - contrary to his own
opinion - that the respondent was entitled to assert that the covenants in the
underlease or any of
them were unenforceable as in restraint of trade the
restraints were reasonable and that accordingly issue 2 must be answered in
the negative. It followed, of course, that issues 3, 4 and 5 did not arise.
10. The respondent appealed from this judgment to the Full Court (Bray C.J.,
Hogarth and Walters JJ.) which on 7th August 1972 reversed
it and answered
issues 1 and 2 in the affirmative
(1972) 7 SASR 268
. Bray C.J. expressed his
conclusion in the following words:
"The conclusion I have reached is that the covenants in the
underlease go beyond what was reasonably necessary for the
protection of Amoco. Certainly Amoco, in my view, has not
shown the contrary and the onus is on it. A shorter term would,
in my view, have been adequate to afford ample protection to its
proprietary interest in its investment: and a shorter term or less
onerous covenants or both would, in my view, have been
adequate to protect its commercial interests. I do not decide
that a restraint for a shorter term but containing these covenants
should necessarily be bad; or that a restraint for fifteen
years with less onerous covenants, particularly when there was
some provision for review and possible escape for Rocca at
some point during the term, would necessarily be bad. All I
decide is that, in my view, this restraint for this term with these
covenants is unenforceable.
That makes it unnecessary to consider the question of public
interest." (1972) 7 SASR, at p 345
After saying that the answers to issues 1 and 2 were "Yes" he added:
"These affirmative answers are of necessity ambiguous
because of the alternatives in each question between the covenants
as a whole and any of them severally, but no other
answers can be given since the question of severability has not
yet been argued. (1972) 7 SASR, at p 345
Hogarth J. and Walters J. delivered judgments concurring with that of the
Chief Justice. (at p337)
11. The appellant appealed to the High Court of Australia from the judgment
of the Full Court on issues 1 and 2 and on 11th October
1973 that Court
dismissed the appeal by a majority (McTiernan A.C.J., Walsh and Gibbs JJ.,
Menzies and Stephen JJ. dissenting)
133 CLR 288
. Walsh J. - in whose
judgment the Acting Chief Justice concurred - expressed his conclusion in the
"The question is whether or not the Full Court was in error in
holding that the second issue should receive an affirmative
answer. In my opinion, it was not in error... A decision upon
the question of reasonableness depends upon a judgment the
reasons for which do not admit of great elaboration. In my
opinion it was not shown that the restrictions placed upon
Rocca did not go beyond what was adequate for the protection
of Amoco's interests. It is not in doubt, in my opinion, that
Amoco was entitled in the circumstances to obtain the benefit of
a trade tie in aid of recoupment of its investment and in aid of
the trading interests arising out of its agreement to supply its
products to Rocca. The question is whether or not the terms of
the tie, considered in conjunction with the covenants to which I
have referred, was greater than was reasonably necessary. In my
opinion it was. At all events its reasonableness was not established.
In his judgment Bray C.J. said: 'The conclusion I have
reached is that the covenants in the underlease go beyond what
was reasonably necessary for the protection of Amoco. Certainly
Amoco, in my view, has not shown the contrary and the onus
is on it. A shorter term would, in my view, have been adequate
to afford ample protection to its proprietary interest in its
investment; and a shorter term or less onerous covenants or
both would, in my view, have been adequate to protect its commercial
interests.' (1972) 7 SASR, at p 345 I find myself in agreement with that
subject to the qualification that in my opinion the same
conclusion would have been correct even if the covenants (other
than the exclusive trade tie) had been less onerous."
(1973) 133 CLR 308
, at pp 308-309 (at p338)
12. The most important passages in the judgment of Gibbs J. are the
"In deciding upon the reasonableness of the restraint it is not
possible to regard the length of the tie apart from the provisions
of the covenants - all must be considered together. Perhaps it
should be said that some covenants found objectionable in other
similar cases do not appear in the present case. For example,
there is no covenant giving Amoco the right to fix the price at
which Rocca might sell its products. Further, it is expressly
provided (by cl.4 (a)) that Amoco will sell to Rocca at its usual
list prices. It is true that Amoco if so minded might sell at a discount
to a competing retailer and it is also true that cl. 4 (b)
gives Amoco power to suspend supply in certain circumstances,
but I do not regard these provisions as of cardinal importance.
The covenants which seem to me most to require further
mention, apart from cl. 3 (h) which binds Rocca to buy
exclusively from Amoco, are the following. The obligation cast
on Rocca by cl. 3 (i) to purchase a specified minimum gallonage
of petrol and motor oil would not have been unreasonable had it
enured only for a short period, since the evidence shows that the
gallonage fixed (at least that of petrol) was by no means excessive.
However, if over a long term the business of the service
station declined, the covenant could impose an unreasonable
burden on Rocca. However, the most onerous of the covenants
in the underlease is cl. 3 (g) which requires Rocca to carry on
the business of a petrol service station for the whole period of
fifteen years unless Amoco releases it from this obligation.
Perhaps cl. 3 (e), which prevents Rocca from assigning, subletting
or otherwise parting with possession of the demised
premises should also be mentioned in this connection. It may be
assumed that Amoco's consent to an assignment or sublease
could not be unreasonably withheld, but there might be practical
difficulties in finding a person willing to take an assignment
or sublease on terms which included cl. 3 (g), particularly if the
business got into difficulties. It is true that provisions in the
form of cl. 3 (g) are not uncommonly inserted in leases of
various descriptions. However, as I have already indicated, the
clause was not inserted in the present case by an owner of land
to protect his interests when he leased it, but for the purpose of
imposing a restriction on the owner itself. Moreover, the long
period of the underlease renders the possible operation of the
clause unduly harsh. During the period of fifteen years, trade at
the service station could become quite unprofitable for a variety
of reasons, including some of those mentioned by Diplock L.J.
in Petrofina (Gt. Britain) Ltd. v. Martin
(1966) Ch 146
, at p 189 :
'Better or cheaper
products may be discovered. New or improved highways may
divert the motor traffic from passing the filling station, other
filling stations may be opened in the vicinity - even by the
appellants themselves.' However, Rocca is obliged to carry on
the business even if it is trading at a loss. It was said that in
practice Amoco would be likely to release Rocca from its obligation
if in fact the business became unprofitable, but the
interests of Amoco might well be served by maintaining the
service station as an outlet for its products as long as it could,
notwithstanding that Rocca was making an inadequate profit or
even trading at a loss.
After full consideration of all the circumstances, I have
reached the conclusion that it has not been shown that a tie for
fifteen years on the terms of the underlease was reasonably
necessary to protect the interests of Amoco. On the other hand,
the great changes that might occur in the space of fifteen years
could render the covenants intolerably burdensome on Rocca
and the effect of inflation during that period might well greatly
reduce the value of the fixed rebate which formed an important
part of the consideration receivable by Rocca. On the other
hand, there is nothing whatever to show that a tie for fifteen
years was necessary to ensure for Amoco the stable outlet and
economical system of distribution at which it was entitled to
aim. Further, it was not shown that Amoco's outlay - even
taking it as $18,955 - could not be recouped with profit in a
shorter period."
(1973) 133 CLR 320
, at pp 320-321 (at p339)
13. As the decision of the Full Court on issues 1 and 2 had been affirmed by
the High Court the other issues arose for determination
and it was agreed
between the parties with the assent of Wells J. and the Full Court that,
instead of going back to the judge of
first instance, these issues should be
determined by the Full Court constituted as before. That Court gave judgment
on issues 3
and 4 on 10th December 1973. As appears from the judgments to
which reference has been made, the vice in the underlease as it stood
the opinion of the Full Court and the High Court the cumulative effect of a
number of covenants restricting the respondent's
freedom to trade and a term
as long as fifteen years. It would not, of course, have been possible for the
Full Court on the further
application to remedy the position by shortening the
term but either party could have submitted that even though the term could not
be shortened the covenants in restraint of trade could be "severed" and not
all of them treated as unenforceable. In order to decide
whether "severance"
was possible it would have been necessary for the Full Court - which, of
course, had available all the evidence
given before Wells J. - first to
decide which of the covenants in restraint of trade must go and which, if any,
could still stand
- whether, for example, if covenant 3 (h) was deleted
covenants 3 (g) and 3 (i) would or would not constitute unreasonable
restraints.
Having identified the covenants which would have to go the Court
would then have had to decide whether what was left of the underlease
remain on foot or whether the whole underlease should be treated as at an end.
It is clear from the terms of their judgments
on issues 1 and 2 that all three
members of the Full Court realised that when issues 3 and 4 came to be debated
they might be called
upon to pronounce on the question of severance; - but in
fact they were not asked to do so since at that stage neither side wanted
underlease to remain on foot. What was argued by the appellant on the fresh
application was that the underlease was unenforceable
in toto but that the
lease remained in full force and effect. Bray C.J., in whose judgment Hogarth
J. concurred, and Walters J.
both emphasise in their judgments that counsel
for the appellant never suggested that the underlease might be left standing
of some of its covenants. The main argument for the respondent on the
other hand was that not only the underlease but also the head
unenforceable in toto. It is true that its counsel submitted - very much as a
"second best" - that if his main argument
failed then the underlease should
remain on foot with any offending covenants deleted, but the Court did not
find it necessary to
give any formal decision on the question of severance
since it accepted the respondent's main argument. At the same time it is
enough that the members of the Court did not think that this was a case
in which if it had been necessary to decide the point severance
would in fact
have been possible - indeed Walters J. said this in terms (1972) 7 SASR, at p
365 . On the question argued before
it the Full Court had no doubt that the
head lease must share the same fate as the underlease. Both were integral
parts of the same
transaction; the statements to the contrary in cll. 18 and
19 of the lease were untrue: and as public policy was involved the respondent
was not estopped from asserting that they were untrue. But for the fact that
the lease and underlease were registered and that,
by virtue of that fact,
legal estates in the land were vested in the lessee and underlessee
respectively, the Court would have declared
that both instruments were void.
As it was it answered issues 3 and 4 as follows:
"3. The memorandum of underlease is not void, but neither party thereto can
enforce any of the covenants in it against the other.
4. The memorandum of lease is not void, but neither party thereto can
enforce any of the covenants in it against the other." (at
14. Counsel for the appellant suggested in his argument before the Board that
in its order the Full Court meant by the word "covenants"
obligations as were expressly so described in the two instruments. Their
Lordships have no hesitation in rejecting this
suggestion. They have no doubt
that the Full Court meant to declare unenforceable all obligations contained
in or arising out of
the execution of the lease and the underlease as opposed
to their registration; on the other hand they left over to be dealt with
issue 5 all questions arising out of the continued existence of the two bare
legal estates. (at p341)
15. On its appeal to the Board counsel for the appellant adopted a totally
different approach from that taken on its behalf before
the Full Court for he
placed in the forefront of his argument the contention that cl. 3(h) of the
underlease (which was, he submitted,
the only offending covenant) should be
treated as deleted and that the underlease shorn of that covenant should be
left standing.
This change of front places their Lordships in a position of
some difficulty. The point that the covenants in the underlease could
severed was never strictly speaking "abandoned" by the appellant since it
never took it and the point was in a sense before the
Full Court in the shape
of the subsidiary argument on behalf of the respondent. On the other hand it
is not a pure point of law
such as their Lordships would normally allow to be
taken before them even if it had not been taken below since it depends on a
of fact which the Full Court has not made. It does not in the least
follow that if the Full Court had found it necessary to give
a decision on the
question of severance it would have held on the evidence which was before it
that the deletion of cl. 3(h) would
have sufficed to make the remainder of the
underlease unobjectionable. It might well have held that not only cl. 3(h)
but also cll.
3(g) and (i) or one or other of them would have to be deleted
and their Lordships who have not the evidence before them have no means
reaching any conclusion of their own on the point. In the end counsel for the
appellant was constrained to admit that this was
so; but he submitted that
even on the assumption that cll. 3(g), (h) and (i) were all deleted the rest
of the underlease should still
be left standing. Their Lordships have no
hesitation in rejecting this submission. (at p341)
16. As Kitto J. remarked in Brooks v. Burns Philp Trustee Co. Ltd.
[1969] HCA 4
, at p 438 , "questions of severability
often difficult". The
answer depends on the intention of the parties as disclosed by
the agreement
into which they have entered;
but generally, of course, they have not foreseen
that one or more of the provisions in
their agreement will be unenforceable.
tests have been formulated which might not in every case lead to the
same result -
e.g. is that which is unenforceable "part of the
main purport
and substance" of the clause in which it appears? (per Lord Moulton
Mason's Case: sub nom. Mason v. Provident Clothing
and Supply Co. Ltd.
, at p 745 ); does the deletion "alter entirely the scope and intention
of the agreement?" (per
Lord Sterndale M.R. in Attwood v.
(1920) 3 KB
, at p 580 ); does the deletion of the covenant in question "leave the rest
of the deed a reasonable arrangement between the parties"
(per Denning L.J. in
Bennett v. Bennett
(1952) 1 KB 249
, at p 261 ); does
what is left constitute
an "intelligible economic transaction in itself...even though it furnished the
for" the unenforceable
restraint? (Kelly v. Kosuga
[1959] USSC 54
(1959) 358 US
, at p 521 (3 Law Ed 2d 475, at p 479) ). But whatever test be applied the
must, their Lordships think, be the same in this
case. It is
inconceivable that any petrol company would grant a dealer a lease
nominal rent of a site on which it had spent
a substantial sum in installing
pumps and other equipment without imposing on the
dealer any obligation to buy
petrol from it or
even to carry on the business of a petrol station on the
demised premises. Clauses
3(g), (h) and (i) were the heart and soul of
underlease. It is, of course, true that the appellant - perhaps because it
little faith in the point on which it rested
its case in the Full Court -
now thinks that it is to its advantage to affirm the continued
existence of
the underlease even though
shorn of those three sub-clauses; but that fact has
no bearing on the question at issue.
Their Lordships would only add on this
aspect of the case that they must not be taken to be expressing any view - one
other - on what the position with regard
to "severability" would
have been if it had been established on the facts that the only
provision in
the underlease which had to
be excised in order to make the rest
unobjectionable from the point of view of restraint
of trade was cl. 3(h). (at
17. At this point their Lordships must refer to a submission made by counsel
for the appellant based on some words used by Lord
Reid in his speech in the
[1967] UKHL 1
(1968) AC 269
, at p 299 . One of the documents to be considered in
was a mortgage
of the petrol station in question by its owner to
oil company in consideration of a loan. The mortgage provided
(inter alia)
(a) that the loan should be repaid by annual instalments
spread over
twenty-one years; and (b) that during the term
of the mortgage
the owner of
the petrol station would buy petrol exclusively
from the oil company. The
owner contended that the
covenant was an
unreasonable restraint of trade and
expressed his willingness
- indeed claimed the right - to repay the loan
notwithstanding
the provision for repayment by instalments. It
that the question must have been mooted in argument whether
have insisted on the unenforceability of the trade tie
contained in the
mortgage while at the same time taking advantage
of the right
which it gave
him to repay the loan by instalments
for Lord Reid touched on that point in
the following words:
"I am prepared to assume that, if the respondents had not
offered to repay the loan so far as it is still outstanding, the
appellants would have been entitled to retain the tie."
[1967] UKHL 1
(1968) AC 269
The appellant argued that what was true of a mortgage - which takes effect by
way of lease to the mortgagee - must also be true of
an ordinary lease and
that where a lease contains a covenant which is unenforceable as being in
restraint of trade the covenantor
- in this case the respondent - must elect
either to give up the lease or to perform the covenant notwithstanding its
unenforceability.
18. It is clear - as counsel indeed conceded - that no such election is
required of the covenantor when the unenforceable promise
is contained in a
bare contract. Provided that the unenforceable part is severable the rest of
the contract remains in force and
either party can rely on its terms. It
would be odd if the position should be different when the promise in question
is contained
in a lease. The fact that a covenantor has obtained and will
continue to enjoy benefits under the relevant agreement which formed
the consideration for the covenant which he claims to be unenforceable is no
doubt pro tanto a reason for holding that the
covenant is not in unreasonable
restraint of trade. But once it is held that it is in unreasonable restraint
of trade, there seems
to be no reason for drawing any distinction with regard
to the consequences between provisions in contracts and covenants in leases.
If in a case where severance was possible the party who had entered into a
covenant in a lease which was unenforceable because it
was in unreasonable
restraint of trade was forced to make the election suggested by counsel he
would be put under pressure to observe
a promise which public policy said he
should be free to disregard. Lord Reid was not expressing any opinion on the
point and as
at present advised their Lordships do not think that the
assumption which he was prepared to make was justified. But even if the
appellant was right in saying that had the covenants been severable the
respondent would have been put to his election either to
observe the
unenforceable restraint or to give up the lease its case would not be advanced
in the least since the covenants are not
severable and the respondent has
always been willing - indeed anxious - to give up the underlease provided that
the headlease also
disappears from the scene. (at p344)
19. Finally their Lordships turn to consider whether the headlease can remain
on foot if the provisions of the underlease disappear.
On this point again
they have no doubt that the Full Court reached the right conclusion. It is
not possible to regard the two leases
as separate dispositions of property.
The agreement of 19th June 1964 shows clearly that they were parts of a single
commercial transaction
under which the respondent was to get a supply of
petrol at an agreed rebate and the appellant a trade tie with security for its
investment in the station. The statements to the contrary in cll. 18 and 19
of the headlease are simply untrue and it may well be
that they were inserted
in order to strengthen the position of the appellant in the event of the
validity of the trade tie in the
underlease being challenged. If there was no
question of public policy in the case then no doubt the respondent would be
from denying that the headlease was independent of the underlease but
if there was such an estoppel here it would deter the respondent
asserting that the trade tie was unenforceable on grounds of public policy,
since, as Bray C.J. points out, its position if
the underlease went but the
headlease remained in force would be far worse than if it acquiesced in the
trade tie and retained the
benefit of the underlease. On this aspect of the
matter their Lordships agree entirely with the passages in the judgments of
J. and Owen J. in Brooks v. Burns Philp Trustee Co. Ltd.
(1969) 121 CLR, at pp 444, 482 , to which Bray C.J. and Walters J. refer in
their judgments. (at p344)
20. In the result therefore their Lordships will humbly advise Her Majesty
that the appeal be dismissed and that the appellant pay
to the respondent its
costs of it. The question whether the bare legal estates must remain on the
register and if so whether the
parties enjoy or are subject to any, and if so
what, rights and obligations by reason of the mere fact of registration will
to be decided - in default of agreement - with any other questions
arising under issue 5.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter