Miratos & Miratos (No 2) [2025] FedCFamC2F 1190 (12 September 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Miratos & Miratos (No 2)
FedCFamC2F 1190
File number(s):
MLC 10399 of 2020
Judgment of:
JUDGE O'SHANNESSY
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Costs and default
application – dispute as to appropriate orders to be made in default of
property settlement –necessary
circumstances for a section 106A order
– costs application following final property orders – whether
section 117 or section
114UB applied – no material difference in any event
– whether a party wholly unsuccessful – whether conduct of
proceedings justified an order for indemnity and/or party/party costs –
whether oral offers made during mediation were
admissible – mediation
agreement provided anything said in mediation was not to be put in evidence
– where oral offerer
party did not make a written offer in compliance with
rule 4.11 – oral offers made in mediation not relevant – therefore
oral offers in mediation not admissible pursuant to section 117(2A)(g) –
if long and oral offer in mediation is admissible
then no weight given to oral
offers – general law authorities relating to section 131(2)(h) of Evidence
Act discussed –
Family Law Act authorities applied – application for
costs dismissed – application for costs of the unsuccessful costs
application dismissed.
Legislation:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Evidence Act 1995
Family Law Act 1975
(4)(a), (b) & (c),
Family Law Rules 1984
o 24 r 8 & o 29
Family Law Rules 2004
rr 10.01, 10.02, 10.03, 10.04, 10.05, 10.06
Family Law Amendment Act 2024
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules
rr 4.06, 4.07, 4.08, 4.09, 4.10 & 4.11
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
Federal Court of Australia Act 1956
Limitations of Actions Act 1958
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) ss110P(4) & (5).
Cases cited:
Alexender v Australian Community Pharmacy
Authority (No 2)
[2010] FCA 467
AMEV Finance Ltd v Artes Studios Thoroughbreds ty Ltd
Askey & Askey
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) v Australian
Safeway Stores Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2002] FCA 1294
Azzi & Ors v Volvo Car Australia Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWSC
Bruinsma v Menczer
(1995) 40 NSWLR 716
Calderbank v Calderbank
[1975] 3AII ER 33
Commonwealth v Verwayen
(1990) 170 CLR 394
Cutts v Head
[1984] CH 290
Forsyth v Sinclair (No 2)
[2010] VSCA 195
Harcourts WA Pty Ltd v Roy Weston Nominees Pty Ltd (No 6)
Harrington & Lowe
(1996) 190 CLR 311
, FLC 92-668
Hazelden’s Chicken Farm Pty Ltd v Victorian Workcover Authority
(2005) VSCA 298
Miratos & Miratos
[2025] FedCFamC2F 821
Kilich & Wood
[2003] FamCA 629
, FLC 93-169
Lenova & Lenova (Costs)
141, FLC 93-467
Marks, Kinross, McCullagh & Williamson v GIO Australia Holdings Ltd
(1996) 66 FCR 128
Nobrega v Roman Catholic Church (No 2)
(1999) NSWCA 133
Pinot Nominees v the Commissioner of Taxation
(2009) FCA 1508
Rajski & Anor v Tectran Corporation Pty Ltd & Ors
Rodgers v Rodgers
(1964) 114 CLR 608
Silver Fox & Ors v Leonards Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2004] FCA 1570
Steel & Steel
(1992) FLC 92-306
Trask & Westlake
[2015] FamCAFC 160
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr Puckey KC
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Landers and Rogers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Forte Family Lawyers
MLC 10399 of 2020
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
JUDGE O'SHANNESSY
DATE OF ORDER:
FURTHER TO THE ORDERS OF 17 JUNE 2025 AS TO "DEFAULT OF PAYMENT"
PROVISIONS:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
in the event the Husband defaults in the making of the whole of the First
Payment and/or the whole of the Second Payment by 17
December 2025 (Default
Date) in accordance with paragraph 2 of the Final Orders, the following orders
shall apply.
14 days of the Default Date, the Husband personally and in his capacity as the
Director of J Pty Ltd do all acts and things,
sign all documents as may be
necessary and give all necessary instructions to sell the parcels of land
comprising the fruit orchard
more particularly known as Certificate of Titles
Volume ... Folio ... and Volume ... Folio ... (B Street, Town C Property) being
part of the real property situate at and known as B Street, Town C in the
State of Victoria, being the land described at paragraph
1(a) of the Final
Orders (B Street Sale).
for the purposes of the B Street Sale:
(a) The selling agent and the conveyancing lawyers to have the conduct of the
sale shall be appointed by the parties jointly, AND
in default of agreement as
to the selling agent or the conveyancing lawyer, the Husband is to propose three
names to the Wife within
30 days of the Default Date and the Wife is to select
one within seven days thereafter;
(b) The parties shall accept the reasonable recommendations of the selling agent
as to the appropriate manner of sale, the preparation
of the B Street Property
for sale, sale listing arrangements, the settlement period and/or reserve price
in default of agreement
between them;
(c) That the Husband pay or cause to be paid any sale preparation costs.
(d) The proceeds of the sale shall be applied in the following manner and
(i) First, to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the sale;
(ii) Second, to discharge any encumbrances upon the title(s) comprising the B
Street Property, including but not limited to any mortgage(s)
in favour of
National Australia Bank or any other lender save and except any caveat lodged to
secure the legal fees of either party
AND each party do all acts and things,
contemporaneously with the settlement of the B Street Sale to discharge any
charge and cause
the caveat to be removed at their own expense;
(iii) Third, to pay to the Wife so much of the First Payment and the Second
Payment as then remains outstanding together with interest
thereon pursuant to
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law)
(2021) (Rules) noting that such payment is made by the Husband (as sole
beneficiary of The Miratos Family Unit Trust) to the Wife
calculated from the
default date;
(iv) Fourth, to reimburse the Husband for the sale preparation costs paid by
(v) Fifth, to pay any and all capital gains tax payable by J Pty Ltd (if any),
when assessed and due; and
(vi) Finally, to pay the remaining balance to the Husband (if any).
in the event the whole of the First Payment and the whole of the Second Payment
(together with any interest thereon) is not paid
contemporaneously with the
settlement of the B Street Sale, then within 30 days from the settlement of the
B Street Sale the Husband
personally and in his capacity as the director of H
Pty Ltd further do all things and sign all documents and give all necessary
instructions
as may be necessary to sell the whole of the property situate at
and known as D Street, Town C in the state of Victoria (D Street)
being the land
described at paragraph 1(c) of the final orders (D Street, Town C
for the purposes of the D Street Sale:
(a) The selling agent and the conveyancing lawyers to have the conduct of the
sale shall be appointed by the parties jointly AND
in default of agreement as to
the selling agent or the conveyancing lawyer, the Husband is to propose three
names to the Wife within
30 days of the Default Date if the B Street Property is
not to be sold or 14 days of the settlement of the B Street Sale, and the
is to select one within a seven days thereafter;
(b) The parties shall accept the reasonable recommendations of the selling agent
as to the appropriate manner of sale, the preparation
of the property for sale,
sale listing arrangements, the settlement period and/or reserve price in default
of agreement between them;
(c) The parties do all acts and things to obtain the early release of the
deposit money paid by the purchaser/s to be paid to the
Wife to her nominated
bank account to pay part of the First Payment and/or the Second Payment;
(d) That the Husband pay or cause to be paid any sale preparation costs; and
(e) The proceeds of the sale shall be applied in the following manner and
(i) First, to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the sale;
(ii) Second, to discharge any encumbrances upon the title(s) comprising the D
Street Property save and except any caveat lodged to
secure the legal fees of
either party AND each party do all acts and things, contemporaneously with the
settlement of the D Street
Sale to discharge any charge and cause the caveat to
be removed at their own expense;
(iii) Third, to pay to the Wife so much of the First Payment and the Second
Payment as then remains outstanding together with interest
thereon pursuant to
of the Rules, noting that such payment is made by the Husband (as
sole beneficiary of the Mr Miratos Property Trust) to the Wife
(iv) Fourth, to reimburse the Husband for the sale preparation costs paid by
(v) Fifth, to pay any capital gains tax payable by H Pty Ltd (if any) when
assessed and due; and
(vi) Finally, to pay the remaining balance to the Husband (if any).
Husband keep the Wife informed,
(a) Without being obligated to provide details of negotiations with any bank or
banking institution or documents relating thereto,
of the progress of any
application for finance to meet the First Payment and/or the Second Payment
and/or the Total Payment (as defined
in the 17 June 2025 Final Orders) and/or
any rejection or refusal of any such application; and
(b) Without being obligated to provide details of negotiations with any
purchaser or documents relating thereto, of the progress
of any sale of the B
Street Property, D Street Property, the Farming Property and/or the Retail
Business Property by private sale
or otherwise.
Husband may elect to effect the D Street Sale prior to the B Street Sale upon
written notice to the Wife no later than three business
days after the Default
Date and in the event of him exercising such election, the provisions of these
orders with respect to the
B Street Sale shall take effect (if required) after
settlement of the D Street Sale.
the event the B Street Property is sold, and contemporaneously with the
settlement of the B Street Sale, the Wife withdraw at her
expense any and all
caveats lodged by her (or upon her behalf) on the title(s) comprising the B
Street Property.
the event D Street Property is sold, and contemporaneously with the settlement
of the D Street Sale, the Wife withdraw at her expense
any and all caveats
lodged by her (or upon her behalf) on the title(s) comprising D Street Property.
payment of the whole of the First Payment and the Second Payment to the Wife
(together with any interest thereon), the Wife further
withdraw at her expense
any and all caveats lodged by her (or on her behalf) upon any real property held
by the Husband and/or any
company or trust comprised of the Miratos Group.
parties each be and are hereby restrained from further encumbering any real
property held by either of them or any company or
trust comprised in the Miratos
Group, save and except for the purposes of permitting the Husband and/or company
or trust comprised
in the Miratos Group to procure any necessary finance upon
properties for the purposes of procuring the funds required to effect
Payment and/or the Second Payment.
parties be authorised to provide a copy of these Orders to the selling agent and
conveyancing lawyer.
party do all acts and things reasonably required by the other including the
signing or execution of all necessary documents to
give effect to the provisions
of these Orders within the specified timeframe and if there is no specified
timeframe, within 14 days
of being requested to do so.
the purposes of these Orders, 'sale preparation costs' means the money spent (if
any) by the Husband in advance of settlement
for real estate agent commissions,
marketing expenses and/or conveyancing fees and does not include the removal of
any part of the
B Street and/or stock.
Liberty to apply
Husband and Wife have general liberty to apply in relation to the implementation
and/or the enforcement of these orders on short
notice by email to the Chambers
of Judge O'Shannessy at ...@..., including the terms and conditions of the B
Street Sale and/or the
D Street Sale and any other sale or order required in the
event that those sales do not enable all of the total payment, together
interest to be paid to the Wife, in default of agreement between the
applications for costs are otherwise dismissed.
for costs be and are reserved.
AND THE COURT NOTES THAT
Husband does not believe that any capital gains tax would be payable by J Pty
Ltd upon the sale of the B Street Property as that
property was acquired prior
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE O’SHANNESSY
the matter of Miratos, I heard contested
Family Law Act
(Cth) (‘the Act’) proceedings over 29 July 2024 to 1 August
2024. I reserved my decision and reasons. I made final
orders and delivered
reasons on 17 June 2025 (‘the
I had ordered the
parties to confer and bring in minutes of necessary provisions dealing with what
assets should be sold if the
property settlement was not paid on time
(‘the default provisions’). Agreement was not reached and so the
matter came
before me again on 20 August 2025. In the mean time an application
for costs was of part of the proceedings was made and on the
same day I also
herd the costs application.
heard the matter over the morning and reserved my decision and reasons to 3.30pm
that afternoon, intending to deliver oral reasons.
Time taken to deal with
another matter listed that day meant I only got to orders and reasons at about
4.15pm. I made the orders
relating to the default provisions and dismissed the
applications for costs and reserved my reasons. These are those reasons.
SUMMARY OF THE FINAL ORDERS
summary I found the asset pool to be a total of $6,880,550, net of debt and
including superannuation and that of those total assets,
the Wife already had or
would keep assets including part property settlements of a total of
The final property
orders I made included:
or before 4.00 pm on 17 December 2025 (‘the Date’) the Husband pay
to the Wife the total sum of $1,790,643.00 (‘the
Total Payment’) by
way of two payments as follows:
(a) on or before 4.00 pm on 17 November 2025, the sum of $100,000.00 (‘the
First Payment’); and
(b) on or before 4.00 pm on 17 December 2025 the sum of $1,690,643.00
(‘the Second Payment’); and
(c) no later than contemporaneously with the First Payment, the Wife notify the
Husband, in writing, of her intended time and date
of vacating the [FMH]; and
(d) no later than contemporaneously with the payment of the Total Payment, the
(i) vacate the [FMH]; and
(ii) notify the Husband in writing that she has done so; and
(iii) do all things, sign all documents and give all necessary instructions
required to withdraw at her expense any and all caveats
lodged by her or on her
behalf upon the title to [the Farm].
effect of those orders was that the Wife would continue to occupy the Former
Matrimonial Home (‘FMH’) situated on
or nearby the property
described in the reasons as “the Farm” until the payment of the
total payment, and at that time
the extant spousal maintenance order of $300 per
to the wife be discharged. The Husband was otherwise to retain his interests in
the Farm property and the entities associated with it.
the reasons set out in
, I had ordered that the parties were to
confer as to the default provisions and unless agreed in writing the parties
were to file
and serve the “default provisions” that he/she sought.
Any application for costs was to be made by short written submissions.
parties were unable to agree to the provisions to apply in the event that the
Husband defaulted in the total payment. The Husband
provided a detailed minute
of the default provisions he sought. The Wife responded by providing a helpful
“marked up”
(changes tracked) version of the provisions the Husband
REASONS FOR THE DEFAULT PROVISIONS ORDERED
Experienced
counsel made further sensible agreements that were announced to me at the start
of the costs and default provisions hearing
on 20 August 2025. The scheme of
the default provisions that each party pressed was that if a default sale was
necessary then regardless
of whether the sale achieved more or less than that
contemplated in previously agreed valuations and regardless of the extent of
sale expenses and matters like Capital Gains Tax (‘CGT’), the Wife
should receive a fixed sum and penalty interest as
calculated. Hence it was
common ground that what could be described as “rise and fall”
provisions or the formula approach
in decisions like
Trask & Westlake
[2015] FamCAFC 160
’) would not be engaged.
Hence, I was told, in the event of default, the costs of preparation of sale
would be borne by the
Husband. This agreement necessitated some minor
alterations to the form of the default provision orders that were submitted by
party. I have endeavoured to follow the scheme of the sensible agreement
between the parties as I was told of it in making minor
variations to the form
of the orders submitted.
agreed scheme of the orders was that in default of the Total Payment, what was
described as the ‘B Street Property’
being part of the Farm, should
be sold first and if that did not realise sufficient to satisfy the total
payment to the Wife, then
the FMH should be sold next. I note that unlike the
Farm property or properties, the FMH was unencumbered.
major controversies about the form of the default provisions, described
conceptually, included the following:
(1) Whether in proceeding with the sale of the first to be sold property (the B
Street property), the Husband should ensure there
was a separate water license
for that property;
(2) Whether prior to the actual sale of the first to be sold property (the B
Street property), the Husband should ensure the release
of that property from
any existing mortgage to the bank;
(3) Whether prior to the actual sale of the first to be sold (the B Street
Property), the Husband ensure his solicitors remove the
caveat securing their
(4) Whether, in the event the Husband had not satisfied the three requirements
described above, that the first to be sold property
should then be the FMH;
(5) Whether the default provisions should further provide for the sale of the
property that can be described as ‘the Eastern
most block’ of the
Farm, in the event that the sales of the B Street block and the FMH had not
raised sufficient funds to meet
the Wife’s fixed property settlement;
(6) Whether the default provisions should further provide for the sale of the
property that was described as ‘the Improvements
block’ of the Farm,
in the event that the sales of the B Street block, the FMH and the Eastern most
block had not raised sufficient
funds to meet the Wife’s fixed property
settlement;
(7) Whether, pending the receipt of the property settlement, the Husband should
be restrained from accepting any offer to purchase
any part of the farm required
to be sold in the default provisions without the prior written consent of the
(8) Whether the default orders should authorise the Wife’s solicitors to
execute any document in the Husband’s name pursuant
to section 106A of the
(9) Whether the Husband should be ordered to meet all payments in regard to the
existing mortgages over the Farm pending receipt
of the property settlement.
will deal with the disputes described at 1-4 above together.
Husband’s case at final hearing and in his submissions on the costs
application, was that his first preference and intention
is to obtain sufficient
further borrowings to meet the Wife’s property settlement. I am not
satisfied that expressed intention
is other than
of his applications and negotiations for finance, that I infer are underway,
will determine whether his intention was realistic
That circumstance is the point of why default provisions are required.
was not satisfied that the provisions pressed are well-founded in regard to need
or practicality. I did not include those provisions
in the orders that I made.
As to the water license controversy, the Wife’s proposed order
that a separate water licence for the B Street property
was both possible and achievable within the timeframe contemplated by the
default sale orders. There was no such evidence and I was not prepared to
assume or infer such an arrangement.
was not prepared to order that the first property to be sold in default of the
payment should be unencumbered from the commencement
of the sale process rather
than what I am satisfied is the usual business and conveyancing practice of
encumbrances, including discharges
of mortgages, being dealt with at settlement
after a concluded sale, not beforehand. As discussed with counsel, I am
satisfied that
dozens of properties are sold in the state of Victoria each
weekend with existing mortgage encumbrances described in the contract
sale/section 32 statement. Further the contentions of the Wife in support of
these provisions did not satisfactorily deal with
the multiplicity of potential
circumstances as the Husband applies to and negotiates with, the banks to obtain
the funding he seeks.
the Husband cannot borrow sufficient funds to meet the Wife’s property
settlement, it may be that by a combination of the
B Street property sale
proceeds and some further borrowing or reorganising of mortgage debt on the
other parts of the Farm, that
he will be able to meet the property settlement.
As discussed with counsel, I am satisfied from ordinary banking and security
that it is unlikely that individual mortgages relate to particular
properties without any cross collateralisation when the same bank
mortgagee of all of the different parts/titles of the farm. It is likely that
the mortgage debt encumbering the B Street
property is part of “all
monies” debtor obligations to the bank, cross collateralised or covering
all of the different
parts/titles of the farm. Hence, it is possible, and even
sufficiently likely that the possibility would have to be excluded, that
an order that the Husband was to effectively unencumber the B Street property
before its sale and before settlement proceeds
are received would mean that all
of the secured debt over all of the different parts of the Farm would need to be
discharged. That
is not practical and likely to be impossible.
take into account that the Wife’s position in the default provisions
pressed by her, accommodates or acquiesces in the Husband’s
position of
(the B Street property being the first property to be sold in the event of
default) comes with, and is inclusive of,
the further conditions or scheme
pressed in points 1-4 above. However I am satisfied, including from the
evidence given in the final
hearing, that if push comes to shove and the Husband
defaults then it is just and equitable that the B Street property is the first
property to be sold in the forced sale of the default provisions, and if
insufficient, followed by the sale of the FMH.
is convenient to deal with the contentions or schemes described at numbers 5-6
above together. On the evidence before me, taking
into account the extent of
the indebtedness of the farm, it is conceivable that no funds will be available
to meet the property settlement
from the default sale of the B Street property.
It is conceivable that only some funds will be available from that default sale.
The agreed value at final hearing following independent valuation of the FMH,
which is a separate title to the other parts of the
farm, is significantly in
excess of the Total Payment. I accept the point made by the Wife’s
counsel that a valuation, and
an agreed valuation for the purpose of a final
hearing, is not a guarantee of an achieved market price some time later.
Nonetheless
and looking at the worst outcome from the default sale of the B
Street property, that is that no part of the proceeds of sale would
be available
to the Husband to meet the Wife’s property settlement, it is likely that
the net proceeds of the FMH property,
being unencumbered, would be sufficient to
meet the Wife’s property settlement.
controversy was whether provisions should be made in these orders for two
further sales to ensure the Wife’s property settlement
can be met. It is
possible that the sale of a third part of the farm and indeed the last/fourth
part of the Farm may need to be
sold to meet the Wife’s property
settlement. However on the evidence that is unlikely and the most likely
outcome is that
the B Street property sale, whether in combination with further
borrowings or not would be sufficient to meet the Wife’s property
settlement. If that does not come to pass, on the evidence, it is likely that
the further sale of the FMH would, either by itself
or with combination of any
proceeds or borrowing around the sale of the B Street property, raise sufficient
to meet the Wife’s
property settlement.
that does not come to pass the parties have liberty to apply as to what further
orders should be made to ensure the Wife’s
property settlement is met and
the Wife accommodated.
meantime penalty interest would run.
all of those circumstances, I am not satisfied it is either necessary, practical
or just and equitable to make further orders that
assume that the Husband will
not be able to borrow sufficient funds to meet the property settlement without a
default sale
that default sales of the B Street property
the FMH would not raise sufficient funds to meet the
property settlement. For those reasons I did not make the further orders
in regard to default sales of the Eastern most block and the
Improvements block.
Controversy
number 7 (listed above) is whether the Husband should be restrained from
accepting an offer for any property without the
consent of the Wife. The
parties have a deeply conflictual and troubling relationship and neither trusts
the other a jot. Whether
or not it was intended as such, this provision as
pressed would give a veto power to the Wife over any sale and the potential for
trouble arising from that is abundant. I am satisfied that in broad parameters,
the Wife should be kept informed of the progress
of Husband’s first
intended position of borrowing further funds to meet the property settlement,
and if he can’t so borrow,
then she should be kept informed, in broad
parameters, of the progress or lack thereof of any default sale. But disclosure
of documents
and provision of information and the expense to each of the parties
in either pressing for the information, or providing it, has
vexed the parties
in these proceedings. One of the purposes of the final orders is to end that
mutually vexing process. Hence I
am not satisfied that the requirement to keep
the Wife broadly informed should, without further order of the court, also
detailed explanation or answers and disclosure of documents relating to
communications between potential financiers and/or purchasers.
I did not make the order as the Wife pressed but rather for there to be broad
information provided.
The prospective 106A order
Wife pressed for a
section 106A
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) order
that gave her solicitors the authority to execute any document necessary to give
effect to these orders in the event the
husband defaults. That begs the
question of: in default according to who? The Wife? Her solicitors? Or only if
it is agreed he is
in default?
106A of the Act provides as follows:
Section 106A Execution of instruments by order of court
(a) an order under this Act had directed a person to execute a deed or
instrument; and
(b) that person has refused or neglected to comply with the direction or, for
any other reason, the court considers it necessary
to exercise the powers of the
court under this subsection;
form of the order pressed, and such orders are frequently made by consent but
empowering a Registrar of the Court to execute,
contemplates that the order can
be made at this time anticipating a possible refusal or neglect to comply with
the deed or instrument.
I accept this section should be deployed liberally given
its remedial purpose. But that liberal engagement must be
‘judicially.’
power comes in two parts. First, set out in (a) means an order has to have
already directed a person to execute a deed or instrument.
The second part,
(b), has two bits or sub sections. The first of those sub sections of (b),
applying the plain meaning of the words
of the sub section, means the power
“refused or
neglected to comply”. As to the second sub section of (b), “or for
any other reason the court considers
it necessary”, it is very wide but
the power must still be exercised judicially, that is there must be some
circumstance/s
that would justify or explain the exercise of the power. That
subsection might include contemplation of an anticipated or likely
“refusal or neglect” or a lack of capacity that has arisen since the
order. And the recalcitrant party or person
affected, would ordinarily need to
be given procedural fairness, including what the justifying circumstance is said
the power arises to remedy an existing or, if justified, an actually anticipated
default. But it is not a power to be used
prophylactically or just in case or
just because it seems like a good idea. There is no evidence here of any
intended “refusal
of neglect”
of an anticipated, or
likely, “refusal or neglect” on the part of the Husband. A general
mistrust, however strongly
felt, or mere possibility, is unlikely to be
sufficient. It is not in this case. Further, I am satisfied that ordinarily
person endowed with the section 106A power should be someone who can be seen
to be acting reliably and responsibly from the perspective
of each of the
parties, not just one of them. If a need for a 106A order does arise there is
liberty to apply.
those reasons I did not make the section 106A order pressed.
many years of litigation and deep distrust between the parties, there has not
been an order that the Husband must attend to
payment of all mortgages as and
when they fall due. There was no evidence that the Husband has defaulted on
such obligations and
no evidence that he would, or intends to, default.
Further, whilst attempting to negotiate with the bank, it is very much in his
interest to comply with his existing obligations to the extent that it would
keep the bank happy. Injunctions are not made to ease
the anxiety of a party.
In this case in regards to this injunction in this circumstance, I am not
satisfied that there is an arguable
case made out as to the risk of the event of
the injunction is to protect against occurring and I am not satisfied that the
of convenience favours the making of such injunction.
those reasons I did not make the injunction as pressed.
COSTS APPLICATION
The Husband’s application
11 July 2025 the Husband made an application for costs by written submissions
and the Wife responded on 25 July 2025. The Husband’s
submissions
referred to what were alleged to be oral offers to settle made
the mediation that had occurred between the parties on 30
January 2024. When issue was taken with the accuracy of the assertions
oral offers, the Husband’s solicitor served an affidavit corroborating the
assertions within the written submissions.
The Wife’s solicitors objected
to the filing of that affidavit and in that context, I then listed the matter
for hearing as
to costs and as to the default provisions at 8.45am on
20 August 2025 (‘the costs hearing’). Both counsel who had
at the Final Hearing appeared on the costs hearing.
Section 117 of 114UB?
parties made written submissions on the basis that section 114UB of the Act
applied to the costs decision. Section 114UB came
into operation on 10 June
2025 by reason of the
Family Law Amendment Act 2024
Section 114UB is
almost the same as the provisions of section 117 of the Act that had applied
until 10 June 2025. For the purpose
of this case there is no material
difference between section 117 as it was prior to 10 June 2025 and the
“new” provisions
as to costs now contained in section 114UB.
However, by reason of section 15 of Schedule 4, the transitional provisions of
Family Law Amendment Act 2024
because the final hearing
of this matter had commenced before 10 June 2025, section 117 (as it was)
applied to the determination of
costs, not section 114UB. That provision
15 Application of amendments relating to
The amendments of the
Family Law Act 1975
made by Divisions 1 and 2 of this Part
apply in relation to the following proceedings:
(a) proceedings instituted on or after the day this Division commences;
(b) proceedings instituted before, and not finally determined before, the day
this Division commences, other than proceedings in
respect of which a final
hearing has commenced before that day.
repeat, there was no material
in regards to this case
between the two provisions.
costs dispute is governed by section 117 of the Act as it was prior to 10 June
2025 and section 117C as it was and remains (save
it now refers to section
114UB(2) rather and section 117(2) and section 117). Those provisions are as
Section 117 Costs
(1) Subject to subsection (2), subsection 102QAB(6) and sections 117AA and
117AC, each party to proceedings under this Act must bear
the party’s own
(2) If, in proceedings under this Act, the court is of opinion that there are
circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court
may, subject to subsections
(2A), (4), (4A), (5) and (6) and the applicable Rules of Court, make such order
as to costs and security
for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or
otherwise, as the court considers just.
(2A) In considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the
court shall have regard to:
(a) the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings;
(b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of
legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that
assistance to that
(c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings
including, without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, the conduct of the
parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions
to answer questions,
admissions of facts, production of documents and similar
(d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the
proceedings to comply with previous orders of the
(e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the
proceedings;
(f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the
other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings
and the terms of any
such offer; and
(g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.
Section 117C Offers of settlement
(a) a party to proceedings to which this section applies makes an offer to the
other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings;
(b) the offer is made in accordance with any applicable Rules of Court;
the terms of the offer must not be disclosed to the court in which the
proceedings are being heard except for the purposes of the
consideration by the
court of whether it should make an order as to costs under subsection 117(2) and
the terms of any such order.
the event I am wrong and the costs provisions of this hearing are not governed
by section 117 and section 117C but are governed
by section 114UB and
(“the new”) section 117C, those provisions are as follows:
Section 114UB Costs orders -- general
(1) Subject to subsection (2) of this section, subsection 102QAB(6) and sections
114UD and 114UE, each party to proceedings under
this Act is to bear the
party’s own costs.
(2) If, in proceedings under this Act, the court is of the opinion that there
are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the
court may, subject to
subsection (3) of this section, sections 114UC and 114UD and the applicable
Rules of Court, make any order
for costs and security for costs that the court
considers just, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise.
(3) In considering what costs order (if any) should be made, the court must have
regard to the following:
(a) the financial circumstances of each party to the proceedings;
(b) whether any party to the proceedings is receiving assistance by way of legal
aid in respect of the proceedings and, if so, the
terms of the grant of the
assistance to that party;
(c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings
including, without limiting paragraphs (a) and (b),
the conduct of the parties
in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to
answer questions, admissions
of facts, production of documents and similar
matters, and in relation to their duty of disclosure under subsection 71B(1),
or 90YJA(1);
(d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the
proceedings to comply with previous orders of the
(e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the
proceedings;
(f) whether a party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other
party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings
and the terms of any such
(g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.
(4) A party to the proceedings may make an application for costs:
(a) at any stage during the proceedings; or
(b) within 28 days after the final order in the proceedings is made.
(5) The court may order that a party is entitled to costs:
(a) of a specific amount; or
(b) as assessed on a particular basis (for example, party and party, solicitor
and client or indemnity); or
(c) to be calculated in accordance with the method stated in the order; or
(d) for part of the proceedings, or part of an amount assessed in accordance
with the applicable Rules of Court.
(6) If the court makes a costs order but does not specify the method for the
calculation of the costs, the costs are to be assessed
on a party and party
(7) Subject to subsection (3), the court may make a costs order in favour of, or
against, a party to the proceedings regardless of
the degree to which the party
has been successful in the proceedings.
Section 117C Offers of settlement
(1) This section applies to proceedings under this Act other than the following
proceedings:
(a) proceedings under Part VI;
(b) proceedings under Division 6, 9 or 13 of Part VII;
(c) proceedings to enforce a decree or injunction made under Division 6, 9 or 13
of Part VII.
(a) a party to proceedings to which this section applies makes an offer to the
other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings;
(b) the offer is made in accordance with any applicable Rules of Court;
the terms of the offer must not be disclosed to the court in which the
proceedings are being heard except for the purposes of the
consideration by the
court of whether it should make an order as to costs under subsection 114UB(2)
and the terms of any such order.
from the provisions of the Act, the Judge made
relating to costs also apply.
The Judge made rules are contained in the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(‘the Rules’) and relevant
parts of the Rules include the following:
Rule 4.06 How to make an offer
(1) A party may make an offer to another party to settle all or part of a
proceeding by serving on the other party an offer to settle
at any time before
the court makes an order disposing of the proceeding.
(2) A party may make an offer to settle all or part of an appeal by serving on
the other party an offer to settle at any time before
the court makes an order
disposing of the appeal.
An offer to settle:
(a) must be in writing; and
(b) must not be filed.
Rule 4.07 Open and without prejudice offers
(1) An offer to settle is made without prejudice (a without prejudice offer)
unless the offer states that it is an open offer.
(2) A party must not mention the fact that a without prejudice offer has been
made, or the terms of the offer:
(a) in any document filed; or
(b) at a hearing or trial.
(3) If a party makes an open offer, any party may disclose the facts and terms
of the offer to other parties and the court.
(4) Subrule (2) does not apply to:
(a) an application relating to an offer; or
(b) an application for costs.
Rule 4.11 Compulsory offer to settle
(1) This rule applies to a property proceeding.
(2) Each party must make a genuine offer to settle to all other parties
(a) 28 days after a conciliation conference or mediation; or
(b) if no conciliation conference or mediation has been held or is to be
held--28 days after the first court date; or
(c) such further time as ordered by the court.
(3) The offer to settle must state that it is made under this Division.
is readily apparent, the costs provisions of the Act (whether section 117 or
section 114UB) and the offers in writing provisions
of the Rules (authorised by
the Act) are entirely consistent and direct attention to the fact of, and
content of,
offers in writing
. No attention is directed by the
Act or the Rules to oral offers or anything said
within a mediation
Husband relied upon sections 114UB(3)(c) (“conduct of the parties to the
proceedings...”) and (e) (“wholly unsuccessful...”)
(“other matters as the court considers relevant”). The subsection
(g) “other matters” were the oral
offers within the mediation.
Husband sought indemnity costs and, alternatively, party/party costs, from the
day after the parties’ mediation until the
day orders were made.
Indemnity costs were sought on the basis of an “imprudent refusal of an
offer to compromise”.
The section 79 controversy and decision
many matters were in dispute between the parties, and I set out only some of
them to contextualise the costs application.
The size of the pool dispute
matrimonial pool of assets to be taken into account was net of debt, $6,880,550.
Until just before the hearing, the Wife contended
that the pool of assets was
that further $790,000 was made up of
assets in the Husband’s hands
and to be retained by him. On
the morning of the hearing I was advised that the parties agreed that I should
proceed on the basis
that the pool was agreed to be $6,880,550 and I did so. It
was not disputed of the $6,880,550 that “the Wife’s keep”
The section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) percentage finding
Husband contended that I should find the respective contributions were 85% to
him and 15% to the Wife. The Wife contended that
contribution should be
regarded as equal. That is, the controversy at the second stage of the then
orthodox four step analysis of
the section 79 dispute, was whether an 85/15 or
50/50 contribution finding should be made. A remarkable disparity.
The section 75(2) and just and equitable dispute
Husband contended that in the circumstance of his 85/15 position, such a
disparity between the parties at the conclusion of the
“contribution” step, warranted a further 5% adjustment pursuant to
section 75(2) in the Wife’s favour: that
is a total/final division in his
favour of 80/20. In the context of pressing for a finding of equality of
contribution, the Wife
did not press for any section 75(2) adjustment in favour
of either party. That left the dispute between the parties as to whether
net assets should be divided 80/20 or 50/50. A remarkable disparity.
Other significant disputes
case the Husband pressed at trial was that the Wife should be ordered to
immediately
leave the FMH that she had occupied to the exclusion of the
Husband since an intervention order removing the Husband from the home
imposed on him by the Magistrates Court of Victoria in mid-2020: that is almost
four years before the first day of the final
hearing. The Wife contended that
she should vacate the FMH when she received the property settlement that she
pressed for.
Wife contended that the Husband had long enough to work out how to fund her
property settlement and how to organise it in advance
of the trial, and that so
of the different parts of the farming enterprise should be sold with her to have
the sole conduct of the
sale and the sale process to commence within 45 days of
final decision/orders.
the Wife sought an immediate injunction that would facilitate borrowing by her
secured upon the Farm properties to enable
an immediate payment to her lawyers.
The Husband opposed that application.
The effect of the decision
found that in all the circumstances, contribution should be regarded as
72.5/27.5 in the Husband’s favour, and that there
should be a 3% further
adjustment in the Wife’s favour on account of the matters described in
section 75(2) of the Act. I
found that the Husband should have a further six
months to organise and fund the property settlement before penalty intertest and
default provisions would apply, not 12 months as he sought. I found that the
Wife should be entitled to remain in the FMH until
she has received the whole of
the property settlement, that is she should not be required to move out
immediately. I did not accept
that it was just and equitable that the Wife
would have the sole conduct of any sale or that there should be an automatic
all of the farm assets to commence 45 days after the final orders.
Further time consuming disputes not pursued
is convenient to refer to and repeat [106] of the reasons delivered 17 June
affidavit material each party made many, and serious, allegations against the
other, including alcohol abuse, allegations of very
poor step-parenting of the
other’s children and of family violence to each other and the children.
By agreement on the first
day of the hearing, I was told of an arrangement
between the parties, brokered by their counsel, that the negative and highly
allegations each party, and his or her witnesses, made against the
other in affidavits of evidence in chief (‘the allegations’)
not relied upon and should not be determined by the Court. I accepted that
agreement. I expect that had the allegations been
pursued, the matter would
have likely taken some 3 or 4 days more to hear.
Husband’s application for costs relied upon circumstances that were said
to displace the general, or starting position of
each party bearing their own
costs as follows:
the conduct of the Wife in the proceedings, as recited above, in running a case
that was to compel a sale of all of the Farm rather
than give the Husband the
opportunity to fund the settlement to her
to run a case that
sought an equal division of the assets
that the Wife had been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings in seeking a
property settlement equivalent to an equal division of
the parties property and
in seeking to prevent the Husband having the opportunity to raise the property
settlement, but instead sought
a sale of the entire farm.
such other matters as the court considers relevant including the oral offers
made within mediation discussed above.
Husband submitted that the matters relevant to section 114UB(3)(c) & (e) of
the Act commanded an order for costs whether or
not the oral offers within the
mediation were admissible
given any significant weight.
Husband relied upon the public policy consideration that the parties should take
seriously genuine offers to the other and so
avoid the cost, trouble and delay
of litigation. It was said that the Wife had unreasonably put herself and the
Husband to much
trouble and expense by the manner in which she conducted her
case, and her failure to consider seriously the oral offers in mediation.
The Wife’s case: opposing costs
Wife sought that the Husband’s applications for costs be dismissed and
that the Husband pay the Wife’s costs of responding
to his application for
Wife submitted that the Husband did not make any offer in writing as he was
compelled to do by the rules. This was said to disentitle
the Husband to bring
a costs application at all. Further, the Wife had made a detailed written offer
to the Husband on 2 May 2024
and that was said to be in compliance with the
Rules. If one squints his or her eyes and looks broadly at the rules, the
offer in writing made three months after the end of the mediation,
rather than 28 days after could be regarded as more or less in
compliance with
the Rules and certainly far closer to compliance than the Husband’s
failure to make any offer in writing at
principle submission of counsel for the Wife in regard to the oral offers, was
the oral offers were inadmissible
because, addressing the
section 131(2)(h)
Evidence Act
, the offers to the extent the
Court could discern what was actually offered, were not capable of acceptance as
would bring about
an agreement capable of being put into orders and putting an
end to proceedings. The Wife’s submissions included the following:
of the Rules states if a party does not comply with these Rules the court
may “dismiss all or part of the proceeding”,
“set aside a step
taken or an order made”, “order costs” or “make any
other order the court considers
necessary, having regard to the overarching
purpose of these Rules”.
notes “subrule does not limit the
power of the court. It is an expectation that a non-defaulting party will
minimise any loss.”
need for an offer to be in writing is clear and demonstrated by this very
application.
Husband seeks to rely upon verbal communications made to the Wife at mediation
by invoking the provisions of the
Evidence Act 1995
is clear under
Evidence Act
Evidence “Act
affect the operation of the provisions of any other Act”, subject to
exceptions that do not apply here.
basis upon which the Husband advances his position in this application namely by
making assertions about verbal statements (rather
than affidavits) is yet
another reason for the requirement that offers be in writing.
principle applies even more strongly by reason of discussions in mediations
often taking place on the basis of “If I do
this, would you do that”
communications.
was submitted that the Court could not determine what terms were offered, the
Wife denying that any terms were clearly and unequivocally
communicated to her,
and this obvious fact demonstrated the need for offers to be in writing to be
” for the provisions of section 131(2)(h). It was
said that putting the alleged oral statements within the mediation at their
highest, they were merely a step towards a settlement without the necessary
further significant steps needed to get the parties to
settlement. Hence it was
submitted, they were both inadmissible and if admissible, should have very
little weight.
to whether any party had been wholly unsuccessful, the Wife submitted that she
had not been wholly unsuccessful as she received
a property settlement that was
10.5% more of the agreed pool that the Husband sought in his Amended Initiating
Application filed
7 January 2024 and as he pressed all the way to the conclusion
of the final hearing six months later. And, the Wife had or would,
conclusion of the costs and default provisions hearing, achieved default
provisions capable of providing her with certainty
as to when she was to receive
her entitlement. Further, the Wife had achieved orders for a payment in six
months, not 12 months,
as sought by the Husband. Further, she had retained the
use and occupation of the FMH and continued spousal maintenance until the
payment. Hence, the Husband had not achieved her immediate eviction from the
FMH and a hiatus until payment of the property
settlement of a further year.
Hence it was put that the Wife had not been wholly unsuccessful.
failure of the Husband to make an offer in writing at all, or as provided in the
Rules, was said to be significant apart from
compliance with the Rules. It was
asserted that the Husband had not made a certain and capable of being accepted
offer in writing
the Huband was in no position to make any
specific offer because he had no idea how to fund any settlement that might have
from such an offer being accepted by the Wife
submitted that the Husband was “
unable to reduce any communications in
writing or in other words, he was never in a position to articulate any offer
capable of acceptance
”. The evidence raises the possibility but I am
satisfied of that fact.
modest criticisms of the Husband’s case in the primary judgment were also
relied upon.
Section 117(2A) considerations
Section 117(2A)(a) – Financial circumstances
considering whether the circumstances displace the starting position of each
party bearing their own costs, the financial circumstances
of the parties must
be considered.
parties’ financial circumstances were that the wife would receive a
further payment of $1,790,643 (and retain real and
notional assets to the value
of approximately $307,925) and hence, I infer, could afford to pay the costs of
the Husband. The Husband
would retain net of debt, equity and assets, including
a small degree of notional assets (part property payments to the Husband and
Wife had been expended on legal fees) of about $4.78 million and I infer could
afford to pay his own legal fees
matters neither contended for, or against, departure from the starting position
of each party bearing their own costs.
Section 117(2A)(b) – Legal Aid
provision is not applicable in this case.
Section 117(2A)(c) & (e) – Conduct of the parties
& whether wholly unsuccessful
parties affidavits including affidavits of witnesses covered intense and
factually dense disputes of the conduct of each that,
if proven, may have been
relevant to the application of section 79(4) of the Act to the ascertainment of
a just and equitable property
settlement. I refer to and repeat [106] of the
reasons (recited above).
is clear from the detailed and extensive affidavit material dealing with those
matters, that each of the parties applied significant
time, effort, money and
grief in making allegations and rebutting or defending the other’s
allegations. Counsel for the Husband
conceded that in the circumstances of the
sensible agreement (recited at [106]) that saved the parties some likely 3 or 4
court hearing time and expense, that a “carve out” from any
costs order of the expense of making and rebutting those
criticisms” would have to be made.
on the one hand the parties conducted the litigation by unnecessarily adding to
the trouble, expense, money and grief of the
litigation by the making of
allegations that were ultimately sensibly not pursued, but on the other hand
when conducting the final
hearing, had the courage and maturity to accept the
agreement brokered between counsel at the last minute not to pursue those
in the final hearing.
The procedurally troubled course of the proceedings
the circumstances where both parties broadly rely upon the others conduct of
proceedings as either supporting a costs order or
its dismissal, it is necessary
to pay some attention to the protracted and troubled course of interlocutory
proceedings and complaints
of each party. Neither party contended that the
other had so conducted the proceedings so as to necessitate or cause the
significant
time in court on interlocutory directions, adjournments and so on.
Those difficulties included the following:
10 February 2021, the matter was listed for final hearing on 21 February
proceedings are listed for Final Hearing for 2 days commencing 21 February 2022
at 10.00am.
(emphasis added)
16 February 2022, the February 2022 final hearing was vacated, and the matter
was set for a further interim hearing on 25 February
the matter was heard on 25 February 2022, very detailed orders were made by
consent for a further part property settlement payment,
disclosure, as well as a
valuation of the business and properties of the parties. The matter was listed
for final hearing for a
matter came before another Judge of this Court for mention on 30 August 2022
where the final hearing was once again vacated and
adjourned to May 2023 before
me. The orders also set out that the parties were at liberty to seek the matter
be mentioned on short
25 November 2022, the Chambers of another Judge received an email from the
solicitors for the Wife seeking the matter be listed
for mention. The Wife
complained of the conduct of the Husband as to disclosure and cooperation with
valuation procedures.
Husband retained his current solicitors on or about 1 December 2022.
more communication between the Court and the parties, the matter was listed for
mention on 20 December 2022, where further
very detailed orders relating to
procedural matters and valuations were made by consent.
28 April 2023, my Chambers received joint correspondence from the parties’
solicitors requesting a further adjournment of
the final hearing for reasons
that included:
There are a number of unresolved issues relating to the appointment of
previously nominated single experts in this matter and in
relation to the
position of a third party who has engaged separate legal representation but is
not yet a party to the proceedings...
As a consequence of the unresolved nature of those matters, the single expert
reports have not been completed and there has been
no mediation between the
parties, as was contemplated by previous interim orders.
Our purpose in writing to you is to indicate that in the above circumstances,
the proceeding will not be ready for Trial on 15 May
2023 and will need to be
re-listed...
The parties request by agreement that His Honour leaves the matter listed before
him on 15 May next so that we will be in a position
to inform His Honour as to
whether there remain any unresolved issues which might otherwise require further
interim determination
or whether the matter is ready to be re-fixed for Trial
later in the year.
matter remained listed for 15 May 2023, but for a directions hearing and an
update on the outstanding issues. On that occasion,
I listed the matter for
Final Hearing on 5 February 2024 (where this would be the
time the matter was set down for trial) and a further interim hearing. At the
further interim hearing on 5 February 2024, further
orders were made including
orders that contemplated the long delayed private mediation proceeding after the
parties had filed trial
paragraph 1 of the Orders made 15 May 2023 be varied to provide that [Mr R] be
the single expert in relation to the matters specified
in that paragraph.
paragraphs, 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7 to 15 of the Orders made 15 May 2023 remain in full
force and effect subject to the Applicant filing
trial material on or before 12
January 2024 and the Respondent by 25 January 2024, and should [a named
mediator] be unavailable the
parties shall select an alternate member of counsel
to mediate pursuant to Order 5 of those Orders.
30 days of reports being available pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 3 above, the
parties attend mediation with [a member of counsel]
as mediator at their equal
mediation proceeded on 30 January 2024.
31 January 2024, the Husband filed an urgent application in a proceeding seeking
an adjournment of the final hearing listed for
5 February 2024.
Contemporaneously with the filing of the application, the Husband’s
solicitors sent a letter to the Court
which set out the details of the
application:
[Mr Miratos] seeks an urgent Mention of this matter and an adjournment of the
Final Hearing in circumstances where [Ms Miratos] provided
our offices with
several boxes of hard copies of financial disclosure yesterday, 30 January 2024,
during the parties' private mediation
before [a member] of Counsel. On a
preliminary review, this financial disclosure amounts to thousands of pages of
what appear to
be highly relevant documents.
matter was called for an urgent mention the following day, where I made orders
that the matter be listed for a compliance and
readiness hearing before me on 3
May 2024 and was again fixed for a final hearing on 29 July 2024 (the fifth
time). Costs of the
mention on 1 February 2024 were reserved.
matter proceeded to a compliance and readiness hearing on 3 May 2024 and the
final hearing began on 29 July 2024. That is, nearly
two and a half years after
the matter was first listed for final hearing.
lengthy account of the proceedings is the context within each of the parties
rely upon the conduct of the other of the proceedings
as relevant to the costs
question. I was not asked to, nor can I, make findings as to whether either
party was at fault or more
at fault than the other, as to procedural matters
including disclosure over that troubled history, and I do not.
as to the conduct of the proceedings, I refer to and repeat [102] of the reasons
for the final orders.
of the Businesses includes some sheep. I infer yarding the sheep for shearing
proved to be much easier than corralling the parties
and experts to produce
valuation evidence. Ultimately that task was successful and the single expert
valuations were in evidence
and not disputed.
parties were unsuccessful on significant aspects of the case. The Wife achieved
than the payment that would represent an equal division
of the equity of the parties’ assets. But, the Husband
is required
to pay much more
, one and a half times more or 10.5% of the property
pool more, than he pressed. The Wife did not obtain orders that gave control
the almost immediate sale of the entire farm as she pressed but the Husband did
not achieve orders requiring the Wife to vacate
the FMH immediately and he did
not achieve orders that gave him 12 months to raise the necessary funds before
the default provisions
with penalty interest operated, only six months.
Section 117(2A)(d) – Proceedings necessitated by failure
to comply with orders
the various interlocutory stages described above, each of the parties attributed
fault to the other as to proper and timely disclosure
and relevant documents and
information and as to sensible cooperation necessary to enable proper valuation
evidence to be before
the Court that would permit the matter to progress to
final hearing. At interlocutory stages, each alleged the other was not
with the letter or at least the spirit of the many directions and
orders of the Court. In the costs submissions, neither party addressed
pressed that the conduct of the other of these interlocutory or discovery
matters contended for or against orders for costs on
the conduct of proceedings
do not proceed on the basis that either party has, or has not, failed to comply
with procedural orders of the Court.
Sections 117(2A)(f) & (g) – Offers in writing and
“other matters”
written and oral submissions the Husband relied upon offers alleged to be
communicated during the mediation on 30 January 2024.
The Wife asserted that
evidence of these offers made in mediation was inadmissible. Discussions with
counsel contemplated that
if admissible, the weight to be given to any oral
offer in mediation would need to be dealt with.
those circumstances it is convenient to deal with offers in writing and oral
offers together. The Husband did not make an offer
after the mediation on 30
January 2024 as the rules required him to. The Rules, recited above, required
both parties to do so within
28 days of the conclusion of any mediation. The
Wife did make an offer in writing, but about three months after the mediation.
That offer was in evidence on this costs application but was wide of the mark.
The mediation agreement
was common ground that the parties had attended a mediation back on 30 January
2024 before an experienced mediator and were represented
by solicitors and
counsel at that mediation. On 15 May 2023, the parties had been ordered to
attend a mediation as follows:
30 days of reports being available pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 3 above, the
parties attend mediation with [a member of counsel]
as mediator at their equal
mediation can be described as a “private” mediation but also as a
“court ordered” mediation. In this
case, I cannot discern any
practical difference or consequence as to whether the intended mediation had
been ordered by the Court
or whether the parties had themselves decided to
undertake it.
infer that the mediation was undertaken within the parameters of the mediation
agreement executed by the parties and the mediator
beforehand. After enquiries
by me during the hearing, the mediation agreement was produced and clause 10 of
that agreement was tendered
in evidence without objection. Clause 10 provided
as follows:
as all the parties may otherwise agree in writing, anything said or done by any
person at the mediation is said or done without
prejudice and no party shall be
entitled to call evidence of anything said or done by any person at the
mediation, except as required
mediation was unsuccessful. What was said, or not said, within that mediation
was controversial in the costs application as well
as whether or not what was
said, or alleged to be said, in the mediation was admissible at all.
Section 131(1)
& (2)(h) of the
Evidence Act
adduce the oral offer in mediation, the Husband relied upon
sections 131(1)
(2)(h) of the
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
those provisions are as recited earlier.
Husband asserted that a number of oral communications in the course of the
mediation constituted
offers of settlement and, by virtue of
section 131(2)(h)
Evidence Act
, such oral offers were admissible on the
costs application. On the costs application, the word
“communication” in
section 131(2)(h)
was said to authorise the
admission into evidence the oral offer/s in mediation. They were said to be
relevant because they were
more generous to the Wife than the result, and had
they been accepted would have avoided the trouble and expense of the proceedings
from that point and they showed the unreasonable attitude of the Wife as to the
size of the property settlement she sought.
Husband asserted:
s.131(2)(h)
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) (Evidence Act) allows evidence of a
“communication made” or a “document prepared" in connection
with an attempt
to negotiate a settlement to be adduced if relevant to deciding
liability for costs. Plainly communications at a mediation relating
attempt to reach a settlement are encompassed by those
provisions.
Husband acknowledged section 114UB(3)(f)/117(2A)(f), referring to
offers in writing
”. But, in substance, submitted that
by reason of subsection (h) of
section 131(2)
Evidence Act
statement during the mediation was admissible as a
communication
” referred to in the
Evidence Act
, regardless
of “(f)”, and that part (117)(2A)(g) (“other matters”
encompassed “oral offers” permitted
section 131(2)(h).
was said within the mediation was in part controversial. The Husband asserted
that during the course of the mediation he had
made a number of offers
that he be given “
the opportunity to raise any agreed further
payment to the wife upon security of the real property... but that he accepted
sale of some of those real property interests would be required if he
could not raise the necessary funds or defaulted in the making
of any part of
the agreed payment.
” I will refer to that submission in these reasons
”. In written submissions, the Husband
alleged that on
he made a total of three offers to pay the Wife
a property settlement. The allegations were set out in written submissions as
husband's first offer at mediation was to pay the wife the sum of $1.8 million
on those terms.
wife rejected that offer and counter-offered to accept the sum of $3.3
husband's second offer at mediation was to pay the wife the sum of $2.0
wife rejected that offer and counter-offered to accept the sum of $3.2
husband's third and final offer at mediation was to pay the wife the sum of
31. The wife rejected the husband's final offer and the mediation concluded.
Dispute about offers communicated in mediation
was offered within the mediation was controversial. The Husband’s
solicitor had then sworn an affidavit corroborating
the assertions in the
written submissions. Two of the Wife’s solicitors swore affidavits that
agreed to only part of the allegations.
In substance, those deponents
that the $1.8
million proposal was expressed to be
the $150,000 part
property settlements the Wife had already received hence, I infer, a further
payment of $1.65 million
and the proposal did not contain any
, or at least not
alleged by the Husband; and
that the $2
million proposal included that the payment was
in addition
$150,000 part property settlement the Wife had already received, but that the
proposal did not contain any terms, or at least
the Husband; and
A $2.25 million
proposal was not communicated to the wife made; and
it was accepted
that the Wife had proposed a payment of $3.3 million and later $3.2
Fortunately,
on the morning of the costs hearing, the parties sensibly accepted the agreement
reached between their counsel that the
requested to
determine the disputed aspects of what was alleged to have occurred within the
mediation, and no party sought any witness
for cross-examination. Hence the
allegation of the $2.25 million offer and the “terms” allegation was
then not relied
Husband’s case was that these statements or offers in mediation that the
Husband would pay a sum above (and significantly
above) that awarded by the
Court, demonstrated an imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise and, in
combination with other circumstances,
justified both an order for costs and an
order for indemnity costs from the day after the mediation until the final
orders were made.
consequence of the Wife not accepting those proposals within the mediation was
said to be:
the wife accepted any of the offers of the husband at mediation, she would have
received considerably more than what was ultimately
ordered that she receive;
the parties would also each have avoided the costs thrown away by the
adjournment of the January 2024 trial
listing and the July 2024 trial
Husband asserted that the Wife’s conduct of the proceedings from the day
after the mediation justified, pursuant to section
114UB(3)(c)/117(2A)(c), in
combination with other circumstances, an order for costs and indemnity costs.
The conduct criticised
was in pursuing orders that did not permit the Husband
any opportunity to retain the Farm, or even part of the Farm, and in pursuing
property settlement of no less than 50% of the pool that would effectively
create an entitlement to a property settlement of a
further payment of over $3.1
million. Such conduct was said to be unreasonable in all of the circumstances
as found in the reasons.
Is an oral offer admissible?
common law, since at least 1889, without prejudice negotiations were not
admissible on questions of
Steele’s case and the common law
discussion convenient enough for present purposes of how certain offers or
negotiations came to be admissible at common law is contained
in the Full Court
of the Family Court decision of
Steel & Steel
(1992) FLC 92-306
Steel’s case
Steel’s case
decided under sections 117(2A)(f) & (g) & 117C of the Act as those
sections then were.
117(2A)(g) was in the same form then as now. Section 117(2A)(f) and section
117C then provided:
(f) The policy of law centred on avoiding litigation between parties to a
marriage by negotiation is of great importance to the Family
correspondence containing negotiations is to be used on questions of costs, that
should be made clear by express statements.
Family Law Rules 1984
, applicable from 2 January 1985, included Order 29
that merely stated:
Rule 1 Filing of copy of offer, acceptance or withdrawal of where
(a) a copy of an offer of settlement in accordance with Form 60;
(b) a notice of withdrawal of an offer of settlement in accordance with Form 61;
(c) a copy of an acceptance of an offer of settlement in accordance with Form
is filed, the copy or notice, as the case may be, shall not be placed on the
court file in relation to the proceedings but shall
be placed in a separate
Family Law Rules
also included in schedule 1 at Form 60, a
specified form headed “Offer Of Settlement”.
determining the section 79 orders dispute, on the following costs application,
the learned Trial Judge had taken account of
the Wife’s offers described
pursuant to section 117C
”. The final orders were more
generous to the Husband than the Wife’s “pursuant to section
117C” offers.
The first relevant such offer was made about 5 months
before the final orders and open until withdrawn by the next. But other without
prejudice others in writing had been made that did not assert that they would be
relied on the question of costs. The learned Trial
Judge had taken account of
the “pursuant to section 117C” offers
offers in writing including those that did not advert to being used on the
question of costs.
learned Trial Judge had ordered that the Husband pay 70% of the wife’s
solicitor and client costs of the entire proceedings
that was apparently an
amount “equivalent to the wife’s taxed costs
the proceedings”.
Full Court referred to and adopted the 1964 discussion of the High Court in
Rodgers v Rodgers
(1964) 114 CLR 608
relied upon and adopted Cross on Evidence (as it then) was in the 1991
Australian edition as follows:
“As part of an attempt to settle a dispute, the parties frequently make
statements ‘without prejudice’. When this
is done, the contents of
the statement cannot be put in evidence without the consent of both parties, the
case being one of joint
privilege. Re
Turf Enterprises Pty Ltd
“Obviously it is in the public interest that disputes should be settled
and litigation reduced to a minimum, so the policy
of the law is in favour of
enlarging the cloak under which negotiations may be conducted without
prejudice...”
“The Courts have further encouraged ‘without prejudice’
negotiations by refusing to take them into account when
considering questions of
costs or security for costs or statements made in letters written on their
clients’ behalf in proceedings
in which they are sued
personally...”
“In certain cases where the procedure of paying money into court is not
available it has been held that a party may make an
order which is marked
‘without prejudice save as to costs’. This procedure, known as the
letter or offer, was first used in matrimonial cases, but in
England at least, it is now recognised to be of general application.
consequence of marking an offer ‘without prejudice save as to costs’
the document and its contents are treated as being without
prejudice for the determination of the substantial issues between the
they are privileged
they may be
used after these issues are determined, for the purpose of deciding incidence of
Court referred to and adopted the observations of Hodgson J in
AMEV Finance
Ltd v Artes Studios Thoroughbreds ty Ltd
(1988) 13 NSWLR 486.
“In my view it is desirable that the effect of without prejudice
communications be clear, and while accepting the view expressed
in the recent
decisions that such correspondence is admissible, where the intention to tender
them on the question of costs has been
shown, it seems to me that to allow
without prejudice material to be tendered where that intention is not disclosed
would introduce
undesirable uncertainty into the position. It could be that
persons making without prejudice offers might wish that such offers not
even on questions of costs and it seems to me that the possibility of protecting
without prejudice offers altogether should
be preserved.
Full Court went on to observe as follows:
...However, ...it is clear that neither counsel for the parties adverted to the
fact that the correspondence in question was clearly
privileged and apparently
the trial judge did not advert to the matter himself. It may well be that all
concerned mistook the effect
of the words “or
sub-paragraph (f) of section 117(2A) and acted in the belief that that
sub-paragraph had the effect of abolishing the privilege
attaching to offers of
settlement made whilst proceedings were contemplated or pending.
opinion, the section refers to offers which are not subject to privilege, and
the section is not intended to override any existing
privilege relating to the
negotiations between the parties.
The words “or
otherwise” refer to offers which are admissible on general principles such
as an offer contained in correspondence
in which it is stated that the letter in
question will be used on the question of costs
In our opinion, the policy of the law centred on avoiding litigation between
spouses whenever it can be avoided by negotiations is
of great importance in
this court.
The parties should ordinarily be free to conduct their
negotiations for settlement without apprehension that these negotiations can
used against them either on matters or property or on questions of costs. If
correspondence containing negotiations between the
parties is to be used on the
questions of costs, then that should be made clear by express statements in the
correspondence, so that
the other party will know this and fashion his or her
conduct accordingly.
The letters clearly were written on a without prejudice basis and did not
contain any limitation that they would be used on the question
of costs. In such
circumstances, and in the absence of a waiver, we think that his Honour should
not have had regard to their content.
If he had not done so, he would have been confined to a consideration of
the offers made under section 117C.
regard the finding of “
should not have had regard to their
as being more elegant, but synonymous with
inadmissible
was determined, by Order 24 Rule 8 of the
, that is Judge
made rules (not an act of Parliament), provided as follows.
Party must attend in person
] A party shall attend a
conference under this rule in person, and may do so either with or without
counsel of solicitor.
Parties to endeavour to reach agreement
] Parties who attend
a conference under this rule shall make a
endeavour to reach
agreement on relevant matters in issue between them.
Evidence inadmissible
] Subject to sub-rule (9)
evidence of anything said, or of any admission made, in the course of a
conference held pursuant to this rule is not admissible in
(whether or not exercising Federal jurisdiction) or before a person
authorised to hear evidence by consent of parties or by or under
the Act, the
Regulations or these Rules.
Evidence which may be admitte
d] Sub-rule (8) does not
prevent evidence of anything said, or of any admission made, in the course of a
conference being admitted
in evidence—
(d) In a court upon the trial of a person for an offence committed at the
conference;
(e) Upon the hearing of an application under section 108 or sub-section 114(4)
of the Act in relation to any statement made or act
done at a conference;
(f) Upon the hearing of an application
for costs arising out of the
And in such a case the Court in which the evidence is admitted shall treat the
evidence in the manner necessary to preserve, so far
as is practicable, the
confidentiality of the conference.
also adopted with approval statements from Cross on Evidence (as in was
in 1991) that, in substance, asserted that,
“The ordinary law
concerning without-prejudice statements applies to negotiations ...which take
place with a view to compromising
a matrimonial cause...(and) this would
probably be the case with all negotiations carried on through a
. Hence, the detailed discussion in
Steel’s case
dealing with the common law privilege of genuine settlement negotiations and
section 117 of the Act (as it then was) did not refer
to, and I infer did not
contemplate, the possibility of oral without prejudice communications within a
conciliation or mediation
being admissible or able to be had
“regard” to on the question of costs.
117(2A)(g) was then as it is now, and although expressly referred to
not influence
the Full Court in
Steel’s case
to have regard
to or admit the other without prejudice offers. It is clear enough on the
Steel’s case
that an oral offer, including in mediation,
and not adverting to being relied on for costs would not then have been had
or admitted into evidence.
end result was that the Wife received only that part of her party/party costs
from the day after the first in time “pursuant
to section 117C”
offer that was more generous to the Husband that the final orders and
a costs order equivalent to her party/party costs
proceedings.
1996: Harrington & Lowe: Order 24 rule 1(8) struck down
as without power.
Harrington & Lowe (1996
190 CLR 311
, FLC 92-668
‘Harrington
’), a party to section 79 property settlement
orders had sought to set aside those orders pursuant to section 79A(1) of the
on the basis that she had
entered into consent orders in the mistaken belief that the detail of the orders
put into effect what she
said she had agreed to an Order 24 (‘O 24’)
conference sometimes described as a conciliation conference and undertaken
before a Registrar of the Court. It was further alleged that the Respondent
knew that the Applicant was entering into the consent
orders in a mistaken
belief that the detail of the orders reflected the agreement reached at the O 24
conference, but nevertheless
allowed orders to be made. It was alleged the
Respondent to the section 79A application had engaged in equitable fraud and
what was said at the O 24 conference was relevant to that allegation.
the Judge at first instance had permitted the evidence of what
was said at the O 24 conference to go into evidence on the basis that
those Rules was “
ultra vires
”. On appeal, the Full Court of
the Family Court disagreed. The High Court found that the Judge at first
instance was, in
the circumstances of that case, correct to take account of the
evidence and the impugned O 24 did “
much more than re-state the law as
to evidentiary privilege in respect of “without prejudice”
communications
That privilege is concerned with the admissibility of
evidence at trial after the failure of negotiations and even then does not
a legal norm which is absolute in nature. Thus, in a proceeding in which
the ordinary rules of evidence apply, “without prejudice”
will be admissible if the issue is whether or not the negotiations resulted in
an agreed settlement. So also where what
is in issue is the entry into an
impugned agreement as a consequence of engagement in misleading and deceptive
conduct by another
party... What is significant is that O 24 r 1 (8) and (9) had
no valid operation to prevent the primary judge in this case from admitting
evidence in question upon the application under s 79A(1) of the Act.
EVIDENCE ACT
is convenient to deal with general law and
Family Law Act
cases after the
introduction of the
Evidence Act 1995 (C’lth)(‘the Evidence
together. The Evidence Act including section 131(2)(h) applied
from 23 February 1995, about two years after
Steele’s case
Husband’s submissions in this case in part relied on section 131(2)(h) of
the Evidence Act. Sections 131(1) & 131(2)(h)
are as follows:
Section 131 Exclusion of evidence of settlement negotiations
(1) Evidence is not to be adduced of:
(a) a communication that is made between persons in dispute, or between one or
more persons in dispute and a third party, in connection
with an attempt to
negotiate a settlement of the dispute; or
(b) a document (whether delivered or not) that has been prepared in connection
with an attempt to negotiate a settlement of a dispute.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if:
(h) the communication or document is relevant to determining liability for
1996: Marks v GIO: 131(2)(h) and oral negotiations admitted
enough after the introduction of the Evidence Act and section 131(2)(h), on 13
May 1996, Einfield J in the Federal Court of
Australia dealt with the matter of
Marks, Kinross, McCullagh & Williamson v GIO Australia Holdings Ltd (No
(1996) 66 FCR 128
Marks v GIO
’) on an application to
depart from the usual rule (that a successful litigant received an order for
costs on a party-party
basis) so as to obtain an order for indemnity costs. The
evidence discussed protracted settlement negotiations contained in
various conversations and documents exchanged in the context of
settlement negotiations
”. The evidence also discussed “
further set of settlement discussions
”. Despite the evidence
including “
this talk of settlement
” it is apparent that
Einfield J regarded oral negotiations as admissible. It is convenient enough to
recite the decision at
[135] of the case as follows:
"However, irrespective of the common law position, the legislative framework is
now clear and unambiguous. S131(2) of the Evidence
Act clearly allows for
'without prejudice' communications between the parties which are relevant to the
issue of costs to be admitted
into evidence on that issue. For this reason I
hold that the applicants may adduce evidence of such communications which are
to the determination of the question of costs."
admissible, because of the Evidence Act provision, negotiations in
were oral but were not within a mediation. That may not have made any
difference to the decision.
2002: ACCC v Safeway: sec 131(2)(h) makes oral negotiations
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) v Australian Safeway
Stores Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2002] FCA 1294
ACCC v Safeway (No
’) Goldberg J dealt with the issue of whether the plaintiff’s
refusal of an offer to compromise the proceeding was unreasonable
and imprudent.
In doing so, his Honour dealt with the question of “
are certain
without prejudice communications between the parties’
’ admissible?
negotiations relevant to the decision were not contained within a mediation.
His Honour referred to negotiations that were contained
in a conversation albeit
recorded in a contemporaneous file note that was in evidence as well as
negotiations in writing. His Honour
dealt with, referred to and relied upon
section 131(2)(h) of the Evidence
and dealt with the
contentions of ACCC including the following:
Commission submitted that s131(2)(h) did not render the communications expressed
to be "without prejudice" admissible because
the parties had, by so designating
their communications, agreed that the communications would not be admissible and
therefore not
relevant to any issue before the Court. Put another way, it was
submitted that because the parties had expressly agreed, by designating
communications "without prejudice", that they would not be admissible in
evidence, the communications could not then be said
to be "relevant to
determining liability for costs" as the parties had agreed that they would not
be so relevant.
particular issue, whether designating a communication as "without prejudice"
means that the parties to it have agreed it is not
relevant, in the legal sense,
to any issues between the parties before the court, does not appear to have
arisen before for determination...
Honour considered the view of Santow J in
Bruinsma v Menczer
’) that section 131(2)(h) of the Evidence Acts
a letter offering to settle... [was] clearly admissible
Honour also referred to
Nobrega v Roman Catholic Church (No 2)
’) where in an application for indemnity
costs a without prejudice letter was admitted into evidence and the Court in
had observed to the effect that “...
although an
objection to admissibility [to a without prejudice letter] would inevitably been
upheld prior to the coming into operation
Evidence Act 1995
of that Act changed the position so that the letter was admissible on
any argument as to costs.
Honour concluded as follows:
a consensual arrangement or agreement underlies the basis or part of the basis
upon which "without prejudice" communications
are protected from admissibility,
that consensual aspect does not determine the issue of relevance for the
purposes of
Evidence Act
. The relevance there provided for is
to be judged and determined by reference to legal principle rather than the
decision of the
am therefore satisfied that [the file note of the offer in the phone call
between solicitors] and [the other solicitor’s]
letter are admissible in
evidence [on this costs application]...
final decision as to costs in
took into account and weighed a number
of matters as well as the oral and in writing negotiations.
May 2003: Rajski: 131(2)(h), oral negotiations in mediation
not admissible
Rajski & Anor v Tectran Corporation Pty Ltd & Ors
[2003] NSWSC
’) Palmer J dealt with an application to order
that mediation be “
further extended
”. Palmer J dealt with
the issue of the juxtaposition of
section 131
section 135
and section 110P(4) & (5) of the
Supreme Court Act 1970
Supreme Court Act
Section 131
including 131(2)(h) is as
recited above, and section 135 (there is no difference between the NSW and
Commonwealth provisions) is
as follows:
Section 135 General discretion to exclude evidence
The court may refuse to admit evidence if its probative value is substantially
outweighed by the danger that the evidence might:
(a) be unfairly prejudicial to a party; or
(b) be misleading or confusing; or
(c) cause or result in undue waste of time.
110P(4) & (5) of the
Supreme Court Act
(in Part 7B of the Act)
as follows:
(4) Evidence of anything said or of any admission made in a mediation session
or neutral evaluation session is not admissible in
any proceedings before any
court, tribunal or body.
(5) A document prepared for the purposes of, or in the course of, or as a
result of, a mediation session or neutral evaluation session,
or any copy of
such a document, is not admissible in evidence in any proceedings before any
court, tribunal or body.
determining the application, counsel for the Applicant had asserted that it was
necessary “
for the Court to examine what had happened at the
”. His Honour observed:
That is so, it seems to me, in order to avoid the very thing that is occurring
in this case; that is that instead of the mediation
affording a haven from
litigation in which parties may negotiate frankly and informally towards
settlement of their dispute, the
mediation itself becomes yet another area of
conflict generating another whole set of proceedings in court.
That such a circumstance can come about, as it has come about in this case, is
enormously counterproductive not only for the parties
themselves, but it is an
enormous waste of the resources of the Court, which Pt7B of the
Supreme Court
was designed to prevent.
it seems to me that the mediation process was intended to facilitate settlements
between parties, not to provide them with another
battleground.
Honour also dealt with the issue of any conflict of
section 131(2)(h)
Evidence Act
Supreme Court Act
mediation provisions:
seems to me that
Evidence Act
are concerned with the
exclusion from and admission into evidence generally of matter which may
otherwise attract the principles
of the common law relating to "without
prejudice" communications between parties made for the purposes of negotiating
settlement;
they are not intended to apply to the special process of settlement
negotiation provided by a mediation ordered by the Court under
the provisions of
Pt7B of the
Supreme Court Act
. Pt7B contains its own rules as to the evidentiary
use which may be made of what is said and done in and for the purpose of
negotiations in a mediation under that Part and, in my view,
those rules override the general provisions of
But I do not think that it will be helpful, nor is it permissible, nor is it
within the spirit and intendment of Pt7B of the Act,
that for the purpose of
answering that question, I allow the parties to conduct, as they presently
propose to do, four days of hearing
in this Court in which what transpired in
the mediation is the subject of allegation and counter allegation for the
purpose of determining
who has acted reasonably or unreasonably, and who is at
fault in the breakdown of the mediation process so far.
to the issue under
section 135
Evidence Act
, Palmer J observed:
seems to me... if the material which is directed to that purpose, and contained
in various documents which the parties seek to
tender, including the letter of
25 November, were admissible for that purpose, that material should be excluded
pursuant to
Evidence Act
on the ground that the probative value of
such evidence in relation to the real issue to be determined in this application
is substantially
outweighed by the danger that the evidence would either be
confusing within subpara(b) of the section, or else would cause or result
undue waste of time within the meaning and operation of subpara(c) of that
The second and more powerful reason is that such evidence should be excluded
because an investigation, and a "finger-pointing exercise"
in particular, as to
what went wrong with the mediation in the past will, in my view, result in an
undue waste not only of time but
also of the Court's resources...
I think that this letter should be excluded on the discretionary ground under
Evidence Act
both under subparagraphs (b) and (c). It is a letter
which gets further into the debate as to the conduct of the mediation, which
do not think is permissible, and if admitted on its own even with ... consent,
it may very well tend to produce a distorted picture
of the events which are in
even if the affidavit of ... had been read or sought to be read, I would
probably have rejected that affidavit in the exercise
of discretion under
Evidence Act
for the reasons which I have already given.
to me, as I say, that the Court should not permit the process of mediation to
become a further arena of conflict.
of the decision would be that the provisions of
legislation about mediation privilege specific to the jurisdiction of the
dispute overrode
section 131(2)(h).
And the practical wisdom of
experience of the observations of Palmer J is also compelling.
2003 Family Court: Kilich, oral offer on first day of
hearing admissible
August 2003, a few months after
, the Full Court of the Family
Court of Australia, Kay, Warnick and Waddy JJ in the matter of
Kilich v Wood
[2003] FamCA 629
, FLC 93-169 (‘
’), dealt with an
appeal involving an order for costs where the evidence included the following
from the first instance decision:
further evidence is that on the morning of the first day of the hearing an offer
was made on behalf of the husband for payment
to the wife of $60,000 in
settlement of the proceedings that were then about to be heard. That offer was
rejected. There is some
difference in the evidence before me as to the terms of
that offer.
events transpired the wife received orders which were equivalent to
approximately half of the last-mentioned offer.
the time of the decision,
section 117(2A)
was the same as at the time of
(f) whether either party to the proceedings has, in accordance with section 117C
or otherwise, made an offer in writing to the other
party to the proceedings to
settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer; and
(g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.
reference was made to the
Evidence Act
section 131(2)(h).
The Full Court
rejected the argument that the reference to “offers in writing”
precluded reference or consideration
of an oral offer. The Full Court
acknowledged that there was “some force” to that argument. The
Court went on to observe
at [25] as follows:
is, of course, another available interpretation of the relevant sub-paragraphs.
That is, that while
the legislation makes it mandatory that the Court have
regard to terms of offers in writing, it may have regard – and shall,
if it deems relevant
– to an oral offer.
interpretation, there remains a distinction between the position of offers in
writing and those not so. Accordingly, both
sub-paragraphs
serve a purpose
in relation to the consideration of offers,
in writing or
(emphasis added)
Court referred to the well known decision of
Cutts v Head
[1984] CH 290
Cutts v Head
’) as follows:
The public policy behind taking account of such offers is that ‘parties
should be encouraged so far as possible to settle their
disputes without resort
to litigation’
Court further recited from
Cutts v Head
at 299 and 306:
“...Usually such offers in writing. Oral offers would commonly suffer the
disadvantage of not being able to be precisely provide.
However in principle,
there is no reason why an oral offer to settle cannot be proved, and if it is,
why the fact that it as made
cannot be brought before the court o tribunal in
due course when the result is known.”
inherent difficulty with an oral offer was also acknowledged at [30]:
was further submitted that the trial Judge should not have had regard to the
offer because of some uncertainty as to its terms.
However, it is to be noted
that the trial Judge had regard to the offer as it had been understood by the
accepting that an oral offer was admissible, the Court went on to remark upon
the “highly undesirable” course of
an oral application for costs at
the end of a trial raising “yet further factual dispute”. But
highly undesirable or
not, and without reference to
section 131(2)(h)
Steel’s case
, the Court did accept that the oral
offer was admissible in the form “
as it has been understood by the
of the circumstances of that case, the Full Court found the oral offer to be
“relevant” and hence admissible.
But the Full Court then went on to
place little or no weight upon that oral offer and upheld the appeal of the
offeree and ordered
that there should be no order as to costs because of the
financial circumstances of the parties.
the admissibility of the oral offer turned on the scheme within
section 117
itself and in particular, 117(2A)(g) – “
matters the court considers
Family Law Rules 2004
Family Law Rules
(SR 2003 No 375) came into
operation on 29 March 2004, that is a few months after
rules had a new scheme as to offers to settle.
rules, including the preliminary
at the start of the new part
dealing with offers to settle, stated as follows:
PART 10.01 – OFFERS TO SETTLE
Each party is encouraged at all times to make an offer to settle to
the other party in an effort to resolve a case. This Part sets
out the rules
that apply to offers to settle in the Family Court. Part 10.01 contains two
Division 10.1.1 applies to all offers to settle and provides
(a) how an offer is made;
(b) the form an offer is to take;
(c) how an offer is accepted or withdrawn;
(d) the timing of acceptance or withdrawal; and
(e) what to do when an offer is accepted and a case is resolved.
Division 10.1.2 applies only to offers to settle in property cases in which an
offer to settle must be made after a conciliation
conference.
Rule 10.01 HOW TO MAKE AN OFFER
A party may make an offer to another party to settle all or part
of a case by serving on the other party an offer to settle at any
time before
the court makes an order disposing of the case
See also paragraph 177(2A)(f) and section 117C of the Act in
relation to offers to settle.
A party may make an offer to settle all or part of an appeal by
serving on the other party an offer to settle at any time before the
court makes
an order disposing of the appeal.
An offer to settle:
(a) must be in writing; and
(b) must not be filed
A later offer to settle has the effect of withdrawing an earlier
offer (see subrule 10.03(3)).
Rule 10.02 OPEN AND ‘WITHOUT PREJUDICE’ OFFER
An offer to settle is made without prejudice (a without
prejudice offer) unless the offer states that it is an open offer.
A party must not mention the fact that a without prejudice offer
has been made, or the terms of the offer:
(a) in any document filed; or
(b) at a hearing or trial.
If a party makes an open offer, any party may disclose the facts
and terms of the offer to other parties and the court.
Subrule (2) does not apply to:
(a) an application relating to an offer; or
(b) an application for costs.
10.06 COMPULSORY OFFER TO SETTLE
This rule applies to a property case.
Each party must make a genuine offer to settle to all other
parties within:
(a) 28 days after the conciliation conference;
(b) if no conciliation conference has been held — 28 days after the
procedural hearing at which the case was allocated the
first day before the
(c) such further time as ordered by the court.
The offer to settle must state that it is made under this
For rules about making, withdrawing and accepting an offer, see
Division 10.1.1.
An offer to settle is a factor that must be taken into account
when the court exercises its discretion in relation to costs (see
paragraph 117
(2A) (f) of the Act).
Rule 11.02 sets out the consequences of failing to comply with
these Rules.
10.07 WITHDRAWAL OF AN OFFER
10.07(1) A party who withdraws an offer to settle made under this Division must,
at the same time, make another genuine offer to
(emphasis added)
have highlighted the words of the
at the start of the then new Part
10.1. The “notes” are not the Rules but are only an aid to the
interpretation of the
Rules on orthodox statutory interpretation
is clear enough that the Rules, from March 2004, contemplate only offers in
writing being relied on under section 117(2A)(f) and
section 117C. The notes of
the Rules are silent as to section 117(2A)(g).
Dec 2004: Silver Fox: oral offers in mediation
the Federal Court of Australia, in
Silver Fox & Ors v Leonards Pty Ltd
[2004] FCA 1570
’), Mansfield J dealt
with the issue of whether oral communications, conceded to be without prejudice
negotiations in a mediation,
and notwithstanding a clause in the mediation
agreement that provided:
settlement proposal made in the court of the mediation will be
“privileged” and will not be tendered as evidence
in any proceedings
relating to the dispute. The dispute is defined to include the present
proceedings reflected in the applicant’
claim and the first
respondent’s cross-claim.
Honour observed as follows:
Notwithstanding the terms of the Mediation Agreement, the applicants seek to
rely upon the communications at the mediation. They
contend that the receipt of
the evidence of those communications is authorised by
s 131(2)(h)
Evidence Act 1995
my judgment, the terms of the Mediation Agreement are clear. They do not permit
the adducing of evidence of the course of the mediation
or what offers were made
in the course of the mediation.
may nevertheless be assumed that the terms of the offers made during the
are relevant
to determining liability for costs, so that
prima facie
s 131(2)(h)
Evidence Act
would remove the prohibition in
from adducing evidence of communications in an attempt to negotiate a
settlement of a dispute.
(emphasis added)
[36] & [37] his Honour went on to observe as follows:
...Clearly,
it is in the public interest that negotiations to explore resolution of
proceedings should not be inhibited by the risk
of such negotiations influencing
the outcome on those primary issues. It is equally in the public interest that
negotiations should
be conducted genuinely and realistically. The effect of
is to expose that issue to inspection when costs issues only are to be
resolved. There is no apparent public interest in permitting
a party to avoid
such exposure by imposing terms upon the communication, whether by the use of
the expression ‘without prejudice’
or by a mediation agreement.
In my judgment,
s 131(2)(h)
on its terms applies to the Mediation Agreement. I
propose to receive into evidence the two affidavits referred to. I have not
the arguments based upon
Evidence Act
applies. The applicants could not be said to be acting improperly
by using an enabling provision of the
Evidence Act
Section 135
empowers the Court not to receive certain evidence if its receipt would be
‘unfairly prejudicial’ to a party
or parties. I do not regard the
terms of the Mediation Agreement per se to demonstrate such prejudice. I would
be reluctant to accede
to such a general proposition...
admitting into evidence the contents of the mediation that had been pressed to
demonstrate a party had acted imprudently or
unreasonably in not accepting the
offer, his Honour observed as follows:
I also bear in mind that the evidence discloses only the final negotiating
offers of the parties. It is not clear to what extent
evidence which was adduced
at the hearing was made available or adverted to at the mediation. Given the
timing of the mediation,
it is unlikely that all the material led in evidence
was then available. Clearly the medical evidence was not. The picture available
to the parties at the time of the mediation is not shown to be, and probably was
not, the same as that ultimately before the Court.
In my judgment, for those reasons, the respondents’ rejection of the
applicants’ offer was not imprudent or plainly
unreasonable. Nor was their
negotiating position imprudent or unreasonable.
no reference to a legislative provision
to the field of the dispute, like for example the
Procedure Act
there said to limit the applicability of
the key to the admissibility was, in the
circumstances of that case, the assumed relevance of the oral offer in
2005: Amendment to section 117(2A)(f) of the Act
Act No. 98 of 2005, section 117(2A)(f) as it was at the time of
was amended to provide as follows:
(f) whether either party to the proceedings has, in accordance with
section 117C or otherwise, made an offer in writing to the other
the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer; and
other matters
” was not amended. The practical
difference is that the reference in (f) to section 117C and the words “or
were deleted and what was to be considered was simply “an
offer in writing”.
explanatory memorandum to the 2005 amending Act merely states under the heading
“Costs and Offers of Settlement, Item 5:
Paragraph 117(2A)(f)”
item amends paragraph 117(2a)(f) so that when a judge is determining whether to
make a costs order (under subsection 117(2)),
there is no longer a requirement
to consider whether the parties have made an offer of settlement in accordance
with section 117C.
further extrinsic material of the “Bills Digest” dealing with the
section 117(2A) amendment observes:
Item 5 amends subsection 117(2A) of the Act which sets out the matters relevant
to the making of a costs order. Item 5 removes the
phrase ‘in accordance
with section 117C or otherwise’ from paragraph 117(2A)(f), but the meaning
of the paragraph seems
to be unchanged. The Explanatory Memorandum states that
‘there is no longer a requirement [for judges] to consider whether
parties have made an offer of settlement in accordance with section 117C’.
However, the words ‘or otherwise’
in the current provision already
mean that judges do not have to consider whether any offer of settlement is in
accordance with section
(footnotes omitted)
was no reference to oral offers or to the Full Court’s decision in
2006: ALRC 102:
communications in mediation
the context of an apparent parliamentary intention that the Evidence Acts should
be of uniform application throughout the Commonwealth
of Australia, the
Australian Law Reform Commission (‘ALRC’) in ALRC Report 102
released in February 2006 considered whether
section 131
Evidence Act
should be amended so as to adopt and I infer, protect and preserve
“the terms of a mediation privilege as expressed in Acts such as the
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
.” ALRC referred to and
acknowledged the decision of Palmer J in
and the decision of
and observed the mediation protection provisions recited above
(for example section 110P(4) & (5) the
Supreme Court Act
) and Palmer
J’s observation that those specific provisions “o
verride the
general provisions of the [Evidence] Act
Report 102 then went on to discuss mediation agreements as follows:
15.176 Few submissions were received on this issue. It was note that there is
not a great deal of case law on s 131 and mediation.
This may mean that the
section works well, is not often invoked, or that it is not being utilised by
mediators to protect communications.
15.177 The Commissions were told
in consultations
mediators tend to rely on the specific confidentiality provisions located in the
other state and federal statutes,
Family Law Act 1975
)...to protect them from having to disclose matters discussed in
mediation rather than s 131. Confidentiality agreements are also
a feature of
most specific mediation contracts (where the parties agree to keep the content
of the mediation proceedings confidential
on a ‘without prejudice’
privilege provisions, although it was noted that the extent of the common law
privilege on settlement
negotiations is uncertain (for example, whether it
extends to documents prepared before or produced as a result of the mediation).
15.178 It was also noted that issues may arise from the manner in which an
agreement was reached in mediation. For example, a party
may allege misconduct
or duress on the part of a mediator or the other party.
(footnotes omitted and emphasis added)
the circumstances where Order 24 had been struck down by the High Court back in
1996, when it comes to mediation in financial matters,
it is difficult to
discern what “
specific confidentiality provisions were located in the
Family Law Act 1975
”, that the ALRC was referring
ALRC concluded as follows:
15.179 From the Commissions’ survey of the case law, it appears reasonably
well settled that evidence of matters discussed
at mediations falls within s
131. While the section could be amended to adopt the terms of a mediation
privilege as expressed in
Acts such as the
Federal Court of Australia Act
(Cth), in the absence of strong submissions suggesting that such action
is necessary, it is the view of the Commissions that amendment
of s 131 is
unwarranted.
May 2006: Section 10F & 10J introduced
Act No.46 of 2006, the Act had been amended to provide that where family dispute
resolution had been conducted by a family dispute
resolution practitioner,
evidence of anything said or admission made by or in the company of the family
dispute resolution practitioner
conducting the dispute resolution was not
admissible in any Court save as to admissions to child abuse (see sections 10F
it would appear, that if a mediation was conducted so as to be a Family Dispute
Resolution conducted by a dispute resolution
practitioner, then save for
admission of child abuse, the absolute prohibition upon the reference to the
content of the mediation
may apply. It is difficult to discern why such a broad
prohibition would apply to a private, but formal mediation about a financial
matter, conducted by one person but not when conducted by another.
2007: Azzi v Volvo: oral negotiations in
Azzi & Ors v Volvo Car Australia Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWSC 375
Azzi v Volvo
Brereton J sitting in the Supreme
Court of New South Wales Equity Division, had a bit to say about section
131(2)(h) and how that
interacted with the then applicable
Civil Procedure
(‘Civil Act’)
which then provided at section
29(2) as follows:
(a) Evidence of anything said or of any admission made in a mediation session is
not admissible in any proceedings before any court
or other body, and
(b) A document prepared for the purposes of, or in the course of, or as a result
of, a mediation session, or any copy of such a document,
is not admissible in
evidence in any proceedings before any court or other body.
Honour dealt with the question, in the context of the
Evidence Act
Civil Procedure Act
is evidence of the
offers made at mediation admissible?
Azzi v Volvo
another Judge had made an order referring the
parties to mediation. His Honour’s observations included:
It is plain that the offers that were made at the mediation could be relevant
on the question of liability for costs. Mr Moses submits
that as the Court has
“jurisdiction”, under
Civil Procedure Act
, to order that
costs be awarded on an indemnity basis, and as
Civil Procedure Act
that nothing in the Act limits the jurisdiction of the Court, the offers made at
the mediation are admissible under
Evidence Act
s 131(2)(h).
He submits that
Civil Procedure Act
, and in particular
, was not intended to exclude or
oust the jurisdiction of the Court to make an indemnity costs order by reference
to offers that were
made at a mediation.
In my opinion, this misconceives the operation of
, and confuses
provisions ousting jurisdiction with rules of evidence.
to the first of these matters,
Evidence Act
s 131(2)(h)
, does not make every
offer of settlement that may be relevant to a question of costs admissible;
rather, it removes, in the case
of such offers, the bar to admissibility
otherwise imposed by
It is only that bar, and not any other bar, that
it removes. In particular, it does not remove the bar imposed by
Civil Procedure
to the second aspect,
is a rule of evidence, and not a provision
affecting the jurisdiction of the Court. It in no way limits the jurisdiction or
of the Court to make a costs order or an indemnity costs order. It simply
excludes from admissibility (not only on the question of
costs, but at all)
evidence of what transpires at a mediation session. That it extends to
proceedings in respect of costs is plain
enough on its face: the provision says
that such evidence is not admissible in any proceedings, any court or other
Brereton J dealt with any apparent conflict between the
Evidence Act
section 131(2)(h)
and the Civil procedure Act mediation provision is as
...However...
the provision is contained in an Act of Parliament, and a fortiori where that
Civil Procedure Act
) is later in point of time than the
Evidence Act
Another way of looking at it is that, while the
Evidence Act
contains a general
provision excluding evidence of settlement negotiations, with an exception to
that general exclusion where the
negotiations are relevant to costs,
Procedure Act
is a more specific provision directed specifically to
negotiations in a mediation session, excluding evidence of such negotiations,
without any corresponding exception.
When it applies, the later and more
specific provision prevails over the more general one
his Honour observed:
view that I take of the relationship between
Evidence Act
s 131(2)(h)
Civil Procedure Act
, is substantially the same as that expressed by
Palmer J in
Rajski v Tectran Corporation Pty Ltd
[2003] NSWSC 476.
Honour identified (at [11]) that the purpose of such provisions included
avoiding the circumstance that a mediation, rather than
affording a haven for
litigation in which parties negotiate frankly and informally towards settlement
of their dispute, instead become
another area of conflict, generating further
proceedings in Court.
Honour referred to
and the circumstance that in that case
there was not any equivalent to the
Civil Procedure Act
section 30(4)
those circumstances, it may well be that evidence of offers made at the
mediation or conciliation conference can be admitted.
his Honour went on to state as follows:
that is not this case, in which
applies. The evidence that Volvo seeks
to adduce of the offers made at the mediation is evidence of something said in a
session. The present costs application is a proceeding before a Court.
By reason of
Civil Procedure Act
, that evidence is not admissible,
and I reject it.
Honour then went on to deal with the effect or weight to be given to the oral
negotiations “
lest I be wrong
nd the excluded evidence was
admissible.
” This discussion was in the context of whether indemnity
costs would be justified. His Honour went on to refer to the circumstances
should be considered if the offer was admissible. Those circumstances
frame that the offeree had to consider the offer”; and
Whether the
offer expressly stated that it was made in
Whether there
was evidence or a permissible inference that the offers made at the mediation
were intended to operate as Calderbank offers
”, that is,
whether it was clear that a “
failure to accept the offer made at
mediation... would be relied upon in connection with
consistent with conventional practice, a party has sent another party a
letter following the completion of “unsuccessful
mediation” restating the last offer at the mediation; and
Whether the
offer was realistically “
open for a lengthy period of time The time
constraints under which mediations are conducted are yet another reason why, as
of policy, different considerations apply to offers made at them than
to Calderbank offers or formal offers of compromise under the
Rules. This
occasions no hardship to the offeror, who can protect its position by a
Calderbank letter following the mediation if
it wishes to do so
Whether the
parties evidence, as it was available at final hearing, had been served or
available at the time of the mediation.
considering those considerations and on the basis the oral offers from the
mediation were admissible, his Honour concluded as
Accordingly,
I do not think that this is a case in which the Plaintiffs’ failure to
accept the offer made at the mediation,
in a context in which it was not
apparent that it could or would be relied on in connection with costs, was so
unreasonable as to
justify an indemnity costs order.
effect, his Honour held that because of the provision of the
Civil Procedure Act
the oral offer was inadmissible
he was wrong
and the oral offers were admissible, then in the circumstances, those oral
offers within mediation had very little weight.
June 2007: Askey & Askey: 117(2A)(g): oral offer
admitted in evidence
Askey & Askey
Watts J at first instance in the Family Court of Australia, on an application
for costs after a final decision in property
alteration proceedings, made an
order that one party pay 80% of the others party/party costs incurred from a few
days after an
was made and a few days later rejected.
The oral offer, well before final hearing, followed shortly after a detailed
written offer
by the other party. The oral offer, in a telephone call between
solicitors and
in mediation, but I infer, adopted the form of
the other parties’ earlier written offer, but with a different percentage
the non-superannuation assets and a different percentage of the
superannuation payment split. A few days after the oral refusal
of the oral
offer, a letter was sent, referring to and confirming the details of the by then
rejected offer. The letter did not
repeat the oral offer. There was no dispute
as to the details or terms of the oral offer, or of the confirming letter
shortly after
the oral offer was rejected. The oral offer did not expressly
advert to the offer being relied upon on the question of costs but
was not apparently taken.
Honours decision in the primary dispute was more generous to the offeree than
the oral offer. In other words the offeror received
more at the trial than she
was prepared to accept in the (rejected) oral offer. His Honour rejected the
application for indemnity
costs and rejected the submission that the oral offer
lacked clarity and he found it was “a clear one”.
it was not contended that the oral offer was not admissible, rather that no
weight should be place on it because it was
not in writing. At [22-26] his
Honour relied upon
and referred
“newish” Rules as to offers to settle and
section 117(2A)(g)
for the husband said that no weight could be placed on
s.117(2A)(f)
FLA because
the offer was an oral one and that subsection required an offer “in
writing”. The effect of the submission
was that oral offers needed to be
heavily discounted given that
FLA specifically refers to written
offers and not oral offers.
submission is not consistent with what the Full Court (Kay, Warnick and Waddy
JJ) said in Kilich and Wood
[2003] FamCA 629
(2003) FLC 93-169.
In that case the Full Court held
at 78,725 that the Court could have regard to an oral offer of settlement
pursuant to
s 117(2A)(g)
which allows for ‘such other matters as the court
considers relevant’ though they cautioned:
before we leave the question of the status of oral offers in respect of
applications for costs, we stress the likely difficulties
associated with the
proof of the terms of oral offers. It is highly undesirable that at the end of a
trial an application for costs
raises yet further factual
the Full Court says, written offers are preferable because they eliminate
disputes in relation what words had been used when conveying
the offer. There
is, however, in this case no dispute as to the conversations that took place
between the legal representatives of
each of the parties.
10.06 Family Law Rules provides that in a property case each party must make a
genuine offer to settle. That rule does not require
that the offer be in
Neither the
husband’s written offer nor the wife’s oral offer strictly complied
with r.10.06(3) but clearly both parties
had fulfilled the spirit of r.10.06.
my view it is clear that the terms of the oral offer of the wife in late May
2006 can be taken into account by me as an important
matter under s.117(2A)(g)
FLA: “such other matters as the court considers
then applicable Division 10.1 of the Rules was near identical to the current
2021 Rules.
the oral offer was confirmed in writing shortly after it was made.
It was clear. It is readily apparent that, in
to not take
into account the oral offer
that adopted the details of the other sides
recent written offer with merely different percentages and where the different
percentages
were confirmed in writing shortly thereafter, would have worked an
injustice to the offeror and an unfair advantage to the offeree
who rejected the
offer. Such matters would likely always be a relevant matter. Hence,
can be regarded as an example of the sensible flexibility of
117(2A)(g) to avoid injustice by looking at the overall substance of
circumstances rather than only the form.
can be regarded as turning on the relevance of the oral offer considered under
117(2A)(g).
2009: Pinot v The Commissioner of Taxation: oral offers in
Pinot Nominees v the Commissioner of Taxation
(2009) FCA 1508
Pinot Nominees
’) Siopsis J dealt with an application for
costs following a trial on the basis that a party had “a
unreasonably...after rejecting the offers of compromise
” the other
party had made. The applicant for costs sought to rely upon:
Pinot referred to three offers of compromise including two which had been made
during the course of the mediation conference referred
to above. The third was
contained in a “without prejudice” letter dated 23 July 2009,
referred to below.
case turned upon the interaction between
section 131(2)(h)
Evidence Act
and section 53B of the
Federal Court of Australia Act 1956
Federal Court Act’). Section 53B provided, in very similar terms to
section 30(4)
Civil Procedure Act
discussed in
Azzi v Volvo
Section 53B
Evidence of anything said, or of any admission made, at a conference conducted
by a mediator in the course of mediating anything
referred under s 53A is not
admissible:
(a) in any court (whether exercising federal jurisdiction or not); or
(b) in any proceedings before a person authorised by a law of the Commonwealth
or of a State or Territory, or by the consent of the
parties, to hear evidence.
Honour determined the relationship between the
Evidence Act
provision and the
anything said in mediation
” provision of section 53B the
Federal Court Act as follows:
I have said, the mediation conference in this case was convened pursuant to an
order of this court. It follows that s 53B of the
Federal Court Act applies and
anything said during the course of that conference is inadmissible in this
proceeding...
2010: Alexander v ACPA (No 2): offers in writing
Alexender v Australian Community Pharmacy Authority (No 2)
[2010] FCA 467
apparently relying solely on section
Tracey J dealt with the issue of whether certain without
prejudice offers in writing, including a Calderbank letter, were admissible
the question of costs. Tracey J observed as follows:
131(1) gives effect to a significant public interest in enabling “parties
engaged in an attempt to compromise litigation
to communicate with one another
freely and without the embarrassment which the liability of their communications
to be put in evidence
subsequently might impose upon them.”: see
v Cmr for Railways
[1957] HCA 92
(1957) 99 CLR 285
at 291. The exceptions which are
provided for in s 131(2) (including the exception provided for in para (h)),
acknowledge the existence
of some competing public interests. One such public
interest which is advanced by the exception in para (h) is the encouragement
acceptance of reasonable offers of compromise: see
ACCC v Black on White
[2002] FCA 1605
. If a party has had the opportunity to settle a matter
before trial on terms which were more favourable than those obtained following
trial, but has not done so, it is well established that such a failure or
refusal might have costs consequences. Once the trial is
over the interests
which are protected by s 131(1) no longer weigh as heavily as those which are
recognised in the exceptions contained
in s 131(2).
The exceptions do not, of themselves, render the evidence of the making
of the offer admissible.
They do, however, mean that the proscription
contained in s 131(1) does not apply, thereby leaving it open to the court to
have regard
to the documentary evidence of what passed between the parties
during settlement negotiations: ACCC v Black on White at [6].
The court has, on a number of occasions, admitted such evidence and had regard
to it for the purpose of determining appropriate
costs orders: see, for example,
Marks v GIO Australia Holdings Ltd (No 2)
(1996) 66 FCR 128
ACCC v Australian Safeway Stores Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2002] FCA 1294
Pinot Nominees Pty Ltd v FCT
[2009] FCA 1508
(2009) 181 FCR 392
(emphasis added)
dealt solely with the admissibility question, and not with the weight to be
given to offers in writing that were not in the
2011: Lenova (Costs): a timely offer in writing
Lenova & Lenova (Costs)
141, FLC 93-467
in discussing consideration of offers in
writing, the Full Court Bryant CJ, Coleman & Murphy JJ made the following
observation
in regard to offers of compromise and costs under the Act:
Nevertheless, as the letter makes clear, the husband indicated plainly that, if
the appeal proceeded, he would seek to set aside
timely offer in writing genuinely made might, then,
be seen as an
important part of a limited armoury available to prospective litigants seeking
to avoid the costs of litigation
. Conversely, where, consequent upon
success in an action, a litigant can point to the making of a genuine and timely
offer having
been made, that offer might be seen as an important (albeit not the
only) matter in the exercise of the discretion as to the ordering
am unable to discern that the discussion in
of “a limited
armoury available” included in reference to oral offers in mediation.
2010: Forsyth v Sinclair (No 2)
the matter or
Forsyth v Sinclair (No 2)
[2010] VSCA 195
) in the Victorian Court of Appeal, Neave &
Redlich JJA and Habersberger AJA dealt with the admissibility of what was said
mediation in the context of
section 131(2)(h)
Evidence Act
and section
Supreme Court Act 1986
(‘Supreme Court Act Vic’)
in an application for costs of an appeal.
24A then provided as follows:
Section 24A Mediation
Where the Court refers a proceeding or any part of a proceeding to mediation,
other than judicial resolution conference, unless all
the parties who attend the
mediation otherwise agree in writing, no evidence shall be admitted at the
hearing of the proceeding of
anything said or done by any person at the
Court observed that the effect of section 24A of the Supreme Court Act was
equivalent to section 53B of the Federal Courts Act
as defined in
. The Court went on to observe, approving the rationale of
, as follows:
131(2)(h) of that Act clearly allows for “without prejudice”
communications between the parties which are relevant
to the issue of costs to
be admitted into evidence on that issue.
However, in our opinion, that
general provision must give way to the specific provision concerning
mediations.
our opinion, this is a sensible outcome in that it leaves the parties free at
the mediation to explore all avenues of settlement
without the fear that
something said or done will be referred to later without their agreement.
Positions eventually reached at the
mediation can be relied on, if a party
wishes to do so, by making an offer of compromise or an offer to compromise the
accordance with O 26 of the
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure)
(“the Supreme Court Rules”), or by making a Calderbank
offer, following the mediation. Thus, it would have been preferable,
opinion, for the respondent to have made its position on the costs of the appeal
clear by correspondence after the mediation
rather than attempting to refer to
what was said at the mediation.
conclusion means that in the present case, the relevant provision was s 24A of
the Supreme Court Act and not
s 131(2)(h)
Evidence Act
evidence of something that had been said at the mediation was not admissible at
the hearing relating to the costs of the
appeal unless all the parties who
attended the mediation agreed in writing...
The settlement offers made by the respondent, which it seems were made
“without prejudice”, would normally not be admitted
into evidence,
s 131(2)(h)
Evidence Act
applied. All of the respondent’s
settlement offers were made before the trial. Therefore, they are not
“relevant to determining
liability” for the costs of the appeal and
are not excluded by
s 131(2)(h)
from the statutory prohibition on adducing
evidence of settlement negotiations contained in
Evidence Act
Accordingly, we will put any reference to the respondent’s settlement
offers out of our mind.
(footnotes omitted & emphasis added)
2016: Harcourts: Offers in writing following
Harcourts WA Pty Ltd v Roy Weston Nominees Pty Ltd (No 6)
[2016] FCA 1492
’), McKerracher J in the Federal Court of
Australia dealt with an offer in writing following mediation where section 53B
the Federal Court Act (recited earlier) applied. His Honour observed:
relation to RWN’s submissions as to the inadmissibility of correspondence
evidencing settlement negotiations that refer to
what occurred at mediation,
Harcourts WA submits, and I accept, that
s 53B of the FCA Act does not
prevent a party from repeating an offer made at a mediation.
Settlement Offer was made after the mediation had closed.
It was a new
offer made outside the mediation process, and it is therefore admissible
pursuant to
s 131(2)(h)
Evidence Act
as it ‘is relevant to
determining liability for costs’.
If the offer contained in the Second Settlement Offer had only been made at the
mediation then s 53B may have operated to exclude
it. But the Offer was made
later and merely referenced the mediation. Section 53B does not operate to
exclude the admissibility of
an offer made outside of the
follows from the above submissions that the time afforded to consider the First
Settlement Offer was reasonable, and supported
by numerous requests by Harcourts
WA that RWN respond to the offer. Further, the First Settlement Offer
represented a significant
compromise on the part of Harcourts WA. The terms of
the offer were clear.
terms of the First Settlement Offer were such that it was imprudent for RWN to
refuse the offer. The unreasonableness of RWN’s
response (or, rather, lack
of substantive response) is heightened by the fact that RWN did not actually
respond to the First Settlement
the time of the Second Settlement Offer, the legal issues were well —
established by the parties and the evidentiary issues
had been resolved. The
latter point is particularly important. RWN’s submission that, by this
stage, ‘[t]here has been
a number of interlocutory hearings and
considerable costs incurred’ is an inadequate answer for RWN’s
failure to accept
the offer. The parties’ prospects of success could be
assessed with relative certainty. The terms of the offer were clear.
Once again,
RWN provided no substantive response to this offer. Accordingly, in my view, it
was also imprudent for RWN to refuse
the Second Settlement Offer.
(emphasis added)
those considerations, the decision as to costs turned on other issues apart from
the written offers. But, it is an example
that the weight to be given to an
offer in writing following mediation, in part, turns on the extent that the
offeree is fully informed
consideration of the offer.
Conclusion as to oral statements in this mediation
Evidence Act
was relied upon by counsel for the Wife and provides as
Operation of other Acts etc.
(1) This Act does not affect the operation of the provisions of any other Act,
sections 68
Judiciary Act 1903
(2) This Act does not affect the operation of regulations that:
(a) are made under an Act other than this Act; and
(b) are in force on the commencement of this section.
(3) This Act has effect subject to the
Corporations Act 2001
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
it is difficult to see how
section 131(2)(h)
was intended to or could affect the
operation of the specific provision of the
Family Law Act 1975
with those matters.
Marks v GIO
ACCC v Safety (No 3)
the only applicable legislative provision was
section 131(2)(h)
Evidence Act
and the oral negotiations were admissible. It is clear enough that
absent other legislative provisions
, that the repeated
interpretation of
section 131(2)(h)
by superior Courts was that offers,
including an oral offer, whether within or without mediation may be admissible
if “relevant”.
The law compels me to regard those statements of the
law as highly persuasive and to be followed unless plainly wrong.
Azzi v Volvo
Pinot Nominees, Forsyth
the general provision of
section 131(2)(h)
was found to be
overridden or subject to the specific provision relating to the admissibility of
mediation confidentiality as expressed
in the particular jurisdiction that the
primary dispute dealt with. Those decisions could be regarded as an example of
the application
of the cannon or maxim of statutory interpretation of
eneralia specialibus non derogant
” which can be described
where there is a conflict between general and specific provisions,
the specific provisions prevail
s”, see Statutory Interpretation in
Australia DC Pearce 10
Ed Lexus Nexus (‘Pearce
Azzi v Volvo
maxim. I am satisfied that the same principle is applicable where there is a
legislative provision or scheme applicable
to costs and/or offers in the
I am satisfied, by the weight of authority, that where there is a specific
provision of a jurisdiction relating to confidentiality
of offers and/or
mediation and/or costs, those provisions override the general provision of
section 131(2)(h).
with the specific legislation in
Azzi v Volvo
Nominees, Sinclair & Forsyth (No 2)
I am satisfied
that the general provision of
section 131(2)(h)
Evidence Act
to and qualified by the specific scheme of costs set out in section 117/114UB of
the Act. That is, that the reference
to communication, and hence, oral
communication, in 131(2)(h) when considering costs is subject to the provisions
Family Law Act
section 117/114UB.
oral offers in mediation in this case do not squeeze through into admissibility
by weight solely of section 131(2)(h).
there to be a provision protecting mediation privilege in the Act equivalent to:
section 110P(4)
& (5) of the
Supreme Court Act NSW; and
section 24A of
the Supreme Court Act Vic; and
section 29(2)
Civil Procedure Act
section 53B of
the Federal Act;
and as discussed in
Rajski, Azzi, Pinot Nominees,
the answer to the question on this point in this case would be
more straight forward. Curiously, such a provision is contained in
governing this Court. Section 168 & 169 of the
Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia Act 2021
(‘FCFCOA Act’) provides:
Section 168 Scope of Division
This Division applies to proceedings in the Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia (Division 2) other than family law or child
support proceedings.
Section 169 Mediation
(1) The Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) may, by
order, refer proceedings in the Court, or any part
of them or any matter arising
out of them, to a mediator for mediation in accordance with the Rules of Court.
(2) Subsection (1) has effect subject to the Rules of Court.
(3) Referrals under subsection (1) to a mediator may be made with or without
the consent of the parties to the proceedings.
(4) Evidence of anything said, or of any admission made, at a conference
conducted by a mediator in the course of mediating anything
referred under
subsection (1) is not admissible:
(a) in any court (whether exercising federal jurisdiction or not); or
(b) in any proceedings before a person authorised by a law of the Commonwealth
or of a State or Territory, or by the consent of
the parties, to hear evidence.
(5) A mediator has, in mediating anything referred under subsection (1), the
same protection and immunity as a Judge of the Federal
Court has in performing
the functions of a Judge.
as can be seen, this provision does not apply to property or financial matters
under the Act. Perhaps it should but it
do not accept the contention of counsel for the Wife that to be relevant, and
hence admissible, that the “offer” must
be capable of acceptance so
as to determine the proceedings. As recited above, Rule 4.06 provides that a
may make an offer to another party to
settle all or part
of a proceeding
” and that would include all or part of any question or
issue in the proceedings such as the quantum of the property settlement.
would be so notwithstanding that the terms or timing of the payment of the
property settlement remained in dispute. The public
policy considerations that
commend genuine negotiation and settlement of proceedings, including
consideration of offers to settle
in writing, also apply to settlement of a part
of the dispute or the proceeding.
I do accept part of the contentions implicit in that submission. This is,
offers should have real clarity so that the offeree
can grasp exactly what is
being offered and to be admissible an offer must be relevant to the costs
application.
party made submissions to me to the effect that to conduct a cost proceeding by
reference to matters that were on the plain
reading of the mediation agreement
proscribed should be prohibited by the operation of
section 135
recited later in these reasons. Nonetheless, I was and am troubled by the
costs application seeking to take into account such a
matter, that is something
said at the mediation contrary to the plain words of the mediation agreement.
acknowledge the words of clause 10 of the mediation agreement of “unless
required by law” clearly exempt anything said
where a crime or
unconscionable conduct or conduct involving section 79A of any sort occurred
within the mediation. I do not accept
the submission that the words
“unless required by law” was a reference to, and invoked, one of the
exemptions to settlement
negotiation privilege of
section 131(2)(h)
option of one party.
party made reference to the law of evidence as it relates intra-parties. It is
settled law that where a party does not object
to evidence that would otherwise
be inadmissible then absent the matter being raised by the Court, that evidence
would be admissible.
Whether the otherwise inadmissible evidence was accepted
or given any weight would be a different matter.
the matter of
Commonwealth v Verwayen
(1990) 170 CLR 394
a plaintiff who had been injured in a
tragic collision between HMAS Voyager and HMAS Melbourne back in 1964
(‘the Voyager tragedy’)
had issued proceedings seeking damages for
personal injury many years later and well outside the
Limitations of Actions
(Vic) (‘Limitations Act’) The Commonwealth admitted
liability, but the question of damages remained in issue. Initially
Commonwealth did not plead that the action was barred by the Limitations Act.
Both before and after it filed its defence, the
Commonwealth stated that it had
adopted a policy not to contest liability and to not plead the Limitations Act
in Voyager tragedy
cases. About a couple of years later, the Commonwealth
changed its mind and filed an amended defence raising matters previously
forsaken including the Limitations Act. The Judge at first instance upheld the
Commonwealth’s position and dismissed the action.
The Full Court of the
Supreme Court of Victoria allowed an appeal on the basis that the Commonwealth
was estopped from resiling
from its promise not to plead the Limitations Act.
High Court dismissed the appeal and the majority Deane, Dawson, Gaudron and
Toohey JJ found by operation of the doctrine of estoppel
by conduct, that the
law would not permit an unconscionable departure by one party from the subject
matter of an assumption that
had been adopted by the other party as the basis
of some relationship, course of conduct, act or omission that would operate to
the other parties detriment if the assumption was not adhered to for the purpose
of litigation.
this case, clause 10 of the mediation agreement is part of the relationship of
the parties within the mediation. That is that
anything said would not be
relied upon subsequently, and I infer, including on the question of costs.
Section 135 & Verwayen not taken into
this case the parties did not raise the issue of whether, assuming oral
statements within the mediation were otherwise admissible
on the question of
costs, the parties should be held to their agreement and the basis upon which
the mediation was conducted. Nor
did the Court raise that matter with the
parties. Accordingly, that matter not having been raised, I do not take such a
proposition
into account. That should not be regarded as a criticism as the
Court relies upon the parties and their counsel to take such points
regards as dispositive of the proceedings rather than taking every point.
section 135
Evidence Act
was not raised before me, nor did I
raise it with the parties, and hence I did not take it into account.
Does the case turn on
section 131(2)(h)
the logic and
Azzi v Volvo
the issue of whether an oral
offer in mediation is admissible, although permitted by section 131(2)(h), is
governed by the specific
legislative scheme of the law of the primary dispute.
In this case that specific legislative scheme is the
Family Law Act
the FCFCOA (Family Law) Rules 2021
the applicable authorities (‘the
Family Law Act
of offers to settle’). The answer to the oral offers controversy,
consistent with those five general law authorities
referred to, is within the
Family Law Act
scheme of offers to settle. Those applicable authorities
. Or to use the language of
, the relevant provision is the
Family Law Act
scheme of offers to
section 131(2)(h)
Evidence Act
am bound by the Full Court ratio in
The first instance decision
must be regarded as highly persuasive and to be followed unless
clearly wrong. The relevance of the avoidance of the injustice (that
reliance on
sections 117(2A)(f)
and 117C would have wrought) by the application
of the flexibility of 117(2A)(g)/114UB(3)(g), in
is compelling.
Although decided in 2006, the substance of the current legislative provisions
and the FCFCOA (Family Law) Rules
2021 about costs and offers to settle are near
as identical to those applying in 2006.
only of limited assistance, that Parliament has seen fit to reenact in identical
form (save as to section numbers) the provisions
of section 117114UB after
reinforces my confidence that I should
follow the guidance of
when considering oral
offers and section 117(2A)(g)/114UB(3)(g).
Was the reliance on the oral offers contrary to the
mediation agreement?
satisfied that, in the circumstances, the reliance on the oral offers within the
mediation was contrary to the mediation agreement.
Without prejudice privilege
has never been absolute and would not be a cover for a threat, or other crime,
or unconscionable behaviour
but those extreme exceptions don’t apply here.
That reliance of oral offers was contrary to the mediation agreement is not
determinative of admissibility but is a significant matter to be taken into
am bound by the
and well persuaded by the
. In those cases the oral offers were
in the circumstances of the case and hence admissible by
117(2A)(g). I am not satisfied that in the circumstances of this case the
offers within the mediation are
to the section 117 discretion.
I am not satisfied those oral offers are relevant because:
(1) The adduction into evidence of the oral offers within mediation is directly
contrary to the provisions of the mediation agreement
upon which basis the
mediation was conducted; and
(2) The offers were open for a very short period, that is, until the next offer
was made or at the latest until the end of the mediation;
(3) The form of the offers to the extent they can be discerned did not alert the
offeree to the fact that the offeror intended to
rely upon the offer, and a
refusal of the offer, as relevant to the question of costs at the end of the
final hearing; and
(4) The terms upon which the offers were made is disputed and I cannot determine
what, if any, terms accompanied the quantum offers;
(5) The scheme of the Rules of Court 4.06 – 4.12 command and draw
attention to offers in writing and the Husband did not make
any offer in writing
even when reminded of how settlement offers were to be conducted when the Wife
(6) It was within the power of the party seeking to rely upon the oral offer to
have converted or repeated, that offer into an offer
in writing after the
mediation and over the months of February, March, April, May and June of 2024;
(7) No special circumstance was pointed to that would explain why the clearly
defined and much preferred pathway for offers, that
is offers in writing, was
not adhered to.
those circumstances I am not satisfied that the oral offers are relevant. Hence
they are not admissible, or to be had regard to,
within the scheme of section
117/114UB and Rule 4.06 – 4.12.
But if oral offers in mediation are admissible, what
I am wrong, and the oral offers within the mediation in this case are
admissible, it is convenient at this point to deal with the
weight to be given
to the oral offers.
The terms? And how long was the offer open for?
this case the terms upon which the offers as to quantum were made, if any, are
unclear. Further, there is no evidence or suggestion
that the last of those
offers as to quantum, not disputed to have been made, was open for acceptance
indefinitely. In the absence
of any evidence of how long such an oral statement
of quantum was to be open for, I infer that the oral offer was open until it was
rejected or not accepted and at the very latest, until the end of the mediation.
Ordinarily the point of an offer to settle is for
the offeree to think long and
hard about the consequences to refuse the offer. Not such time for reflection
accompanied these offers.
this case there is no evidence that the offer was communicated in the form, or
understood by the offeree to be, that the oral offer
would be relied upon on the
question of costs. That an offer is intended to be relied upon in the question
of costs, and so communicated
at the time of the offer, is an important
consideration in determining the weight to be given to the offer. The public
policy imperative
of genuine negotiations being conducted with the intention of
the offeror, and the knowledge of the offeree, that an unreasonable
refusal of a
sensible offer would influence costs is an important matter.
the circumstances, like Brereton J in
Azzi v Volvo,
in the absence of
evidence about this issue,
I am not prepared to infer that any of the
oral offers so communicated were either expressly or implicitly accompanied by
such a concept.
The Wife’s late offer in writing
Rule 4.11(2)(a) the parties were required to “make a genuine offer to
settle” within 28 days of the
The 28 day time
prescribed by rule 4.11(2)(a), 28 February 2024, came and went without either
party serving an offer in writing.
However, roughly two months after the due
date (28 February 2024) the Wife filed a comprehensive offer in writing
referring to the
well known authorities of
Hazelden’s Chicken
formal and transparent offer was contained in a detailed five page letter and a
detailed eight page minute of proposed final
orders. The letter of offer
described the asset pool and overstated the asset pool by $790,000, with the
same double counting error
persisted in until the first day of the final hearing
property settlement in the total sum of $3.2 million dollars composed of $1.2
million within 60 days of acceptance and a further
$2 million a further 60 days
later with penalty interest to accrue after 120 days, that is providing for a
total payment in four
months from acceptance of the offer.
of the overstatement by double counting in the asset pool, the Wife calculated
and asserted in the offer that upon the acceptance
of her offer she would be
receiving about 44.5% of the net asset pool. Because of the double counting
aspect of the overstatement
of the asset pool, the offer was actually equivalent
The offer was to be
open for 28 days, that is, until 30 May 2024. The Wife’s offer was well
before the final hearing and
was in plenty of time for the Husband to accept it.
Wife’s late Rule 4.11 or
offer was well wide of the
outcome of the final hearing. However, it is significant that, in a timely
manner, it demonstrated to
the Husband the proper and sensible way to proceed
with an offer of settlement intended to settle property proceedings. It came
with a clear statement of how that offer in writing would be pressed to be taken
into account on the question of costs following
the final hearing. That
practical demonstration of the proper way to proceed and the potential cost
consequences of an offer to
settle in writing was apparently unheeded. Instead,
the Husband now relies upon on alleged oral offers made in the course of
apparently made without a statement that they would be relied upon on
the question of costs
only open until the next offer was made
or the end of the mediation
contrary to the plain words of
clause 10 of the mediation agreement
where accompanied
“terms” were not clear.
No offer in writing or otherwise in accordance with the
Rules by the Husband.
having participated in mediation and the compulsion of Rule 4.11 of the Rules
(recited above), the Husband did not make an
offer to settle at any time
following the mediation. Nor was any explanation why not attempted. Nor was
any application to dispense
with Rule 4.11(2)(a) made. Nor did the Wife’s
offer in writing, complying with the spirit of Rule 4.11, prompt the Husband
make an offer in writing.
these reasons, in the event that I am wrong and the offers in mediation in this
case are relevant, and hence admissible on account
of section 117(2A)(g) and/or
, I do not place any, or any significant weight
upon those offers. To do so in the circumstances of this case, would be
antithetical
to the scheme of consideration of offers of settlement in the
provisions of section 117/114UB of the Act and Rules 4.06 – 4.12
Rules and work an injustice to the Wife. Any injustice to the Husband could
have been overcome by mere adherence to the Rules
and/or a timely offer in
this case neither party was wholly unsuccessful in the outcome of the final
hearing. And the Wife achieved a result whereby she
obtained an order for a
further payment substantially greater than the outcome pressed by the Husband
throughout the trial,
achieved an outcome whereby she was
permitted to remain in the former matrimonial home until she received her
property settlement,
an outcome whereby the total payment due
to her was to be made at the expiration of six months from the orders, not 12
the Husband pressed.
all of those circumstances, I am not satisfied that it is just to depart from
the general starting point that each party bear their
own costs of the
proceedings.
The costs of the cost application.
to the Wife’s application (not addressed in oral submissions but contained
in the written submissions and not abandoned)
to be paid the costs of this
unsuccessful costs application, I have dismissed that application. I do so for
the reasons that the
appearance and attendance before me on the costs hearing
was necessitated by not only the costs application, but the substantial
as to the default provisions. Those matters were heard on the same day.
further expense was incurred by the Wife in opposing the unsuccessful costs
application of the Husband. But in regard to the
default provisions dispute,
the Wife was not wholly unsuccessful, but was largely unsuccessful in obtaining
any further provisions,
save for those as pressed and ultimately agreed to by
the Husband.
those circumstances I am not satisfied it is just to depart from the general
position that each party should bear their own costs
in regard to the
unsuccessful costs application of the Husband.
I certify that the preceding two hundred and
twenty-four (224) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
Judgment of
O'Shannessy
Dated: 12 September 2025
Miratos & Miratos
[2025] FedCFamC2F 82
’). Those reasons, and
these, adopt the description of the parties as ‘Husband’ and
‘Wife. These reasons also
adopt the same nomenclature of items of property
as the reasons.
Described as
‘the Wife’s keep’ in the reasons at
The Wife has to move out
of the FMH to permit the settlement of its
See Division 3 –
Transitional Provisions, Section 15 – Application of amendments relating
to costs, of Schedule 4 of
Family Law Amendment Act
Section 114UB(3)(c), the
equivalent to 117(2A)(c) in addition to the matters covered in the previous
provision has added to it under
the conduct of the parties, “in relation
to their duty of disclosure under subsections ...”. But otherwise save for
juxtaposition
of various words and references to the provisions of the
legislation as it now is, the provisions are close to identical.
Authorised by section
123(1)(g) of the Act.
reliance upon the observations of the Full Court of the Family Court of
Australia in
Redmond & Redmond (Costs)
[2014] FamCAFC 55
Prantage & Prantage
[2013] FamCAFC 105
and the authorities there
referred to.
114UB(3)(c)/117(2A)(c)
114UB(3)(e)/117(2A)(e)
114UB(3)(g)/117(2A)(g)
114UB(3)(a)/117(2A)(a).
Email to my Chambers on 28 April
Email to Chambers by
Landers and Rogers.
alleged in submissions and on affidavit that the Husband had made this third
See J D Heydon
“Cross on Evidence” 12
Edition, Lexis Nexus
Butterworths at 25.306 and the authorities cited therein.
That is “such
other matters as the court considers
Edition consolidated on 14 January
i.e not the final
Section 79A(1) of
the Act then and now, provided that: Where, on application by a person affected
by an order made by a court under
section 79 in property settlement proceedings,
the court is satisfied that: (a) there has been a miscarriage of justice by
of fraud, duress, suppression of evidence (including failure to disclose
relevant information), the giving of false evidence or any
circumstance;
For practical
purposes, the New South Wales
Evidence Act
provision as to settlement
negotiations and the Commonwealth Act provision are the same.
That is section 117(2A)(f)
& (g) recited above.
Writer’s emphasis.
the discussion in
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
, Pearce D.C.,
Ed., Lexis Nexis (‘
46 of 2006 referred to the later in these reasons had not yet been assented to
in February of 2006.
is no material difference between section 131 of the Commonwealth and NSW
Evidence Acts.
Footnote 36
The proposition that Rule
10.06, in Division 10.1.2,
governed by Rule 10.01(3) might
surprise some readers of Division 10.1. and the reference to “all offers
to settle” in
. It is unnecessary in this decision to
determine whether this observation in part of
ratio decidendi
obiter dicta
description of the proceedings and
is taken from the headnote at
(1990) 95 ALR 321 at 321.
And if, Rule 4.06(3)(a) governs Rule 4.11(2)(a) offers to settle those offers
are required to be in writing. It maybe that the observations
writing were
obiter dicta
. Nothing turns on that in this
Calderbank v
[1975] 3AII ER
Chicken Farm Pty Ltd v Victorian Workcover Authority (No 2)
(2005) VSCA
$3,200,000 + $229,770 =
$3,429,770 divided by the pool as later agreed of $6,880,550 = 49.84%.
RTF format (1.05 MB)
Signed PDF/A format