Australian Business Industrial - re s.576H - Commission may vary modern awards - application to vary the Hospitality Industry (General) Award 2010 [2009] AIRCFB 986 (24 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Commission may vary modern awards
Australian Business Industrial
(AM2009/154)
HOSPITALITY INDUSTRY (GENERAL) AWARD 2010
JUSTICE GIUDICE, PRESIDENT
VICE PRESIDENT LAWLER
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT ACTON
COMMISSIONER SMITH
MELBOURNE, 24 DECEMBER 2009
This decision deals with an application by Australian Business Industrial (ABI) to vary the
Hospitality Industry (General) Award 2010
(the modern award), the effect of which is to create specific penalty rate provisions in relation to a specified sector of the catering
The variations sought were:
(a) the insertion of the preliminary words in cl.32.1 (which specifies penalty rates) “Except where (b) of this sub-clause 32.1
provides otherwise” and the insertion of a new cl.32.1(b) applying to specified caterers:
“(b) An employee employed by a caterer to perform work connected with non-retail catering services within an institution which
provides for residential facilities (such as an aged care facility, a boarding school or a residential college) will be paid 150%
of the minimum wage rate in cl.20 for the relevant classification for work performed on a Sunday.”
(b) the insertion of the preliminary words in cl.32.4 – Other penalty (late hours) – “With the exception of employees
described in sub-cl.32.5” and the insertion of a new cl.32.5 applying to specified caterers:
“Employees employed by a caterer to perform work connected with non-retail catering services within an institution which provides
for residential facilities (such as an aged care facility, a boarding school or a residential college) will be entitled to the following
additional penalty for work performed at the following times:
(a) Monday–Friday – 9.00 pm to midnight: 10% of the standard hourly rate per hour or any part of an hour for such time
worked within the said hours;
(b) Monday–Friday – midnight to 6.00 am: 15% of the standard hourly rate per hour or any part of an hour for such time
worked within the said hours.”
(c) re-numbering cl.32.5 “Penalty rates not cumulative” as cl.32.6.
(d) replacing “Additional arrangements for full-time employees” cl.37.1(b) with:
“(b) Additional arrangements for full-time employees working 160 hours each four week period with a minimum of eight days off
each four week period, plus a rostered day off, in accordance with sub-clause 29.2 of this award.”
The primary purpose of the application is to establish special penalty rate provisions for caterers which provide catering services
under contract to institutions with residential facilities. Its secondary purpose is to remove ambiguity in cl.37.l(b).
The Australian Federation of Employers and Industries (AFEI) supported the ABI application. It relied on its original submissions
lodged on 10 October 2008 in response to the exposure draft.
Penalty provisions
ABI submitted that caterers which provide catering services under contract to institutions with residential facilities, such as aged
care facilities, boarding schools and residential colleges, provide a non-retail food service. The food service is confined to the
staff/residents/students of the particular institution and is not available to the public. It was said that these operations can
be distinguished from retail-oriented food service. Alcoholic beverages are not generally served in these institutions. Typically,
the catering contract requires the caterer to provide breakfast, morning tea, lunch, afternoon tea, dinner and supper to residents
of the institution on each day of the week.
ABI submitted:
the work associated with breakfast frequently requires preparatory work to be carried out from 6.00 am and that under the New South
Wales, Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania Notional Agreements Preserving State Awards (NAPSAs), ordinary hours may be worked
from 6.00am on any weekday without penalty;
supper service requires work after 7.00pm, but is usually concluded at or before 9.00pm and that under the New South Wales, Queensland
and Tasmania NAPSAs, ordinary hours may be worked in the period between 7.00pm and 9.00pm on any weekday without penalty; and
the penalty for working ordinary hours on a Sunday in the New South Wales and Queensland NAPSAs is 150%, rather than 175% in the
modern award.
It was submitted that the modern award provisions represent additional costs and that the penalty rate provisions in the NAPSAs are
more appropriate the demands of the sector than the provisions in the modern award.
The Liquor, Hospitality and Miscellaneous Union (LHMU) submitted that the circumstances of New South Wales catering companies were
dealt with extensively in written and oral submissions in the consultations preceding the making of the modern award and the transitional
provisions. For example, the LHMU filed a written submission on 29 May 2009 in relation to transitional matters generally. In
of the submission (at pages 3–4) the LHMU drew particular attention to the effect of the modern award on employees currently
covered by the New South Wales NAPSA known as the
Caterers Employees (State) Award
The LHMU further submitted that various penalty rates were dealt with in depth by interested parties and that the provisions the
Commission adopted represent a balance drawn from the many different provisions contained in pre-reform awards and NAPSAs covering
the different parts of the hospitality industry. The LHMU submitted that it is inappropriate that a party ask the Full Bench to
retain a particular benefit from a NAPSA without acknowledging that that party will also derive benefits from the “balancing”
that informed the final content of the modern award.
Decision on penalty rate provisions
In our statement of 26 June 2009, we stated:
“[3] Applications to vary the substantive terms of modern awards will be considered on their merits. It should be noted, however,
that the Commission would be unlikely to alter substantive award terms so recently made after a comprehensive review of the relevant
facts and circumstances including award and NAPSA provisions applying across the Commonwealth. Normally a significant change in circumstances
would be required before the Commission would embark on a reconsideration. A variation in the Minister’s award modernisation
request made after the modern award might constitute such a change.”
The two elements of the ABI variation application dealing with penalty rates raise matters canvassed at length in the consultations
leading to the making of the modern award
This is evident in the fact that in these proceedings AFEI relied on submissions it made in October 2008, which the Commission took
into acount in making the modern award. Penalty provisions in existing awards and NAPSAs vary considerably across instruments –
both for the broader hospitality industry and the catering sector.
The penalties included in the modern award reflected a considered assessment of the weight of current regulation.
Further, the ABI application focusses on one matter, penalty rates, in which additional costs arise in relation to catering industry
employers in New South Wales. It does not make any reference to areas in which labour costs may be reduced under the modern award.
Nothing has been put to us to cause us to alter the conclusions we reached. In particular there has been no significant change in
circumstances which would lead us to reconsider the penalty rates in question.
Public Holidays - cl.37.1(b)
ABI submitted that there is an ambiguity in cl.37.1(b). The clause deals with, among other things, payment for a public holiday falling
on a rostered day off. ABI submitted that it is not clear how the term “rostered day off” is to be interpreted. The term
is capable of being construed as having broad application to both a day on which a full-time employee is not rostered to work and
a day on which the employee is entitled to be absent without loss of ordinary pay by virtue of the rostered day off accrual method
permitted at cl.29(2) of the award. If the term applies to a day which does not form part of the employee’s usual weekly roster,
then the award will have the unfair (and arguably unintended) effect that the employer is required to pay the employee the equivalent
of a day’s pay in circumstances where the employee is not otherwise required to work.
The LHMU submitted that, contrary to the ABI submission, the term “rostered day off” is defined in cl.3 of the modern
award. The relevant part of cl.3 is as follows:
rostered day off
(RDO) means any continuous 24 hour period between the completion of the last ordinary shift and the commencement of the next ordinary
shift on which an employee is rostered for duty.
The LHMU submitted that the modern award clause is in virtually identical terms to cl.34.2 of the
Hospitality Industry – Accommodation, Hotels, Resorts and Gaming – Award 1998
(Hospitality Award 1998) and reflects the Commission’s
Public Holidays Test Case
The clause has operated in the hospitality industry for many years without controversy. It submitted that the Hospitality Award 1998
– and the modern award – enable employers to roster employees for ordinary hours of work over any of the seven days of
the week. The clause means that in a week in which a public holiday falls, an employee is entitled to one of the three benefits of
Public Holidays Test Case
Decision on Public Holidays - cl.37.1(b)
We have concluded that cl.37.1(b) reflects provisions operating throughout much of the industry. It is in relevantly the same terms
as the equivalent provision in the Hospitality Award 1998
in which the definition of rostered day off is also in relevantly the same terms.
Clause 33.7.2
Catering - Victoria - Award 1998
provides the same entitlement as cl.37.1(b). Clause 12.5 of the New South Wales
Caterers Employees (State) Award
provides that:
“If an employee, other than a casual employee, is not normally rostered to work regularly on the same days each week and the
employee is not rostered to work on a public holiday, the employer will either pay the employee an additional day’s wages,
or add a day to the employees annual holiday’s leave, or give the employee another day off on ordinary pay within 28 days after
or within one week before that public holiday.”
Furthermore, the entitlement in cl.37.1(b) is consistent with the
Public Holidays Test Case
decision which dealt with non-standard working hours.
In that decision the Full Bench reached the following conclusion, consistent with the principle established by it that full-time
workers who do not work on Monday – Friday of each week should receive the benefit of prescribed holidays:
“We refer here to full-time workers who do not regularly work a five-day, Monday – Friday week. Such workers include persons
who work regularly on Saturday or Sunday, workers with variable rosters, continuous shift workers and employees who work for nine
days per fortnight or 19 days in each four weeks. This list is not intended to be exhaustive.
It may happen that a prescribed holiday falls upon a day when the employee would not be working in any event. Fairness requires that
the worker be not disadvantaged by that fact. The appropriate compensation, we think, is
an alternative “day off”; or
an addition of one day to annual leave; or
an additional day’s wages.”
In these circumstances, we see no reason to alter the terms of cl.37.1(b). The ABI application is refused.
BY THE COMMISSION:
[2009] AIRCFB 645
Where cl.28 of the
Catering - Victoria - Award 1998
[AP772681] reflects the provisions in the modern award, whilst the
Caterers Employees (State) Award
[AN120106] prescribes penalties reflecting those sought by ABI in its variation application.
[2009] AIRCFB 945
, at para 6.
Prints L0498, L4534 and L9178.
AP783479 at cl.34.2.
AP783479 at cl.3.8.7.
AP772681 at cl.33.5.2.
AN120106 at cl.12.5.
Print L9178, 20 March 1995.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR992139>
No downloadable files available