Hearst & Cagley (No 5) [2025] FedCFamC2F 1055 (31 July 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Hearst & Cagley (No 5)
FedCFamC2F 1055
File number(s):
PAC 5669 of 2020
Judgment of:
JUDGE STREET
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
FAMILY LAW –
Parenting-father mental
health -not properly managed over seven and half years- lack of empathy for
children/mother- lack of insight-
continuing denigration of mother- high
likelihood of undermining or destroying primary carers relationship - lack of
parenting capacity-
unacceptable risk – identity time only
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
[1993] FamCA 143
Bielen & Kozma
(2022) FLC 94–123
Champness & Hansen
[2009] FamCAFC 96
Norton v Landell (Consent Final Parenting Orders)
[2015] FamCA
Slater & Light
[2013] FamCA 4
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
2 December 2024, 3 December 2024, 22 July 2025
and 23 July 2025
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr C Sperling
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Phillip A Wilkins & Associates
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Mic Lawyers
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Mr N Jackson
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Jlm Family Lawyers Pty Ltd
PAC 5669 of 2020
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
JUDGE STREET
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
interim parenting orders are vacated.
the mother have sole parenting responsibility including all major long term
issues for the children X born in 2018 and Y born
in 2020 (“the
children”).
the children live with the mother.
the children spend time with the father on four occasions each year at a contact
centre to be facilitated as follows:
4.1 The father shall advise the mother in writing of the contact centre to
facilitate the time on the second Saturday or Sunday in
January, April, July and
October each year at least 14 days prior to the time occurring;
4.2 The contact centre to facilitate the time shall be in the Sydney
Metropolitan area;
4.3 The mother shall within 48 hours of being advised by the father that the
time is to occur shall make contact with the centre
and complete intake;
4.4 The father shall be solely liable for the costs of the contact centre.
parents are to use the parenting app, “Talking Parents” for the
purposes of all communications pursuant to these Orders
only and shall use the
app as follows:
5.1 Should there be an urgent and or serious medical issue for either of the
children then the mother shall advise the father of
the diagnosis and prognosis
as soon as practical;
5.2 For the father to speak with the children between 6.30pm and 7pm:-
5.2.1 On the last Sunday of each month;
5.2.2 On Father’s Day;
5.2.3 On each of the children’s birthdays;
5.2.4 On Christmas Day; and
5.2.5 On Easter Sunday.
5.3 That the father shall confirm that the communication is to occur pursuant
to Order 5.2 herein to the mother in writing 48 hours
5.4 That the children’s communication with the father will not occur
unless Order 5.3 herein has been complied with.
5.5 That the mother be permitted to supervise the communication and may
terminate the communication if the content becomes inappropriate
and the mother
will communicate within 48 hours to the father of the reason for the
termination.
the father be at liberty to provide to the children at the contact centre
pursuant to Order 4 herein letters, cards, gifts and
photographs on the closest
date to the children’s birthdays and at Christmas and the mother is to
ensure that all appropriate
items given to the children by the father are
provided to the children.
the mother is to advise the Department of Communities and Justice in writing and
immediately should her child H born in 2008
(herein referred to as
“H”) return to live in her home and or be in her care in the
presence of the children on an overnight
the mother is hereby restrained from leaving the children in the presence of H
without her direct supervision at all times.
the mother shall continue to engage the children with counselling, therapy or
psychological support as recommended by the children’s
practitioner.
on a without admissions basis, the mother is hereby restrained from physically
disciplining the children.
the mother is to provide to the father redacted copies of the children’s
school reports for each semester.
the Applicant provide a copy of these Orders to the Department of Communities
and Justice.
s 68B(1)(a)
(1)(b)(i) of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), unless
expressly permitted by these Orders, the father is hereby restrained by
injunction for the personal protection of the
mother and children from the
13.1 Approaching the mother at any time;
13.2 Approaching the children, unless expressly permitted to do so by these
13.3 Contacting the mother or children directly or indirectly, unless expressly
permitted by these Orders;
13.4 Approaching within 200 metres of the mother’s home, the
mother’s workplace or the children’s school or the
extracurricular activities;
13.5 Posting any photographs, video or audio of the children or the mother on
any public electronic platform or on Facebook;
13.6 Posting any information or document in relation to these proceedings on
any public electronic platform or on Facebook.;
13.7 Using any pseudonym to post any material pursuant to Order 14.5 and 14.6
13.8 From trying to ascertain the mother’s residence, the school of
either child or the location of any school activities
for either child.
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) both parents are hereby
restrained from denigrating the other parent, the other parent’s extended
family, or a person
with whom the other parent has a relationship in the
presence or hearing of the children or permitting the children to remain in
presence or hearing of any other person doing so.
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) the father is restrained in any
discussions with the children or in the hearing of the children from:
15.1 Anything related to these proceedings including proposals to relocate or
future living arrangements involving him and the children
15.2 Denigrating the Mother or members of the Mother’s family including
her son, H including blaming the mother or implying
that the mother is to blame
for the current parenting regime, limited access and time of the father with the
children or permitting
anyone else to do so.
15.3 Any long-term proposals he may have in mind.
15.4 Questioning the children about any topics outside their day to day lives,
with such questioning to not include any details
concerning the Mother’s
residential address and information that would identify the children’s
15.5 Using the opportunity to communicate with the children as an opportunity
to communicate with a mother or to convey a message
to the mother, or to ask
either child questions about the mother, the mother's household, conduct of the
mother movements, the whereabouts
of the mother, or to display-online other
spaces or rooms in the mother's household.
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) the father is restrained from
organisation to
request welfare checks based upon any historical complaint
against the mother leading up to the date of these Orders and a copy of
Orders is to be provided to the relevant authority at the time of request.
Independent Children’s Lawyer is hereby discharged.
order as to costs of the Independent Children’s Lawyer.
to appeal will not commence to run until the Court has published its written
Court reserves its written reasons
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE STREET
INTRODUCTION
parenting proceedings were commenced by the applicant mother (“the
mother”) on 23 October 2020 against the respondent
father (“the
father”). There are two children of the relationship, X, born in 2018, now
six years old, and Y, born in
2020, now five years old (“the
children”).
final parenting hearing commenced on 2 December 2024 and continued onto 3
December 2024, when it was adjourned until 22 July 2025,
and concluded on 23
July 2025. The Court made interim parenting orders on 3 December 2024 for the
children to spent two hours once
every three weeks at a contact centre at Suburb
K. Pursuant to those orders the father spent time with the children on 14
2024, 14 February 2025, 7 March 2025, 31 March 2025, 11 April 2025, 9
May 2025, 30 May 2025 and 20 June 2025.
Court had earlier made by consent parenting orders on 5 September 2022. On 23
February 2023 the matter had been fixed for a final
parenting hearing for 7 and
8 December 2023. On 24 August 2023 the Court suspended the interim parenting
orders and ordered supervised
time through a contact centre and use of a
parenting app for communications and required a list of all practitioners that
were attended
upon by the father to be provided to the mother’s solicitor
and the ICL within 7 days.
initially there were issues joined between the parties of a broader nature, in
final addresses there was no issue in respect
of the mother having sole parental
authority, including all major, long-term issues, and no dispute that the
children live with the
mother. The mother and the ICL pressed for orders, in
essence, providing for identity contact between the father and the children
times a year with electronic communication on the last Sunday of each month,
Father's Day, the children's birthdays, Christmas
Day and Easter Sunday, and
relevant restraints under
Family Law Act 1975
(“the Act”).
father, who had since early 2025 seen the children at a supervised contact
centre almost every third week, pressed for a continuation
of the current
supervised contact and the increasing of that time to unsupervised time and then
overnight time every second weekend
and half the school holidays.
23 July 2025, having heard the oral submissions and having concluded it was in
the best interests of the children to do so the
Court pronounced the above final
parenting orders for identity contact only, vacating all earlier interim
parenting orders and the
Court reserved its written reasons.
Court finds the following events
Birth of father’s child, Mr L,from a previous
relationship.
Birth of father’s child, M, from a previous
relationship.
Birth of mother’s child, H, from a previous
relationship.
Birth of mother’s child, O, from a previous
relationship.
The parties first meet.
Mother moved out of her house and moved into
father’s house at N Street, Suburb P (with H and O).
Mother moves out of father’s house at Suburb P and
Docs remove the children, Mr L and M, from
father’s care.
M and Mr L are placed within the care of the
Minister until they are 18 years of age, following Court orders.
Mother moves to R Street, City S.
Father follows her to City S, moves in with her and
their relationship resumes.
September 2017
M and Mr L are taken into care by Family & Community
Services as a result of excessive physical punishment and neglect whilst
their father’s care.
The father’s behaviour continued to fluctuate and
he became more controlling of the mother.
The father wouldn’t let mother leave bedroom and
to escape the mother ripped TV off the wall and threw it to the ground.
The parties first child, X, is born.
Father loses contact with his doctor in Region T and is
entirely off his medications.
Father became more abusive. Calling mother
names, such as, “pathetic”, “bitch”,
“stupid” and “useless”.
The parties second child, Y, is born.
August – September 2020
Parties’ relationship breaks down. Father is not
attending counselling appointments made by mother.
Mother asked father
to leave but he refused.
Father refuses to move into temporary accommodation.
Father tries to barge back into the house physically assaulting the
mother by pushing and shoving the mother out of the room grabs
mother by both
arms and throws her backwards. Mother receives bruising to elbow and upper arm.
Police called and attended.
Parties separate.
Father retains X.
Shortly after mother receives termination notice from landlord being the
father’s friend.
Father sends SMS text to mother offering to return X to
“if I had sex with him”
October 2020
H (then approx. 11 – 12 years old) exposes himself
and made inappropriate actions with his penis.
Mother reports incident
Children spend overnight time with father.
Father makes manipulative and threatening Facebook post
“soon I will be gone leaving everything behind me and friends
please don’t worry about me. I a fine wherever I am if I
need you I will
let you know. Even know you all are the reason for me leaving besides 1 person
who will know where I will be and
when. Please don’t call me please
don’t text me to see if I’m ok if I was ok, I would not be leaving
you all behind
to find peace this is my goodbye”
Mother receives manipulative image of father in hospital
hooked up to a machine and message: “
off to hospital I go”
Father refuses to effect changeover at parties’
household and “stated for his personal safety, changeovers would have
happen elsewhere”.
Mother alleges changeover altered to occur at U
Store at Town QQ and later U Store at Suburb V.
Mother agrees to changes
of location of changeover at last minute demanded by father.
The father sends the following manipulative and
gaslighting text message to mother:
“you know you wonder why I speak to
you the way I do sometimes it’s the absolute lack of respect you have for
children’s father right you have a 90% of the timer and you
can’t let me have one time every two years a little bit of
time with my
children so I can actually have a Christmas right you want to fight and argue
you wonder why I speak to you like this
its not the fact that I just want to
disrespect you and I’m so disrespectful it’s the way you treat me
and the things
you do and say that set me off to make me want to fucken swear at
you and call you nasty s*** and raise my voice because you can’t
speak and beef that you have 90% of the time with the children and can’t
give me until 114 on Christmas day once the fucken
year every 2 years”.
December 2022
The father sends the mother two threatening voice
message and the following coercive text messages:
please let me say goodbye to my children”
The father sends
manipulative screenshot of email to mother of the following communication with
his lawyer:
“I thank you for your time and effort in the work you have
done but I am now done with court. I will no longer be attending
mediation or
any other court dates or require your services”.
December 2022
The father sends the following threatening text message
“I swear I am done [Ms Hearst] I swear whatever you want in
the orders u will get I won’t be there I swear I won’t
in any way again I will not bother you in any way again I will not have anything
to do with you at all again as long
as you pick up and let the recording play;
how about I drive down some time and play it over my car sound system so you and
that live around you can hear it; that way I know you could hear it and
so can the rest of the world so they can judge you how you
judged me”.
December 2022
The mother receives inappropriate and coercive text
message from the father’s phone written in third person, including
images of the mother that she had previously sent to the father, along
with the following message:
“Dam girl can I get a bit”.
December 2022
The father sends the following threatening and
manipulative text message to mother:
“[Ms Hearst], you have full
custody, full responsibility. I no longer have anything to do with the children,
yourself or anything
else at all, and yes, I plan on killing myself sometime
very soon OK. I plan on jumping on my motor bike and riding somewhere extremely
far and probably ploughing into something extremely quickly because I AM FUCKING
OVER THIS SHIT WITH YOU. I am done, you have broken
me enough. No matter how
much I have tried to sort things out you have tried to kick me in the fucking
guts and putting me down.
I do everything I possibly can for you, and it is
never fucking good enough. Or because of this ire cause of that, you are just
up excuses because you don’t have the fucking guts about things you
really want to say how about you just say what you really
want to say instead of
just fucking pussy footing around like you normally do and sugar coat and she
and make it taste like fucking
candy right. You want what you want, and you just
want to fuck me so yes soon this will be your fault. It’s your fucking
Father admitted to Z Hospital as a result of suicidal
ideation and discharged the same day.
Provision ADVO made for the protection of mother.
The father spends time with the children.
The father spends times with the children.
Late December 2022 – early January 2023
The father did not spend time with children.
Mid-January 2023
The father spends time with children.
Pursuant to order 1, the matter is fixed for a final
hearing on 7 – 8 December 2023.
The father sent a tirade of messages to the mother
professing his love for her and a goodbye message.
The father sent a letter to the mother’s residence
and contained the following: “I would have done anything for you”
and “there is nothing I would not do to have a life with you”.
The father is admitted to Z Hospital as a result of
suicidal ideation and discharged on the same day.
Dr W psychological report -major depressive disorder
– prognosis guarded given enduring severity and chronic psychiatric
symptomatology-
continues to experience depressive and anxious symptoms 5 and
half years subsequent to stopping work- father prescribed medicinal
Orders made as follows:
Order 1 - Interim p[a
renting orders dated 5 September 2022 are suspended until further
Order 2 - The father shall communicate with children for 1.5 hours
through parenting app, Divvito Messenger, and not by any other
means unless
agreed between parties.
Order 4 - the children shall spend supervised time
with father at B Children’s Contact Services for two hours each alternate
Saturday and at such times provided by this service.
Order 5 – The
father shall provide a list of all medical practitioners, including GPs,
psychologists, psychiatrists, Community
Health and specialists, attended on by
the father in relation to his mental health, to the mother’s solicitor and
within seven days.
The father is admitted to Z Hospital as a result of an
overdose and discharged on the same day.
The father told the children during a phone call that it
was the mother’s fault that they haven’t seen the father.
The father sent an SMS text message to the mother
pleading with her to drop ADVO.
The father sent threatening SMS text message to mother
as follows:
“I have the steering wheel please stop”.
The father is admitted to AA Hospital by referral of
Town BB police following threats of self-harm.
Father breach of bail established – conditions for
protection of mother City CC Local Court
The father is discharged from AA
The father is admitted to AA Hospital as a result of
suicidal ideation.
The father is discharged from Town BB Acute Care Team.
Father two breaches of bail established –
conditions to protect mother-Town BB Local Court
The father is admitted to DD Centre at Z Hospital.
Father two breaches of bail established –
conditions for protection of mother- Town BB Local Court
The father is
discharged from DD Centre at Z Hospital.
The father is admitted to MH Acute
Care Team at AA Hospital.
The father is discharged from MH Acute Care Team at AA
Final ADVO for protection of mother from father not to
go within 100 m of any place where the mother lives or works until late
Father breach bail conditions to protect mother –
City CC Local Court
Pursuant to order 3, the
final hearing listed 7 – 8 December 2023 is vacated.
Pursuant to
order 7, the matter is listed for a final hearing on 9 – 11 December
January /February 2024
The father posted an intimidatory and manipulative
Facebook video recording in which he stated the following:
sweetie, I knew exactly what I was doing in court today. Got my lawyers to quit
their arse so I could play that card right
out the window; oh yeah! Got it
adjourned for another year; that’s perfect. Got visitations. Sweet. Got
communication even
better. See, now, when you play hard you don’t get too
far but when you play smart that’s a different fucking story isn’t
it. I tell you what I played fucking smart today didn’t I. I made sure to
do what was needed extending this so I can make sure
I bring everything shit to
bare in the next year with a lawyer that is not legal aid sweetheart. You
wanted it done before work
cover finished up so I didn’t have any money to
my name but by the end of next year isn’t going to be no fucking legal
aid. Ill tell you what, I’m going to bring every fucking inch so I can
bare down on you and you are not going to like what
January /February 2024
The father posted the following threatening and abusive
comment on his Facebook profile:
“...Here I motherfucking am bitch,
time for you to run and hide; cry like a baby and lie. Enjoy your life. After
you will realise what you did was wrong and pushing someone to
the point they would rather die then be alive for there
children...”.
The father attends Personal Injury Commission for
medical assessment.
Medical Assessment Certificate produced for father by Dr
The father posted a video on his Facebook profile of the
mother giving birth to X without her consent or knowledge.
made threatening comments on Facebook that he would
everything uncut every fight the birth of [X] every photo of you me the kids,
every text I have every recording,
Good bye [Ms Hearst]”.
Father two contraventions AVO release without conviction
12 months good behaviour from Early 2024 to Early 2025 by Suburb FF Local
Father two contraventions AVO released without
conviction 12 months good behaviour Early 2024 to Early 2025 by Suburb GG Local
Family report is produced by Court Child Expert, Ms HH.
Father breach of bail established conditions to protect
mother – City JJ Local Court
Father found to have engaged in three contraventions of
AVO’s fined $400, $200, and $400
Pursuant to order 1, the final hearing listed on 9 - 11
December 2024 is vacated.
Pursuant to order 2, the matter is listed for
a final parenting hearing on 2 – 4 December 2024.
2 – 4 December 2024
Parties attended defended hearing before Judge Street.
The final parenting hearing is adjourned part heard and is listed to
recommence on 22 – 23 July 2025.
Interim parenting orders are made and commented pursuant
to slip rule.
Father spends time with children.
Father attends psychological appointment of Mr
A schedule visit was arranged but the father did not
Father attends psychological appointment of Mr
A scheduled visit was arranged but the father did not
confirm his attendance and the visit subsequently did not occur.
A scheduled visit was arranged but the father did not
confirm his attendance and the visit subsequently did not occur.
Father attends psychological appointment of Mr
A scheduled visit is arranged and the father spent time
with the children.
Father attends psychological appointment of Mr
Father undergoes hair follicle testing.
A scheduled visit is arranged and the father spent time
with the children.
A scheduled visit is arranged and the father spent time
with the children.
A scheduled visit is arranged and the father spent time
with the children.
Mr KK’s psychological report is produced.
A scheduled visit is arranged and the father spent time
with the children.
A scheduled visit is arranged and the father spent time
with the children.
Father undergoes hair follicle testing for a second
Dr LL from MM Clinic sent a letter to the father
confirming that he has reduced his use of medical cannabis from 130 grams to 80
A scheduled visit is arranged and the father spent time
with the children.
Father files most recent affidavit.
22 - 23 July 2025
The part heard final parenting proceeding recommences.
mother and father both gave evidence and were cross-examined. The Court child
expert, Ms HH, who issued a family report dated
30 April 2024 also gave
Court received into evidence the following affidavits, with annexures treated as
being in evidence:
(1) Affidavit of Ms Hearst dated 11 November 2024;
(2) Affidavit of Ms Hearst dated 10 July 2025;
(3) Affidavit of Mr Cagley dated 5 February 2023; and
(4) affidavit of Mr Cagley dated 8 July 2025.
The Court received it into evidence the following exhibits:
(a) Exhibit A: Family Report of Ms NN dated 19 August 2022;
(b) Exhibit B: Family Report of Ms HH dated 30 April 2024;
(c) Exhibit C: Independent Children’s Lawyer Tender Bundle Part A;
(d) Exhibit D: Independent Children’s Lawyer Tender Bundle Part B;
(e) Exhibit E: Respondent Father Notice of Child Abuse, Family Violence or Risk
of Family Violence dated 23 October 2020;
(f) Exhibit F: Applicant Mother Notice of Child Abuse, Family Violence or Risk
of Family Violence dated 12 October 2020;
(g) Exhibit G: Applicant Mother Tender Bundle;
(h) Exhibit H: Applicant Mother Proposed Minute of Orders;
(i) Exhibit I: Applicant Mother Supplementary Tender Bundle;
(j) Exhibit J: Independent Children’s Lawyer Supplementary Tender Bundle;
(k) Exhibit K: Report of Dr W dated 14 April 2023; and
(l) Exhibit L: Independent Children’s Lawyer Proposed Minute of Final
MOTHER’S EVIDENCE
further consolidated trial affidavit relied upon by the mother, filed on 11
November 2024, identifies that the mother is presently
32 years of age and that
the father is presently 39 years of age. The mother identified the relationship
as commencing around 2014
and separating on a final basis in late 2020. The
mother identified the two children of the relationship: X, now aged 6; and Y,
now aged 5. The mother said that she was the primary carer. The mother
explained she had two other children: H, who suffers from
disabilities and
mental health issues but is not currently under her care and has been in the
Minister's care since October 2023,
and her other child O.
mother identified that H is residing at an alternative care arrangement where he
is cared for by support workers 24/7 and that
all contact between H and the two
children subject to these proceedings are supervised. The mother stated she had
no intention or
interest in allowing H to come into contact with X and Y in an
unsupervised capacity and that she undertakes to always be present
adult present when the children are spending time with each other. The mother
identified that O's father is deceased.
mother identified that the father has two children from a previous relationship,
M and Mr L, who have been removed from his care.
The mother identified
that M was violent and aggressive even when the mother had Y in her arms; and
that M did not follow rules
and boundaries set for children; and that on one
occasion, the mother was pushed up against a wall by M, who made threats to kill
her. The mother believed that M would carry out her threats and called the
police and obtained an apprehended violence order from
the City S Local Court in
late 2020. The mother deposed that M used the ADVO to leave the father's care
and indicated that she was
afraid she would breach it as she could not control
her anger. The mother notes that M was scheduled under the Mental Health Act
soon after she left.
mother said the relationship became intimate in around 2016 and that she moved
out of her house, into the father's property at
N Street, Suburb P at around
that time, and at that stage H was then aged eight and O was age three. The
mother identified the father
at that time was in difficulties with the
Department of Community Services regarding his own two children, M and Mr L.
stated she believed the father got her to move in so as to improve
his chances with DoCS.
the mother moved in, she saw a great deal of abuse and neglect, including the
father hitting the children with objects, dragging
them, threats and verbal
abuse. The mother said the father's children were neglected, but there was
nothing she could do to turn
the situation around because the father was so
controlling. The mother said that she was shocked at what she saw and moved out
after. The mother identified that the father then lost his job and suffered
a mental breakdown from work. The mother deposed that
the father went on
medication which calmed him down, but did not alleviate the other problems.
mother identified that in late 2016 she moved out and back to her mother's
Housing Commission residence in Suburb Q with H and
O. The mother stated that
soon after that DoCS removed M and Mr L from the father's care. The mother
believed that there were orders
made placing the children under the parental
responsibility of the Minister until they were 18.
early 2017, the mother indicated she was not getting along with her mother, so
she moved to City S, to get out of Suburb FF and
give the children a better
future and leased a property from City S Real Estate. The mother said four
months later the father followed
her to City S and begged her to let him move
in, and by that stage his children had been removed from him, and he was in very
spirits. The mother stated she relented, and they resumed their
relationship.
mother stated that the father was on medication, but did not get himself a new
doctor in City S and would visit an old doctor
in Region T on occasions when he
was there. The mother observed that the father ran out of medication frequently
and noted that
there was a dramatic difference in his behaviour and demeanour.
The mother observed and experienced the father becoming verbally
towards her and her children. The mother stated that the father would yell at H,
calling him names, as well as calling
both children names, and the mother would
insist he get back on medication to settle things down.
mother recorded the father spent nearly all his time playing video games. The
mother observed that the father cooked dinner,
but that was it, and did not
assist in any other way around the household with the children. The mother
identified she fell pregnant,
and the father said he did not want the baby and
as the mother was not confident of the father as a father, she terminated the
mother identified that she became pregnant again and decided to go through with
it, and X was born at City S Hospital in 2018.
The mother said that following
X's birth the father was very little help and that the mother did the majority
of feeding, changing
nappies and bathing, and on the odd occasion, grumbling
overwhelming majority of housework and parenting. The mother observed the
father's behaviour continued to fluctuate, and he became
more controlling of the
mother. The mother observed that the father would answer for her and override
her decisions. The mother
said that the father became physically aggressive
with H by tackling him to the ground and yelling at him. The mother observed
the father did not show the children any respect but expected to receive
respect in full.
2019, the mother felt pregnant again and experienced the same pattern of
behaviour from the father as she had during X's pregnancy.
The mother recorded
that the father did want X, but he did not want Y. The mother identified that Y
was born in 2020 at City S Hospital.
The mother records that by August 2020 she
had had enough and that the father was no help, and they were arguing
constantly. The
mother asked the father to leave the house, and he begged her
to be allowed to stay and promised he would go to counselling. The
not keep the counselling appointments, and so, again, the mother asked him to
leave, and he refused. The mother notes
that by September 2020 the father had
promised to leave but failed to do so even after he had secured temporary
accommodation.
30 September 2020 the father moved out some of his stuff. The father on that
occasion refused to move into temporary accommodation
and tried to barge back
into the house. He pushed and shoved the mother out of the room. The father
took X and the children into
X's room and closed the door and kept pushing and
barging his way through, pushing the door into the mother's elbow, which really
hurt the mother. The mother said she remembered the resounding pain in her
elbow, and then the father suddenly grabbed her by both
arms and threw her
backwards. The mother said she was left with bruising to her elbow and upper
arm. The mother said that while
she was down, the father grabbed X, and the
mother called the police, who attended. The mother asked the police to get the
out of the house, but they did not require him to leave as he was a
co-tenant on the lease, it having been renewed in both names.
The mother noted
that she tried to make a statement to the police, but they did not come back to
1 October 2020, the mother said she and the father separated on a final basis.
The mother says that shortly after they separated,
the landlord, who was the
father's friend, served a notice of termination, even though the mother had been
up to date with their
rent since they moved in, and that she had until 31
December 2020 to vacate the premises.
separation, the father retained X in his care and did not take her to childcare.
The mother records the father repeatedly asked
her to sign Centrelink documents
so that he could receive partial parenting payments for X, which the mother
eventually did as she
could see no other option. The mother observed she
believed his motivation stemmed from money as he had never shown any interest
parenting in the past. The mother identified trying to have daily communication
with X; however, more than half the time, the
father would not facilitate the
calls by not answering or not making X available. The father did allow the
mother to have contact
with X via telephone every second or third day, sometimes
up to an hour, but he would cut off the call for no good reason, such as
said hello to X.
father did not allow X to have communication with her siblings. The father told
the mother that he was under the impression that
if X and Y were in his care,
that she would resume her relationship with him. The mother believed that was
the real motivation for
the father taking X, not having any real concern as to
X's welfare. The mother noted the father moved residence twice while retaining
X. On 11 October 2020, the father sent an SMS text message to the mother
offering to return X if the mother had sex with him.
October 2020, the mother's son H exposed himself, which the mother reported to
the Department of Communities and Justice. The mother
deposed that she made that
report in the best interests of the children. The mother recorded that the
Department of Communities and
Justice were satisfied that the mother was taking
appropriate action and referred the mother to OO Service for case management,
visits and counselling. The mother identified that even after the
Department of Communities and Justice were satisfied the matter
had been dealt
with, the mother continued to engage with the OO Service and accepted a referral
to the PP Service in Region T. The
mother identified that a Children Sex
Educator at City S Community Health on 23 July 2020 said that there were no red
flags and deemed
H to be safe around the other children and that he had been
only doing what his friend had showed him. The mother records that both
now understand it was not appropriate and there have been no further issues.
mother observed the father keeps posting material about child molestation and
identifying the children, which the mother said
was just not true and said that
she believed it was not in the best interests of the children for this to be
posted online. The mother
observed that the father has continued to name H
online as a sexual predator, which the mother observed is a threat to his safety
and well-being.
5 September 2022, interim orders were made for the children to live with the
mother and spend time with the father each alternate
weekend from 5.30 pm Friday
until 5 pm Sunday or at such other times as were agreed. On that occasion the
father attended the children's
day care for Father's Day. On 4 November 2022,
the mother informed the father that X had preschool orientation on 15 November,
the mother also attended changeover. The father sent an SMS text message to
the mother:
Two busses decided to kiss each other on the [road]
13 November 2022, the mother received concerned messages on Facebook concerning
the father's posts saying he was going to kill
himself including:
Soon I will be gone, leaving everything behind me and friends please don’t
worry about me. I a fine wherever I am if I need
you I will let you know. Even
know you all are the reason for me leaving besides 1 person who will know where
I will be and when.
Please don’t call me please don’t text me to see
if I’m ok if I was ok, I would not be leaving you all behind to
this is my goodbye.
mother records that on 15 November 2022, she received an image from the father
being in hospital hooked up to machines with a
text message saying:
Off to hospital I go.
15 November 2022, the mother text messaged the father informing him that she had
an appointment that she could not avoid during
the scheduled communication time
with the children and asked him to propose a different time. The father refused
and commenced a
tirade at the mother for not being available as a one-off. The
father did not spend time with the children as he was severely injured.
5 December 2022, the mother received a text message from the father about
Christmas arrangements for the children. The father was
demanding changes to be
made to the interim orders to suit him. The father turned the discussion into
an argument about the mother's
alleged behaviour towards him before leaving the
mother two concerning voice messages, screaming at the mother.
of the father's SMS text messages said:
You know, you wonder why I speak to you the way I do sometimes it's the absolute
lack of respect that you have for me as the children's
father right you have a
90% of time, and you can't let me have one time every two years a little bit of
time with my children so
I can actually have a Christmas right you want to fight
and argue you wonder why I speak to you like this it's not the fact that
want to disrespect you and I'm so disrespectful it's the way you treat me and
the things you do and say that set me off to
make me want to fucken swear at you
and call you nasty s*** and raise my voice because you can't just speak and beef
that you have
90% of the time with the children and can't give me until 114 on
Christmas Day once the fucken year every 2 years.
father thereafter sent two voice messages that were threatening and sent an SMS
message stating:
I'm done please let me say goodbye to my children
followed by a further message saying:
mother records the father proceeded to send her 22 messages, consisting of
alarming and threatening content, including messages
that were attacking the
mother, and some were the father professing his love for the mother and
contained images of the mother giving
birth to her children and other messages
confessing suicidal ideation. The mother records she then received a three
alarming voice
messages on her mobile phone from the father. The mother records
that one voice message was meant for the children and included
father’s sorrow that he is no longer around, and he won't be around for
the children growing up. In one of the messages
the father can be heard crying
and screaming at the mother. In another, he was threatening the mother.
mother records the father also sent her a screenshot of his email to, what she
believed, was his lawyer:
I thank you for your time and effort on the work you have done, but I am now
done with court. I will no longer be attending mediation
or any other courts
that require your services.
mother records that after the father sent that email, the father subsequently
commenced threatening the mother to say that he
has evidence against her to
incriminate her and cause the police to charge her with criminal offences.
father commenced demanding that the mother answer his phone calls and listen to
a recording he had secretly obtained of the mother.
The father subsequently sent
an SMS message, saying:
I swear I am done [Ms Hearst] I swear whatever you want in the orders u will
get I won't be there I swear I won't contact you in
any way again I will not
bother you in any way again I will not have anything to do with you at all again
as long as you pick up
and let the recording play; how about I drive down
sometime and play it over my car sound system so you and everyone that lives
you can hear it; that way I know you could hear it and so can the rest of
the world so they can judge how you judged me.
mother subsequently received an SMS text from the father that was accusatory in
nature. The SMS message included images that the
mother had shared to the father
of herself in an intimate setting. The father's text message said words to the
Damn, girl. Can I get a bit?
mother expressed concern that the father had shared his phone with someone else
and had shared intimate photos of herself with
other people, as well. The mother
said that she subsequently received photographs of herself giving birth to the
children and photos
of the father by her side and other family photos
accompanied by further SMS text messages right through to 10 December 2022.
father requested that police conduct a welfare check on the children in her
care. The children were sighted happy and healthy
in her care. The mother
identified that despite the father's behaviour she was afraid not to comply with
Court orders, and the mother
messaged the father informing him that she would
initiate the children's communication with him.
late 2022, a provisional apprehended violence order was made naming the father
as defendant and the mother as the protected person.
The conditions included a
non-approach order. The father breached the ADVO on several occasions, and the
breaches were listed in
the Suburb FF Local Court to be heard in early 2024.
The mother received a text message from the father stating that he had lost
phone on Sunday afternoon. Despite the issues of the father's behaviour, the
mother was afraid not to comply with the Court orders
and sent a text message
informing the father that she would initiate children's communication with him.
mother recalled during the call, that the father commenced to denigrate the
mother to the children, including telling them that
she was the reason they were
not seeing him. The mother had to terminate the call as the children commenced
getting distressed. The
mother followed up in a text message, and the father
proceeded to say that the mother had stolen his phone and written messages to
herself from his phone.
mother subsequently received six voice messages from the father that were
horrifying, including screaming at her and blaming her
for the current orders in
place. The mother noted the father can be heard professing his love for her and
then, in others, he is
threatening to kill himself. In one of the messages, the
father can be heard saying words to the effect of:
[Ms Hearst], you have full custody, full responsibility. I no longer have
anything to do with the children, yourself or anything
else at all, and yes, I
plan on killing myself some time very soon OK. I plan on jumping on my motorbike
and riding somewhere extremely
far and probably ploughing into something
extremely quickly because I AM FUCKING OVER THIS SHIT WITH YOU. I am done you
have broken
me enough. No matter much I have tried to sort things out you have
tried to kick me in the fucking guts and putting me down. I
do everything I
possibly can for you, and it is never fucking good enough. Or because of this or
because of that, you are just making
up excuses because you don't have the
fucking guts about things you really want to say how about you just say what you
really want
to say instead of just fucking pussy footing around like you
normally do and sugar coat and shit and make it taste like fucking candy
You want what you want, and you just want to fuck me, so yes soon this will be
your fault. It's your fucking fault.
mother identified that on the same day she received another recording in an
extremely mellow tone state, where the father said:
[Ms Hearst], this will be the last time if you listen to audio recording. That
is, it. No more court. Not going to do it. As you
see I showed ya, told ya.
Showed my lawyer. That's it is over. When you go to court next you will get
whatever you want because
I won't be there. I just need to hear you. I need
you to hear this recording so I can be done and finished.
mother records that at approximately 11.08 am she received a message from the
father stating that she had his mobile and sending
the messages to herself from
his phone. The father sent further 13 SMS messages from this different mobile
phone. The mother identified
that the messages and recordings are distressing
and highly convoluted with the father's tirades. The mother stated that as a
of the father's persistent behaviour, she held concern for her safety,
the children's safety, and concerns for the father's mental
mother attended the Suburb FF police, and the police were equally concerned. A
provisional apprehended violence order was made
naming the father as the
defendant and naming the mother as the protected persons, with conditions, and a
non-approach order. After
the ADVO was made, the mother continued to present
the children to Mr Cagley as he was adamant to show the Court that she could not
comply with orders, and the father threatened that the mother would get into
mother referred to arrangements being made for the father's friend to collect
the children from Suburb FF Police Station as the
mother was fearful of the
father and was not comfortable to be around or near him. The mother observed
this continued for one and
a half months, or three fortnightly visits, before
the father and his friend had a falling-out and the friend stopped coming to the
Suburb FF to collect the children or return them to the mother. The mother
observed this continued until early 2023.
mother referred to the Court child expert's family report release on 24 February
2023, and the father commencing a tirade of messages
professing his love for the
mother and sent a message of goodbye: "You will always be in my heart. I'm
sorry I broke yours. Use
the calls and text sent. Send them to the police send
me away so you all are safe from me."
around March 2023, the mother commenced receiving personalised letters in a
mailbox that did not have an address or postage stamp.
The mother observed the
letter was signed by the father and contained apologies for him treating the
mother so badly and pleas for
time with the children and professing his undying
love for the mother, asserting, "I would have done anything for you," and,
nothing I would not do to have a life with you." The mother observed
that some of the letters with the children had contained inappropriate
mother was concerned that the father was approaching her home while she was
inside and reported the letters to the police. The
mother was aware that the
police breached the father for not complying with the ADVO because of sending
those letters.
early 2023, a no contact interim apprehended violence order was made for the
mother's protection from the father. The mother observed
the father breached
the ADVO, which is being heard in Suburb FF in late 2023. The mother observed
the father made no attempts to
arrangements regarding the children between March and May 2023. In early '23,
was charged with three counts of breach ADVO, as the father had
the father had
mother referred to a breach on 14 April '23, when the father requested the
police conduct welfare checks on the children in her
care, and the children were
sighted happy and healthy in her care. In early '23, another provisional ADVO
was made for the protection
of the mother through the Town D Police. That ADVO
was breached by the father. The father's behaviour significantly deteriorated
since the making of the interim parenting orders. The mother expressed concern
and the father's
erratic and clearly disturbed behaviour towards her and the children. The mother
observed that she is fearful and
cannot go on any longer with the current
arrangements.
2 June 2023, the father requested the police conduct a welfare check on the
children. The police were asking for the mother's
location, as the father had
requested they do a welfare check on the kids. Even when the police had seen
her standing at the top
of the stairs, the mother observed that, "Given you have
sighted the children twice, is this absolutely necessary?", and the police
officer said, "Unfortunately, it is, as we need to do what's requested." On 10
June '23, despite all these events occurring, the
mother tried to call the
father for his communication with the children. The father did not answer.
Later that night, the father
between the father and the children, which went for 19 minutes. The mother
that she facilitated another video call on 11 June '23 between the
father and the children, as the children were missing him, and
that the video
chat lasted 29 minutes.
19 June 2023, the father commenced an SMS text to the mother,
Please, please, do not breach me for this
And was preceded by a plea for the mother to drop the AVO. The mother observed
this continued for several days, and the content
of the messages did not relate
to the children. The mother reported the father to the Town D Police Station
because of his continued
- Town D police applied for a further provisional apprehended violence -
violence order for the mother's protection and for the protection of X
and Y due to the growing concerns about the father's behaviour.
The provisional
ADVO contained conditions of non-approach. And the father's solicitor ceased
acting for him in the Family Law proceedings,
but continued to act for him in
the criminal proceedings.
21 June '23, the father's insistent messages did not stop, and he continued to
...he would always love me, always wants me in his life, and he desperately
wants to fix things between us.
22 June '23, the father's messages continued and consisted of questions
regarding the mother's relationship status and queries
for more time with the
children. The father informed the mother of an injury he had sustained on his
finger that turned out to allegedly
be an illness and told the mother he almost
died, which was the reason for his behaviour. The father has not provided any
to threaten the mother if she did not come to an agreement
that was satisfactory
to him. The mother was concerned about the father's behaviour and the tone he
took in the messages and subsequently
reported the issues to the police. In
mid-2023, the father was charged with four counts of breach ADVO and one count
of intimidation
and harassment:
The [Town D] Police Station applied for an interim ADVO protecting me from [Mr
Cagley]. [Mr Cagley] breached the ADVO, which is
why it was listed in the [Town
BB] Local Court [in mid] 2020.
late 2023, a final ADVO was made for the mother's protection in the Suburb FF
Local Court. On 28 June '23, the father commenced
made threats to take legal action against her. The father alleged that he had
been forced to complete
an insurance job on her car to help her claim money on
it that was not true. The father had spoken of burning the mother's car and
making it look like theft, and the mother told him that she did not want him to
commit a crime.
the mother's knowledge, the father took her car keys and car, and she thought it
was, in fact, stolen. The father then threatened
the mother that he would
report her to the police for insurance fraud unless she agreed to drop the ADVO
made for her protection.
The mother fervently denied the allegations that she
coerced him to steal the car and burn it for an insurance job. The father
continued to email the mother's solicitor, and this continued even after he
became legally represented.
mother identified being extremely concerned as to the father's mental health and
state of mind had deteriorated, leading him to
act irrationally, erratically,
and that he has no insight into his behaviour, leading to continued criminal
behaviour and violence.
The mother opined that the children are not safe in the
father's care. The mother then turned to difficulties with changeover.
mother observed the pursuant to orders made on 5 September 2022, the mother and
father attending changeover at Town QQ McDonald's
each fortnight for the
commencement of the father's time and the father's driving the children back to
the Suburb FF McDonald's which
was closer to the mother's home.
14 October 2022 the mother drove the children to the father's friend at Suburb
RR, and they came back with the mother and were
21 October 2022 the father did not have a working vehicle, and time did not go
4 November 2022 the children spent overnight time with the father. When the
children were returned to the mother's care, X could
not sleep until late at
night and O did not eat his dinner.
18 November 2022 the father requested commencing using a third party for
changeovers, and the mother notes the father missed his
visit on 15 November
2022 because he had been assaulted and could not drive for the next eight to 10
19 November 2022 the father refused to agree changeover at Suburb V, and
changeover commenced at U Store at Town QQ at the commencement
of time and U
Store at Suburb V for the conclusion of time. The mother records that the
father often demanded a change of location
for changeovers at the last minute.
The father often said that he was unable to drop them off or pick them up and
requested the
mother collect the children or drop them off to him in
Town QQ to make his time with the children possible. The mother records
when it came to time for collecting the children, the father would change
the time or not show up and the entire thing was unworkable
as the mother had
limited financial means and had to care for the children.
16 December 2022 changeover took place at Town QQ Police Station at the
commencement of the father's time and at Suburb SS Police
Station at the
conclusion. The mother observed that both X and Y were extremely unsettled on
their return to her care, and that
Y said words to the effect "I hate you,
you're a bitch", and X said, "[Mr L] and [Y] is my only brother because [O] and
me, and you do nothing to stop them. I hate you." The mother noted
that these are not things the children had ever said to her
24 November 2022 the children spent time with the father overnight, and when
returned to the mother at Suburb FF Police Station,
X came home saying, "[H] and
[O] are not my brothers because they are mean to me." The mother observed that
X and Y were very unsettled,
and also X saying that she hates the mother and
wants to live with the father.
the end of December 2022 to early 2023 the father gave up his time with the
children. From mid-January 2023 the children attended
changeover with the
father's friend at Suburb FF Police Station, and this occurred three times.
early February '23 X and Y were extremely unsettled whenever they were returned
to the mother's care. The mother observed that
X and Y would not settle well
before going to bed, and that X was calling the mother hurtful names like bitch
and that the mother
is stupid and that she hates the mother.
mid-February '23 X started to call the mother by her first name when she
returned home from the father's care but would revert
to calling her Mummy a day
or two later.
23 February '23 the father refused to see the children after release of the
family report. The mother ceased feeling safe to effect
changeover herself, and
the father made no attempt to arrange alternative changeovers with the mother
after the early 2023 AVO.
father missed Y's birthday in 2023 but attended the mother's home without her
knowledge or consent and dropped off the children's
belongings, toys, boxes of
clothes and bedding.
11 May '23 the mother engaged new lawyers offering to make changeovers in a
supervised capacity as the mother feared what the father
may do if they came
face to face. The mother did not effect changeover at Town QQ as demanded by
the father because she wanted something
safe to occur.
mother on 1 June records that the father insisted through his lawyer that the
mother affect changeover at his home. The mother
records feeling pressured to
offer some time and hoped that the denial of anything being wrong by the
father's solicitor was true.
2 June the mother responded to the father's correspondence dated 1 June
informing that she would agree to a public place halfway
between Town D and Town
QQ. The mother indicated that if she did not hear back from the father
changeover would be effected at Suburb
FF Police Station, and the father did not
respond. The mother presented the children to Suburb FF Police Station and
remained there
for an hour, and the father did not attend the changeover.
2 June '23 arrangements were made through solicitors for the mother to take the
children back to Suburb FF Police Station despite
the mother's concern that the
children would be tired and be subject to a long drive to Town QQ where the
father resides after drop-off
as the mother was desperate for assistance with
the children while the mother moved to a new home. The mother waited for the
at the Suburb FF Police Station for approximately an hour and a half
before leaving as the father did not attend. Whilst driving
Police Station contacted the mother to identify they had been contacted by the
father to conduct a welfare check
on the children who had care as he was
concerned they were not in their beds.
was a third request for a changeover at 10 pm at night which the mother
declined. The mother's lawyer recorded the events in
correspondence sent to the
father's lawyer.
16 June '23 the mother attempted to facilitate the father's time with the
children and presented the children to the Suburb FF
Station, and the father
demanded the mother attend Town QQ and collect the children because he had car
problems. Upon return of
the children, Y was calling the mother by her first
name, and X was upset that the father did not take her out of the house the
weekend. X and Y both had a set of clothes missing.
22 June 2023 the mother received a message from the father meant for the
children saying, "I have the steering wheel. Please stop."
The mother took
this as a suicide threat and did not facilitate the children's time with the
father as a result.
28 June '23 the mother informed the father about the change to the children's
practitioners and received a response, "Please stop
form of harassment."
14 July '23 the father sent an email to the mother's lawyer that he could not
have the children as he was moving houses. The mother
referred to the telephone
calls that take place being sporadic and the father being focused on asking
questions of the mother about
the court or directing slurs at the mother, and on
one occasion in December '22 screamed, "Shut the fuck up, [Ms Hearst]", which
heard, and the mother was forced to terminate the call.
mother recorded that the calls made in June and July '23 were not answered by
the father. The mother referred to trying to keep
the father informed of the
children's circumstances to the best of her ability, but identified it was
causing her stress, anxiety
and fear that she will be subject to the father's
tirades, threats, and in general, harassing behaviour.
mother identified an inappropriate response by the father in relation to being
informed about X's medical appointments on 24 July
'23. The mother recorded
that the father continued to say that she is in breach of family orders, and
that the mother is stressed
out about not complying with Court orders and
fearful of the father. The mother identified it was difficult to co-parent with
father, including keeping him informed of things, as this always somehow
opened the mother up to conflict and emotional and psychological
mother also identified receiving letters in the smashed up mobile in her
letterbox from 8 March '23, and received a payphone voice
message from the
father confessing it was him who had left the items for her.
mother records that since interim orders were made, the father uses video calls
or attempts to communicate with the children to
speak to the mother using
inappropriate language, name calling, to question X about the mother's life and
her parenting, and to simply
put the mother down as a mother.
mother records that the father repeatedly used a payphone to contact the mother
and leave messages that were not related to the
children, and then denied that
he was the author of the payphone calls to the police.
mother identified on 15 May '23 the children's child care centre contacted her
regarding the father being quite upset and verbally
abusive because of them not
allowing the father to see Y while he was at the centre. The mother identified
that she did not want
Y's enrolment being jeopardised due to the father's
persistence in going to the child care. The mother recorded that she is
the father will remove the children from the child care and not return
them. The mother noted that the father had made repeated
requests to contact
him so that he could speak with the children, however when the mother does so,
he does not answer.
mother identified the father leaving voice messages inappropriately asserting
that the mother is not following the Court orders
and dropping her off and doing
phone calls like she was meant to, and that he would see them soon, and
asserting that there is a
new house with new furniture, and that he has a new
"fuck car", and that they would hear from him soon.
10 June '23 in a video call the father was telling the children that it is the
mother's fault they have not seen him, using words
to the effect, "Mummy has
blocked me", and that he needed to go to Town D Police Station to sort a few
things out. The father had
a further conversation with the children on Sunday,
and again told the children that he had not seen the kids, and that it is the
mother's fault. This approach by the father continued in June until the mother
made the last call on 30 June and the father did
not answer.
mother identified that the father had denigrated her and called her names on
social media platforms, calling the mother "a deceitful,
disrespectful,
narcissistic, abusive, violent, aggressive, controlling, and manipulative
person." The mother identified the father
posting on Facebook the mother's full
name attached to posts, and sending out a message to the two children and
asserting that God
takes his vengeance upon those who do harm and included the
threat that "we are here to do God's work." The mother expressed concern
the father denigrates her to other people.
mother identified having received repeated and numerous contacts through
payphones from the father.
mother identified that she had been the primary carer of both the children since
birth and identified the numerous parenting activities
and routines that she
attended to.
mother observed that the father rarely assisted around the home, and that the
most he would do was cook dinner.
mother observed the father has not worked full-time since she gave birth to X.
mother referred to the children in her care being very happy, bubbly, and
mother referred to Y having a minor speech delay.
mother referred to the children saying that they miss the father, that is,
referred to X saying that she misses the father, and
Y asking about the father.
The mother noted that to date, the father has made no attempt to contact the
supervisors to engage in
supervised time with the children.
mother observed that the father appears to care for the kids when he does not
have to do much for them but forgets about them
when he must take active steps
to care for them or do things for them.
mother referred to completing the parenting after separation program on 15
December '22, and that she had been fortunate enough
to obtain permanent housing
in Town D, and relocated for many reasons, including that she did not feel safe
due to the father and
did not wish to disclose her address.
mid-2023 the mother was contacted by City TT Police concerned for the father's
welfare and as to his mental health.
30 July '23 the mother received a message from the father's mother, and the
father posted online that he was homeless. The mother
did not accept that the
children should be sleeping at random places.
mother observed that the father did not pursue time with the children between
the interim hearing and until 10 October '23.
mother notes the matter was listed for a final hearing on 7 December '23, and
that the father's lawyers withdrew from the proceedings,
and that the mother did
not oppose an adjournment because she wanted the father to get the benefit of
legal guidance and advice.
The father acknowledged that he had mental health
problems, and that he wanted to work on those problems. The mother was hopeful
that the father would use time until the next hearing to improve his behaviour
and that they could move on from the trauma and conflict.
The mother observed
that this has not occurred, and that she has been struggling and living with
conflict and constant fear of what
the father might do next.
mother referred to a video posted by the father on Facebook which she identified
was intimidatory where he declared he had successfully
manipulated the Court and
was proud of the manipulation, and that he was coming for the mother. In that
video the father said words,
as identified in the chronology. The mother was
alarmed at the father's message that had clearly been intended for her and
her lawyers to write to the father.
father posted on his public Facebook profile a video of the mother giving birth
to X without the mother's knowledge or consent.
mother observed that a nude video of her entire body released on the internet
for everyone around the world to see caused her
extreme distress. The mother
recalled shaking, feeling sick to her stomach, being embarrassed, mortified,
horrified and scared.
The mother observed the video was taken when she was
under the influence of an epidural during a long labour by the father, and
did not agree to the father to take any such recording.
mother observed the father had posted threats and comments such as "I am
uploading everything uncut. Every fight, the birth of
[X], every photo of you,
me, the kids, every text I have, every recording. Goodbye, [Ms Hearst]." The
mother reported the online
video to the police.
mother observed since the making of the interim orders on 7 December '23 the
father has sent numerous proposals that he withdraws
or takes back, and that the
mother is exhausted. The mother observed that these proposals have included
overnight time with the
children, and that she is concerned about moving forward
with overnight time arrangements or any unsupervised arrangements because
father has not demonstrated any reform.
mother observed that the father has not offered any new information about his
mental health treatment or progress, nor that his
drug use has ceased, nor that
his personal circumstances have improved.
mother observed the father was homeless or living in a car or van, and that this
was not suitable arrangements for the children.
mother identified a string of horrendous names that the father has continued to
call her in conversations and continues to denigrate
the mother. The
denigrating words and names include:
Narcissistic, cunt, dumb as shit, piece of shit, shut her fucking mouth, shut
the fuck up, vindictive manipulative piece of shit,
dirty piece of lying
manipulating shit, low life.
mother observed that the correspondence from the father is ongoing and comes in
bursts every few months. The mother observed
a pattern of behaviour where the
father will settle and then resume his tirade of attacks against the mother
every few months.
mother is concerned that when there is no more Court, the father's behaviour
will be unmonitored, will increase, and the mother
is concerned that the father
will find her and harm her.
mother identified the propensity of the father to blame her for things that are
not her fault and gave an example of a tirade
during Father's Day, blaming the
mother for not facilitating the children.
mother referred to a multiple of texts asserting that she was not complying with
Court orders when there was no such arrangement
in place and said those actions
are a form of abuse and that she is extremely stressed out by the father's
mother identified that the father has caused her to further fear his stalking
and intimidatory behaviour. The mother referred
to the father taking a
photograph of her and the children leaving the contact centre. The father did
not abide by the rules of the
extremely concerning as the father has located her whereabouts in the past which
her to fear for her life.
mother identified the father continuing to post things using a false name
"[...]", which includes threats towards the mother and
threats of self-harm, and
set out a tirade that was posted by the father.
mother observed the father has been threatening towards her elder child, H,
which raises the mother's concern as to the father's
lethality and tendency
towards acting in violent ways.
father has publicly shamed and named H as a predator.
father made a false report to DCJ that the mother broke X's arm, when X in fact
broke her arm at school.
mother referred to the father's reports to DCJ, welfare checks and home visits
because of neglect allegations made by him in relation
to the mother, including
causing the mother to be investigated by PP Service.
mother identified that communications on the app began on 15 February '24, and
identified 10 unanswered calls made between 28
February '24 to 30 June '24.
mother identified the father answered on 3 July '24 and informed the children
that he would be residing in the USA, and he had
to have the children blocked,
and that they would never have a chance to do fun things again. The mother
expressed concern that
the father was seeking emotional validation from the
children and set out the text of the assertions by the father he would be living
in America. The mother recalls that the children were shocked.
mother recalls in a call on 7 August '24 X telling the father that she had a
boyfriend and that she did not need to lie to Daddy
4 September '24 X was crying and distressed and was being asked by the father
questions about missing the father repeatedly, and
the father then asked the
children what they got their other Daddy, causing X to become distressed and the
mother to intervene in
the telephone call.
were further telephone calls between 11 September '24 and 9 October '24, and on
6 November '24 the father asked X if a man named
Mr UU is the mother's boyfriend
and started asking intimate questions about the mother's personal life. The
father also suggested
to X that he had only one visit left and would not be
seeing them again.
30 October '24 the father told the children there were only two more
opportunities he had to see them. The mother records that
the father said some
very horrible things to the children including that he would abandon them, never
see them again, and that he
is relocating overseas, and that the mother is to
blame for them not seeing him more often and more.
mother records the father has consistently manipulated the children emotionally
and undermined the mother during the audio visual
calls and inserts false
narratives, asking misleading questions that confuse the children and negatively
affect their emotional wellbeing.
As an example of an inappropriate question,
the mother referred to the father asking:
What did you get the other Dad for Father's Day?
mother deposed that such questions it is also implied that the mother
intentionally hurt the children and that they do not want
to live with the
mother expressed concern about the impact of the father's behaviour on the
children and concern about the children's mental, psychological,
and emotional
wellbeing in the future. The mother observed the children experience confusion
and distress due to the lack of regular
their sense of security and stability.
mother observed that if the father is granted visitation, she is concerned that
his inconsistency will continue further harming
the children's emotional health
and daily routines. The mother referred to the supervised visits as being
inconsistent visits with
the children.
mother identified the father spending time with the children supervised on 2
March '24, 23 March '24, and that 13 April '24 was
cancelled by the father, and
on 10 May the father informed the mother that he would not be attending until
further notice, and there
were no further visits until 3 August '24, and that
the father, on 3 August '24, cancelled that visit. The father cancelled the
visit for 14 September '24. The father spent time with the children on 26
September '24, 12 October '24, and 2 November '24. The
mother observed that the
father is unpredictable, and the only consistency is his erratic and
inconsistent and concerning behaviour
that negatively impacts on the children's
emotional and mental wellbeing.
mother observed that the children experience confusion and distress due to the
lack of regular contact which disrupts their sense
of security and stability.
The mother observed that if the father is granted visitation, she is concerned
his inconsistency will
continue further harming the children's emotional health
and daily routines.
mother referred to the struggle for the child O going on long drives and trips
and that it takes another almost two hours to get
to Suburb K.
mother observed that the children's education is on track and that there are no
development issues other than Y's speech delay.
mother observed that X is helpful, kind, caring and shares and does everything
asked when not spending time with the father, and
that other than the times when
she comes back from the father's care, X is pleasant and a well-behaved child.
mother referred to the children having therapy, and that they attend those
sessions as part of their ongoing emotional and psychological
mother referred to the children regularly seeing a paediatrician and dentist,
and additionally a support for Y's speech, emotional
regulation and behaviour.
mother referred to an assertion that she had punched Y in the face and said that
the story was entirely false, and the mother
was unclear where the allegation
stemmed from.
mother identified that she seeks support from doctors and counsellors when she
feels it is necessary and currently undergoing
domestic violence counselling to
mother referred to a medical condition and two minor surgeries.
mother referred to orders for a PO box for the father to send gifts, which the
father has not used at all, and the expense of
maintaining that PO box.
annexures to the mother’s affidavit include communications from the father
to the mother’s solicitor that were abusive
and manipulative. On 4
September 2024, the father falsely alleged he had cameras inside the
mother’s home and accused the mother
of narcissistic manipulative tactics
to cause his mental health breakdown. On 2 September 2024 the father alleged
abuse by the mother.
On 6 May 2024, the father called the mother a
dumb as shit client, cunt of a client, peace of shit out of my life
father on 6 May 2024 also made the threat
your stupid client will wish she never fucked me over and around
email from the father dated 1 May 2024, referred to the mother your piece of
shit client, fuckwit of a client, made a threat that
the mother needs to shut
her fucking mouth, called the mother a vindictive manipulative piece of shit and
dirty piece of lying manipulative
shit. An email on 3 May 2024, alleged the
mother uses mental abuse and manipulative behaviour to force her own outcomes
the mother a lowlife. On 5 March 2024, the father alleged the mother
suffers from NPD on the covert spectrum (this is a reference
to narcistic
personality disorder), alleged abuse of the mother against the father and
children for many years, alleged the mother
lied for a recovery order. On 29
February 2024, the father said:
Your client can go absolutely go an f*** herself. Because I plan on screwing her
if she does not decide to take one of the deals
that I have offered.
father in that email also called the mother a covert narcissistic bully. On 29
February 2024, the father made a threat the mother
is lucky he did not have
adequate legal representation, alleged the mother had narcissistic abusive
tendencies, made a threat that
if the mother did not choose to accept his offer
and that he would
fully fight her. And I will use absolutely everything at my disposal.
the cross-examination, the mother identified that she is a stay-at-home mother
and has the primary care of the two children. The
mother confirmed in relation
to the notice of risk that she did not allege that the father had abused either
child and confirmed
that she answered the question that neither child is at risk
of being abused by a party to the proceedings. The mother also confirmed
she had answered a question in the notice of risk in paragraph 3:
Has there been family violence or is there a risk of family violence by a party
to the proceedings or any other person who is relevant
to these proceedings?
And that the answer given had been "no".
Court notes exhibit F was dated 12 October 2020 and was filed at the same time
as the originating application and an interim application
by the mother seeking
a recovery order in relation to the two children and that the mother filed an
affidavit in support of the interim
application and that there was a response
filed on the same date by the father seeking to have the proceedings
discontinued or transferred
and that the father filed a notice of risk, which
was marked exhibit E.
asked whether there was no risk that the father presents to the safety of the
children in cross-examination, the mother said,
"I don't agree at all." The
mother explained that she answered the question and noted a risk, assuming on
the basis that it referred
to physically harming the children. The mother did
not accept that the father does not at present, present a risk of abuse to the
children in relation to the suggestion of whether there were incidents of abuse
by the father, the mother replied, "Yes, but not
physical at the present time."
The mother accepted that there had been no physical abuse by the father, of the
the mother was asked about an incident involving H, being the mother's child
from a previous relationship, involving sexual activity
towards his younger
brother, O, who was a child from a previous relationship, the mother was asked
O, and said he was led by another child to do
so. The mother accepted that the father was justified in having a concern about
and Y being in the presence of H, and indicated that is why H is no longer in
her care. The mother indicated that H has supervised
children. The mother identified she suggested supervised visits for H, who
currently resides in a juvenile
detention centre.
mother agreed that there was a previous AVO applied for by the father, and
recalled the incident where the father was taking her
phone, and she tried to
get it back. The mother said that when she tried to explain her side to the
police officer, they did not
want to listen, and when she explained she just
tried to get back her phone, the police took it as an assault, and that is how
AVO came out against her. The mother confirmed that she tried to take her
phone back from the father and that she tried to wrestle
the phone out of his
hands. The mother confirmed that before that she had asked for the phone to be
returned by the father a number
of times and he had told her to wait and that he
was trying to put in contact numbers and that is what she was trying to stop him
doing. The mother was not sure whether the incident was in 2018 or 2020. The
mother disagreed that she could physically pin the
father to the lounge and
identified that he was able to stand. The mother disagreed that she shook or
hit the father.
mother was asked about ripping the TV off the wall, throwing it to the ground,
and said that was another incident. The mother
explained she did that because
she felt as if she wasn't able to leave the room and that the father was
preventing her from leaving
the bedroom and that she had no other option but to
do that so that she could get out of the room. The mother explained she thought
it was her only option to get out of the room. The mother disagreed that when
angry, she normally breaks things.
mother agreed that when she separated from the father on September '20, she told
the father to take both of the children to further
prevent physical harm towards
herself and the children witnessing that. The mother denied taking the father's
keys and locking him
out from his belongings. The mother disagreed that she
told the father he would be doing her a favour by taking the children or
would be helping her.
mother agreed that after separation, up until early 2022, on a few occasions she
slept with the father and described it as somewhat
consensual. The mother said
that the father had offered to trade sex with the mother for returning X. The
mother explained that
that was when she was asked by the father to have sex with
him in relation to having time with X. The mother said she did not have
consensual sex with him after that and that there were only two occasions after
separation where they had sex.
mother disagreed that she had sex with the father after he sent a message, and
that it was a number of weeks before he had asked
whether she would have sex
with him for time with X.
mother said she had only had sex with him twice and that was before he had said
what he said and that there was no time after
mother agreed that in December 2022 there was an occasion where she went to
Region VV with the children and spent the day together
with the father.
The mother agreed that on that occasion, the children were happy on a boat with
the father and that from the pictures
she had seen, the father cared for the
children and met their needs on that occasion. The mother indicated she did not
recall leaving
the children with the father unsupervised.
mother agreed that she had postnatal depression after she gave birth to her
oldest child, H.
mother identified the mood swings were part of the postnatal depression and that
she experienced then forgetfulness, and that
she didn't feel good enough for her
mother denied that she ever experienced extreme anger.
mother explained that she only took medication for the initial onset of
post-natal depression, and that she then worked with a
counsellor for better
ways to treat the condition without medication and said that she does not
currently take medication.
mother denied that she had a tendency to overreact to minor things. The mother
identified that H stays with WW Organisation at
the present time, being an
organisation run through DCJ. The mother identified that H is allowed to visit
every second weekend.
Just for a few hours on one day. The mother said she is
still a parent to H. The mother did not accept that she had care of H.
mother accepted, like every parent, she gets angry and with X, she asks her to
give her time so she can gather her thoughts
and then talks to her as a child.
The mother denied calling X names and denied hitting X in the face. The mother
denied, in 2016,
deliberately running her vehicle into the back of the father's
vehicle and denied that she blacked out. In 2017, the mother accepted
to M, "Your dad is not here to protect you this time, is he?" The mother denied
throwing a cup of coffee at the father
in early 2019. The mother denied
breaching the AVO for the protection of the father.
mother identified being taunted by the father, daring her to throw the cup and
said she picked it up and put it back down. The
mother denied pushing M against
a wall in 2020. The mother agreed that arguments with M had resulted in M
hurting the mother not
the mother hurting M with M being physical. The mother
said she tried to get M to keep a routine, going to bedtime and took her
and M pushed her up against the wall and made threats towards her. The mother
denied pushing M. The mother asked the father
to physically remove M from her.
The mother denied having repartnered. The mother explained that X would tell
the father she has
a new partner because she was trying to seek some form of
attention from the father, but that the mother had not repartnered. The
agreed that the children love the father and that they say they want to spend
time with the father. The mother disagreed
that the children should spend time
with the father without being watched or monitored and said, given the history
of the father's
mental health, it should be supervised.
mother said she had no mental health issue of relapse since 2008. The mother
did not accept that if the father's mental health
stabilised, it would be good
for the children to have unsupervised contact with the father. The mother
explained that it would then
go back to family violence where the kids are being
coerced into saying things and things like that which is currently happening
which the mother is trying to protect the children from. The mother agreed that
there had been no instance of physical domestic
violence by the father towards X
and Y but that there had been to M and Mr L. The mother disagreed that she had
been physically
violent towards the father and that the father took her phone.
The mother said she did call the police, and that she wanted to get
off him, and that he had no right to take her phone and did not want him putting
he was lying to the police which was
what he was trying to do. The mother said the father was trying to manipulate
the police into
thinking that she was the issue when she was not.
mother agreed that the children currently enjoy spending time with the father at
supervised visits. The mother identified that
the last unsupervised visit with
X was when she was about three or four. The mother said that all children love
to spend time with
their parents. Whether that is good for them or not is
another question altogether. The mother confirmed her position that there
should be no unsupervised time between the father and the children. The mother
was asked about changing her position from the application
filed on 11 November
2024 that there be no face-to-face contact to proposing supervised contact.
mother identified she was motivated by what makes the children happy, but also
highly motivated by protecting them as well. The
mother denied that she was
motivated by enmity towards the father and puts herself in his shoes all the
time. The mother denied
that she was motivated by the practical inconvenience
of facilitating contact with the father. The mother identified the only
inconvenience
she has is the fact the father doesn't have unsupervised time with
them. The mother said it would be in the best interests of the
children and
herself for there to be unsupervised time, if it is safe to do so, and that this
was her belief last year when they
requested mental health assessments.
independent children's lawyer, Mr Jackson, took the mother to the Court child
expert's family report, and the mother confirmed
that she consented to interim
orders on 7 December '23 that permitted the children to spend time with the
father at a contact centre.
The mother agreed the children should have
face-to-face time, as long as it's obviously safe. The mother said that X might
daddy issues later in her life if she didn't have contact with her father,
and that it would be the same with Y. The mother said
she believed the children
should have both parents around in some way, shape or form. The mother
confirmed that the children appeared
quite happy to see their father in the
supervised visit in March 2024.
mother agreed the children were saying they really wanted to see their father.
The mother confirmed that, up until today, her
case had been no time, and that
she had some regrets about the interim orders made on 7 December. The mother
said she had recommended
no time because of the high conflict between the father
and her and didn't want the children witnessing that. The mother said she
believed the children should have some time with the father, but it's going to
be supervised, so there's minimal risk to what they
see and hear when it comes
to the father and mother. The mother said there has been high conflict from the
father since 7 December
2023. The mother says this relates to video and
text messages and when the father chats to the children on a Wednesday.
relation to having sole parental responsibility, the mother said she and the
father cannot agree on anything, and that the mother
is able to identify what
supports and services the children need, and she does not believe the father can
do that, considering he
cannot do it for himself. In relation to education
arrangements, the mother referred to the father feeling there should be one
forever, and that she feels whatever school is catering to the children's
needs. In relation to the family report, the mother agreed
she spoke of a wish
for the children to spend time with the father and his extended family if it's
deemed safe.
asked why the mother currently thinks it would not be safe for the children to
spend time unsupervised with the father, the mother
said it is because the
father puts her in a position where the children are being coerced to do things
that they do not really want
to do. The mother said she is questioned
extensively about her private life when it comes to pick-ups and drop-offs, and
are quite volatile. The mother was asked about the problem with video
chats on Wednesday, where the father made an assertion X disclosed
information
to a supervision lady, that X said that she told the lady that the mother had
punched her in the leg. During the call,
the father was telling X to go tell
the school and the teachers, and if she did that, it would be okay.
mother explained that there had never been any such incident where she hit X.
When asked about whether the children would be
safe with the father in the
future, the mother said, "Given his current mental health at this point of time,
I don't think that would
be safe on an ongoing basis." The mother referred to
the father's mental health and need for ongoing treatment and the past physical
harm to M and Mr L. The mother was concerned that he might be fine now, but
might not be fine in the future. The mother accepted
that she needed some sort
of convincing that his mental health had significantly improved and his
parenting as well. The mother
referred to going to counselling and that she
would follow the recommendations given by XX Service. The mother explained the
counselling
services available through XX Service and that she had
benefited from attending the same and improved herself as a parent. The mother
said that the insights as to co-parenting did not work at all. The mother
referred to effective communication and that the father
never comes back to her
proposed times, and that it keeps going back and forth and never agreed upon,
and that the mother is left
bending to what the father wants.
mother identified trying, on a number of occasions, to introduce contact between
the children and the paternal members of the
family, and that she had contacted
the paternal grandmother. The mother identified that the children had not been
having communication
with the paternal grandparents since last year and that
father has allowed them to come into video calls. The mother identified
she was concerned that paternal family members would let the children come into
would not encourage that. The
mother identified feeling that the ongoing controlling stalking had continued,
at some level, with
the controlling, and referred to the father going to lengths
to obtain information, like taking photographs of her at the contact
which happened recently. The mother identified feeling that is a form of
stalking and that the father did not comply with
the F Contact Service set
policies and procedures. The mother said she did not feel confident to talk to
the father about the incident
she perceived occurred.
mother confirmed she had felt a sense of vulnerability in the last few years in
the context of her relationship with the father.
The mother was asked about
2016 and whether she ever felt safer under the same roof as the father and said
on occasions, she did.
On other occasions, when he was frightening and
escalated, she did not. The mother said she was cautious of what she would say
and do and still is to an extent. The mother identified the father dragging his
two children by the shirts and along the ground,
or another way he would do it
was grabbing by the arms and dragging them along the ground. The father made
verbal threats not to
push his temper or his limits, and that the father could
do anything he wanted, really. The mother observed a lack of teaching and
discipline, an absence of positive reinforcement and things like that. The
mother raised her concerns in relation to his treatment
of the stepchildren, but
felt like she was never being heard and it got to a point where she was not
being heard with her own children.
mother was asked about the father's excessive discipline and confirmed that she
feared he may do the same to X and Y if he struggles
with managing their
behaviours. The mother noted she was told by DCJ that if she did not leave the
relationship with the father,
then her own children will be removed from her
care, because the father was not following the advice from DCJ. That advice was
his parenting techniques and removing himself from conflict in the
violence. The
mother said the father had a lack of parenting strategies in relation to X and
Y, and that he believes the children
may be treated in the same way as Mr L and
M. The mother said that she did not hit O. The mother said there had been
regular attendance
by the DCJ or police caused by the father. And that the
father would request DCJ or police attend once a week, and ask the police
a welfare check.
relation to the father losing his job and having a mental breakdown, the mother
said she saw the same behaviours that he was doing
before. The mother referred
to the father already having lost his children and was already getting looked
into with physically disciplining
his children, his marijuana use and lack of
parenting skills towards the children, an unhealthy environment, and living
arrangements.
The mother said she has not seen anything since she was last in a
relationship with the father regarding his mental health treatment
or progress.
The mother was asked about the father's threats of suicide or suicide ideation,
and said that if he has bad thoughts,
he will voice those to the children,
seeking validation from X and Y. And that would severely emotionally affect the
wellbeing in the long-term. The mother said the father has not got
self-control to restrain himself from telling the children things.
mother confirmed that she would require some sort of medical evidence relation
to the assessment of the father's health, like
ongoing evidence, and not just
see a psychiatrist for a period of time and say this is medication. The mother
said there needs to
be consistent involvement with the psychologist and
consistently following guidance. The mother said throughout her relationship,
nothing like that has ever been done and that the father will not continue with
counselling, and has not followed the recommendations
of DCJ, and that he is not
following the recommendations of anything, now, really. The mother referred to
taking into account the
opinion of the independent children's lawyer and that
she has always wanted the children safe and herself safe mentally and
physically.
The mother referred to the children experiencing ongoing coercive
control, manipulation and stuff via video, audio and at drop-off
times, and does
not consider that being safe for anybody and that is why she was putting forward
no time. The mother identified
that there were some real drawbacks in the
children not having time with the father.
mother was asked about the time by the father with the children not being very
consistent and said that was a concern of hers
and that the inconsistency is why
she suggested no time, as she believes it would be detrimental to the children's
mental health
and wellbeing for the children to have time and then, no time at
all. The mother agreed as to the importance of consistency if there
supervised time. The mother said the father had resumed supervised visits, she
assumed, to find out information about her home
life, because it showed up in
the photo and then, the lawyer communication and continues in the video calls,
as well as on Wednesday.
The mother identified the children are impacted when
the father sees them and then, when he does not see them. The mother referred
the children as starting to blame her as to why they cannot see the father. The
mother said they are more confused and basically
upset. The mother said the
children are more unsettled during Wednesday video calls than anything, and that
Y is highly escalated,
and that there is nothing she can do to calm him down,
unless the phone call has ended and that she sits Y down where he can
self-regulate
with her there. The mother identified that there is no way she
can calm him down when the father is on the phone and it is like
when a tiger
sees prey, but they cannot physically get to the prey and it is left not knowing
what. The mother said she feels that
Y feels left out and does not know how to
get a read on his father, where X is different, and she seems to be more settled
on a Wednesday,
but then, more heightened not on a Wednesday. When asked about
the impact on the mother of the Wednesday video calls, she says it
the father's mood. But that there are times when the father has got a point to
prove, or he wants the mother to know
something which the children do not need
to know and implying the mother is in a relationship or implying the children
to him and that she does not know how to console the children during
those times and that she does not know whether to completely
conversation, and that she is very conflicted during those times. The mother
said when she ends the calls abruptly, she
gets abused by X and she tries to
explain that she is trying to protect her little ears from bad things that she
could possibly hear.
Court asked the mother how she would cope if the Court were to allow ongoing
supervised access and weekly calls, and the mother
said she cannot answer that,
because anybody can change at any time. The mother said she has been hoping the
father will change
for their benefit and his own, but at this stage, it does not
seem like anything is going to change. The mother referred to the
problems in
dropping the kids off and the location, and the change of time despite specific
orders, and the uncertainty of whether
the father will bring the children back
to the mother. The mother said she was coping quite fine with the current
supervised time,
but that she is definitely struggling with the video calls, and
that she could not predict the mood of the father would be in when
conversations with the children.
mother confirmed she feels the children are safe in a supervised contact centre,
and that they clearly love their father and get
benefit from seeing the father
in a safe environment. The mother confirmed the children do miss the father.
The mother said there
have been a number of occasions where the father did not
make himself available at the last minute, and that the mother gets the
for it. The mother confirmed that the children were upset they did not get to
see their father on those occasions. The mother
said it is even worse during
video calls.
December 2022, the mother said she did not think it was in the best interest of
the children to spend unsupervised time with their
father, but she was willing
to put herself at risk for their benefit. The mother said she did not believe
the children would be
safe in their father's care, and made a decision based on
a sense of intimidation, and that she had great regrets about that decision.
mother identified the concerns she had about conversations the father was having
with the children. The mother said there have
always been times when he said
something that the children should not know or need to know, and it is purely
for the mother to know,
and that is on every phone call. The mother confirmed
the children were shocked when the father told them he was going to be residing
in the United States. The mother confirmed that X was quite upset in the
conversation where the father was suggesting there was
another dad in the home
and that X is confused whether she lies and says her mother is in a
relationship, or whether she tells him
the truth, and the father calls her a
liar, and that this is confusing.
mother said the conversation with the father are very unpredictable and most of
the communications are about the father, what
he is doing, and nothing, really,
receiving validation
and telling the mother what is happening in his life and
finding information about her home. The mother said if there was a no contact
order in place, then she would feel able to confront the father, but says
nothing she says is heard by the father and that is proven
in previous text
mother’s affidavit of 10 July 2025 was admitted into evidence without
cross-examination and identified concerns that the
father is unable to comply
with and follow Court orders. The mother identified the father’s failure
to comply with orders 7,
8 and 13(d). the mother identified the visits that did
and did not occur. The mother said the children love seeing the father and
extremely excited and love spending time with him. The mother said the daughter
is a different person when she sees the father
and tells her she hates the
mother and exhibits the bad behaviour for 2 days after supervised visits and
then settles down. The mother
said the son is out of sought every Wednesday
being the date of telephone communication and engages in bad behaviour kicking,
and slamming doors that he does not do every other day. The mother
referred to the daughter being assessed for suspect ADHD and identified
payments of child support from 2 January 2025 to 7 August 2025 with $1,727 in
child support outstanding. The mother identified
the difficulty with
transportation costs with taking the children to Suburb K “if it is
determined that it is in their best
interest to spend time with the
FATHER’S EVIDENCE
father in his affidavit said that the mother moved in with and his two children
in 2016, and separated on a final basis on 17
September 2020 but continued to
have a sexual relationship after that time and continued to live together until
1 November 2022.
The father says he sees the children regularly and has a close
bond with them and tries to support them as best he can. The father
being the primary carer of X from August 2019 until 4 December 2020. The father
alleged he was very active in the care
of X on her birth and that he did more to
care for X than the mother, but they shared normal duties. The father alleged
again shared normal duties after the birth of Y in 2020 and supported
and cared for him physically and emotionally.
father alleged the mother throughout 2018 became more and more controlling,
which led to an incident where she physically pinned
him to the couch and was
shaking and hitting him. The father alleged the mother turned on the television
and ripped it off the wall
and threw it onto the ground. The father asserted
this led to an ADVO put in place for his protection for 12 months.
father identified that in September 2019, the father completed paperwork that he
was to be X's primary carer, and she would live
with him and Centrelink
commenced making payments to him. The father alleged in September 2020 that the
mother said:
Take the children, take them both, you will be doing me a favour.
father alleged the mother would often tell him to leave with the children. The
father alleged that the mother stole his house
keys and locked him out from
being able to get his belongings. The father alleged that he facilitated
communication between mother
and X when she was with him, and alleged the mother
refused the arrangements to spend time with X. The father alleged she had
significant
care of the children throughout the relationship. The father said he
kept the children in routine, and that the mother often sat
on the lounge and
watched television and was not interested in the children’s schooling or
father said he loved his children and missed them very much and that he has a
close bond and it has been difficult not seeing
them. The father referred to a
history of Court proceedings when on 4 December 2020 Judge Newbrun made orders
requiring the father
to return X to the mother and for the father to spend time
with X and Y once a week for four hours. The father alleged that he and
mother were still doing things together in November 2021 and said that in
January 2022 he and the mother and children went on
a holiday together and had a
good holiday.
father denied offering to trade sex with the mother for X. The father denied
pressuring the mother to continue a sexual relationship
and expressed the belief
they were working on their relationship and bringing their family back together.
The father said that on
12 July 2021 there were interim orders for him to spend
five hours a week with the children and other times as agreed. In October
November 2021, the father said that they were still on and off, and that the
mother invited him to spend time with her and to
assist with the children.
late 2022, the father said the mother took out an interim ADVO against him. The
father referred to the children coming up to Region
VV in December 2022 and
taking the children out on a boat and being happy, and the mother leaving the
children with a father for
a period of time without any concerns, and that he
cared for the children and their needs. The father identified that in late 2023
the ADVO proceedings where he was the defendant were finalised for the ADVO to
remain in place for a period of two years.
father referred to his mental health and said that in late 2016 he suffered from
a workplace bullying and harassment incident
that caused him to become very
depressed, anxious and emotionally hypersensitive. The father referred to having
workers compensation
proceedings on foot and that he had been unable to work
since the incident. The father says the Department of Community Services
involved with the father and the children due to his mental health, that he was
diagnosed with PTSD and that his children
were placed with his mother, being
their parental grandmother.
father said that when his children were removed from his care, he took advantage
of the assistance provided and undertook the
following courses:
(1) Dealing with strong emotions;
(2) Circle of security; and
(3) Managing children’s behaviours.
father said he sought professional help and underwent treatment and was
medicated for a period of time, and that in 2019 the father
ceased taking
medication as it was no longer needed. The father said he has tele-consults
with Dr YY in Queensland, who prescribes
medicinal cannabis. The father said he
has a consult every two to three months and does a review. The father said he
had been prescribed
other medication, but would feel like a zombie, and could
not drive and that it impacted on his day-to-day life. The father reduced
other medications and now doesn’t take anything else other than medicinal
cannabis. The father alleged he is able to function
day-to-day and feels much
better than when he was taking the other prescribed medications.
father says the mother does not like to go to doctors and is careful about what
she tells them. The father alleges that the mother
went to see a counsellor in
2017 and told the counsellor she wanted to kill herself and the children. The
father alleges the mother
in the past has been prescribed medication to
stabilise her moods and would often have significant mood swings and overreact
incidents. The father recalled on one occasion the mother started and
continued an argument with the father for three hours. The
father alleged
concerns as to the mother’s undiagnosed mental health. The father said he
had attended his GP on multiple occasions
to get a referral for his mental
health assessment but had not been able to get one.
father said he was frustrated in not being able to spend time with his children.
The father said that in 2016 he and the mother
mutually made a decision to move
to City S as the mother was having issues with her mother and wanted to get
away. The father says
he organised the residence through a City S real estate
agent. The father alleges after the property was secured, he and the mother
moved all their property to City S.
father identified concerns in relation to H, who has an intellectual disability
and was allegedly sexually overactive. The father
alleged he had seen H make
advances towards X. The father said that during the 2019 Christmas holidays H,
O, and another child had
their pants down, touching their penises. The father
alleges that he told the mother she had to report the incident. The father
alleges he noticed concerning behaviour of H in April or May 2020. The father
alleges he observed H touching O’s penis again
in or about July 2020, and
that the mother refused to report the incident to the Department, and that after
this the mother moved
out with her two children. The father alleges that H
became the root of their arguments. The father alleges on 30 September 2020
told the mother he was leaving and taking Y and X as he was concerned as to
their safety. The father recorded the mother packing
items for about an hour,
and that the police helped the father collect the rest of his belongings, and he
left with X. The father
alleges he contacted the Department and informed them of
the situation on or about 1 October 2020 and advised them that X was now
father expressed serious concerns about H being exposed to Y and X. The father
alleges the mother had shown no insight in relation
to H’s behaviours. The
father alleged that the mother had left the children with H. The father referred
to a conversation with
H’s father, that the mother was going out with one
of her old boyfriends, and that H could be very violent.
father alleges a close bond with the children, and that they have been happy and
comfortable in his care. The father alleged that
he attended to all the
children’s needs during the relationship and following their separation.
The father alleges he was involved
in short-term/long-term decisions and prided
himself about being involved in their day-to-day and long-term decisions. The
said he had not had contact with the children since June 2023. The father
alleged at the end of his time with the children, they
are upset, and they
don’t want to go home. The father alleges that X has told him the mother
A fucking bitch, a cow, and that mummy hits me in the face.
father referred to supervised time orders made on 24 August 2023 and that he
could not afford to attend the contact centre, which
was very upsetting and
distressing. The father said it was very upsetting spending time with or having
communication with his children,
and that he believes it would be emotionally
upsetting for the children and himself, as he was the primary care of the
children when
they lived together.
father denied the mother’s assertion that he didn’t help her, and
asserted he did most of the housework and cooking.
The father referred to a solo
trip on a motorbike, and before he could leave on 15 November 2022, deposed that
the police tried to
enter his home following a call from the mother that he was
going to kill himself, and that at that time he was disorientated and
asleep. The father denied that he was suicidal and said he had no thoughts of
harming himself. The father alleged the mother
had been domestically abusive to
him and the children throughout their relationship.
father alleged H had been domestically violent towards himself, the mother and
the children. The father alleged there was an incident
in 2016 when the mother
blacked out and did not take responsibility for her actions. In 2017 the father
says he found a recording
where the mother said to M:
Your dad is not here to protect you this time, is he?
mid-2018, the mother was interviewed by police after being arrested for assault
and destruction of the father’s property.
The father alleges that the
mother broke the television, hit him several times and jumped on top of him and
chased him around the
mother said that H had threatened to kill her while she was pregnant.
early 2019, the father says the mother was arrested for breaching the ADVO in
place to protect him. The father said the police
were called after an argument
continued where he was abused for hours and that she threw a coffee cup at him.
The father says in
2019 and 2020 when arguing, the mother would say words to the
Go run to the police, you have no evidence.
father alleged the mother would say he had no evidence of her abusing him. The
father alleged that the mother and M ended up
in verbal arguments, and that the
mother was very controlling. The father alleges that the mother pushed M up
against the wall,
and that he attempted to separate them. The father
alleges that the mother was abusive not only to himself, but to M and Mr
father alleges, the mother would yell and scream at himself and his
children endlessly, and that the father didn’t realise
this was domestic
violence. The father alleges the mother said very nasty things to M.
The father alleges the mother taught the
children to call us by our names, and
that she didn’t care what the father thought.
father alleges on 3 December 2022, when he dropped off the children to the
mother, his mobile phone went missing. The father deposed
that he was later
served with an ADVO and a message cancelling his time with the children.
The father expressed a belief that the
mother took the phone at
changeover. The father alleges that the mother has a new partner, and that
he has been told by X that the
new partner has hit X and the mother. The
father alleges he has recordings of the mother abusing M and abusing
father said he currently lives in a four-bedroom home with his parents and his
son Mr L. The father said he is looking for a
place for himself and
the children. The father said he is currently in receipt of the Centrelink
New Start Allowance. The father
alleges he has close family supports and
misses his children and seeks for them to live with him, and if that’s not
to spend regular and consistent time with them. The father
alleges the mother has breached orders and not allowed him to spend time
the children, and that he did not believe this was in the best interests of the
children as they need stability.
father said he had a work injury in 2017 and expected the Workers’
Compensation claim to be finalised in 2024. On 8 July
2025, the father
swore a further affidavit in which he identified compliance with requests by the
ICL for drug tests and the father
said he only consumes medicinal cannabis as
per the medical practitioner’s prescription. The father said his
work cover pays
for the medicinal cannabis as his mental health issues/injuries
are workplace related. In relation to mental health, the father
psychologist, Mr KK to obtain an assessment of his mental health for these
proceedings. The father identified the assessment
took place on 9 January,
23 January, 6 February and 20 February and an extra copy of the report.
father, in his affidavit, referred to the psychologist Mr KK's concern as to how
he had been represented to the Court by other
parties and opinion that the
father's psychopathology has not adversely affected his ability to attend to the
appropriate developmental
needs of his children.
father referred to Mr KK, the psychologist, suggesting that he showed a
relatively high degree of insight and awareness of his
psychological triggers
and ways to manage those, and that this insight was a protective factor and that
in light of this, the father
was not harmful for the children, who he very much
father referred to Mr KK's, the psychologist, report, that he displayed
commitment and engaged in follow-up regarding developing
his parenting skills
prior to commencing therapy, and that he is committed to ongoing therapy to
address PTSD and comorbid anxiety
and depression.
father referred to the report of Mr KK, the psychologist, confirming the absence
of any clinical evidence to suggest that his
mental health poses any direct
threat to his children, and suggests that more contact of the children with the
father will be beneficial
for the children. The father also referred to the
report, suggesting ongoing targeted mental health intervention will support the
father's capacity as a parent and increase his community participation. The
father alleged that this commitment would serve as a
powerful template for his
father referred to the psychologist, Mr KK, suggesting that he is capable of
extended visits with his children, and that he requires
ongoing psychotherapy
and additional psychosocial support to address his PTSD and comorbid anxiety and
depression. The father said
he is committed to receiving the ongoing help to
improve his mental health, by receiving individual trauma therapy from Dr KK,
social support from family and friends. The father said he is taking care
of his health by exercising and going to the gym, and
engaging with his friends,
siblings and family more. The father said that he felt his life is changing for
the better, after receiving
father alleged he booked therapy sessions and counselling sessions for Mr KK,
for the rest of the year, and an annexed a screenshot
of the booking.
father referred to a report from Dr LL from MM Clinic, dated 3 July 2025,
stating that he is compliant with her advice, and that
he was keen to improve
his mental and physical health. The father, again in his affidavit, referred to
Dr LL's report, that he is
engaging in counselling and has support from his
psychologist, and that he is engaging in ongoing sessions arranged for the year.
father further referred to Dr LL as confirming that his medicinal cannabis has
reduced from 130 grams in a month, to under 80
grams in a month, and that he is
on a stable and ongoing path to reduce usage further.
father referred to completing a number of co-parenting and divorce education
courses. The father alleged these provided him with
useful insight in relation
to the importance of co-parenting and how important it is for the children to
have loving parents in life.
The father alleges the courses taught him that the
best interests of the children take precedence over parenting conflicts. The
father says the courses also informed him that there is no space for a domestic
violence in community, and the importance of ensuring
the safety of everyone in
the family and in the community. And also helped him overcome the abuse that
had he had been inflicted
to in his life. The father alleged the courses also
see and spend time with the children.
father said he had learned to be more positive, and was looking forward to
spending more time with the children, and to provide
them the best in their
lives, so that they can be the happiest and best versions of themselves.
father identified that he was thankful for being able to resume seeing and
spending time with the children, and he had loved and
enjoyed every bit of it.
And that the children have been very happy and excited to see him. And that
they have created very joyful
moments in life.
father said that he had not been provided with documentation from the contact
centre, but had been told his visitations had been
very successful and that the
children had been happy and attached to him every time they had seen him. The
father said he could
not express in words how happy he is to see the children
and love his children, to whom he can dedicate his life.
father said that since the Court listing, he had regularly spent time with his
children at F Contact Service, Suburb K, once every
three weeks for two
hours. And that the visitations were changed to Fridays, at the mother's
request, which he agreed.
father referred to video calls on Wednesday and on special occasions, but says
that he did not receive a call on video on Father's
father explained the missed visitations at the contact centre being because the
mother refused to bring the children to the contact
centre on approximately
three occasions. The father referred to the initial orders that required him to
notify the mother directly.
The father said the mother refused to bring the
children to the contact centre due to technical requirements, pursuant to the
orders. The father referred the requirement to communicate directly
through the parenting app being inserted through a slip rule
that he said he was
not aware of. The father referred to a visit being cancelled by the mother
because she was in Queensland, and
another visit being cancelled because she had
to attend an ash spreading ceremony. The father said the time with his children
been very comforting and has re-established his children's attachment to
father said he has never said anything denigrating or derogatory to his children
regarding the mother or her family, during these
visits, and that he has never
mentioned anything to the children regarding Court proceedings or legal
cross-examination, the father says he chooses to reside in a fully
self-contained caravan, and that he can reside in his mother's
said there are bedrooms and shower facilities available inside the home.
father said once he knows where his children are residing, he will be moving
closer to that area so he can spend more time with
father said he had been residing in the caravan for about four months now. The
father then agreed that for eight months, he has
resided in a caravan on that
property. And before that, he said he was staying inside the home. The father
said he had been paying
rent for residing in the caravan, and that the amount
depends on what his mother and father need. The father then said there is
fixed amount, and that he had given his mother and father, this year, about 3 to
4000 dollars.
father said for a portion of 2023 he was homeless, living out of his car and a
box trailer. The father said he came to live in
his mother's home in December
2023. The father said he was homeless for about nine months. The father said
the property had been
living, had become storm damaged, and he had to move out,
and that was about March or April 2023.
father agreed at the time he was homeless, he was spending time with the
children. The father said he was having every second
weekend with his children,
from Friday afternoon until Saturday afternoon, and then said from Friday
afternoon until Sunday afternoon.
The father said when he became homeless, he
had phone communication with his children, but he was not able to see them
had nowhere to take them.
answer to the question whether the father informed the mother that he was
had him arrested for
breaching the AVO.
father said the last time he spent time with the children unsupervised was
around March 2023, before he became homeless. The
father said he had an AVO
taken out on him in late 2022, at a time when he was having overnight time. The
father said the last unsupervised
time with the children was March 2023, prior
to becoming homeless. The father identified he tried to communicate this in a
call with the children. The father said he did not put it in writing
that he had become homeless. The father then said that he
spent overnight time
with the children between March 2023 and June 2023. The father then said that
he did not spend overnight time
with the children while he was homeless. The
father said he was not good with the order of months and sometimes gets confused
high-stress situations. The father said:
It is a bit nerve-racking having to fight for my children. Something I should
have a natural right to. I have never harmed them.
I have taken care of them
since they were born. I was always there. I fed them and looked after them.
Changed their nappies.
I did most things. I used to drop [X] off to day care.
father said that the mother even signed X into his care and now states that he
forced her to do it. The father said he never
raised a hand or forced the
mother to do anything. The father said he is - in fact, he is scared of the
father said he suffered from workplace bullying and harassment in 2017. The
father said it started at the beginning of 2017 up
till about September 2017,
when he had a breakdown and left work and the mother came to pick him up. The
father said as a result
of this, it caused him to become very depressed and
anxious. The father said he is a very emotional and sensitive person. The
asserted he tries to avoid any sort of argumentative situation as much as
possible. The father said his fight-flight response is
more flight than fight.
The father said instead of speaking, he would prefer to try and type something.
father agreed he sometimes used abusive words. The father agreed he used
"pathetic" when frustrated and stressed and that he
does not think and just hits
send. The father asserted he has never really threatened harm or abuse. The
father referred to calling
people a name sometimes when he just is so frustrated
and called the mother's lawyer some pretty nasty names when he was homeless.
response to the proposition that until separation, the father called the mother
"pathetic" he said, "No, actually. Bitch, no.
Stupid, no. Useless, no." The
father said he has not told them to her face or anything like that while they
were together.
they were separated in answer to the question whether he had called the mother
such terms the father said “maybe and maybe
not”. The father agreed
he called the mother narcissistic. In response to a question that he called the
mother a cunt, the
father evaded the question. In response to a second question
unresponsive.
Court informed the father that failing to answer a question directly affects the
Court's assessment of his credit. In response
to the question as to whether he
had called the mother various names including narcissistic, the father answered
“yes, possibly”.
Have you called her a cunt,
“possibly”. Dumb ass shit, “possibly”. Piece of shit,
“possibly”.
Shut her fucking mouth, “possibly”. Shut
the fuck up, “possibly”. The vindictive manipulative piece of
“absolutely”. Dirty piece of lying manipulative shit,
“yes” and low life, “yes”. “These
were out of
frustration”.
asked why the father could not remember the other names he had called the
mother, the father unresponsively said:
Because I know exactly what I had to deal with since 2016 to 2018 when I got an
AVO against her. In 2019, she breached the AVO.
In 2020, when I left the
property taking my daughter and my son. And then she prevented me taking my
son. And I left the property
to get out of an abusive relationship.
as to whether it is the father's view today that the mother is a vindictive
manipulative piece of shit, the father responded:
Not a piece of shit but she is very vindictive and manipulative.
I understand why she is doing what she is doing.
The father has confirmed his view that the mother was vindictive and
manipulative.
asked by the Court whether the father recognises that that is possibly
gaslighting. The father said:
Yes. After doing many courses I understand that was a form of gaslighting.
The Court then asked:
Gaslighting by you in saying you thought she was vindictive and manipulative.
The father said:
I was making - I didn't mean it. Meaning it was being like gaslighting. It was
just I was trying to put forward my observation
of the time I was with the
mother and things that she would do while we were in the relationship. That
something would go wrong
and she would do something back to me worse or
vindictive and manipulative. She would coerce and control. She would send me
messages. She would go through my telephone. At one point, she stole my
telephones and hid it from me to try and access it. She
asked me to give her my
full medical information so she can have access to the doctors and all this sort
of stuff to see and determine
whether or not I'm a danger to the children. I'm
not a danger to the children. I'm just extremely stressed and frustrated at
whole situation. And having my children continuously slowly removed from
my care by the mother for no reason at all. Because she
does not want me to
have as much contact with the children so they cannot say what happens in the
in that home when I was not around and while
I was with the mother.
Court then observed to the father:
Do you understand that the answer you just gave was advocating your case, and
not responsive to the question?
The father responded:
What was the question?
father was referred to correspondence since December 2023, and that his view was
that the mother is a dirty piece of lying manipulative
In answer to the question that she is a lowlife, what did you mean by that
The father said:
Lowlife. It takes somebody pretty low to on purpose withhold a child from the
father, on a time that was specified by the Court
for the father to have.
In response to the question whether the father still believes the word "lowlife"
is appropriate to use for the mother, the father
responded that:
The mother continuously stopped communications with the children over the
smallest things.
In response to the question that the father believes it is appropriate to call
her a "lowlife", the father responded:
I would never directly call that to her face or in front of the children. I
would never do that. I already have a relationship
with two other children that
I communicate with their mother.
In response to communicating to the mother, through her lawyers, that she was a
lowlife, the father said he did not know it would
be communicated back to the
mother by her lawyers. In response to the question that that is the father's
view, he said:
At the time, yes.
In response to the question is it his view today, the father said:
Well, it is a pretty low act for somebody to continuously withhold and remove
the children when there is no danger to the child,
even though she stated that
to herself today.
father indicated that after the incident happened, he had medication up until
2009. In response to the question that he has not
been medicated since 2019, the
father said he has been medicated since, by cannabis. In response to the
question that since 2019,
the father is not taking any prescribed drugs for
depression or anxiety and emotional hyposensitivity, the father said:
Yes, I am. I am taking medicinal cannabis now.
The father agreed he has not taken other medication since 2020.
father identified doctor prescribing cannabis has changed, and it is prescribed
by a practise up in City ZZ, Queensland. The
father said he last attended on
that particular doctor on the 28th of last month, being 28 November. The father
said the last time
he attended on the doctor in Queensland would have been six
months ago, and that was the first time. The father said that the doctor
from the same medical practice as the person who first prescribed medicinal
response to the question whether the father advised the mother's legal
representatives that he was attending on the doctor, the
father said that he had
not, and had tried to stay away from the mother's legal representative.
answer to what medication and dosage the father is currently taking, he
It is medicinal cannabis.
In response to the question what dosage is he taking, the father said:
It is a multiple sample of different dosages. It is about two grams a day. It
In answer to the question how does he take that, the father said:
I use a vaporiser, but I am transferring to wafers and oil, so I do not have to
smoke, as I currently quit smoking cigarettes as
The father said he had been using a vaporiser for about a year and a half to two
years at the most. The father said he was starting
to wean off medicinal
cannabis vaporiser, to go onto the dissolvable wafers that go under the tongue.
The father said he started
the process over three months ago.
father said he has a current driver's licence and says there is a limitation as
to when he can use it and where he can drive.
The father said he cannot drive
for six hours.
response to the question whether the father ever provided details to the family
report writer about his prescribed medication,
the father, unresponsively,
They were very quick and through - and through with me, and were not interested
in having much of a talk with me. And it is like
they had already decided what
they wanted to do.
father said he does not currently have a psychiatrist. In response to the
question as to when he last saw a psychiatrist, the
father said:
said his doctors at [AB Medical Centre] gave him a
referral for a psychiatrist
father was asked about the orders on 24 August 2023, to provide a list of
medical practitioners, including GP, psychologists,
psychiatrists and community
health specialists attended upon in the last two years. In response to the
question as to whether the
father advised and provided a list, unresponsively,
I am pretty sure I said it was okay for them to give out whatever medical
information was needed.
The father said he understood there was an order made by the Court on 24 August
2023, and that there were previous orders back in
2020 and 2021 to provide the
information and the father alleged:
I provided those informations to the mother's previous lawyer.
In response to the question, whether he provided the details in August or
December 2023, he said:
Not that I can recall
response to the question, that it was not in his affidavit, the father
Because I am not looking to bad mouth or abuse or whatnot. I just want time
with my children. And that was it. But the mother
continues to remove them
father said there have been a few other psychiatrists and psychological reports
to do with WorkCover. The father said his workplace
compensation is about to
hit mediation, for the final phase. The father said the company acknowledged
they did what was said, and
have paid him out.
father said he received some form of compensation at the beginning of maybe
March or January or February this year. In response
to how much the father
received, there is an unresponsive answer:
I am not exactly specifically sure how much I received. Maybe I got 60 or 70
father said child support tell him when the money is taken. The father said he
did not know how much it was. The father agreed
that maybe $200 is outstanding.
father said that TPG proceedings are continuing. In response to the question of
the name of his lawyers, the father said he could
not recall. The father said
the proceedings were ongoing.
relation to other proceedings, the father referred to ADVO issues, and that
there is a mediation coming up to try and settle the
whole thing. In response
to the question:
Some orders were made about the requirement for you to provide details regarding
your doctors including psychologists, psychiatrists
and specialists?
The father said:
Yes, unfortunately I failed to do so.
The father acknowledged that he knew they were orders by the Court. The father
agreed it was not in his affidavit of December 2023,
and that he had not put
anything on since then. The father said he had not informed the Family Court or
the Court because he did
not have a lawyer.
father said he is still unable to work. The father agreed he had been diagnosed
with PTSD. The father identified providing information
over the internet, to a
doctor. In response to the question:
Did he receive a report or something in writing?
The father said:
The father agreed he did not send it on to the mother's representatives or the
response to the questions as to whether it was the last time the father was
provided with a report in relation to his medical situation,
unresponsively, he
Within this year and that his medical situation was not the best. The father
said being homeless and trying to rebuild his life,
he had to get himself back
In response to the question:
What did you mean your mental health was not the best, and not knowing the
outcome of when he will ever be able to see his kids?
response to the question whether the father was still very depressed, he
I am not depressed. I am so sad I cannot do anything.
The father said:
It is so sad I do not get to see and spend time with my kids. That is the
depressing part of life.
It makes me very sad. It does not make me want to hurt myself.
The father said he thought of hurting himself; only occurred in 2023 when he
finally had no time with the kids for months on end,
after the mother put an
ADVO on him.
father was evasive, in response to the question that the 40 calls by the mother,
only 26 were answered. In response to the proposition
as to whether the father
was suggesting it was the fault of the mother, and that she did not make the
calls, the father said:
No. Maybe she tried to make those calls but, unfortunately, the network that we
were using was not working properly, or the parenting
app was ceased.
response to the question as to whether he said, on 3 July, he would be living in
the USA, he said:
I may if I do not get any time with the kids, I just get telephone calls. So
why wouldn't I move to the USA?
Pressed further:
Did you say to the children you will be living in the United States, on the
telephone, on 3 July?
The father said:
No. I will be staying in the United States.
When pressed as to whether he said he would be residing in the United States,
the father said:
I may possibly end up residing in the United States. Maybe. Yes.
father said he did not recall saying to the children that he never had the
opportunity to do fun things anymore.
father said he has not been in the United States and has not been overseas.
When asked by the Court, "What was the purpose of
you telling the children you
may be living or residing in the US", the father responded:
I explained to them that even if I did live or reside in the US, if I did get
time to see them, that I would be able to come over
and spend time with them,
either in a hotel for a day or so, or a picnic, or at my mother's house for a
weekend. It wasn't just,
like, I'm going to be living in the US, and my whole
world - my portion of the conversation thrown into context.
The father was asked, "Did you recognise that by telling the children in a
communication with them that it might be characterised
as coercive or
controlling behaviour by you to tell them that you were going to start living in
the USA?" The father said:
I thought it, but I didn't believe that, your Honour. I just thought it would
be informing the kids that I would be staying further
away, and if I did have
time with them, that I would still be able to come and have time with them.
Unresponsively, the father said:
I didn't think it was coercive or controlling.
And he did not think his kids would want to live that far away, and that he did
not even want to take them from the mother. The
father gave an unresponsive
answer to the question whether in his application it is for the children to live
with him. The father
then agreed that he sought orders that the children live
with him. The father said:
Currently, that's the order that has been put forth to the Court.
The father then said:
No, I don't seek that the children live with me.
father confirmed that he notified the mother on 10 May that he would not be
attending any further, and there were no further visits
until 3 August '24. The
father agreed that he did not contact the independent children's lawyer to
advise that he would not be attending
and did not contact the mother's legal
representative. When asked for the reason that he did not attend between May
and August,
the father said it was an infection of his finger. The father was
asked about cancelled visits to see the children.
Court then said to the father that one of the things troubling the Court is that
it constantly appears in the father's evidence
that he blames the mother for his
own problem in relation to not having access to the children. When asked
whether he understands
that his behaviour has contributed to the current
situation where there's limited time with the children, the father
Yes, I do understand.
father said:
Currently, my time is completely removed from me, contributed from me -
The mother has an ADVO against me for no other reason than not showing up at
court or at time with my children, and me trying to
find out if my children are
okay, and if she will be showing up, and if she would like to rearrange the time
to drop off later and
no reply. The father says that a few hours later he gets
police knocking at his door for an ADVO, and he can no longer communicate
his partner.
father said he did multiple programs. The father said he understands his
actions over the last little while could seem rash and
show that he is unstable
or whatnot, but that he is very frustrated and a cranky father. The system, he
feels, has failed him.
The father said he has got plenty of videos, with his
lawyer, showing how many times he recorded going to pick up and drop off the
children because he was afraid of the mother, and what she would do and say, and
he just was not able to submit the evidence.
answer to the question:
Do you recognise that the answer you have just given shows little, if any,
insight in relation to the impact of your behaviour in
relation to the current
circumstances in respect of seeing the children?
I do, your Honour. I understand my behaviour was poor.
Court referred to a concern about answers given by the father having a natural
right as a father to have his children and whether
he understood in relation to
parenting that parents have parenting obligations to their children, and do not
have a natural right
to custody of their children. The father said he did not
mean he had a natural right to custody, and that his words had been taken
response to the father's evidence he put everything he could into it, the Court
asked why he did not comply with the Court's orders.
The father said:
You gave me those orders and the lawyers pulled out.
Court raised with the father that one of the concerns was that he had an
adjournment last year, because his mental health was
unsatisfactory, and that he
conveyed he understood that and was going to take appropriate steps. The Court
observed that it has
no evidence as to the father taking appropriate steps to
adduce evidence in relation to his current mental health. And that creates
problem in relation to the Court being able to determine whether or not, as a
matter of safety, there is an acceptable risk for
the children, because of his
mental health. The father responded that:
Even the mother today has specified she has no concerns about the children being
in my care, or unsupervised in my care, and says
the father never risked the
children or harmed the children and that he never would.
And the father said:
I understand I have not been able to give you the evidence that you want. I am
sorry. I never wanted any of this stuff. And the
mother is probably having a
good laugh about this. I just want time with my -
The Court interrupted the father, to indicate that he was again making comments
in relation to the mother, and that he was denigrating
her and seeking to
gaslight her. Which is a further concern.
Court identified its concern that if the father is given an opportunity to spend
time or communicate with the children, he will
continue to denigrate and
gaslight the mother. The father asserted, when spending time with the children
he does not even bring
up the mother unless they specify something or say
something about the mother.
father said him questioning the children on the telephone call is when he had
had a visit with his children in person, and they
say something, and he follows
up on what they were talking about, at the communication centre.
Court raised with the father that a further concern was the number of occasions
he had contacted DoCS or the police, to attend
upon the mother. And asked
whether they were steps being taken by the father to control or impact on the
mother in relation to her
parenting. The father denied that, and said they were
genuine concerns about the welfare of the children. The father asserted they
were taken when the mother would not show up with the children on a
Court-ordered specified time, and would not answer a phone call
or text message.
father said he did not want to denigrate the children to the mother, and that he
had never done that to his ex-partner, and that
he wouldn't do to the mother,
because the children need to respect the mother. The mother said they need to
have respect for the
father, "They need to have respect for both of us, so we
can nurture them". The Court raised with the father the concern that when
talks about respect and describes the mother as vindictive and manipulative, the
words he's saying may now just be hollow. The
father said, "No, it isn't. The
children need to respect the mother", and that he needs to show the children
that he would respect
the mother. The father said they're not verbalised or
spoken to the children, and asserted he would never put their children down
the mother. The father said he understood that denigrating the mother in front
of the children would be extremely damaging, and
he said he understood that.
3 December, the Court heard argument as to whether there should be an
adjournment and identified that the adjournment would not
be a fresh hearing but
was an opportunity for the father to address the issue of his mental health, his
use of medicinal cannabis
and whether there is a wider drug or alcohol issue and
to comply with the Court's orders in relation to providing a list of
practitioners.
Court at the end of the hearing before adjourning emphasised the importance of
full compliance with the orders the Court had made
in respect of the list of
practitioners. The Court identified that a failure to comply with the orders
may impact on whether there
was time or no time.
father agreed at the time of the adjournment on 3 December 2025, the Court - the
father agreed that it was very clear he was going
to make sure that he complied
with the orders. The father confirmed he understood he was required to file an
affidavit by 2 June.
The father confirmed that he had read those orders. In
relation to the question as to the father not filing it at that time, the
unresponsively said, "I contacted my lawyers several times." The father then
agreed that he did not file the affidavit in
accordance with the orders by 2
June. As to why it was not filed, the father proffered that he had several
emails and texts to his
lawyer that it needed to be filed and said, "They did
not file it on time." The father said, "I have to throw my lawyers under the
bus on this one." In response to the proposition as to whether his affidavit
was prepared prior to 2 June, the father said, "No,"
and, again, referred to
trying to contact his lawyers. The father confirmed that he swore the affidavit
just last week on 8 July.
father confirmed that he knew when he sworn the affidavit, it was out of time.
The father alleged he gave his solicitors instructions
to file it immediately.
The father alleged that he told his solicitors to provide a copy of the
affidavit, even though not yet filed,
to the independent children's lawyer. In
response to the question as to whether the father instructed the solicitors not
it until 19 July, the father said, "No, I did not instruct my solicitors
not to file it." The Court asked the father why he did
not put an explanation
in his affidavit as to it was late. And the father alleged that his lawyer said
it should be all right and
asserted, "If I needed to give an explanation in the
affidavit, then I absolutely would have." The father was then asked about order
3, requiring a list of practitioners within 21 days and that he remembered that
order. The father alleged that he contacted his
lawyers that day or the next
day and informed them to give out a list of his practitioners and he gave them
the list of those practitioners.
The father maintained that he had given that
list to his lawyers within the 21 days.
father, again, blamed his lawyers for the failure to comply with the Court's
order. The father confirmed that he knew about the
requirement of the orders.
The father said he did not make any inquiries as to whether his solicitors had
actually provided the
information. Again, blamed the lawyers, stating he
believed that they were doing the right thing by him and that he assumed the
information had been distributed to the parties. The father said it was the
lawyer's fault that he did not provide the information
in accordance with the
orders. The father confirmed that he did provide some details as to medical
practitioners on 18 July '25,
being Dr LL, and Dr AC, a psychologist. The
father alleged that he had sent that information to his lawyers in December. In
to whether they were the medical practitioners the father had attended
upon, he said, "No. Also, [Dr AD] at [AB Medical Centre]."
confirmed that it was Dr AD who gave him the referral to attend on the
psychologist.
father was asked, being aware of the orders, whether the reason he did not
provide the information was because of his solicitor's
difficulties, not because
he did not want the mother to see the information. The father said he was quite
happy for the mother to
see whatever information about his mental health and
alleged it had greatly improved. The father was asked about an email he sent
20 November '24, to the solicitor for the mother, saying that his medical
information is not for the mother to have access. In
contrary to the content of
the email, the father said it was only for the mother not to be able to
communicate directly with my doctors.
Yes. The extract of the email read to
the father identified the assertion that his medical information is not for Ms
have access to:
And my doctors are not for [Ms Hearst] to be able to talk to like this.
father was then asked about an order made on 24 August '23, number 5, to provide
a list of medical practitioners, and said, "That
was with my previous lawyers,
the ones I sacked." The father confirmed that he was aware of the order, and
confirmed he did not
provide the information to the mother's solicitor or ICL at
that time. The father said the reason for non-compliance was a bit of
incompetence of the solicitors, and it would be a bit of his, and that he had
lost confidence in his lawyers, and was homeless,
and living in the back of his
car and trailer. The father confirmed that the order in August '23 was breached
by him with his knowledge,
and asserted he had a lack of communication and lack
of confidence in his lawyers. The father agreed that he had a report that was
prepared on 6 February 2024 by Dr EE, and that he had never given any
information about that to the court prior to attaching it to
his affidavit.
father said he didn't think the Personal Injury Commission reports were
relevant. The father said that he just forgot to provide
the report. The
father said that this isn't a treating doctor and that this is a doctor that did
an assessment on him and suggested
that he thought he had only been asked for
treating doctors. Order 5, made on 24 August '23 by this court, said,
The father shall provide a list of all medical practitioners, including GP,
psychologist, psychiatrists and community health and
specialists attended upon
in the last two years in relation to his mental health, to the applicant
solicitor and ICL within seven
father was asked who is Dr W, and he said another reporter. When asked what Dr
W's qualifications were, the father said he didn't
recall. They were all
independent doctors that were done through lawyers to assess his ability to work
for WorkCover reasons. The
father said they weren't treating doctors.
father agreed he saw Dr W on two occasions in 2023. In response to the question
that he never provided any details about Dr W
prior to providing the report
attached to the affidavit, the father repeated that as far as his knowledge was,
he was to give treating
doctors, and that these aren't treating doctors.
They're just doctors that gave reports.
father denied that he knew the order was for a list of all practitioners he had
seen in the last two years. In response to the
question that the father
deliberately decided not to provide those details, the father said he believed
it was for treating doctors
at the time
response to a question of assessing the father's mental health and whether they
may be relevant to the current proceedings, the
father said he didn't have any
idea whether or not they would be beneficial, and maintained he thought it was
just treating doctors.
father confirmed that Dr AE is a doctor at AB Family Practice and that Dr AF, is
a psychologist. The father was asked whether
he had provided any details in
relation to his attendance on Dr AF in relation to these proceedings, and the
father said that was
also WorkCover related. The father agreed that this was
the first time that the parties to these proceedings had heard of Dr AF.
response to the question that the first time the father told the mother that he
had attended on Dr AG, was by providing information
attached to his recent
affidavit. The father responded unresponsively. The mother knew all about his
medical information previous
to 2023. The father said he attended Dr AG in
2020. The father said he wasn't sure how many times he attended on Dr AG.
response to the question as to what date, the father told the ICL he was
attending on Mr KK. The father repeated that he gave
the information to the
lawyers in December, he believed.
father confirmed that he received that report from Mr KK on 26 May '25. The
father asserted he instructed solicitors to send
that report to the children's
lawyer when he received it. The father asserted he wanted to follow the orders
as correctly as possible.
father confirmed that he hadn't seen Mr KK since the four occasions between 9
and 20 February. The father was asked whether he
provided Mr KK with any
previous reports, and he said he did.
father said he could not specifically say what reports they were that he sent to
Mr KK. The father alleged he gave Mr KK the
orders that were made last year.
In response to the question whether he told Mr KK what orders he was seeking,
the father said:
Just time with my children. Yes.
father confirmed he has not seen Mr KK since 20 February, and unresponsively
said he had an appointment booked soon. The father
was asked about the
recommendations at the end of the report by Mr KK, and that one of them was
individual trauma therapy. In response
to whether the father had seen that, the
father said yes, and added unresponsively:
That's what I'm booked in for currently.
father was asked whether he had attended any further trauma therapy, and he
No, I have not.
made reference to having a tooth removed. The father was then asked about the
second recommendation in relation to needing increased
social support. The
father was asked in relation to his affidavit that he provided no evidence in
that regard. Unresponsively,
the father asserted that there are men's groups,
men's tables, dads in distress that talk.
father was asked the question again as to not providing any evidence about that
in his affidavit, and he said no. The father
disagreed that that was because he
had not done anything about it. In relation to the father's affidavit that he
would book therapy
sessions with Mr KK for the end of the year, he said yes.
And he was then asked about a session that was due to occur on 13 June
did not attend it, and proffered that he was not able to due to a tooth
father was asked about not making any reference to having failed to attend that
session in his affidavit, and said he must have
overlooked it. When asked by
the court why the father did not continue regularly attending upon Mr KK every
week or two weeks, right
up until now, the father said it is $300 an appointment
and it is quite expensive.
relation to the worker's compensation proceedings, the father said he has a
mediation on 15 August and said that he is receiving
regular worker's
compensation payments. The father was asked as to whether he had made reference
to the worker's compensation continuing
in his affidavit, and he said he did
father was asked whether he understands his physical impairment is, and said he
had an issue with work, a trauma issue with work.
When asked whether he knows
what the situation is, the father said he suffers from PTSD, anxiety and
depression. The father said
he received about $50,000 in 2024. The father said
it had been mostly spent on court and that there is not much left of it.
father said he paid child support, whatever he was told he needed to pay. In
response to the question that he currently pays
the mother $80 a month from
March in child support, the father said he is not sure, and he pays whatever
child support requests of
father then said he believed it was something like $80 a month. The father said
in relation to the courses he had enrolled in,
the certificates are quite
expensive, but the courses are free. In response to the question as to why the
father had not taken responsibility
in his affidavit for his own conduct, the
father said:
I just don't understand why. I did state to my lawyers that I do understand my
part in all of this and why I'm not seeing my children.
The state of my health
at the time, my homelessness and the breaches of the ADVO.
The father was taken to paragraph 30 of his affidavit, referring to: Overcome
the abuse I've been inflicted to in my life.
asked that he paints him as a victim, and shows no insight into the role he has
played in relation to the current circumstances.
And did he understand that?
And he said:
And said he believed his lawyer was obviously trying to write this to help
benefit him as best he could: Maybe paint me in the best
light. But I do
understand my part in all of this.
asked to tell the court his part that he played in relation to him not spending
more quality time with the children, the father
Well, through the proceedings, my mental health deteriorated when I became
I wasn't getting treatment
at the time. Because during that time, I wasn't getting help through
The father said it was only the beginning of 2020 they decided to step up and
start paying for medical information.
asked the father about his level of insight in relation to his behaviour causing
the current problem in not seeing the children
more regularly, and agreed it was
his fault. And added:
There's reasons for why in my affidavit. Like, that does paint me in a bad
light, this entire court case.
father said he understood that the reason why he hasn't been spending more time
with the children is his fault. The court asked
the father whether he
understood when he makes remarks in relation to the mother that is critical that
can be incredibly damaging
to the children for their relationship with her, and
responded that he never speaks badly or ill about the mother in front of the
children, that he never had and would never would, that he also had custody of
two children for many years and shared custody with
another mother and did not
speak ill about their mother in front of them.
father said he understood that if he undermined the mother in front of the
children, it would be very damaging for him. The court
asked the father about
paragraph 13 of his recent affidavit continuing to paint him as the victim
rather than displaying insight
in relation to the role he has played in causing
the current problem. The father repeated that he was referring to the trauma
he had been through and the abuse he had suffered through his relationship
with the mother.
asked whether the father understood that saying he suffered abuse through the
relationship with Ms Hearst, he was gaslighting
her, the father said:
Unfortunately, there's not really any other way he could describe it.
asked whether he had the capacity to ensure that he didn't criticise or
undermine the mother in the eyes of the children and
why the court should have
that confidence, the father said he had videos of many communications with Ms
Hearst, and there were occasions
where Ms Hearst was telling the children to
behave, and the father said he was stating:
[X] and [Y], can you please listen to Mummy.
Reinforcing Ms Hearst's authority on the children.
father said he had undertaken 50 hours of work and that it's classified as 52
weeks of work. The father said he had had 103 lessons
and finished. The date
certificates", but he had already
finished the courses. The father was asked
have informed him, the father's answer was unresponsive: "If
I was to list
everything I learned, there is quite a lot of information". The father was
asked about taking responsibility for matters.
The father was asked whether
that was something he has been doing, and he said "I've been taking
responsibility for my part in these
matters, yes".
father was asked about missing a few visits with the children. The Court noted
that there was an error by the Court omitting
paragraphs (c) and (d) from order
13, and that the orders were corrected, on 3 December, and there was a further
error in failing
to identify what the amendments were made under the slip rule.
The father said he was present when the orders were made and suggested
the understanding he had to cancel within 48 hours of the visit. The father was
asked whether he refused to provide the
information to confirm the visit to the
mother up until April, and the father asserted that he told them during the
week, on Wednesday,
of the upcoming visit.
father said he was not aware that he needed to communicate because he only had
paragraphs (a) and (b), and then said that the
mother has put him behind bars
due to him accidentally breaching an ADVO. The Court observed that the father
was being unresponsive
to the question, and that impacts on its assessment of
his credibility and cuts across the veracity of his evidence as to having
insight as to the problem.
Court observed, for the benefit of the father that "You need to understand
answers critical of the mother and making gratuitous
comments adversely affects
the Court's assessment of whether it can accept his evidence as to having a
level of insight as to the
harmfulness of undermining the mother if spending
time with the children". In response to confirming the arrangements about the
visits, the father said, yes. And then added that he had to confer with lawyers
with the police to ensure
that he did not get arrested again for communicating with the mother 48 hours
beforehand that he would
be attending these visits. The father said he had been
doing that in May and June.
father was asked about a scheduled visit on 11 July. The father was asked
whether he was made aware beforehand that the mother
was going to Town AH to
spread her nephew's ashes and unresponsively, the father said he confirmed with
the mother, on Wednesday,
that he would be attending the visit and that the
mother then sent him a text saying she would not be attending and it was after
he had confirmed the visit with the mother. When asked whether he was extremely
angry about that, the father said "I was not angry".
It was after he had
communicated with his children via the video on Wednesday - the same day that he
confirmed the text with the
mother that he would be attending - that it would be
two sleeps, due to the visits being on a Friday, before he saw them and that
they were extremely excited and happy and that there was no comment about Town
AH or any ashes ceremony.
father said he was not angry. The father said he was frustrated that his
children had already been informed that they were seeing
him. The father added
it made him look like a bad parent to his children. When asked whether he
believed it was the mother's fault,
the father responded he believed the
ceremony would have been arranged less than 24 hours before the ceremony
happened and that the
day could have been rearranged sooner. When asked by the
Court whether the father recognised it was controlling behaviour for the
to be telling the children that they would see him in two sleeps, the father
unresponsively said "they were asking me when
they would be seeing me next and I
told them in a couple of sleeps. It is not me telling them. But when they ask
me things, I tell
them. It is not me trying to control the situation and
communication".
father was asked whether the mother arranged an alternative visit, on 14 July,
and that that occurred and said, yes. It did occur.
When asked whether the
father was critical of the mother for not having rearranged and confirmed with
the centre, prior to the 11th,
the father provided a response in relation to the
ashes ceremony and that the mother waited until 24 hours before the visitation
to even inform him of the ceremony, or to inform the centre that the visit had
been cancelled and then she arranged for a date to
be remade. The father
alleges that he had contacted the mother on Wednesday, at which point he could
have confirmed the ceremony,
and that she should have informed his lawyers there
would be a ceremony and that they could have arranged the whole visit to be
for another day instead of 24 hours beforehand.
asked whether that was another example of the mother's fault in the father not
spending time with the children, the father said
"I did not say it was the
mother's fault that I was not spending time with the children” and that
she provided a make-up date
for which he was thankful. When asked whether it
was the mother's fault that it did not occur, on 11 July, the father said the
did need to attend something else that could have been re-arranged. The
father was asked about his relationship with his daughter,
M, and when he last
came in contact with her and said "it was last week". The father was asked
mother seeking financial assistance and the
father said his daughter is a drug addict, that she is under the care of the
that she is a liar and a manipulator and that he can have many people
come in and state the same.
father said she has current ADVOs and said his daughter has seeked help and
asked for money from multiple people, when she does
not need it, to buy her
drugs and that he would have told the mother if allowed to communicate, that his
daughter is trying to get
money for drugs. When asked whether the father was
critical about the mother in relation to the compliance with current orders,
father said "That is how court orders are. The mother wants to follow them to
the letter, and that is how it is. That is how
it should be". That is how he
will be doing it. When asked whether that is what the father had been doing,
the father said "as
best as my ability. I have not breached any ADVO recently
or anything like that. I am following them to the letter. I am doing
everything as best I can for my children". The father confirmed that he lives
in his mother's house in a caravan still - at least
in a caravan - but that he
has access to the home.
father confirmed that the mother is not on affidavit in these proceedings. The
father said that his mother was too busy to take
calls from the mother to
arrange communication with the children. In response to the question whether
the father is critical of
the mother in respect of attempts to communicate with
the father's mother, the father said, no and that "on my calls with the
they ask him if they can speak with the mother, and he states that the
mother has the ability to call his mother and should do so
and that she can do
that at any time. The Court asked the father whether he recognised that as
controlling behaviour by him, and
responded that "when the children ask".
court repeated that "You are telling the children that they can get mummy to go
and contact your mother. Do you recognise that
as controlling behaviour, yes or
no?" The father, unresponsively, said "your Honour". When asked again "no,
yes?", the father said
"if I could explain". When told by the court that it is
yes or no, the father repeated, "in the way it is explained, yes or no is
answer". The father was asked and he said "Yes, your Honour". The father was
asked whether he had been doing that on a number
of occasions, encouraging the
children to come to his house and that they ask when they can come and see him
and, he says, he doesn't
know. He is working on it. When asked whether he
tells the children "mummy doesn't want me there. So I don't come", the father
said, no and when asked on one of the occasions, he said:
No, I can't. I'm not allowed to.
When asked whether the father said:
The mother doesn't want me there, so I don't come there.
father said yes, and added the mother does not want him around. That is why she
put an ADVO against him and asked for distance
so he cannot come to her home,
otherwise, he could come. The father said:
I don't lie to people. I might sound like I'm gaslighting or what not, but I'm
not a liar. I will tell the truth, even if it makes
me look bad.
asked whether the father told the children that the mother had taken ADVO out on
him, the father said:
No, not that I can remember.
asked did he say:
Mummy doesn't want me there, so I don't come.
The father responded that:
I'm not allowed there.
pressed as to whether the father said:
Mummy doesn't want me there, so I don't come.
The father said:
I can't remember exact words.
father was then asked whether he had been telling the children he wanted them to
come and stay at his house. The father confirmed
he would say he would love for
them to be able to come because he would. When asked whether the father had
been volunteering, did
he want them to come over and stay on the weekend, the
father said:
When they asked can they come, I told them, "I wish you could. If you could
come over this weekend, I would have you. Unfortunately,
right now, I'm working
on things."
And said he would say:
It's no one's fault. I'm not blaming anyone.
And suggested he said, "I am blaming myself, really." And added:
I actually did blame myself a few times to my children that it's my fault they
can't come over.
was put to the father that he had never in fact said it was his fault they could
not come over. It was put to the father that
in November, he told the children
they might be able to come over and stay. The father denied that he had ever
said that they could
come and stay.
was put to the father that they had been asking about this this year in
telephone calls and said multiple times if they could come
has to tell them not right now. The father was asked as to the purpose of what
he says to the children, and
said the children ask if they can come and spend
time with him. Yes. The father was asked whether that is him trying to get a
from the children, and said no and said if the children ask a question,
he answers them to the best of his ability without trying
to say anything
derogatory about the mother or himself, and tries to answer it as neutral as
father confirmed that the children have been pleased to see him on the contact
visits. The father was asked whether on each occasion
he had been giving the
children presents, and the father said:
One or two, yes.
The father was asked whether he had given the children presents on most
occasions, and he said no.
response to whether the father had been saying to the children about what he was
seeking, the father said no. When they ask to
spend time, he tells them he
wished he could spend time with them, and he is working on it.
father indicated that he drives to the Suburb K F Contact Service for contact,
or he has somebody drive him. The father said
that somebody else is his son or
his mother, and that on most occasions this year, it has been him driving.
father was asked about the urine analysis and CDT test and what the orders were.
The father was asked about providing the results,
and he said he did. He sent
them to the children's lawyer. The father was asked whether he sent them to the
mother's lawyer, and
asserted the results could only be sent to one person.
asked whether the father was aware that the specific order required the results
to be sent to both the children's lawyer and
the mother, the father answered
yes. When it was put to the father he did not comply with the order, the father
It's quite difficult for me to send test results.
And that they got sent to the independent children's lawyer.
to not arranging for any material to be sent to the mother, the father said he
thought the material would have been disseminated
by the independent children's
asked whether the father was saying it is not his fault, it is the fault of the
independent children's lawyer, the father said
no, he would say it is the fault
of the system, and that he is not trying to shift blame.
father said on one or two occasions he sent the information to his lawyer who
sent it to whoever it needed to be sent to. When
asked whether the father was
saying he did not receive the results, the father said he received one or two
after chasing them up,
and that they were sent to the independent children's
lawyer as requested by court order.
father said he sent the results to his instructing solicitor. The father blamed
his solicitor for the information not being sent
to the mother's lawyer. The
father said that he currently takes marijuana by way of prescription. The
father said he had gone down
quite a few grams in flower, and he is now on a
vapour, and said it is just a pill for medical marijuana, and also an oil, which
is right here, which is one meal in the evening. The father asserted it is
non-addictive medication.
relation to the father saying he had gone from 130 to 80, he said he had done
that over two to three months. The father then said:
Well, the increments would probably be about five or six months.
The father said it's maybe 10 grams here and there as we incremented down, so
the father needs less and less.
father referred to needing to slowly wean himself down off the medication, and
not drop off straight away, otherwise, you have
massive withdrawals.
asked when he had the reduction from 130 to 80, the father said several times
over several months over this last year. The father
said he had been having
medical marijuana for over two years now, and it had been 130 for quite a while
to deal with a trauma that
he had dealt with through work.
asked about there being fluctuations up and down in his urine analysis in
materials, the father said:
Absolutely, there would be.
father said he does not smoke cones, that he used to smoke cones probably two or
three years ago. The father said he stopped
smoking cones when he became
asked whether he is taking joints and when was the last time he took a joint,
the father said:
That's how I smoke my medical marijuana, because it's quite easier way of
smoking it instead of having to use the vaporiser, which
is quite expensive.
father was taken to a communication on 27 November 2024 with the children and
asked what he sees wrong with that. And he referred
But Mummy doesn't want me there.
When asked what was wrong and why, the father said:
Because it's putting the children against the mother. In a way, it's trying to
make it look - it looks to be manipulative, like
I'm trying to manipulate the
children to be more angry and aggressive against the mother.
court asked the father:
And you can understand that?
And he said:
Yes, I can.
The court said:
That's the very type of thing the court wants to make sure doesn't happen .....
telephone communications or videos with the children.
And did he understand that? And he said:
And then added:
And I try to keep that to a minimum. And unfortunately, that must have been a
slip of words that that day. I have to deal with
the mother trying to
communicate with, like, say words and talk over the children sometimes. And
when the children ask me this,
it's a very frustrating situation. If I had been
able to tender my previous lawyers that I sacked - if I had been able to tender
some of the evidence that I requested them tender, which I actually have in
front of me here, you will see.
The father was asked to stop. And added:
Massive amounts of where [Ms Hearst] has.
The father was asked again to stop and informed he was not being responsive to
the question. And then said:
Yes, your Honour. I can see how that would pit the children badly against the
The father was asked:
And that's your conduct. That's what I'm concerned about. And that your
conduct, your insight, that's what I'm concerned about.
And the father said he recognises that.
father was asked whether he recognises that that was something that was
manipulative or controlling behaviour, and the father
That could just be taken out of context in that way. Yes your Honour.
court asked the father how the court could be satisfied that would not happen in
the future if you are engaging with the children,
either at the supervised
centre without some supervision or in telephone communications and the father
said that on many occasions,
the children have asked him things, and he has not
put the mother down. The father said:
I've encouraged them to behave from the mother.
father then added:
We're not looking at any of them in these video call logs, are we? We're just
only looking at the one here or there where I've made
a slip of judgment and
said something out of context. Most of the time, I encourage the children to
listen to the mother and behave
for the mother.
asked whether the father understands that the court is concerned as to whether
he now has a deeper insight about the potential
harm to the children if he
undermines the mother or gaslights the mother or engages in controlling or
manipulative behaviour, the
father said:
Yes, your Honour.
And then added:
And that should also be the same for the mother. Unfortunately, the information
that I wish to have tendered.
court identified for the father that the part he added completely undermined the
answer he gave, and that is one of the problems.
And the father said he
understands.
court raised with the father moving past being the victim and having insight
The father said
..... the purpose of the court being as honest as possible now. My children
aren't in front of me. If my children were in front
of me, I wouldn't be saying
certain things in front of my children for the benefit of my children and the
mother, right. I don't
talk like this in front of the children normally. But
yes, I did make a mistake and say the wrong words in that context. But most
the time, I'm encouraging the children to listen and do what the mother asks. I
wish I could present all those video calls.
When asked whether the father understands that not seeing the children in the
moment as much as he wants is his fault and not the
mother's, answered:
In certain ways, yes, your Honour. I do.
The court raised the need for confidence, that the best interests of the
children would be respected, and the father would not be
undermining the mother
and engaging with them, and that the court cannot have any confidence in that if
the father does not have
insight and the father said yes.
father was asked about the doctor who prescribes medicinal marijuana and was
asked whether he was aware it was an offence to drive
with THC in his system.
Father was asked whether he had been driving to the contact centre with THC in
his system, and said he cannot
consume THC and then drive and added the THC can
be in his system for days or weeks after consuming the THC.
ICL asked the father whether he had said:
It is my fault that I can't see you.
And the father said he is pretty sure he said, "Daddy made a mistake," and, "I
have got to deal with it" and that he could not exactly
remember what words
were, but that he did inform his children that he had messed up in certain ways.
father said he is not trying to throw the mother under the bus, but he tries
hardest to watch my wording around the children.
ICL asked the father:
Why is it your fault?
father said:
Well, there's not really any place to take my children when I became homeless.
That's partially my fault.
The father said he was not able to locate another residence quick enough after
the home was damaged. The father said he did not
expect the mother to let the
children stay in a car in a box trailer, and that would not be suitable and
So my fault in that he didn't have accommodation for them at the time.
ICL asked whether it was his fault he has not seen the children because he does
not have accommodation, and unresponsively said:
Depends what happens. I'm waiting to get myself a property. If I can have
for them to come
and maybe stay a weekend.
The father said he is not going to waste 600 or 500 worth of rent instead of 200
worth of rent or travelling around in a van around
Australia if he does not get
to see his children.
ICL asked whether the father identified any other reason why he does not see the
children, and the father said:
My mental health was bad. And the fact I had an ADVO placed on him.
We won't get into the grounds of why because I don't want to make myself look
bad and blame or try and look like I'm blaming, shifting
or what not. But there
are other reasons why I didn't get to see my children, some of them mine, some
of them contributed by other
father was asked whether he had read the report by Ms HH dated 30 April '24, and
answered evasively:
As much as I can, yes.
I've read most of it.
And then said:
I'm pretty sure I read it all.
asked whether he had read it all or read most of it, the father responded
unresponsively:
There's a lot of material to go through.
The ICL pressed the question, and the father evasively responded:
Like I just stated, it might - I'm not sure what report you're referring to.
The father was asked about the report of 30 April '24, and said:
No. Obviously, I haven't read the report.
father was then taken to the court child expert's report dated 30 April, and
that this was done when they met in '23. The father
volunteered
unresponsively:
Didn't paint me in the best light.
father was asked about paragraph 22 where he said:
The WorkCover dispute had been finalised.
father was asked about that he was still currently living with his parents, and
was asked about the family report, that he was
expecting a payout soon, and that
he got $50,000 somewhere through 2024.
father was asked why he did not choose to obtain alternate accommodation away
from his parents. The father said that it is very
difficult in the rental
market at the moment and that he was waiting on this matter to finalise to
whether or not he gets to see
his children, have time with his children. The
father said if his children are not visiting him and spending time with him,
is no need for extra bedrooms.
asked by the ICL if he had made any attempt to obtain alternative accommodation
since he received the $50,000, the father responded:
I've looked at several real estates in several different places, but decided
that it's easier to stay here currently until these
finalise and we find out
what is going on here. If I do not spend - if I do not get to spend time with
my kids then there is no
reason for me to have permanent accommodation. I can
go travelling. I can take this and a four-wheel drive and go around Australia.
father was asked about his admission to Z Hospital in early 2023 and a reference
to telling the hospital staff he was frustrated
at current living situation
whereby he is getting tired of the long custody battle. When I have asked
whether it was his position
he would remain living with his parents in the
long-distant future, the father said no, not for the long-distant future - the
said not for the long distant future, no. The father was asked whether
he was in a financial position right now to afford alternative
accommodation
away from the caravan and said yes. The father was asked whether he took any
steps to obtain that alternate accommodation
and identified he is waiting to
find another suitable location to the outcome of the case and that if he does
not have time with
his children - when his children come over and stay with him,
then he does not need a house. The father was asked about an admission
Z Hospital in mid-2023. He stated he lived alone and relevantly reports a
poor relationship with his mother. The father responded
that he didn't mean he
had a poor relationship with her and said he was estranged from his son that was
removed from his care and
was removed when we were living together at this
location that prevented him from living at this location which rendered him
Which was one of the reasons why he was homeless and he couldn't come
to stay with his parents at the time. So he did the best
he could through that
father was then asked about an admission record to Region VV Hospital in
mid-2023. That the father made threats that he would
kill himself. Banging his
head on the door and demanding he go to hospital. The father said he remembered
that particular occasion
and that it had to do with the anxiety and fear of
being locked in spaces. The father said that being locked in a room triggers
this type of anxiety. The father was also asked about an entry that he was
being belligerent. The father said his anxiety had fired
up. The father was
asked about the last entry that he was threatening to harm the sergeant and
stated fuck up that bald cunt. The
father said he thinks he would have said,
fuck off bald cunt. The father said his mental health was not suitable at the
father was asked about events that appear to have occurred 23 and 24 June 2023,
where the father presented as agitated, dismissive
and entitled. The father
referred to disgusting efforts from the police and disgustingness from himself
and said his mental health
was so poor at the time that he had been locked in
and his anxiety was flaring. He was asked by the Court what the father does to
try and control the triggers - if he is exposed to a trigger. The father said
most of the triggers are avoidable. The father was
again asked what do you do
to try and control those triggers so that you do not have the type of reaction
where you are belligerent
- which means angry or rude. The father said he had
learnt breathing techniques and meditation. The father says that stops him
having an out of control reaction. The father was asked about an admission
report in early 2023, that he had been trialled
on multiple medications but
reported side effects and responded, "Maybe I don't recall clearly."
father confirmed that he had told the staff he had been on multiple medications
in the past and that the medications were for
his mental health, being PSD and
anxiety. Yes. The father said the medications did help on some things but had
caused massive side
effects. When asked whether he was presently on any
medication, the father said, my medicinal medication. The father said that
other than the medicinal cannabis, he was not on any prescribed medication from
a psychiatrist. The father was asked about the report
identifying he had
previous presentations in late 2022 following suicide ideation and he said it
wasn't suicide thoughts, it was
a suicide attempt, in fact. In response to the
question when was that, the father provided an unresponsive answer advocating
case. The father said he attempted suicide in late 2022. The father said
he moved in with his parents at the end of December 2023.
Days before court in
2023. The father said he was homeless between March and December 2023. The
father said he did not move in
earlier because his son was living there. The
father said he was not allowed to reside on the premises until he turned 18 or
father was asked about an admission report dated mid-2023, where the father
threatened suicide in the context of an eviction notice.
The father said his
mental health was failing due to other factors that he did not want to mention
earlier and that he might have
mentioned what was going on with his situation,
his ex-partner and not having a home and said it was no one's fault - no one
fault and said, "I did the best I could" and that he was still trying
today to do better.
father agreed that in July '23 he was still living in the rented property at the
time he presented threatening suicide. The father
was taken to an assessment
that he has a history of personality vulnerabilities with angry temperament, and
the father said, "Yes,
I was quite angry at the situation that was going on".
The father said that was not an accurate assessment of his personality and
temperament at the current moment of this being written. The father was taken
to a reference in Z Hospital where the father was
admitted in late 2023, which
recorded the father had presented multiple times in the past year for suicide
attempts. The father
confirmed that was an accurate statement and that it was a
father did not recall being admitted for seven days. The father was asked that
that was only 22 months ago and does not remember,
and said he recalled the date
that he was admitted. The father was taken to the assessment that there was
drug-affected behaviour
and that he had a diagnosis of antisocial personality
structure and denied any thoughts of suicide or self-harm to others, and the
father did not recall ever being in the hospital. The father said he had never
been in hospital for seven days. The father said
this was the last time he was
in hospital for his mental health. The father was taken to his affidavit where
he stated that he believed
it was in the children's best interests that they
live with him, and the father said, "I'm not sure what the children want".
father said it is not his position that they live with him full-time, and that
he stood by that position last year when he spoke
to the Courts. When asked
whether the family report writer, at least the court child expert, got wrong,
that he wanted the children
to live with him, the father said he can't remember
what he said, and that he would like them to live with him, and that he does
have his concerns of living with the mother on some levels. The father added,
"There would be concerns about them living with me
too, with my current
history". The father was asked about telling the court child expert that he
believed the children did not wish
to live with the mother, and the father said,
"Yes. On several occasions the children have expressed their interests on
with me and not wanting to go home".
father was asked about telling the court child expert that the children did not
wish to live with the mother, and said that he
does recall saying that, and that
words to similar effect had come from his children's mouth, unasked for,
unquestioned. The father
said the children have turned around and said they
don't want to live with their mum, and said he is not trying to gaslight, and
that they are remarks his older daughter, X, had made. When asked when X said
that, the father said, "Some time this year at the
ICL asked the father about his recent affidavit and the assertion that his
current injury is not impacting on his parenting ability,
and the father agreed
that he believed missing the children was having a negative effect on his mental
health. The father was asked
the attention of the ICL on Sunday, and the reference to Mr KK, and that the
time he was seen was on 20 February 2025. The father indicated he wanted a
break because he said he was in extreme amounts of pain.
father said he is not able to specify the specific documents he gave Mr KK. The
father said in the four months since he had Mr
KK's report, he has not done any
evidence-based trauma-informed therapy and he said that was due to his financial
means. The father
said his mental health was caused by work, and he cannot
afford to pay for it himself. The father has asked about the entry in the
report as to being committed to ongoing therapy to address the PTSD and comorbid
anxiety and depression. It was put to the father
that he had not been committed
to ongoing therapy, and the father said, "Yes. Well, I have appointments
booked". The matter was
then adjourned until Wednesday, 23 July 2025.
father was asked about the court child expert report where the father during the
interviews repeatedly referred to the mother
as manipulative and a liar. When
asked whether he maintains those criticisms, the father said, "It would be a lie
if I said I didn't",
and then said, "If you had lived with her as long as I did,
you would understand. But that's my view of the mother. It's not what
present to the children, but that is my personal view of the mother, yes." When
asked whether he had other criticisms of the mother,
the father said none that
he would like to discuss with the court.
father then said he sometimes thinks she's a danger to the children. When asked
in what way, the father alleged, she has episodes
and blacks out. She can
become abusive, violent and assault people. She has threatened to assault his
older daughter in the past,
and that he sometimes fears for the safety of his
children when they are in her care. The father then proffered unresponsively,
"I don't present these views to the children, though. These are views I keep to
asked if he had anything positive to say about the mother, the father said she
has done a good job so far. The father then volunteered
that his daughter,
unresponsively, was in his care at one point of time, and that the mother signed
her into his care in September
2019, and that the mother asked for a recovery
order and that there had been a few incidents he has been worried about. When
father said she has been a mother to them, clothed them,
kept them fed, kept
them schooled, and he referred to his son's education when he is speaking and
said it could be the mother not
father alleged that his using physical force, being observed by the mother, to
discipline M and Mr L was false. The father said
he did use physical discipline
towards his older two children, and he had smacked those children and that is
how his parents had
smacked him if he misbehaved and did not listen to his
parents respectfully. When asked whether he understands the use of physical
discipline is not permitted today, the father said, "It was not permitted, no".
asked whether the father denied the mother's observation that when she moved in
she saw a great deal of abuse and neglect, including
hitting the children with
objects, dragging them, threats and verbal abuse, the father said he did not
deny there were threats, and
that there were threats of physical violence and
there were threats of removing toys and that they were physically disciplined at
the time, and this was over 10 years ago. That was the way he was raised, that
he was smacked, and they did not realise at the time
you could not physically
discipline your children anymore. The father said he learned that, and stopped
that. The father said he
learned that over 10 years ago, when the children were
removed from his and the mother's care. The ICL asked you - the ICL pointed
the father keeps saying the children were removed from the mother's care, and
You take the view that she was responsible for the children being removed from
And the father answered:
Have you read the Family and Community Services reports?
The father then said:
Yes, in fact. The mother is somewhat responsible for my children being removed
from my care.
The father was asked in what way does he blame her, and he says:
I do not blame her. It was both. It was mainly my responsibility.
The father said:
I should have left the mother many years ago to prevent the abuse that my
children suffered at her hands from happening, and mine.
In response to the question whether the father says it was the mother being
abusive to his children, the father said:
She was also, yes, being abusive to the children. That is in the Family and
Community Services reports. I have audio and video
recordings of these
father was asked about going onto medication, calming him down, in 2016, and
that it was prescribed by doctors. When asked by
the Court why the father is
not on an accepted scientific method of treatment for anxiety, the father said
medicinal marijuana is
an acceptable, scientifically proven form of treating
anxiety and depression. The father said he was on pills for about five years,
and after causing the extreme side effects, he transferred to medical marijuana
after it was approved. When asked if there is some
reason why he did not want
- why the father did not want to accept mainstream medication for anxiety and
depression, the father
said the anxiety and depression medication - most of them
cause massive side effects:
I did try and go on several different kinds over the course of five years. Some
of them caused massive constipation, erectile dysfunction
and a number of
extreme problems occurred.
Asked whether the father understands that cannabis use will have an adverse
impact on him, the father said:
It does, but not as adverse as taking pills.
father was taken to the report of Dr W, dated 14 April 2023, which was marked
exhibit K, and that this was a report dated 14 April
'23, provided to the
independent children's lawyer this morning, being 23 July 2025. The father was
asked was there any reason why
he had waited until the fourth day of the trial
to provide the report, and he said he did not remember things that happened many
years ago. The father was taken to page 7 of the report, and the psychiatric
diagnosis as per the DSMV is major depressive disorder
with anxious distress,
and the father said he was aware of that diagnosis, and added, "That's what PTSD
father was taken to the view expressed in the report that there is not likely to
have much improvement. The father said, "Yes,
it's a stable condition that
prevents me from working". The father acknowledged that treatment is very
important in relation to
his mental health. The father was taken to a reference
that he had attended a psychologist at a frequency of once every two weeks,
had not been able to attend appointments since 2018 owing to financial
constraints.
father said he saw a couple of free counsellors. The father said the last time
he had counselling with C Organisation was almost
two years ago now. The father
said it is a drop-in centre. The father agreed he was seeing a psychiatrist
based on advice from
a general practitioner. The father could not remember who
the psychiatrist was he was seeing, he said it was two different people,
they saw him once.
father was asked about the medications he was taking, and he transferred off
that because they were all causing anxiety and depression.
The father was asked
by the ICL that he did not have any medical evidence to support his position
that he could not continue taking
the prescribed medication because of side
effects and the father said, "No." But referred to the list of problems that
these medications
can cause and said he had to go back to his doctor several
times, change medications, change doses.
father was asked whether he had the recordings that he alleges are in his
possession, including the mother threatening M, and
whether they are available
in these proceedings, and the father said, "I have them available." And
I didn't want to put anything on the mother that needed to be recorded and
documented. I don't hate her. I do have those types
of recordings that are
quite concerning, where the mother, at the end of the recording, even says,
"Your father's not here to protect
you right now."
father was asked about a public post on Facebook and volunteered that he was not
aware of it and referred to a video during the
birth where, unfortunately, you
could see part of the mother's nipple, and that he did not understand that was a
violation. The
Court then had played the video recording identified in
paragraph 147 of the mother's affidavit, being exhibit to that affidavit
set out in the chronology.
court then asked the father whether that video that was played was posted on
Facebook, and he said yes, it was. The father said
that the purpose of the
video was satire. When asked what he was trying to achieve, the father said
"Nothing," and referred to posting
hundreds and thousands of videos. The father
has referred to the lawyers not doing what they were told and were not listening
him, and that they needed to withdraw because he had lost confidence in them,
and this is how he got that adjournment, which was
pretty wise, and he lost
confidence in his legal team.
father continued, saying he made lots of films about a lot of stuff. The father
said the mother was literally Facebook stalking
him for a while, and just
picking and choosing bits of video. When asked by the court whether the father
recognised that the video
was extremely intimidatory for his partner, the father
said it was not, because if she was that intimidated by - the court then again
asked the father whether he recognised that video was highly intimidatory, and
that he had answered no. "Do you want to change that
answer?" and the father
said, "Yes, I recognise that if she viewed that video, that would be
intimidating." The court raised with
the father, "Extremely intimidating; do
you recognise that?" and he said, "No, I don't, so I don't understand. There
were no threats
of violence or harm, or anything of the sort," then said,
"Getting a new lawyer, that's not intimidating."
court again asked the father, "Do you recognise that that Facebook post was
extremely manipulative by you?" and the father said,
"No, I don't understand
how, your Honour." The father said to the ICL that the Facebook post was not
for anyone in particular, it
was for himself. In response to the question from
the ICL that it was for the mother, the father said, "For just whatever." The
father was pressed that it was for the mother and he was intending to intimidate
her, and said no, it was not and said, "Don't try
and intimidate me into saying
yes. It was not intimidating anybody. It was a recording of my feelings and
thoughts and stuff onto
father said he would not try and intimidate anyone, and that he would like
counsel to stop saying that he was trying to intimidate
the mother. The father
continued, "there are plenty of evidence of abuse the mother has laid against
me. Assault, battering. If
you don't want to hear those claims, then I can't
do this." The father then continued, "I keep getting told - the mother has not
gotten told once that she should stop this, or stop that, and just because I
want to tell the truth, I get nailed for it." When
I asked what was the truth
he was telling in the video the father said, "The truth in that video was that I
had bad legal representation
at the time and I got rid of - for lack of
confidence, that I got an adjournment. So I could get good legal counsel. So I
try and fight this."
father said, "The intimidation, the intimidation is being Facebook stalked
knowing that everything you put on Facebook is being
looked at by the mother,
and therefore I can't communicate. I can't post. Anything that I can post
could be used against me in
any type of way. Quite upset. Quite intimidating."
The father said, "Maybe this video wasn't posted for amusement" and said, "The
mother has Facebook stalked the father's Facebook profile and picked and chose
what she wished to use in court. What could be looked
at as being bad or
threatening or harmful." The father said, "She plays a very good victim. She
whether he had regrets about posting the Facebook video the father said, "no, I
do." When I asked what those regrets are, the
father said, "I'm sorry that the
mother saw it and felt intimidated by it, but it was not by any intimidating
means." The father
said that if the mother was upset by the video he absolutely
would have apologised to her and removed it the instant she told him
was upset and that the mother got the police involved instead. When asked
whether it came as a complete surprise to the
father that she appeared to be
intimidated by the video, the father said, "Like I said, the mother plays a very
good victim." The
Father denied that the landlord who served the termination
notice was a friend of the father's. Father agreed the notice was served
he had left the premises.
father agreed that, to his knowledge, the rent was up to date. When asked
whether the father knows the circumstances as to why
the termination was served
on the mother, in that situation, the father gave unresponsive answer, asking
for the termination letter.
In answer to the question whether, upon separation,
the father retained X in his care, the father said, "Yes, that is correct,"
added, quote, "After the mother told him to take [X] and [Y] with him and that
she would pack their things before them," and
added, "I've got her audio
recording, too."
father confirmed that he did not take his daughter to childcare, and added,
quote, "Due to the abuse that I suffered from [Ms
Hearst] - due to the abuse I
suffered from the mother, I left the property, and I took her and went and
stayed at my mum's house."
The ICL pressed for an answer to his question that
whilst X was in his care in 20 October 2020, he did not take her to childcare.
The father was asked about repeatedly asking the mother to sign Centrelink
documents so he could receive parenting payments for
X in October 2020, and said
that is incorrect. Alleged the mother signed the daughter over to him through
Centrelink, and said the
mother did it willingly.
father was asked in the period that he had care of X what attempts he made for X
to actually physically see the mother in that
period, and the father said, "The
month and a half or two months that I had away from the mother, the mother had
several video calls
with the daughter during that time," and that the father had
offered for the mother to come and see the daughter at that time. The
alleged he was not withholding the daughter at all.
father alleged he tried and that he offered, but she would not come anywhere
near him. The father was asked about a text sent
on 11 October by SMS offering
to return X to the mother if she had sex with him and was asked whether that was
accurate. There was
an unresponsive statement. The father was asked, "Did you
send such a text message to her on 11 October 2020?" and unresponsively
It wasn't specifically talking about having sex with her or returning [X]. It
was talking - we were talking about me leaving.
The father said:
There are other texts that the mother has not put in here through the messenger
and through the video.
The father continued:
...which would tell the whole story. This is just fragments of something that
she would like to display, which is quite disturbing.
When asked for a third time that - whether he did send such a text, the father
No. I didn't send her saying that I would exchange [X] for sex.
father was pressed for answering the question and spoke about temporary
accommodation and the mother suggesting she could come
over and see X, and we
could fool about as we could leave, and that he had many messages here showing
the mother asking him to come
and spend a week at her house. The Court stopped
the father and took him to paragraph 40 of the mother's affidavit that was on
screen with a text - with a reference to the text offering to return X to
her care "if I had sex with him". Sorry. I am going to
delete that last
sentence. To paragraph 40, which said:
On Sunday, 11 October 2020, [Mr Cagley] sent me an SMS text message offering to
return [X] to my care "if I had sex with him".
father said he could see it on the screen. The father was asked whether he
recognised the inappropriateness of sending such a
text message and responded,
"out of context, absolutely, your Honour". The father was asked, do you
recognise that it displays a
lack of parenting capacity by you and manipulation
by you, and the father responded, "taken out of context, your Honour, yes. The
father was asked about telling the court child expert that he felt the mother's
mental care was impacting on her care of the children.
The father said he
recalled saying the mother's mental health could affect her parenting abilities.
When asked in what way, the
father says she gets too angry, she blacks out and
can't remember what she does during those blackouts, and that she admits this
herself, and she admits to being violent to me in counselling sessions.
blackouts occur where she has split my mouth open with her telephone, and said
it is quite concerning that someone that has
a blackout is looking after my
kids, if she gets too angry. The father said the mother has also rammed into
his car on occasion
when she blacked out, and a few other instances of violence
and violent outbursts from the mother when she has blacked out that she
stated to a counsellor. The father added, and also that, at that same
counsellor, the mother said she would kill, that she threatened
to kill herself,
and if she did, she would kill the children too, because no one else is suitable
to look after them. When asked
by the court whether he recognised his answer
was wholly unresponsive to the question asked, the father said, my concerns are
her looking after my children.
asked whether the father recognised his answer was wholly unresponsive and he
was advocating his case, the father said, no, I
was just worried, concerned
the safety of his children
in her care at those times is not the best. The
father said he can't be honest without stating, and said I'm not trying to be
in any way, I'm not trying to be hurtful or nasty in any way, I have
evidence to back this up. The court observed that the speech
the father just
gave was unresponsive to the question asked.
father was asked by the ICL about the co-parenting and divorce education that he
had done that included 52 lessons of family violence.
The father was asked what
the reason was he did that course, and he said "for a better understanding of
the things I was going through
and the things that I may have put the mother
through". When asked whether he accepted that he was violent to the mother, the
said, I was never physically - I was never physically violent to the
mother, no. When asked, do you accept that you were emotionally
violent towards
the mother, he said, after understanding the full grasp of all these different
domestic violence things, which is
quite varied and quite vast. The father
volunteered, it means - sorry - delete that last, the father volunteered.
father said that, as far as he understands, emotional is me withholding love and
emotions from the mother so, no, I never emotionally
abused the mother. The
independent children's lawyer - at least, counsel for the independent children's
lawyer, asked, why were
you doing the domestic violence course if you never
physically abused her and never emotionally abused her, and said to better
what I might have put the mother through and what the mother had put
me through. In response to the question as to whether he did
these courses
because he perceived the mother was violent to him, the father said, I know she
was violent to me, there is evidence
of her being violent to me. When asked,
was that the reason you did the course, the father said, well, the violence was
perpetrated
against me. The father repeated that he needed to get a better
understanding of the domestic violence that he may have perpetrated
against the
mother and that the mother may have perpetrated against him.
asked whether the father believed, after doing the course, that he was never
physically violent or emotionally violent towards
the mother, repeated I was
never physically violent and did not withhold his love and affection, and stated
he was not emotionally
violent. When asked whether the video he posted on
Facebook that was played to the court was a form of emotional violence. The
father said that was not directed at the mother, and that he did that for his
own emotional release. The father added:
If somebody continue - somebody wishes to continuously look through my Facebook
account for things to use against me, then they mind
things that offend them.
asked whether the father could cope with seeing the children on a supervised
basis four times a year - as to whether he could
cope, the father said:
No. Because it's not enough time with my children.
The father had been taken to that part of the affidavit in which he had said:
The courses have also helped me to overcome the grief, loss and trauma of myself
not being able to see and spend time with the children.
When asked whether it had helped him overcome the grief, the father said:
No. No. It has helped.
The father said:
It has helped to overcome the grief and loss of things that have already
happened, and that it will continue to help in deal with
not having to see his
children for most of the year and maybe four times a year, but it will still
hurt emotionally. I will still
feel grief. I will still feel loss.
father was asked about a post he made - sorry. The father was asked about a
message he sent on Facebook on 13 November 2022 saying
he is going to kill
himself and accepted that he sent that message. The father interrupted counsel
for the independent children's
lawyer, trying to put a question, and volunteered
offering an explanation about the message and it not being black and white and
was reminded by the Court that unresponsive answers adversely affect his credit.
The father was asked about an SMS message at paragraph
49 of the mother's
affidavit demanding changes be made to the interim orders to suit the father and
said he might have sent it, adding,
"It's so many years ago."
father said a lot has happened since 2022. The father was taken to paragraph 50
of the mother's affidavit, and the sending of
messages asking to say goodbye to
the children, and provided unresponsive answers as to whether he remembered that
audio recording,
and gave a further unresponsive answer when asked a third time.
The father was taken to paragraph 50 of the affidavit and said, yes,
said something to that effect, yes. When asked, what was the purpose of sending
that message, unresponsively, the witness
said, it would take a large, lengthier
explanation than I fear the court would like. When asked what the purpose of
sending the
message was - the text was to the mother, the father replied
"frustration".
asked about the mother's affidavit at paragraph 149 and the father posting a
video of the mother giving birth, without her knowledge
or consent, uncovering a
nude video of her entire body, the father denied that he posted that video
without her knowledge and consent.
The father said he thought it was locked for
the mother to be able to view because she didn't have it and that he uploaded it
the mother could retrieve it. The father said she was not fully naked and
that he did remove the content. The father was pressed
as to whether he posted
it without her knowledge and consent, and unresponsively said, I uploaded it, I
did not post it, I uploaded
it to a Facebook file that the mother was tagged in,
and alleged she was able to actually view that footage, only she was able to
view that footage, to his knowledge.
pressed again for an answer, the father said, yes, I uploaded it to my Facebook
for the mother's viewing. When asked again whether
that was without her
knowledge or consent, the father gave an evasive answer, I think I've already
answered your question. The father
was taken to the mother's statement that she
was - recalled shaking, feeling sick to her stomach, embarrassed, mortified,
and scared, and was asked for his response to that evidence, and the
father said, I find the mother to be a liar, unfortunately,
and a very good
manipulator, and there is evidence to see that fact. The father said, I cannot
say it without sounding like I'm
being nasty. The father referred to statements
didn't. When asked whether the father posted things using the name Mr
Cagley on Facebook, the father said he had to delete things
from his other
Facebook because it was being accessed by a third party, unresponsibly. The
father then answered, yes.
father was taken to paragraph 159 of the mother's affidavit which included a
post - included in the post, quote: Here I am - at
least, "here I motherfucking
am bitch, time for you to run and hide", “after I'm done you will realise
that what you did was
wrong and punishing someone to the point they would rather
die than be alive for their children”, and in response to the question,
whether he posted that the father said I'm not quite sure. The father said,
there is another Mr Cagley.
When asked by the court whether he sent that post the father said, I'm unsure if
this is something that I wrote. When asked whether
he sent the words: "Here I
motherfucking am bitch, time for you to run and hide", the father said: "I do
not recall, no." The
court asked again whether he sent it and the father said:
"I do not recall, no." I'm told by the court that the - I've been told
by the court that it may draw the inference that it was posted by him and was
asked to tell the court what was wrong with
the post, the father said: These
posts are just satire or whatnot. Not even a talking about.
When asked what was wrong with the post, the father gave an unresponsive answer.
When asked by the court:
Did you recognise how intimidating and threatening the statement was?
The father gave an unresponsive answer. When pressed a third time, the father
Yes, I understand how intimidating that would be.
When asked:
Did he recognise how intimidating and threatening that statement would be to the
mother, yes or no?
The father again failed to give a responsive answer. When told by the court:
Are you refusing to answer question?
The father said:
Yes, I can see that that would be threatening to the mother. But why is the
mother Facebook stalking my Facebook profile to find
whatever information?
father continued to interrupt the court trying to put a further question, and
Yes, I understand that it could be seen as threatening or intimidating to the
She is threatened and intimidated by me. That is why my misunderstanding on why
she would be sitting there trawling my Facebook
to find things that may threaten
and intimidate her. If she's threatening and intimidating by me, you would
think she would not
be sitting there, reading anything that I write, looking for
any video she can use against me. That's threatening and intimidating
re-examination, the father was asked:
You made references to the mother being abusive; is that correct?
Yes, it is.
Can you just elaborate?
The father said:
Several times, she was quite physically abusive. She was very emotionally
father referred to a recording, and that she was dismissive of him. The father
referred to a recording of arguing where she is
abusing the father whilst he had
an AVO against her. The father alleged the mother hit him, attacked him,
splitting his lip open
with a telephone, and that she ripped the TV off the wall
and had thrown it, smashed it on the ground. The father referred to the
being arrested and charged for that. The father alleged the mother prevented
him leaving the house. The father alleged the
mother would remove his keys.
The father alleged she had text messages to show another form of abuse, and
She wants the court to decide who's the better parent and stuff.
father referred to court orders, and that she dismissed them; that was another
form of emotional abuse; that it has been "quite
nasty torment" and that the
father had broken up with the mother several times but ended up going back to
COURT CHILD EXPERT’S EVIDENCE
court child expert interviewed relevantly the mother and father and two
children. The qualified recommendation by the court child
expert was that the
children live with the mother and that the mother have sole parental
responsibility for the children. The qualification
in relation to the
recommendations identified that it was based on the information gathered at the
time of assessment and what further
evidentiary material should indicate. At the
time of the report the court child expert recommended the father spending two
of supervised time with the children every second Saturday.
mother indicated to the court child expert that she wished for the children to
spend time with the father if it is deemed safe.
court child expert noted that the father presented with a strong focus on
perceived injustices towards him. The father asserted
that he was currently
awaiting a payout and that he intends to rent a home suitable for the children
after he receives his payment.
The father indicated that he was not able to
that his injury is not impacting on his parenting ability and stated that he
is missing the children which negatively impact on his
mental health. The court
child expert identified that the father presented with a persistently negative
view of the mother and when
asked about other matters would return to this line
of conversation. The father asserted that the mother was manipulative and a
The father asserted to the court child expert that he felt disadvantaged
and that the Court is biased towards mothers.
court child expert noted that both parents alleged family violence by the other
and that both denied the others allegations.
mother identified to the court child expert that she had suffered verbal and
emotional abuse from father as well as ongoing controlling
behaviours, stalking
and sexual coercion. The mother recalled that she witnessed the father using
excessive physical discipline towards
his other two children M and Mr L. The
mother reported that she did not feel safe in her own home when cohabiting with
and that he had threatened should she end the relationship he would
take X. The mother stated that she believed the father would
carry out his
threat with the purpose of hurting the mother because X was her only daughter.
The mother recalled the father calling
her names during the relationship,
stating that she was not good enough and that he had pushed her and threatened
violence. The mother
identified an occasion where the father did not let her
leave the bedroom and she broke the TV for the purpose of creating a distraction
to leave the room. The mother stated that her personal freedom was limited
during the relationship with the father and that when
she started working the
father told her he had enough of minding the children and therefore she ceased
her employment. The mother
identified the father controlled what you could use
in the shared home. The mother spoke of sexual coercion in a relationship with
the father and that he asked her to do sexual things she was not comfortable
with and that this behaviour continued after they broke
up and he was spending
time in the home. The mother became emotional and stated that she did not feel
she was able to reject the
father sexual answers because she was worried about
negative repercussions. The mother said that at handovers the father would make
it difficult by trying to kiss her and engaged in placing items in her car. The
mother expressed the view that the father continued
to be obsessed about her
after separation and that the father broke the ADVO on several occasions by
concerned as to the father’s posts
on social media stating that he intends to tell the children the truth about the
Court matter.
father alleged abuse by the mother and that she is not scared of him, but he is
scared of her and alleged that she was very controlling.
The father had made
recordings over the years as to what he alleged was a mother acting in a
manipulating manner, the court child
expert noted that it was not clear how the
father had obtained the information or recordings he alleged he had made.
court child expert made reference to what happened to the father’s older
children and the classification of risk of significant
harm for those older
children of the father. The mother also informed the court child expert that the
father was verbally aggressive
to her two older children. The father alleged
that in a recent telephone call X asserted that the mother had hit O and had
hole in the wall in her home. The mother denied those allegations and
expressed concern that X may tell the father things that she
believes the father
wants to hear to please him. The mother said that the father withheld X after
separation in October 2020 and
that he had retained custody until an order was
made on 4 December 2020. The father denied withholding X and asserted that the
had agreed that X should live with him.
father made reference to the fact that he used to smoke marijuana in the past
and that he has since been prescribed medical marijuana
and that he had thus
ceased smoking the substance. The father asserted that marijuana helped him
sleep at night and that he did not
believe it affected his day-to-day
functioning.
mother noted that she suffered from postnatal depression following the birth of
H and that she is currently attending domestic
violence counselling. The father
asserted that the mother has undiagnosed covert narcissism and reiterated that
the mother is manipulative
and very smart and knows what to say. The father
asserted the mother’s mental health issues are impacting on her care of
children and alleged that she has not been truthful when speaking to police,
DCJ and the Court. The father was diagnosed with post-traumatic
stress disorder
(PTSD) and he stated that this was caused by his traumatic experiences at his
previous workplace. The father stated
everyone is concerned about his mental
health. The court child expert identified from the NSW Health subpoenaed
material that medical
assistance for suicidal ideation was sought by the father
in 2023 having made two attempts of suicide in the same year. The father
that his mental health was affected by not seeing the children and the mother
having him arrested on multiple occasions which
are court child expert
understood to mean his breaching of the ADVO during 2023
mother was aware of the father’s PTSD diagnosis and expressed concern
and how his mental health may
impact on his parenting. The mother expressed concern in relation to the father
being obsessed with
her and also about the false allegations from the father.
The mother expressed concern as to the father’s capacity to safely
for the children. The court child expert recorded that the mother presented as
focused on the children’s needs.
court child expert recorded that the father struggled to engage in conversation
to his grievances with the
mother. The court child expert also referred to the father describing the
children as ecstatic when reunited
with him for their first visit and reflected
that the father may struggle to differentiate between his own feelings and those
others. The father asserted he had learned other strategies rather than
smacking children when they are misbehaving and minimised
the reasons why his
older children were assumed into care. The father made comment about his older
daughter M and spoke negatively
her as aggressive and manipulative. The court child expert identified that these
raise concerns about the father’s level of empathy for his
children’s experiences.
mother expressed concern that the father may use excessive discipline towards X
and Y should he struggle with managing their behaviours
and the court child
expert record the mother wanted a health assessment that the father can care for
the children unsupervised.
court child expert recorded the views of the children and their interactions
with both the mother and father and recommended given
X’s young age that
her views should not be a major determining factor. The court child expert
identified the importance for
the children, their stability and emotional safety
for them to thrive. The child expert identified the likely benefit of the
from empathy and stability from their main caregiver to provide a safe
place for the children to develop and express themselves and
for the children to
develop the unique identities.
court child expert noted that if the Court accepts the allegations of the
mother, the children have been exposed to family violence
relationship between mother and father. The court child expert observed that
children who have been exposed to family
violence have increased stress levels
which can affect their emotions, learning, and behaviours later in life. The
court child expert
observed that the children may have been able to notice that
the mother was fearful and that this may have caused them to feel scared,
worried, or angry. The court child expert observed in these circumstances there
is a risk that the children will continue to be exposed
to family violence from
the father especially at changeovers and in communication between the
court child expert made reference to the power discrepancy between the parties
noting the mother’s young age and that the
father presented as a more
dominant person and that the mother presented with a genuine fear of the father
as she had repeatedly
taken decisions, including moving homes to feel safe. The
court child expert identified that the breaching of the ADVO if it has
raises concerns as to the father in relation to his inclination to follow Court
orders. The court child expert also identified
a concern that the alleged family
violence continued by the father after the parties separated and were living in
different areas.
The court child expert expressed a high level of concern in
relation to the allegations of sexual coercion by the father of the mother
indicated a strong level of control by the father and a vulnerability on the
part of the mother. The court child expert also
expressed concern over the
recordings that have been made and the filming of the mother and children by the
court child expert identified that the mother having sole parental
responsibility and the children living with the mother would
involve minimal
change and be positive for the children’s overall stability. The court
child expert noted that the children
have lived with the mother for most of the
time and it would provide the children with a sense of familiarity and
mother presented as emotionally attuned with the children and responded warmly
to them. The court child expert asserted that the
mother has the ability to
support children’s emotions now and in the future. It was also observed
that the mother has a level
of vulnerability. The court child expert identified
that the benefit of the children spending time with the father needs to be
up against the risk that he may speak negatively about the mother. The
court child expert identified that the father’s then
proposal for the
children to live with him would involve an upheaval that would be very
distressing. The court child expert observed
that the father presented with
persistently negative views of the mother and that there was a risk that he
would not support children
spending meaningful time with the mother, which would
be a loss for the children. The court child expert identified concern as to
father taking minimal responsibility for his two older children’s
assumption into care by the DCJ. The court child expert
expressed concern about
the father’s past methods of discipline and that he was largely dismissive
of child protection concerns
for his older children and blamed others such as
stating that his daughter M lied. The court child expert identified the
lack of demonstrated empathy for his older children’s
experiences is alarming. The court child expert identified that this
concern regarding the father’s emotional capacity to support X and
Y’s emotional needs.
court child expert taking into account the father’s negative view of his
own daughter and the mothers eldest son identified
a concern as to the
father’s capacity to manage challenging behaviours of children and how he
would manage any potential future
behaviours of X and Y. The court child expert
also identified concern as to the father’s interpretation of others’
and intentions such as interpreting the view that the children wish to
live with him although the children had not said that. The
court child expert
identified that the father may find it difficult to differentiate between other
people’s feelings and those
of his own. The court child expert also
identified that the father’s ongoing mental health may pose a concern
regarding how
he would safely care for the children. The court child expert
referred to the father asserting that his suicide attempts related
seeing the children, whereas, it was apparent from the material filed that the
father’s mental health was a concern
early in his relationship with the
mother which is indicative of the father’s mental health being an ongoing
matter. The court
child expert identified that this raises a concern as to the
father’s mental health affecting his care of the children.
court child expert identified serious risks associated with the father’s
proposals. The court child expert of identified
that when considering the
ongoing nature of the allegations of family violence towards the mother as well
as the father’s consistently
negative view of the mother the safety of the
children may be compromised should the father have unsupervised time with the
The court child expert referred to the children’s best interest
being to live with mother so as to provide the children with
the best chance of
stability and emotional safety. The court child expert identified that it is
unlikely that the children would
benefit from spending unsupervised time with
the father considering the father’s mental health concerns, his past child
involvement and his persistent negative views of mother. The court
child expert identified those persistent negative views were likely
to cause the
children unnecessary stress and may cause a sense of double loyalty and the
feeling that they need to report between
the two households.
court child expert made reference to the likely psychological impact on the
mother from contact with the father and said it would
be beneficial for the
mother to continue to attend counselling. The court child expert also
recommended in paragraph 71 that the
father is likely to benefit from engaging
in ongoing mental health support and/or counselling.
court child expert gave evidence that she supported the identity contact
proposed in the orders of the ICL, and that her main
concern was the lack of
empathy shown by the father for his own children, and the impact of that lack of
empathy his parenting capacity.
court child expert identified another concern was the father's mental health,
and its impact on his parenting capacity.
court child expert identified that another concern was the persistent
denigration by the father of the mother. The court child
expert gave evidence
that as this denigration of the mother had continued since the commencement of
these proceedings, being almost
five years, that she believed the denigration of
the father would continue. The court child expert was also concerned that the
would not comply with orders, if made by the Court, requiring the father
not to denigrate the mother in front of the children.
court child expert also gave evidence as to the mother's apparent vulnerability
to the father, and the adverse impact on the mother,
as the primary carer, if
the children were to spend ongoing time, or supervised time, with the father,
other than the identity contact.
The court child expert, in relation to her
concerns in that regard, referred to the defiant behaviour by the older child,
visits with the father, trying to win the father's approval. The court
child expert identified, further in that regard, the false
allegation advanced
by X, to seek the father's approval, of the mother allegedly hitting her.
court child expert identified the importance for the emotional and psychological
well-being of the children to have stability.
And that for the mother,
demonstrated a good parenting relationship with the two children. And expressed
no concern as to the mother's
parenting capacity.
relation to the father and his use of what was called medicinal cannabis, the
court child expert identified that as a further concern
in respect of daily use,
not being an orthodox medication in which there is a controlled dose and an
identifiable measure of medication.
The court child expert identified the
father's daily use of cannabis as a further concern in relation to the safety of
the children
with the father. The court child expert was shown the report of Dr
W dated 14 April 2023, who, as a psychiatrist, gave a diagnosis
that the father
was suffering from a major depressive disorder, with anxious distress, within
DSM-5. The court child expert identified
that diagnosis was of further concern
in relation to the safety of the children in the absence of the father having
taken appropriate
steps to manage his condition and obtain regular counselling
and therapy.
court child expert identified her concern, given the psychiatric diagnosis by
the psychiatrist, which had effectively been present
for the five years of these
proceedings, and was not confident that it could be said there would be a
recovery in the future.
PARENTING LAW
the conduct of these parenting proceedings under Part VII the Court has had
regard to the principles in
Family Law Act 1975
(“the Act”) which are as follow:
(1) A court exercising jurisdiction under this Act must, in the exercise of
that jurisdiction, have regard to:
(a) the need to preserve and protect the institution of marriage as the union
of 2 people to the exclusion of all others voluntarily
entered into for
(b) the need to give the widest possible protection and assistance to the
family as the natural and fundamental group unit of society,
particularly while
it is responsible for the care and education of dependent children;
(c) the need to protect the rights of children and to promote their
(ca) the need to ensure protection from family violence; and
(d) the means available for assisting parties to a marriage to consider
reconciliation or the improvement of their relationship
to each other and to
their children.
(Emphasis added)
(2) Paragraph (1)(a) does not apply in relation to the exercise of
Court has also taken into account the statutory pathway in relation to
the Act and, in that regard, the Court has taken into account the objects in
set out below, which the Court has underlined for emphasis:
(a) to ensure that the best interests of children are met, including by
ensuring their safety;
(b) to give effect to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child
done at New
York on 20 November 1989.
(Emphasis added)
understanding the objects of
in s60B(b) in giving effect to
Convention on the Rights of the Children
at New York on 20
November 1989 the Court has taken into account the whole of the provisions of
the said Convention, including in
particular, the reference in the Preamble to
growing up in a family environment in an atmosphere of happiness, love and
understanding,
as well as the refence to a child, by reason of his physical and
mental immaturity, needing special safeguards and care including
appropriate
legal protection as well as the importance of traditions and culture. Including
Article 3 Rule 1 identifies the best
interests of the child to be a primary
consideration and Article 3 Rule 2 refers to ensuring such child protection and
necessary for his or her well-being, taking into account the rights
and duties of his or her parents.
also includes Article 5 which refers to respecting the rights and duties of
parents and the evolving capacities of a child. Article
6 requires ensuring to
the maximum extent possible the survival and development of the child. Article 8
refers to respecting the
right of the child to preserve his or her identity,
including nationality, name and family relations. Article 9 refers to no
a child from his or her parents except when judicially determined
that such separation is necessary for the best interests of the
child. Article
12 refers to the views of the child being given due weight. Article 13 refers to
rights of freedom of expression.
Article 14 refers to the right of a child to
freedom of thought conscience and religion as well as respecting the rights and
of parents to provide direction to the child. Article 15 refers to the
rights of the child to freedom of association and freedom
of peaceful assembly.
Article 16 refers to no arbitrary or unlawful interference with his or her
Article 18 refers to both parents
having common responsibilities for the upbringing and development of the child.
Article 19 refers
to appropriate measures to protect the child from all forms of
physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent
maltreatment or exploitation, including sexual abuse. Article 20 deals with
special protection and assistance where a
child is deprived of his or her family
environment or in whose own best interests cannot be allowed to remain in that
environment.
This regard includes the other rights and obligations in Articles
21 to Article 41 in Part 1 of the Convention.
Court has taken into account, in the conduct of the proceedings, the five
principles in s 102NE of the Act which are as follow:
Principles for conducting child - related proceedings and property or other
proceedings Application of the principles
(1) The court must give effect to the principles in this section:
(a) in performing duties and exercising powers (whether under this Division or
otherwise) in relation to child - related proceedings
or property or other non -
child - related proceedings; and
(b) in making other decisions about the conduct of child - related proceedings
or property or other non - child - related proceedings.
Failure to do so does not invalidate the proceedings or any order made in
(2) Regard is to be had to the principles that are relevant to the particular
proceedings in interpreting this Division.
Note: All the principles are relevant to child - related proceedings. The
principles in subsection (3), paragraph (5)(a) and subsection
(6) do not apply
in relation to property or other non - child - related proceedings.
Principle 1
(3) The first principle is that the court is to consider the needs of the child
concerned and the impact that the conduct of the
proceedings may have on the
child in determining the conduct of the proceedings.
Principle 2
(4) The second principle is that the court is to actively direct, control and
manage the conduct of the proceedings.
Principle 3
The third principle is that the proceedings are to be conducted in a way
that will safeguard:
(a) the child concerned from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse,
neglect or family violence; and
(b) the parties to the proceedings against family violence.
(Emphasis added)
Principle 4
The fourth principle is that the proceedings are, as far as possible, to
be conducted in a way that will promote cooperative and child
parenting by the parties.
(Emphasis added)
Principle 5
(7) The fifth principle is that the proceedings are to be conducted without
undue delay and with as little formality, and legal
technicality and form, as
Court has also had regard to the meaning of a "parenting order" in s 64B of the
Act, as well as the power in s 65D of the Act.to
make such parenting order as
the Court think proper.
Court has also taken into account the paramount consideration, being the best
interests of the child, identified in s 60CA of
the Act and s 65AA of the Act.
Interests pursuant to s4 in Part VII includes matters relating to the care
welfare and development
of the child.
60CA of the Act is as follows:
Child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order
In deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child,
a court must regard the best interests of the child
as the paramount
consideration.
65AA of the Act provides:
Child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order
Section 60CA provides that in deciding whether to make a particular parenting
order in relation to a child, a court must regard
the best interests of the
child as the paramount consideration.
provisions in s 60CC of the Act are as follows:
How a court determines what is in a child's best interests Determining
child's best interests
(1) Subject to subsection (4), in determining what is in the child's best
interests, the court must:
(a) consider the matters set out in subsection (2); and
(b) if the child is an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander child--also
consider the matters set out in subsection (3).
General considerations
(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(a), the court must consider the following
(a) what arrangements would promote the safety (including safety from being
subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, abuse,
neglect, or other harm) of:
(i) the child; and
(ii) each person who has care of the child (whether or not a person has
parental responsibility for the
(b) any views expressed by the child;
(c) the developmental, psychological, emotional and cultural needs of the
(d) the capacity of each person who has or is proposed to have parental
responsibility for the child to provide for the child's
developmental,
psychological, emotional and cultural needs;
(e) the benefit to the child of being able to have a relationship with the
child's parents, and other people who are significant
to the child, where it is
safe to do so;
(f) anything else that is relevant to the particular circumstances of the
(2A) In considering the matters set out in paragraph (2)(a), the court must
include consideration of:
(a) any history of family violence, abuse or neglect involving the child or a
person caring for the child (whether or not the person
had parental
responsibility for the child); and
(b) any family violence order that applies or has applied to the child or a
member of the child's family.
Additional considerations--right to enjoy Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
(3) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(b), the court must consider the following
(a) the child's right to enjoy the child's Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
culture, by having the support, opportunity and
encouragement necessary:
(i) to connect with, and
maintain their connection with, members of their family and with their
community, culture, country and
language; and
(ii) to explore the full extent of that culture, consistent with the child's
age and developmental level and the child's views;
(iii) to develop a positive appreciation of that culture; and
(b) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this Part will have on
that right.
Consent orders
(4) If the court is considering whether to make an order with the consent of
all the parties to the proceedings, the court may,
but is not required to, have
regard to all or any of the matters set out in subsection (2) or (3).
60CD identities how the Court may inform itself of the views expressed by a
child. The Court has also had regard to the definition
of family violence in s
4AB of the Act, as well as the s 60CG requirement for the Court to ensure that
any parenting order made does
not expose a person to an unacceptable risk of
family violence and is consistent with any family violence order.
4AB of the Act provides:
Definition of family violence etc.
(1) For the purposes of this Act, family violence means violent, threatening or
other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls
a member of the person's
family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful.
(2) Examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are
not limited to):
(a) an assault; or
(b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour; or
(c) stalking; or
(d) repeated derogatory taunts; or
(e) intentionally damaging or destroying property; or
(f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal; or
(g) economic or financial abuse; or
(i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or
her family, friends or culture; or
(j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family
member's family, of his or her liberty.
(2A) For the purposes of paragraph (2)(g), examples of behaviour that might
constitute economic or financial abuse of a family member
include (but are not
limited to) the following:
(a) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that the
family member would otherwise have had, such as by:
(i) forcibly controlling the
family member's money or assets, including superannuation; or
(ii) sabotaging the family member's employment or income or potential
employment or income; or
(iii) forcing the family member to take on a financial or legal liability, or
(iv) forcibly or without the family member's knowledge, accumulating debt in
the family member's name;
(b) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable
living expenses of the family member, or the family
member's child (including at
a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the
person for financial support);
(c) coercing a family member (including by use of threats, physical abuse or
emotional or psychological abuse):
(i) to give or seek money,
assets or other items as dowry; or
(ii) to do or agree to things in connection with a practice of
(d) hiding or falsely denying things done or agreed to by the family member,
including hiding or falsely denying the receipt of
money, assets or other items,
in connection with a practice of dowry.
(3) For the purposes of this Act, a child is exposed to family violence if the
child sees or hears family violence or otherwise
experiences the effects of
family violence.
(4) Examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family
violence include (but are not limited to) the child:
(a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child's
family towards another member of the child's family;
(b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child's family by another
member of the child's family; or
(c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child's family who
has been assaulted by another member of the child's
(d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child's family has intentionally
damaged property of another member of the child's
(e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident
involving the assault of a member of the child's family by
another member of the
child's family.
Court has also taken into account in the context of s4AB the definition of abuse
and exposed in s 4 of the Act which is as follows:
, in relation to a child, means:
(a) an assault, including a sexual assault, of the child; or
(b) a person (the first person ) involving the child in a sexual activity with
the first person or another person in which the child
is used, directly or
indirectly, as a sexual object by the first person or the other person, and
where there is unequal power in
the relationship between the child and the first
(c) causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not
limited to) when that harm is caused by the child
being subjected to, or exposed
to, family violence; or
(d) serious neglect of the child.
EXPOSED to family violence in relation to a child has the meaning given to it by
60CG is as follows:
Court to consider risk of family violence
(1) In considering what order to make, the court must, to the extent that it is
possible to do so consistently with the child's
best interests being the
paramount consideration, ensure that the order:
(a) is consistent with any family violence order; and
(b) does not expose a person to an unacceptable risk of family violence.
(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(b), the court may include in the order any
safeguards that it considers necessary for the safety
of those affected by the
Masson v Parsons
[2019] HCA 21
(2019) 266 CLR 554
in their joint judgment, their Honours Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane, Nettle,
and Gordon JJ noted that the focus of the objects
was on “ensuring that
children have the benefit of
of their parents having a meaningful
involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best
interests of the
Loddington & Derringford (No 2)
[2008] FamCA 925
Cronin J further
added that an assessment of the benefit to the child must be made according to
‘the peculiar facts of what
the parents are offering.’ [At 173]
Cotton & Cotton
[1983] FamCA 18
(1983) FLC 91-330
noted that it was desirable for a child to maintain a meaningful relationship
with both parents, however, his Honour stated
And that desirability only operates when there is a chance of a meaningful
relationship, which is beneficial to the child.
It is not, in other words, a
question of contact for contact sake. If there is a situation where contact with
a parent is, on balance,
likely to cause more harm to the child than good, or
even is not likely to confer any benefit, then little purpose is served by this
Court making orders for such contact.
That does not detract from the
desirability of the child having a meaningful relationship, but the possibility
of a meaningful relationship
must first exist.
(Emphasis added)
first consideration in determining the child’s best interests, as set out
in s 60CC(2)(a) of the Act, is the need to protect
the child from physical
or psychological harm from being subjected or exposed to abuse or violence. The
question that may be asked
is whether there is an unacceptable risk of physical
and/or psychological harm in the child spending time with either parent.
Stott & Holgar
[2017] FamCAFC 152
, the Full Court confirmed that, where unacceptable risk is alleged, the
Court must give consideration to the facts of the case and
decide whether or not
those facts could reasonably be said to raise an unacceptable risk of harm. If
a determination is made that
such a risk exists, the Court is then required to
consider whether that unacceptable risk could be ameliorated by safeguards.
relevant principles in assessing whether a child would be exposed to an
unacceptable risk of psychological and/or physical harm
were recently considered
by the Full Court in
Isles & Nelissen
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
(2022) FLC 94-092
, who agreed with and adopted Austin J’s dissenting
judgment in
Fitzwater & Fitzwater
[2019] FamCAFC 251
60 Fam LR 212
as being the correct statement of the law. Justice Austin’s
judgment includes the following:
138. The assessment of risk is a predictive exercise and while it is, naturally
enough, liable to be influenced by factual findings
contemplation of risk entails the foresight of possible harm. It is an oddity to
expect that the mere possibility
of future harm can or should be proven as a
probability, as has been implied before (
[2007] FamCA 350
(2007) FLC 93-326
, [129]). Risks of harm must be heeded
even if they are improbable eventualities.
139. Speaking of the risk of some future occurrence is just another way of
expressing the chance of it happening. The concept of
chance lies along a
continuum, encompassing all outcomes which lie in the range between highly
probable and remotely possible, assuming
the polar extremes of certainty are
ignored. In the current context, the higher the chance of the children’s
sexual abuse,
the greater the risk of their physical or psychological harm. At
some point on the continuum the risk of such harm becomes so potent
it cannot be
tolerated: it is unacceptable.
142. As was recognised by Hale LJ (as her Ladyship then was) in Re C and B
(Children) (Care Order: Future Harm) [2001] 1 F.L.R 611
at [28], in
child-related proceedings, a comparatively small risk of really serious harm can
justify action, while even the virtual
certainty of slight harm might not. It
could hardly be otherwise, because no prudent adult would willingly expose a
child to the
risk of sexual abuse when there is an unacceptably high chance of
its occurrence, even though the chance is not proven by the evidence
probable. Requiring the proof of any possible future child abuse as a
probability would pervert the law as settled by the High
Court in M v M and
it can be seen that determining the issue of risk essentially involves applying
a risk matrix, whereby it is necessary to assess
the potential seriousness of
the harm in the context of the probability of its occurrence. That is, there is
an obligation on a trial
judge to evaluate not only the extent, magnitude and
nature of the harm that might befall the child if there is a future act of abuse
or harmful conduct, but also to evaluate the prospect or probability of such an
act or conduct occurring that would cause such harm
to the child: see
[1995] FamCA 139
(1996) FLC 92-655
at 82,713 (Fogarty J)
cited with approval in
Napier & Hepburn
[2006] FamCA 1316
(2006) FLC 93-303
Nikolakis & Nikolakis
[2010] FamCAFC 52
Deiter & Deiter
[2011] FamCAFC 82
Additionally,
the following guidance emerges from authorities:
(4) It is now well established that “unacceptable risk” includes not
merely physical harm but also includes an assessment
of the risk of emotional
[1998] FamCA 25
(1998) FLC 92-800
(1988) 166 CLR 69
(5) Such an unacceptable risk can include any or all matters that compromise the
safety, welfare and well-being of a child, and is
examined in light of an
accumulation of factors proved: see
General, Department of Family and Community Services (NSW) and the Colt
[2013] NSWChC 5 at [146]–[148].
(6) The components which lead to a conclusion that an unacceptable risk exists
need not each be established on the balance of probabilities.
The Court may
reach a conclusion of “unacceptable risk” from the accumulation of
factors, none or only some of which
are proved to that standard: see
Johnson & Page
[2007] FamCA 1235
(2007) FLC 93-344
endorsing and applying the principles set out in a paper prepared by the Hon
John Fogarty AM, “Unacceptable Risk: A Return
Australian Journal of Family Law 249.
(7) While each factor establishing risk need not be proved to the standard of
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), insofar as determining whether an
unacceptable risk exists involves a prediction of the future, based on findings
“the confidence one will have in the prediction will be, in part,
a reflection of the confidence one has in the factual findings
that base the
prediction”.
Court has taken into account the meaning and balancing exercise required in
relation to unacceptable risk of the Full Court of
the Family Court in
[2017] FamCAFC 152
to [38]. The Court must take into
account implications arising from findings on the possibilities in determining
the nature and magnitude
of the alleged unacceptable risk:
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
Court has also taken into account the principles identified in
[2021] FedCFamC1F 183
to [90] as to the high standard
required to justify elimination of a parent from the children’s lives in
respect of the risk
of loss of parental capacity. The Court has taken into
account the need for the fears in respect of capacity of the primary carer
genuine and rational:
Blinko & Blinko
[2015] FamCAFC 146
Court has also taken into account the decision
Bielen & Kozma
FLC 94–123 at [67] as to the disapproval of parenting orders that see
protracted or indefinite supervision of the child’s
time with a parent and
the Court has also had regard to the observations at [27,30] of children having
the benefit of both parents
to the maximum extent consistent with the best
interests of the child, as well as the consideration of matters impacting upon
welfare of the child necessarily involving focusing upon the immediate,
medium and long term impact of the proposed orders on the
physical, emotional and psychological safety, security and well-being.
the decisions in
[1993] FamCA 143
the Court is mindful of the
observations to situations where supervised access is intended to assist the
re-establishment of a relationship
between the access parent and the child and
that if there is an acceptable risk of the child or children being exposed to
or emotional or psychological harm by reason of contact with the
abusing parent, and if supervised access is not appropriate as a
measure, then an order for supervised access is not appropriate because of the
Court’s obligation to protect children
from such harm. The Court has also
had regard to the proposition that it is not unreasonable for the Court to take
into account,
in assessing whether an unacceptable risk of harm exists, the need
for a custodial parent to be assured of the child’s protection,
primary carer’s anxiety about the children’s exposure to harm is
likely to impact adversely upon the parent’s
ability to care for the
Court has also had regard to the undesirability of and practical difficulties
associated with long term supervision in a children’s
Champness & Hansen
[2009] FamCAFC 96
Court has also taken into account
Norton v Landell (Consent Final Parenting
[2015] FamCA 96
and [20] (“Norton”) that in
identifying an acceptable risk there is a need to identify and assess the nature
and magnitude
of the risk, the standard of proof to be applied in determining
passed alleged abuse. Norton also refers to
Slater & Light
and in that case at [37] – [38] the Court is mindful of the
caution in finding unacceptable risk where only some of the accumulated
identified in
Johnson & Page
(2007) FLC 93 -344 are established as
well as the observation as to the undesirability of long-term supervision at
MOTHER’S SUBMISSIONS
mother submitted the father was not a credible witness, and that the mother's
evidence in relation to the family violence should
be accepted in relation to s
4AB. It was submitted that the father had used violent, threatening and other
behaviour to coerce and
control the mother, and to cause the mother to be
fearful. Within s 4AB(2), it was submitted that the father had engaged in
falling within paragraph (a), paragraph (c), paragraph (d), paragraph
(g) and paragraph (j).
was made to a video clip identified in the mother's affidavit, that was posted
to Facebook by the father on 16 February
2024. That video clip was played to
the Court, and identified the father engaging in intimidatory and threatening
behaviour to the
mother. The posting of the video on Facebook, it was
submitted, was a serious form of family violence by the father.
was submitted that the father's mental health remained unproperly treated, and
that the father had failed to continue consultations
with the psychologist that
he saw on four occasions at the beginning of this year. It was submitted that
the Court should not accept
the father's explanation that he could not continue
to afford those visits by the psychologist.
was submitted that the unorthodox medicinal cannabis was of further concern in
relation to the safety of the children.
was submitted, within 60CC(e), that this was a case where the Court could not
find that it was safe to do so, for the children
to have the benefit of a
relationship with the father. It was submitted that the identity contact was an
arrangement that would
promote the safety of the children and the mother.
support of the arrangement for identity time and long-term supervision, the
mother referred the court to the following decisions:
(1) B and B
[1993] FamCA 143
(2) Bielen & Kozma
(2022) FLC 94–123;
(3) Champness & Hansen
[2009] FamCAFC 96
(2009) FLC 93-407
(4) Norton v Landell (Consent Final Parenting Orders)
[2015] FamCA 96.
relation to the views of the children, it was submitted that given their young
age, significant weight should not be placed upon
the same. It was submitted
that the risk of harm faced by the children if permitted to have regular
supervised visits with the father
on a long-term basis would be greater than the
harm from reducing the contact to identity contact with the children. It was
that the mother, as the primary carer, would not be able to cope if
the father were to continue to pursue his derogatory remarks
in relation to the
mother, and he would undermine the relationship of the primary carer with the
children, that would cause the children
emotional and psychological harm.
Court was taken through the incidents identified by the mother in her affidavit,
which it was submitted the Court should accept.
It was submitted that the
father's answers to questions about insight were not genuine and could not be
accepted by the Court.
It was submitted that the father continued to see
himself as the victim, with no insight or accountability in relation to the
he had engaged in, and that in all the circumstances, the orders being
sought by the applicant and the ICL should be made.
FATHER’S SUBMISSIONS
father’s case outline identified the statutory regime and the authorities
on evaluation of the unacceptable risk and protective
measures to ameliorate or
minimise the risk
Mando on behalf of the father identified that the children had clearly enjoyed
the time they had had with the father in the visits
that had occurred this year.
Mr Mando maintained that it was apparent from those visits that the children
enjoyed being with their
father and that the children's views supported ongoing
meaningful time, graduating from supervised time to every alternate weekend
overnight and half the school holidays. There was no submission advanced by Mr
Mando that the father should have joint parental
responsibility or that the
father should participate in the making of major long-term decisions.
is no submission advanced other than that the children should live with the
submissions were advanced pressing an alternative regime in respect of the
identity contact.
submissions were advanced taking issue with the constraints.
Mando took the Court to incidents of alleged violence by the mother that gave
rise to the ADVO. The Court raised with Mr Mando
that this was not a case
mother's parenting capacity was a real issue.
Mando submitted that the father should be given the benefit of the doubt and
that he should have meaningful contact with his children.
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN’S LAWYER SUBMISSIONS
ICL in substance adopted the submissions of the mother and maintained that the
risk of regular supervised time on a long-term
basis posed a greater risk of
emotional and psychological harm to the children than the proposed identity
to the cases referred to by the mother, referred
to the judgment of Tree J in
Norton & Landell.
ICL and the applicant supported the proposed constraints identified in the ICL's
proposed minutes. The ICL also sought an order
for costs, which were identified
to be in the order of $16,000.
FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
summary the Court accepts the submissions of the mother and finds that the
father has engaged in family violence as described in
those submissions. The
Court accepts the submissions concerning unacceptable risk presented by the
father advanced by both the mother
and the ICL. The Court finds that the mother
was a credible and truthful witness and accepts the whole of her evidence. The
has suffered sustained family violence primarily in the nature of abuse,
denigration, threatening, manipulative and controlling behaviour
by the father
that has continued, after ceasing to live together, to date. The father has
inadequately managed mental health issues
for past seven and half years. The
father lacks empathy for his children and for the mother. The father has no
genuine insight or
acceptance of responsibility for his behaviour and its
adverse impact on the mother or children. An ADVO was obtained for the
of the mother in late 2022, on two occasions in early 2023 and a
final ADVO in late 2023. The father has breached ADVO’s and
conditions for the protection of the mother on several occasions.
father has persistently failed to comply with orders of this Court. The degree
of compliance by the father has been erratic and
inconsistent. The father is
unlikely to comply with Court orders as to restraints in communications with the
children or restraints
as to physical discipline and is likely currently, the
medium term and in the long term to continue to try to undermine and destroy
relationship of the children with their primary carer being the mother. The
Court finds there is an unacceptable risk of failure
by the father to comply
with Court orders as to changeover and time with the children. That risk is of
emotional and psychological
harm to both the mother and the children resulting
in undermining or destroying the mother’s primary care role for the
The degree of that risk is high and the outcome of the risk outweighs
the benefit to the children of a relationship with the father
through orders
other than the ICL proposed identity orders. The Court does not accept that this
is a case where there can be effective
court orders to ameliorate or minimise
the risk because of the father’s likely failure to comply with the
father’s repetitive requests for police checks were an inappropriate
attempt of control and systems abuse by the father.
Whilst the Court accepts
that the mother’s elder child from an earlier relationship H, with
indigenous heritage on his paternal
side, engaged in inappropriate sexual
conduct and that restraints are appropriate, the mother’s conduct was
prompt and insightful
and the Court finds that she self- reported, without
influence of the father, and the father’s taunting public posts on H,
identified in the mother’s evidence, are a form of abuse and family
violence by the father and display a empathy and parenting
capacity by the
duration of the mental health issues as identified in the report of the
psychiatrist Dr W in April 2023 as being of enduring severity
and chronic of
what was then five and a half years and the duration of the family violence
identified by the independent children’s
lawyer that has continued over
the last five years of these proceedings, support the finding, which the Court
makes, that the father
presents an unacceptable risk of emotional and
psychological harm to the children that is not just current or in the short or
term but continuing in the long term. The father has over the period of
these proceedings repeatedly failed to seek proper psychiatric
treatment, failed
to take medication prescribed by a psychiatrist, failed to attend counselling,
failed to follow psychological recommendations
and self-medicated with
unidentifiable dosage and quantities of marijuana. The father’s
inadequately managed mental health
issues, over now 7 and half years, are likely
to continue into the long term and heighten the unacceptable risk of emotional
psychological harm by the father to the children. The father’s lack of
empathy for his children and for the mother heighten
the unacceptable risk as
does the father’s lack of parenting capacity. The nature of the
unacceptable risk is the undermining
or destructive of the relationship of the
children with the mother who is their primary carer. Destroying or undermining
that relationship
is a greater unacceptable risk of emotional and psychological
harm to the children than that of the psychological and emotional harm
loss of the relationship with their father. The identity orders are likely to
further diminish that harm for the children.
The degree or likelihood of that
unacceptable risk if other than identity time orders were made is extremely
father’s assertion in evidence after allegedly undertaking hours of family
violence courses that he did not engage in emotional
abuse or violence because
he loves the mother and has acted out of love is disturbing, lacking in insight
and heightens the unacceptable
risks presented by the father. The projection by
the father as to his beliefs or state of mind onto the children, reflects a
recognising and meeting the separate children’s needs as
identified by the Court Child Expert and heightens the unacceptable
presented by the father. The Court finds that the mother did not voluntarily
hand over her daughter to the father on 1 October
2020 and that the taking by
the father of his daughter and then depriving the mother of contact until an
order for return on 4 December
2020 was a form of family violence by the
Court finds that the mother did not assault the father in mid-2018 as alleged by
the father. The Court finds it was the father
who engaged in domestic violence
taking the mother’s mobile and physically preventing her from recovering
the same whilst he
entered details into her mobile contrary to the
mother’s wishes. The Court finds that in a separate incident the father
the mother leaving the bedroom, depriving her of her liberty and in an
act of fear and diversion to escape she broke a TV and that
this incident was
actually a form of family violence by the father. The Court finds that the AVO
obtained by the father in 2018 was
in circumstances where it was, in fact, the
father who had engaged in family violence. The Court finds the arrest of the
allegedly breaching the ADVO in early 2019 was controlling behaviour
and family violence by the father.
30 September 2020 the father pushed a door onto the mother’s elbow,
hurting her elbow, grabbing her by both arms and pushing
her backwards causing
bruising and that this was physical family violence by the father to the mother.
abusive and denigrating communications by the father to the mother and to her
solicitor, and posted on Facebook, identified in
the mother’s evidence,
and partially summarised in the chronology, reflects the father continuing to
engage in manipulative,
gaslighting, and threatening behaviour towards the
mother that the Court finds is controlling conduct that constitutes family
The father’s lack of empathy, lack of insight, lack of
acceptance of accountability for his family violence and continuing
inadequately
managed mental health are likely to endure currently, in the medium term and in
the long term and this supports the
finding of a lack of parenting capacity by
the father. The father has been and is likely to continue trying to control,
and instil fear in the mother and undermine or destroy her primary
relationship with the children.
Court also finds that there is an unacceptable risk of physical harm to the
mother and children given the father’s past
physical violence to the
mother, given the father’s physical discipline and violence to his older
children and given the father’s
ongoing inadequately managed mental health
issues. The Court finds the father’s threats of suicide to the mother and
in relation
to a landlord were manipulative conduct by the father. The Court
finds the farewells and goodbyes by the father to the mother and
children were
manipulative conduct by the father. The Court accepting the mother’s
evidence finds the father’s physical
discipline of his older children was
vicious and damaging to those children. Given the father’s ongoing issues
to which the
Court has referred the Court does not accept the father’s
evidence that he would not engage in physical punishment of his children.
relatively young age of the children heightens that unacceptable risk. The
degree of the unacceptable risk to the children and
mother of physical violence
is high given the duration of the family violence by the father to which the
Court has referred including
lack of insight and lack of empathy by the father.
The consequences of that unacceptable risk of physical harm could be
catastrophic.
The Court finds the unacceptable risk of physical harm to the
children and mother outweighs the harm the children will suffer from
the loss of
the relationship with the father by having identity orders.
Court finds the father is an unreliable, untruthful and unsatisfactory witness.
The father was an evasive witness that repeatedly
gave unresponsive answers,
advocated his case and gave inconsistent and contradictory answers. For example
the father’s denial
of an offer to return his daughter for sex,
contradicted by his own text was patently untruthful. The Court accepts the
and truthfulness of the mother’s evidence over that of the father
who was not a credible witness. The father persistently
engaged in any
opportunity presented to denigrate the mother and make derogatory observations
of her. The father demonstrated himself
to have a fixed state of mind that he
was the victim, and revealed no insight in relation to the family violence,
identified by the
mother, that he had engaged in. The father took no
accountability for his conduct, which the Court finds is a significant factor
weighing the safety of the children and the mother. The Court accepts the
submissions of the applicant and the ICL that this
is a case where the Court
cannot find, within s 60CC(2)(e), that the benefit the children would have from
being able to have a meaningful
relationship with the father:
...is safe to do so.
Court has taken into account the objects in s 60B, to which the Court has
referred, and finds that the identity contact orders,
proposed by the ICL and
the mother, is an arrangement that would best promote the safety of the children
and the mother, and best
prevent the mother and the children being exposed to
family violence. In relation to s 60CC(b), the Court accepts that the children
love their father, and, by inference, wish to spend more time with him;
however, the Court has taken into account the young age
of the children, and in
all the circumstances gives the views of the children little weight. The Court
is satisfied that the developmental,
psychological and emotional needs of the
children, under s 60CC(2)(c) are best advanced by the identity contact orders
proposed by
the ICL and the mother. The Court finds that there is a real and
unacceptable risk of serious adverse psychological and emotional
harm to the
children if other than identity contact were ordered in relation to the father.
The Court finds that the nature of that
harm is the undermining or attempted
destruction of the primary carer's relationship with the children and the
manipulation and denigration
of the mother by the father that has a real
likelihood of serious developmental, psychological and emotional harm.
Court accepts the court child expert's evidence that ongoing supervised time is
a greater adverse risk of developmental, psychological
and emotional harm than
the proposed identity contact orders. The Court finds that the mother has ample
capacity to and has been
meeting the needs of the children for their
developmental, psychological and emotional advancement within s 60CC(2)(d). The
finds the father lacks parental capacity to properly meet the children's
developmental, psychological and emotional needs given his
ongoing inadequate
mental health management, lack of insight and lack of empathy that the Court
finds, given the long duration and
history, has no prognosis of
advancement.
Court does not accept the submissions that the psychologist's report
demonstrates the father's mental condition has improved.
The Court finds the
father continues to suffer from the major disorder with anxious distress
identified by the psychiatrist Dr W,
and the Court finds that that major
depressive disorder with anxious distress is not properly managed by the father
and the Court
finds the father, given the history of the matter, is unlikely to
take steps to properly manage his mental health in the future so
as to acquire
an adequate level of self-control, insight and empathy needed to possess
parenting capacity for the children.
Court finds the continued use of marijuana by the father on a daily basis is a
further significant risk factor in relation to
the father's mental health and a
further reflection of his lack of parenting capacity. In relation to s
60CC(2)(e), the Court finds
that it is not safe to do so for the children to
have the benefit of a relationship with the father beyond the identity contact
finding that it is not safe to do so in terms of other than identity contact
relationship with the father, the Court finds that
the lack of empathy
identified by the court child expert of the father in relation to his children
reveals an ongoing state that
was reflected in the evidence that he gave before
this Court, in which he made a stunning disparagement of his daughter, that he
described as a drug addict and a liar. The Court finds that the continued
denigration of the mother after being informed of its
potential adverse impact
in the course of the hearing reinforces a real lack of empathy that continues in
relation to the father
in respect of a want of parenting capacity. The Court
finds that the father's lack of empathy extends to both the mother and the
children, the subject of these proceedings.
Court finds that this lack of empathy as identified by the court child expert is
of considerable concern, given the relatively
young age of the children the
subject of these proceedings, and that this factor further supports the finding
that it is not safe
to do so within s 60CC(2)(e) for the children to have the
benefit of having a more meaningful relationship with the father than identity
the father continues to suffer from a major depressive
disorder with anxious
distress which is not properly treated or managed, other than by the
self-medicating unregulated steps of the
father in smoking daily marijuana.
Court finds the absence of specified and identifiable doses in the medicinal
cannabis taken by the father increases the risk to
the children of physical,
psychological and emotional harm from the father.
Court finds the continuing failure of the father to obtain proper and continuing
counselling means that his mental health is inadequately
managed and this is
likely to continue in the long-distant future. The Court in this regard has
taken into account the failure of
the father to comply with orders made by this
Court on two separate occasions to disclose the names and details of the medical
practitioners
he has been seeing which were not complied with. The belated
filing by the father of the affidavit dated 8 July 2025, which was
more than a
month outside the time ordered by this Court, meant that the mother and the ICL
were unable to take advantage of subpoenaing
further material from the medical
practitioners identified in the material provided by the father in his
supplementary affidavit.
Court did hear argument as to whether the father's affidavit of 8 July 2025
should be received into evidence and determined that
it was in the best
interests of the children for the Court to receive that material into evidence.
The report provided by the father
in that affidavit of his clinical
psychologist, Mr KK, identified only four attendances between 9 January 2025 and
upon that psychologist. The report itself was dated 26 May
2025. The report in its recommendations identified that the father requires
ongoing psychotherapy and additional psychological support to address PTSD and
comorbid anxiety and depression and referred to both
individual trauma therapy
and needing social support.
is apparent from the terms of the report itself and its date that the father did
not continue with his therapy from the psychologist
after 20 February 2025. The
Court rejects the father's evidence that he was unable to afford to do so. The
Court accepts the evidence
given in cross-examination that he had preserved
financial funds so that he could obtain accommodation and accepts the submission
of the ICL and the mother that in these circumstances the father's explanation
for the cessation of the therapy with the psychologist
being due to a lack of
funds must be rejected. The failure to continue with that therapy with the
psychologist is consistent with
the history of the father in dealing with mental
health practitioners and further supports the finding by the Court that his
state is not likely to improve in the long term.
Court prefers the opinion and evidence of the psychiatrist Dr W, to that of the
psychologist, Mr KK. Given the identified limitations
expressed by Mr KK, that
he is the father's treating psychologist and has a bias in his report and that
his conclusions are based
on that relationship and the request made by the
father, the Court places no weight on the opinions expressed favourable to the
in that report, suggesting that the father is capable of extended visits
with the children and that it will motivate the engagement
of the father with
his therapy. The Court rejects the opinion by Mr KK that there is no clinical
evidence to suggest the father's
mental health poses a direct risk to his
children. The Court rejects the opinion by Mr KK that the contact will be
beneficial for
the children. The foundation for the opinions expressed by Mr KK
were wanting and amount to generalised conclusions on which no weight
Court finds that there is no ongoing targeted mental health intervention that
the father is undertaking that supports the conclusion
of Mr KK as to the
father's capacity as a parent. The Court rejects the opinion by Mr KK that the
father has shown any understanding
or insight in relation to parenting from his
online courses. In that regard, the father, in the affidavit that annexed that
included in paragraph 13 a voluminous number of courses in respect of
which he said relevantly:
These courses also inform me that there is no space for domestic violence in
community and the importance of ensuring the safety
of everyone in the family
and in the community
and also help me overcome the abuse I have been
inflicted to in my life.
Further, the courses also
the grief, loss and trauma of myself not being able to see and spend time with
my children
. ( emphasis by italics inserted)
evidence identified reflects the father, in his most recent affidavit,
continuing to see himself as the victim and reveals, in
the context of the
courses he has undertaken, no insight or accountability in respect of his past
family violence and no insight
and accountability in respect of his continuing
denigration of the mother. Further, that context, in terms of victim and lack
insight and accountability, is itself repeated in the report by the
psychologist Mr KK, which reinforces his own accepted bias, where
There is a history of tension between [Mr Cagley] and his ex-partner (the
children's mother).
I am concerned that the way [Mr Cagley] has been
represented to the Court by his ex-partner is inaccurate and has caused undue
to their children and also further psychological harm to [Mr Cagley]
emphasis by italics added)
conclusion expressed by the psychologist reflects an actual bias that undermines
any weight being given to the opinions that he
has expressed and for this
independent reason, the Court place no weight on the opinions supportive of the
father expressed in that
that conclusion just identified reflects the ongoing victim role of the father
and a complete lack of insight as to the current
position in respect of the
limited visitation to the children, being one in respect of which it is the
father’s fault and he
has taken no responsibility or accountability for
that state of affairs.
reinforces the Court's concern that it is not safe to do so in respect of
promoting more meaningful time than identity contact
between the father and the
Court finds that the opinion expressed by Mr KK as to the father's ability to
meet the children's needs can be given no weight,
and the opinion as to the
father showing a relatively high degree of insight and awareness with
psychological triggers and ways to
manage these and that this insight is a
protective factor can also be given no weight. There is no proper foundation for
these opinions
and they amount to no more than generalised conclusions.
opinion expressed that the father has displayed commitment and engaged to follow
up in regards to developing parenting skills
prior to commencing therapy have no
proper foundation, and the Court gives that opinion no weight.
Court also finds that the opinion that the father is committed to ongoing
therapy to address PTSD and comorbid anxiety and depression
can be given no
weight and that there is no foundation to support that generalised opinion.
is not necessary for the Court to repeat the derogatory terms used by the father
to describe the mother, and the Court finds, on
the father's evidence, that he
remains of the belief that his issue of time with the children is the fault of
the mother, and due
to the mother's manipulation. The father suggested in
evidence that he would not make disparaging remarks in front of the children.
The Court does not accept that the father has the capacity to restrain from
making such derogatory remarks. The father was clearly
unable to do so
throughout his evidence to this Court and displayed a similar state of mind in
the interview with the court child
the Court finds as explained above that this is not a case where the Court can
find that the father will comply with Court
orders. The history of the matter,
in relation to the provision of details in respect of medical practitioners, as
well as the failure
to comply with the order in respect of the filing of the
father’s most recent affidavit, is a sufficient evidentiary basis
itself to support the Court's conclusion that the father would not be capable of
complying with Court orders in relation to trying
to frame constraints that
might protect the children from the father denigrating the primary carer, and
undermining/ destroying the
relationship of the children with the primary carer.
In the course of his evidence, the father made reference to criticising the
mother for complying with the strict letter of the orders made by the Court.
Implicit in that characterisation is the recognition
of the father's willingness
to disregard Court orders.
the Court finds that the father has regularly, when engaging with the children,
engaged in manipulative conduct by seeking
to identify, with the children
present, when he will next see them. The Court does not accept that this was
other than intentional
coercive behaviour, by the father, to control the mother.
As identified above the Court accepts the mother's evidence that the father
threatened to withhold the daughter unless the mother had sex with the father.
That type of controlling behaviour is family violence
and reflects a want of
parenting capacity and a complete absence of empathy for the child in relation
to seeing the child's primary
carer while withholding the child until a recovery
order was made.
earlier explained the Court finds that the father's lack of empathy in relation
to his children is a further basis upon which spending
meaningful time with the
father other than identity contact is not safe to do so. For the reasons the
Court has already given, the
Court is not satisfied that there are orders of
restraint in relation to time with the father that could adequately protect the
from psychological and emotional harm by the father by denigrating the
mother and undermining or destroying the primary care relationship
between the
children and the mother. The Court finds that the risk of significant harm to
the psychological and emotional development
of the children through the father's
denigration and manipulation is highly likely.
Court finds the incident of X asserting that she had been hit by the mother was
both untrue, was induced by the father and was
an attempt by the daughter to try
and ingratiate herself in the eyes of the father. That type of manipulation is
likely to cause
greater significant unacceptable risk of harm to the
psychological and emotional development of the children by undermining or
the relationship with the primary carer, than the harm the children
will suffer from the loss of more meaningful contact than that
of the identity
there was other than identity contact
orders with the father is highly likely.
The Court finds that this unacceptable risk of harm is a greater harm than the
will suffer from the loss of a more meaningful relationship with the
father. The identity contact orders are not no time orders and
this also reduces
the harm the children will suffer from the identify contact orders in the loss
of their more meaningly relationship
with the father.
the Court finds that unsupervised time by the children with the father creates a
real risk of psychological and emotional
harm by the father, denigrating and
undermining the primary relationship of the mother. The Court finds that the
degree of that
risk is extremely high given the father's daily smoking use of
marijuana. The Court also finds that this self-administered medication
father's mental health is not one that has achieved a stability or removed the
current diagnosis of which the father continues
to suffer as identified by the
psychiatrist, Dr W.
these circumstances, the father consuming unidentifiable quantities and dosage
of marijuana, creates a real risk of the father
being unable to restrain himself
from physically disciplining the children. The Court finds that that risk is
real given the prior
physical corporal punishment that the father identified he
had given his two older children and to which he was subjected. The Court
places no weight on the assertion of the father that he would not do so.
Court also finds that that consumption of marijuana if there were overnight time
gives rise to the real risk of neglect of the
children, amounting to family
violence. The Court finds the degree of that risk is high given the unknown
quantities of marijuana
being consumed by the father every night. The Court
finds that the proposals advanced on behalf of the father are ones that are
safe to do so for the children. Further, the Court finds that the proposals
advanced by the father give rise to a real risk
of significant psychological and
emotional harm by the father, undermining and destroying the primary
relationship of the mother
with the children by denigrating the mother and by
manipulation. The Court finds that the likelihood of that risk is extremely
Court finds given the history of the failure to comply with the Court's orders
that the father would be unable to comply with
Court orders to protect the
children in a way that would not undermine and manipulate the children so as to
impair, if not destroy,
the primary carer's relationship with the children.
relation to s 60CC(2)(f) the Court has taken into account that these children
are at a young age and unlikely to be able to emotionally
and psychologically
cope with the denigration of the mother, likely to occur by the father, and will
be unable to appreciate when
being manipulated by the father to impair or
destroy the primary relationship with the mother. In relation to s 60CC(2)(a),
Court finds the history of family violence is one perpetrated by the father
upon the mother. In relation to the AVOs that were obtained
by the mother, the
Court finds that the mother's evidence is to be accepted and that this breaches
by the father heighten the unacceptable
risk to the children and the mother.
As explained above the Court does not accept that the mother assaulted the
father and that the AVO against the mother in favour of
the father, was actually
family violence by the father and the circumstances explained by the mother,
accepted by the Court, do not
support any want parenting capacity by the mother.
The AVO for alleged protection of the father should not have been granted. The
father was at no time in need of protection from the mother and the Court
rejects his evidence that he was scared of the mother.
That evidence by the
father was untruthful. As explained above the Court has taken into account that
there is a risk that is imposed
by the child H, which is addressed by
constraints imposed upon the mother. Given the credibility of the mother, the
Court is satisfied
the mother will comply with those constraints.
Court finds that the family violence perpetrated by the father as identified in
the mother's evidence and as reflected in the
continuing denigration of the
mother in the evidence given by the father reinforces the finding that this is
not a case where the
Court can make a more favourable order for more meaningful
time by the father with the children. The Court has taken into account
identity contact order does give rise to a risk of psychological emotional harm
to the children, but accepts the court child
expert’s evidence that such
potential harm is outweighed by the harm that would be done to the children, in
terms of their
psychological and emotional development, by the father
undermining and destroying the primary relationship with the mother. The
finds the degree of risk of the father engaging in that conduct is, as earlier
identified, extremely high.
Court also finds that the mother is a person who is vulnerable, having been able
to be manipulated by the father, a proposition
supported by the court child
expert, and that her capacity to cope with her primary role in meeting the
children's needs is likely
to be materially impaired, if not destroyed, if the
father were to spend more than the identity contact time with the children.
Court finds that the identity time reflects a lesser level of risk of emotional
and psychological harm to the children than if
the Court made a no-time order.
The Court is satisfied that the mother will be able to cope with meeting the
children's parenting
needs if the identity contact orders are made by the Court.
Court finds that the restraints proposed by the ICL are all ones appropriate and
necessary, in the best interests of the children.
The Court finds that the
proposed parenting orders are in the best interests of the children. It is for
these reasons the Court
has made the proposed parenting orders.
Court finds that this is a case where no costs order should be made in favour of
the ICL, under s 114UC. In this regard, the
Court considers that each party
would suffer financial hardship if either party had to bear a proportion of the
costs of the independent
children's lawyer.
Court notes that it raised with the ICL whether this was an appropriate matter
in which the Court should pronounce its final orders,
and reserve its written
reasons. The Court identified that this would bring to an end the interim
parenting arrangements, and that
continuing the same would have an impact on the
ICL supported the making of such orders, and reserving written reasons if the
Court was in a position to do so. The Court was
satisfied, having heard the
evidence, that it was in a position to make final orders and that it would
publish its written reasons
as soon as practicable and would preserve time to
appeal until the publication of the written reasons. The Court took into
the best interests of the children and s 102NE, the objects in s 60B and
the principles in
in deciding to pronounce orders and reserve the written
I certify that the preceding five hundred and
thirty (530) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
Dated: 31 July 2025
RTF format (1.45 MB)
Signed PDF/A format