Halmi & Halmi [2025] FedCFamC1F 551 (19 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Halmi & Halmi
[2025] FedCFamC1F 551
File number(s):
SYC 3560 of 2025
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– HAGUE CONVENTION –
Children brought to Australia from Singapore by the mother – Where it is
uncontroversial that
the children were habitually resident in Singapore –
Where the father seeks a return order – Where the mother opposes
return order on the basis of a grave risk/intolerable situation arising –
Where the applicant father has committed family
violence against the mother over
the length of the relationship – Where the father has a history of alcohol
abuse – Where
there is a risk of the mother's mental health deteriorating
if a return order is made – Where expert evidence says this mental
deterioration would impact upon the children – Where the intolerable
situation/grave risk of harm of the children cannot
be adequately ameliorated by
conditional orders – Discretion to return not exercised –
Husband’s application dismissed.
Legislation:
Family Law (Child Abduction Convention)
Regulations 1986
(Cth), r. 16(3)(b), r. 15(1)
Family Law Act 1975
Convention on the Civil Aspects of International
Child Abduction
Cases cited:
DP v Commonwealth Central Authority; JLM v
Director-General, NSW Department of Community Services
(2001) 206 CLR 401
[2001] HCA 39
McDonald & Director-General, Department of Community Services
(2006) FLC 93-297;
[2006] FamCA 1400
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
11 - 12 August 2025
Counsel for the Applicant:
Ms E. Mallett KC with Mr P. Guterres
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Lander & Rogers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr S. Williams KC with Ms R. Horsley
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Pearson Emerson Family Law
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Mr J. Harris
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Legal Aid NSW
SYC 3560 of 2025
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Form 2 Application filed 29 May 2025 is dismissed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
CHRISTIE J:
proceedings concern two children, X aged four and Y aged two. This is an
application for their return to Singapore pursuant
Convention on the
Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
signed at The Hague in 1980
(“the Hague Convention”). The applicant is the father of the
children. The respondent is
the mother of the children. The interests of the
children in the litigation are represented by an Independent Children’s
(“ICL”) who acknowledged that the best interests of the
children were a relevant but not paramount consideration in this
proceeding.
May 2025 the children travelled to Australia with the mother (and the
parties’ nanny). They were scheduled to return. The
mother retained the
children in Australia without the father’s consent. It is not
controversial that the children were habitually
resident in Singapore at the
time of their retention nor is it in dispute that the father was exercising
rights of custody.
was asked by the father to find that the mother had knowingly used X’s
medical needs as a ruse to remove the children from
Singapore in order to
commence proceedings in Australia. In aid of that conclusion, it was submitted
that the rapid filing of her
Application in this Court was consistent with the
conclusion, as was the availability of appropriate treatment in Singapore. It is
conceded by the mother that her retention was wrongful. Accordingly, I am not
persuaded that whether the decision was made before
or after she left Singapore
bears on the disposition of this application (except in so far as it was
submitted that it impacts on
her bona fides) to which I will return later.
her Answer, the mother resists the making of a return order in reliance upon the
defences in Regulations 16(3)(b) (grave risk/intolerable
circumstance) and
16(3)(d) (contrary to human rights/fundamental freedoms) of the
(Child Abduction Convention) Regulations 1986
(Cth) (“the
Regulations”). No submissions addressed the
Regulation 16(3)(d)
and accordingly, I will proceed to determine the application on the basis that
Regulation 16(3)(b)
is pressed.
I find that the mother has established the matters required by either defence, I
may nonetheless exercise my discretion to make
an order for return.
proceedings were listed with expedition. When the material was filed, it was
plain that the parties were at issue about the
nature and extent of family
violence between them and accordingly, cross-examination was
CONSIDERATION
is not a decision on the merits as to what orders would be in the best interests
of the children. It is accepted, and the supervised
that these children love and are loved by both their parents and, as the Hague
Report writer commented,
if they are safe then it is in their interests to see
and spend time with both parents.
Regulations provide that the discretion to dismiss an application for return is
enlivened where it is established that:
c) there is a
the return of the child
Regulations would
expose the child
physical or psychological
or otherwise place the child in
intolerable
situation (reg 16(3)(b));
(emphasis added)
focus is on the impact of the return on the child. There are a number of parts
to the Regulation. In effect it deals with two
circumstances:
(1) A grave risk that return of the child would expose the child to:
a. Physical harm; or
b. Psychological harm;
(2) A grave risk that return of the child would expose the child to an
intolerable circumstance.
is a qualitative term:
DP v Commonwealth Central Authority;
Director-General, NSW Department of Community Services
(2001) 206 CLR 401
DP v Commonwealth Central Authority
. It requires a
finding not that the children will be exposed to physical or psychological harm
but rather that there is a grave
that, upon return, the children
will be exposed. Accordingly, it calls for an assessment of future risk in
reliance on findings about
past and present circumstances.
issues which the mother submitted give rise to a grave risk of psychological
harm or otherwise place the children in an intolerable
(a) A history of family violence perpetrated by the father towards her over the
entirety of the parties’ relationship;
(b) The mother’s mental health and well-being as a consequence of the
family violence;
(c) A history of alcohol (and potentially steroid) misuse by the father over a
lengthy period of time;
(d) The lack of family and other support for the mother in Singapore;
(e) The reliance upon the father for her immigration status in Singapore;
(f) The impact of the mother’s mental health on her parenting capacity.
mother carries the onus of establishing that the defence for which she contends
is established.
the extent that it was submitted on behalf of the father that the mother’s
conduct in retaining the children in Australia
is precisely the type of conduct
which the Hague Convention is designed to address, I agree. However, it does not
circumscribe the
outcome, because a proper reading of the Convention requires
that I give attention to the Convention as a whole, which plainly requires
rigorous evaluation of whether the mother has discharged the onus to establish a
Family violence
mother outlined a lengthy history of family violence starting in 2010 and ending
upon separation in 2025. The father agreed that
he has engaged in
“physical altercations” but denied having hit, choked, kicked or
punched the mother. In respect of
matters occurring between 2010 and 2017, the
father’s position was that he does not recall the events about which the
gave evidence but said they were “possible”. The father filed
an affidavit in reply to the mother’s allegations.
parties married in 2010. The mother said that on their honeymoon, the father
screamed at her and choked her. The father said he
did not recall but this may
have happened. I accept the mother’s evidence on this issue.
a date in 2011 the mother said the father repeatedly hit her in the face, and
she went to stay with her parents. While the evidence
of the maternal
grandfather was general in nature, he recalled the mother staying with him on
3-4 occasions between 2011 and 2017
with visible bruising and scratches. The
father said in cross-examination that he did not recall the 2011 incident, but
he accepted
it could have happened. I accept the mother’s evidence.
mid-2012 the mother said she and the father had an argument in a taxi during
which he slammed her head into the taxi window. The
father said in
cross-examination that he could not recall the incident, but it could have
happened. In those circumstances I accept
the mother’s evidence.
2015 the mother said she and the father had an argument during which he punched
her multiple times, leaving a bruise on her right
arm. The father said he had
not punched or struck the mother but did not recall the incident. He accepted
that an incident may have
occurred where the mother was injured in the manner
depicted in the contemporaneous photograph annexed to her affidavit –
a bruise to her right arm. I accept the mother’s account.
18 June 2016 the mother said that the father hit her with his fists on her head
and body, kicked her repeatedly and smashed her
phone screen after guests left
their home. He had been drinking and resisted her requests that he slow down his
consumption. The
mother took a taxi to the home of her parents. This event is
one which the father said he does not recall but accepts it may have
19 July 2016 the mother raised with the father, via WhatsApp, the fact that the
bruises on her face had just faded in the context
of her requests that he drink
less. It is clear from context that she was referring to the assault in the
previous paragraph. The
father’s responses themselves are dismissive and
abusive. When cross-examined about this event, the father accepted that his
alcohol consumption in 2016 was a real problem in the marriage and would lead to
events where he was physically abusive of the mother.
I accept the event
occurred as described by the mother.
23 July 2016 the mother said that the father punched her head and body and
kicked her repeatedly. After the assault she vomited.
She took photographs of
her injuries which were included in her affidavit. A few days later, she texted
the father to say that she
thought she may have been concussed. He responded:
Talk later. Prefer not to discuss on tezt [sic] Can you get dry cleaning?
When cross-examined about this event, the father accepted that he perpetrated
violence on the mother that resulted in bruising. I
accept the mother’s
29 July 2017 the mother said the father hit her and squeezed her arm. He was
intoxicated.
1 December 2017 the mother said the parties fought and as the father was running
towards her, she threw a water bottle at him.
The mother said the father then
kicked her leg repeatedly and pushed her onto the road. The mother attached
several photographs of
her injuries to her affidavit. The mother raised the
assault with the father by text the following day. I accept the incident
as the mother deposed.
early 2018 the mother said the father kicked and punched her while they were
both overseas for a friend’s wedding. After
this incident the father
promised to address his behaviour in therapy. The father accepted that the
mother likely raised the violence
in family therapy.
parties attended therapy together. The mother said it ended because the father
was not comfortable with the therapist addressing
his violence. The father said
he left one session early because he was angry the mother had hid his
testosterone. It is plain that
the father accused the mother of taking his
testosterone. He later conceded he had mislaid it.
the father maintained during his oral evidence that he had not hit the mother,
this was inconsistent with the parties’
contemporaneous correspondence. On
4 March 2018 the father sent the mother a message which read in part: “I
wish I never hit
you.” The father’s affidavit also conceded that
while he cannot recall the January 2018 event, he does not deny that
occurred. I accept the mother’s evidence.
30 April 2019 and 1 May 2019, the mother said the father was intoxicated and
pushed, hit and kicked her. When she was on the floor
and, according to the
mother’s account, pleading with him to stop, he repeatedly kicked her. The
mother said these assaults
were followed by an apology and promise to change.
The father gave no evidence about this occasion and I accept it occurred.
13 July 2019 the mother said the father was intoxicated, grabbed her and threw
her to the floor, where she hit her head causing
a bump. Again, the mother said
the father apologised and promised to change. The father’s inability to
recollect hitting or
harming the mother does not persuade me that it did not
4 August 2019 the mother said the father returned intoxicated from the casino
redressed, then
undressed again and attempted to call uber eats and turned on all the lights.
The mother said she told him to go
to bed. In response he began to hit her in
the head. She said the father hit her and pushed her to the ground. The father
did not scream, hit or push the mother to the ground but accepts they
argued. The mother sent the father a text message in which
she described him as
being “barely able to stand.” The father asked the Court to accept
that because the mother’s
messages did not explicitly list the details of
his physical abuse, I should conclude that it did not occur. I accept it
am not satisfied that the father’s denial has weight, given his
likely level of intoxication (and his incapacity to remember
other assaults he
concedes possibly occurred).
2019 the father was intoxicated and the mother said they argued about his
drinking and he punched and kicked her repeatedly. She
said as she curled up on
the floor in a ball with her hands over her head to protect it, the father
continued to hit and kick her.
The following day was the mother’s
birthday, and she said she spent 45 minutes with makeup to cover her
parties exchanged text messages after this incident:
Father: U didnt feed me!!
[Mr B] coming but reckons he wasnt invited
Mother: Are you fucking kidding me? You covered my face and body with bruises,
maybe you should be more worried about that
Father: Sorry
Should we go get your flowers now while they are fresh?
Mother: You do whatever you want. I’m getting on a flight home.
Father: Chicky
Its your birthday party
Dont let me ruin it
Lets go before it gets hot
Mother: [photo of her eye socket]
This is icing it for the past 2 hours. Eye was closed over before
Father: I can get flowers if u like? Just need pics of what u want?
Mother: It’s over
(as per the original)
father’s affidavit conceded the mother suffered physical injuries. In
messages, the father said to the mother “yes
hitting you was dumb”.
The father’s messages to the mother on 23 and 24 September 2019 also
acknowledged hitting the
mother. I accept the mother’s account.
2020 the mother said the father’s drinking was less during COVID
restrictions and the assaults became infrequent. She became
pregnant with X at
this time. When she was 5 months pregnant, she became concerned that the
father had returned to drinking to excess
and began to avoid him so as to
protect herself and her pregnancy. She asked a mutual friend to raise the issue
with the father as
her entreaties had been unsuccessful and she moved into the
spare room.
mother texted the father from behind the locked door of the spare room in early
2021 when she said he had been intoxicated on
three occasions in one week. She
told him explicitly that she was not coming out to protect herself and the
pregnancy (Exhibit 4).
mother said that when she was 7 months pregnant with X the father’s
drinking was significantly problematic, that she avoided
him particularly when
he was drinking again and trying to kick down the door of the room in which she
had locked herself. She called
upon friends for support. She texted to ask if
the father could stay at their place. The response was: “ [h]e can stay of
but I would rather not get in the middle of what’s going on. But
I’ll support you guys of course.”
mother reached out to the paternal grandfather in April 2021 to intervene when
the father had been drinking and she had been locking
the door to ensure her
safety. She did so again in March 2023 and then in October 2023.
X was 4 weeks old, the father returned home sufficiently intoxicated that he had
urinated in his clothes. The mother discovered
the father had been taking
father’s evidence before this Court is that the steroids were prescribed
by his doctor for low energy and fatigue. This
is inconsistent with his text
messages to the mother where he said they were not prescribed for him by his
doctor and they were not
working for him anyway and it was a “dumb
idea” to take them.
early 2023 when Y was about a month old the father returned home at 12.30 am.
The mother videoed him at about 3.30 am urinating
under the TV. She said the
parties’ therapist had recommended videoing the father’s conduct as
he said he could not recall
his conduct when intoxicated. The mother sent the
video to the father’s parents. When the father became aware the mother had
sent the video, he jumped on her and hit her arms and body repeatedly until she
deleted the video. The parties exchanged text messages
in which the father said
he could not recall hitting the mother. The mother’s text message
referenced the fact that she still
had the bruises. The father said he recalls
an argument but does not recall hitting the mother. I accept that this incident
as she deposed.
19 November 2023 the father pushed the mother into a cupboard while she was
holding Y. The mother took the children into the bedroom
and locked the door.
The father banged on the door causing the children to cling to the mother and
cry. Later the father began yelling
again, kicked a childproof gate and damaged
the wall. The mother said she photographed injuries including bruises to her
and palm (and attaches those on her leg and body). The mother said the
father promised to cease using testosterone. The father’s
addresses this incident only obliquely and I accept the evidence which the
mother gave on this topic over the father’s
23 and 24 June 2024 the father’s screaming caused the children to cry. The
mother sent the father a text:
You exploded again this morning. In front of the kids. Even [X] yelled back at
you. You blow up at the kids. You blow up at your
parents. No one else does,
just you. Blaming me for your behaviour is just deflecting rather than owning
the fact you have an anger
issue. Please see a therapist this week. Please.
the latter part of 2024, the mother chronicled several occasions on which she
says the father screamed at her in the children’s
presence. The father
acknowledged arguments in the children’s presence but not the extent of
their frequency, intensity or
impact on the children.
30 October 2024 the father smashed the mother’s laptop after an
incident occurred on 8 December 2024 which was the subject of significant
attention at trial. The father was intoxicated and the
mother challenged him
from the mother, the father,
the parties’ nanny and two videos taken by
the mother. The events occurred in two distinct parts.
mother’s affidavit said: “I went to take his phone and he lunged at
me, pushed me to the floor, pulled at my hair
and pushed my face into the
ground, throwing my phone across the room.”
mother then said 30 to 60 minutes later, she again asked the father to whom he
was speaking, after which, the following occurred:
He then pushed me to the floor. As I got up, he proceeded to put his hands
around my neck choking me and pushing me against the wall.
I screamed. At that
moment, our helper, [Ms C], came into the room and she told him she would call
the police if he did not stop.
father gave some general evidence about an incident in December in his affidavit
filed on 3 July 2025. From context, it appears
as though it may address the
incident on 8 December. While the father recounts the mother asking to see his
phone and recording their
interaction, he does not directly engage with the
mother’s serious allegations in his affidavit.
parties’ nanny says the following in her affidavit filed on 26 June 2025:
[35] I heard [Mr Halmi] and [Ms Halmi] arguing. I heard [Mr Halmi] say:
I’m just calling my mum”
and [Ms Halmi] responded:
I stayed in my room. The argument continued for a
bit. Then I heard loud banging noises and [Ms Halmi] screaming in pain. I
got out of bed and ran to the lounge room where I saw [Mr Halmi] choking
[Ms Halmi] in a standing position. [Ms Halmi] looked terrified
and like she was
in pain. I yelled at [Mr Halmi] “
stop it! I will call the police
and [Mr Halmi] responded “
are you fucking serious [Ms
This is the first time [Mr Halmi] had ever yelled at me and I was
scared. He stopped hurting [Ms Halmi].
broad terms, video 5 (Exhibit 1) depicts the mother repeatedly asking the father
to whom he was speaking on the balcony and the
father repeatedly telling her to
“fuck off”. It is taken at about 8.00 pm Singapore time. It is not
clear that it records
an assault.
6 (Exhibit 1) begins with the father on the balcony speaking on his phone and
the disembodied voice of the mother saying: “Why
are you trying to choke
me, Mr Halmi?” It is clear that the mother is not describing events
which are currently occurring but
asking the father about why he has done
something. The father tells the person with whom he is speaking: “[s]he is
going nuts.”
latter part of video 6 depicts an incident between the parents. Although it is
not depicted on screen, it appears to involve a
physical encounter which the
father describes as him trying to leave outside. The mother says: “Stop
shoving me into walls.”
parties exchanged text messages the following day. The mother said, “You
smashed my phone, tried to choke me, smashed my
hand.” The father replied,
“Ditto.” The mother continued, “Pushed me to the
father said in response: “I’m sorry for my behaviour in self defence
to you screaming at me and trying to take my
phone/You came at me. I was in bed
or on the balcony. Don’t forget that...”
accept that the mother’s inquiries precipitated the father’s
response. However, as the father acknowledged in the witness
box, responding
with violence was not justified.
text exchange between the parents the day after the incident is lengthy, but the
following excerpt is significant:
Mother: So it’s ok to push someone to the ground?
Father: I was fine. You approached me and attacked me. I had no issue with you.
You had issue with me.
Mother: Grab their throat and hold them against the wall?/ I did not attack you
on the balcony [Mr Halmi]
Father: How can you accuse me of being the instigator here. You were screaming
(as per the original)
accept the mother’s inquiries about the father’s telephone call
instigated the argument, but that is significantly less
material than the
father’s response.
parties are at issue about whether the incident involved the father placing one
hand around the mother’s throat and holding
her against the wall. The
mother and the parties’ nanny said that this is what occurred. The
father’s affidavit is silent
but, by his King’s Counsel’s
cross-examination and his general denial, he challenged that the incident
involved choking.
I accept I cannot see on the video the father with his hands
on the mother’s throat, but I do not conclude that this is
definitive.
am persuaded that the account given by the parties’ nanny is accurate. She
was at pains in her affidavit and her oral evidence
to give a non-partisan
account. She said and I accept that she has not spoken to the mother about the
events. She texted the father
on 26 May 2025 and said:
So far I know is all about violence you did to mam sir n screaming infront of
kids Ihv remind sir many times slow your voice infront
of kids but sir always
says I don’t care. Sir always follow your anger. Now this happens comes
even sir choke mam I see before.
I don’t know why sir hate mam so much.
I’m not a side each of you sir. I just tell you what I hv been seen
between you
(Exhibit 9) (as per the original)
the balance of probabilities, I accept her account. Consequently, I accept that,
contrary to the father’s denial, he placed
his hands on the mother’s
throat and pushed her against the wall. However, even if I am wrong about this,
the incident involved
physical violence and is another example in a long set of
examples about the father’s intoxication and consequent violence.
long history of assaults also needs to be placed in the uncontroversial context
that the mother had been, since at least 2016,
entreating the father to cease or
reduce drinking and to refrain from assaulting her. She had asked him to seek
professional assistance.
He had, at least initially, agreed that he would heed
her requests. He has not.
the extent that it was submitted on behalf of the father that the mother’s
bona fides in representing that her trip to Australia
was for the purpose of
obtaining medical treatment for X called into question her evidence more
generally, I am comfortably satisfied
that any duplicity on her part does not
undermine the cogency, consistency and reliability of her evidence about family
mother provides a coherent account supported by contemporaneous records which
demonstrate a long history of physical violence
perpetrated by the father
towards her. I reject the father’s denials as being inconsistent with the
injuries chronicled in
the mother’s photographs and with the various
messages from the father to the mother, which tacitly or explicitly accept that
the physical violence has occurred.
have considered the father’s evidence that the mother’s injuries
were sustained during mutual physical altercations
where he was acting in
self-defence to restrain or control the mother in an effort to de-escalate the
situation. He has told his
family this account. The father did not particularise
his contention that the mother had hit him, placed herself in his way or thrown
objects at him. The father’s King’s Counsel did not put any specific
allegation to the mother. The father’s evidence
in this regard sits
uncomfortably with his concession that he cannot actually recall what occurred
on multiple occasions over a long
period of time. Accordingly, while I accept
that the mother challenged the father, including by yelling at him or using
language about him when he had been drinking or violent, I do not
accept that the father’s actions were a response to family
violence by the
the level of the father’s drinking, there is a credible basis for him not
to recall what has occurred but that does not
permit him to deny the
mother’s account.
is not the mother’s case that the father has physically hurt the children,
however, the evidence establishes that the children
were exposed to family
the affidavit of the parties’ nanny, she sets out conversations with the
parties’ son X. She records at [42] X saying
“lots of times
daddy hit mummy”.
February 2025, according to the text from the parties’ nanny to the
parties, X would tell neighbours in the elevator: “[y]ou
know my mami n
daddy fighting all the time shouting my ear ouchi.”
parties’ nanny raised her concern about the impact of the father’s
shouting on the children via messages dated 25
January 2025 (Exhibit 9). The
messages demonstrate the nanny cancelling her own plans to make sure that the
children have the benefit
of her care when she is concerned they may be exposed
to the father’s drinking or to fighting.
the supervised contact report dated 9 August 2025 (Exhibit 11), the supervisor
recorded the following interchange between Y and
the father: “...[Y] asked
the Father, “Why did you hit Mummy?” The Father responded,
“Who told you that?”
Y replied, ‘Mummy’.” The
mother denied having had a conversation in those terms. She said that she has
her psychologist about how to explain the separation from the father
and their absence from Singapore and said she has told the children
words to the
effect: “Mummy is safer in Australia” (in reliance upon advice from
her psychologist). In circumstances
where the evidence (from videos and the
parties’ nanny) establishes, independently of either parent, exposure of
the children
to family violence, the children raising this issue with the father
may or may not be as a consequence of a conversation with the
mother and, in the
context of these proceedings, is of limited relevance to the determination of
whether the mother has satisfied
children were witness to extreme verbal aggression. The father acknowledged this
but gave evidence that the parties were both
engaged in the abuse.
evidence in the nanny’s messages to the mother is to the effect that she
tried to persuade the mother not to confront the
father when he had been
drinking because of the predictable consequences. The mother was not always
capable of following this sound
early 2025 the parents were arguing about the fact that the mother had attended
the father’s gym. According to the parties’
nanny, the father
screamed to such an extent that the child Y was scared and hid his face in the
nanny’s armpit. In a similar
vein, she recorded that in her observation
the father was more angry and violent after drinking and the children cry and
for her when the father is intoxicated and shouting.
addition to physical assaults, the father was verbally abusive of the mother and
conceded same. The videos attached to the mother’s
affidavit contain
examples, including the father calling the mother a “fucking idiot”
who “listens to idiots”
and, in relation to her parents “what
are they going to do for you now...they’re not even fucking in the same
country...like
it’s hilarious your parents don’t even want to come
here.” I have not set out all of the examples in the mother’s
affidavit where she says the father was verbally abusive including while drunk.
The father asks that I find that the parties verbally
abused one another. I
accept that the mother challenged the father and, from time to time, used strong
language when so doing. In
the context of the father’s behaviour, I am not
prepared to conclude that this was verbal abuse on the part of the mother.
father engaged in behaviour whether by design (or otherwise) functioned to
manipulate, control or punish the mother. For example,
when they had been
fighting, she declined to join him and a third party for dinner. The father sent
the mother a text saying that
“will be worse tomorrow if u don’t
come now as well.” He said, during cross-examination, this was not a
the mother confronted the woman with whom the father had - to use the words in
his affidavit - “inappropriately texted”,
at the gym in early 2025,
the father told the mother that the maternal grandmother could no longer spend
the night at the parties’
apartment. When texting with the parties’
nanny, the father explained that the mother’s actions have to have
consequences.
was submitted in the father’s case that the mother is, in effect, claiming
to fear the father in order to defeat the application
for return. In support of
the submission, the father’s King’s Counsel gave the following
(a) The mother permitted the father to parent post-separation in her absence
(with the assistance of the nanny and his family);
(b) The mother did not remain in Australia on her first visit post-separation.
difficulty with those submissions is that whether the mother was subjectively
afraid (of the father or what he may do) at a given
point in time does not
override my responsibility to evaluate the evidence objectively to determine
whether the father’s conduct
posed a grave risk, and prospectively, poses
a grave risk. I am comfortably satisfied that the father’s violence to the
was chronic, uncontrolled and serious.
make the above findings conscious of the fact that Singapore has a sophisticated
legal and police system which is well-versed in
domestic violence. In this case
there are a number of factors which persuade me that the existence of a legal
system is not the whole
answer to the position in which these children find
themselves.
father did not admit acts of serious violence over a long period of time (but
acknowledged that they may have occurred). The father’s
stance creates a
concern that such conduct may be repeated. Many of the events described by the
mother and accepted by me as having
occurred took place when he was sufficiently
intoxicated that he was unable to recall the events themselves. The father
that he was unable to control himself at times. A restraining order is
of limited value if a person lacks control over drinking and
is also significant that the father has a long history of alcohol misuse which
has not been addressed by him. Between February
and April 2024, the father
attended a course. During that period he did not consume alcohol. At the
conclusion of the course, he
resumed drinking and gave evidence that he has used
it as a coping mechanism.
father contended that, the parties having separated, the risk of physical
violence has abated. The period after separation was
brief (and for a large part
the parties were in separate countries). I accept that since the parties no
longer share the same household,
the opportunity for violence being witnessed by
the children is lessened. However, absent a proper acceptance by the father of
conduct, intimate partner violence in a subsequent relationship or family
violence perpetrated against the children’s mother
cannot be excluded.
conclude, for the reasons expressed above and those which I will discuss below
under the heading ‘mother’s mental health’,
that return to
Singapore would expose the children to an intolerable situation, namely their
mother being required to return to live
in reasonable proximity to the
children’s father who has perpetrated significant family violence over a
lengthy period of time
and continues to minimise and deny its extent and
significance. Further, the mother is aware of the father’s conduct while
intoxicated which has posed a significant threat of physical and verbal abuse to
her in the past – which has been witnessed
by the children. The mother
would be required to remain in Singapore – where she is without family
support in circumstances
where the expert opinion identifies a significant risk
of deterioration in her mental health and wellbeing and consequent impact
parenting capacity.
Mother’s mental health
mother commenced receiving her own psychological assistance in Singapore in 2024
and has engaged with a psychologist in Australia.
The mother commenced taking
anti-depressant medication in 2024 and on a more consistent basis from April
mother relied on a report by a forensic psychiatrist, Dr D. Dr D concluded that
the mother meets all diagnostic criteria for Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder
(“PTSD”), or alternatively Complex Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder.
He expressed the opinion at [127]
of his report that a return to Singapore
...present clinical risks to [her] mental health and, by extension, to her
parenting capacity. The environment in Singapore was the
site of multiple,
repeated traumatic events, including physical assaults, psychological abuse, and
coercive control. [Ms Halmi] has
previously experienced heightened
hypervigilance, dissociation, and physiological arousal in that setting,
including episodes of
impaired functioning when navigating daily life due to the
fear of encountering her husband. The anticipated exposure to trauma-related
triggers in that context is clinically significant and would likely precipitate
an exacerbation of PTSD symptoms.
D said the risk was elevated both because of the trauma which would be
occasioned by exposure to triggering locales, events or
people but also because
of a lack of support in Singapore. Exacerbation of symptoms such as anxiety,
hyper-vigilance, panic attacks
and dissociation were anticipated and the risk of
such occurrence described as high.
father submitted that Dr D’s conclusions were undermined by a failure on
the part of the mother to establish the factual
underpinning. Two examples were
given: (i) the mother’s conduct in attending at the gym used by the father
being inconsistent
with avoidant behaviour and (ii) the mother’s failure
to utilise the opportunity to leave earlier. King’s Counsel for
did not explicitly put those two scenarios to Dr D to permit him to consider
whether they changed his conclusion. Accordingly,
I am unable to discount his
diagnosis on this basis. In any event I am not confident that the mother’s
failure to leave Singapore
in early April 2025 is at all material, given my
findings that she had remained in a relationship with the father in which she
experienced
family violence over a period of fifteen years.
dependent pass cannot be renewed after the parties’
divorce becomes final.
The father has proffered, as a condition of return, his preparedness to consent
to an order restraining him
from cancelling the mother’s dependent pass. I
accept that it is likely she would be permitted to remain in Singapore until
proceedings conclude in that forum. Uncertainty would remain about her
longer-term eligibility.
mother does not want to return to the parties’ home. Dr D’s evidence
supports the reasonableness of the mother’s
reluctance from the
perspective of retraumatisation. The evidence establishes that there is no legal
impediment to the mother obtaining
rental premises nor is there any financial
mother told the ICL in cross-examination that the area in which the parties
lived was a small expatriate community where she had
already encountered the
father post-separation.
lay evidence about the mother’s functioning in the first half of 2025
comes from three sources: the mother, the parties’
nanny and the maternal
grandfather.
mother’s affidavit described worry, anxiety, panic, stress, difficulties
in concentration and upset. She said she is terrified
and physically sick when
she considers return to Singapore.
mother described spending a lot of April 2025 lying in bed as a consequence of
the deterioration in her mental health. The father
submitted that I would reject
that evidence because, in cross-examination, the parties’ nanny said that
the only change she
noticed to the mother’s parenting in April was that
she was more often out in the evening. The proposition that the mother
more time in bed in April was not squarely put to the nanny nor was the mother
challenged about her evidence. I accept that
she was experiencing symptoms of
depression in April which made her less available to the children.
parties’ nanny described that the mother appeared stressed and not eating
in Singapore and has observed a positive change
in these behaviours in
maternal grandfather described having become increasingly concerned about his
daughter’s level of distress and mental state
in the six months prior to
May 2025, describing her as appearing “to be in a depressed mood”.
In his oral evidence he
said the mother was prescribed an anti-depressant
because of her lack of sleep, low mood and because she did not seem happy. In
2025 her mood was still low and the maternal grandfather described the
mother as anxious. He noticed improvements in May including
that she was playing
with the children more.
material produced on subpoena, including the mother’s medical records,
described a patient history which includes “[a]nxiety,
depressed mood,
insomnia.” She told her psychologist in June 2025 that when she wakes in
the night, she struggles to return
to sleep (Exhibit 4).
father gave evidence about five occasions on which the mother drank to excess in
2023-2025. The mother accepted that the father’s
general account was
accurate, though she disputed certain details. I am unable to make a finding
has continued to use alcohol to excess after
separation but there is no evidence to suggest an incident after separation.
this to be the case, that is to the children’s advantage.
it is not the risk of deterioration of the mother’s mental health , as
detailed above, so much as the impact of same
on the children which is relevant
to my determination.
Hague Report writer noted that the children presented as “somewhat
vulnerable children.” I have found that the children
were exposed to
family violence. It follows that the observations of the Hague Report writer
underlie their vulnerability. The report
says at [53]:
If the Court were to find that the mother’s allegations of family violence
occurred as alleged, the children have been exposed
to significant adverse
childhood experiences that place them at a significantly higher likelihood of
longer-term negative outcomes,
including poorer educational outcomes,
relationship challenges, emotional regulation issues, increased antisocial
behaviour in adolescence
and young adulthood and poorer general health. Were
they to return to a living environment in which they are exposed to further or
cumulative incidents of family violence, the risk of negative adverse outcomes
for the children disproportionately increases, including
posing a risk of
children experiencing complex childhood trauma. Given that the children are
reported to have exhibited symptoms
associated with trauma responses, it would
be highly likely that these symptoms would only intensify were the children
further unsafe and abusive circumstances. Children exposed to family
violence are considered victims of child abuse and exposure
to family violence
is well known to have longer term and significant impacts on a child’s
overall development and destroys
a child’s right to a physically and
emotionally safe environment. Family violence, particularly cumulative or
repeated exposure
of children to family violence, is considered a grave risk to
Hague report writer outlined the potential impact of a deterioration in the
mother’s mental health on the children as follows:
Children who are cared for by parents suffering with significant, prolonged or
crises mental health challenges are at increased risk
of exposure to emotional
neglect and abuse. Mentally unwell parents are more likely to be preoccupied
with the often-significant
emotional demands of mental ill health, leaving them
cognitively and emotionally less able to mindfully prioritise their children.
is noted that the children may experience some reassurance from this potentially
intolerable situation with the continuation of
[the parties’ nanny] caring
for them. However, if the mother does significantly deteriorate in her mental
health, the children
are unlikely to escape the circumstance without any impact.
They may, even were [the parties’ nanny] to remain caring for the
children, potentially experience worry about their mother’s function,
concerns about her safety and they may take on greater
responsibility to
‘fix’ their mother, for instance, help with aspects of care, support
and routine that they perceive
their mother unable to do (parentification).
is uncontroversial that the mother’s support network in Australia is
conducive to the cautiously optimistic prognosis which
Dr D anticipates should
the mother remain in Australia. The mother’s parents have demonstrated
support for her, providing housing
and emotional support. The evidence
establishes that the mother has no family in Singapore and would be highly
reliant on the parties’
nanny who cannot, as an employee, be expected to
provide emotional support. The mother’s friends have been hesitant to get
involved according to the mother’s reports to her psychologist and the
mother’s text message evidence discussed above.
Accordingly,
as previously noted, I am satisfied not only that there is a risk the harm will
occur, but also a risk that the children
will be exposed to that harm (
Commonwealth Central Authority
reached the conclusion that the mother has established a defence, I must
consider whether the risk could be ameliorated by
conditions. Regulation 15(1)
provides for the making of conditions to give effect to the Convention.
father offers undertakings to this Court through his affidavit. He said he would
undertake not to approach the mother or the apartment
in which she resides.
father also proffered an undertaking not to consume alcohol for 24 hours prior
to or while the children are in his care (pending
the making of orders in
Singapore).
father said changeover of the children could take place via an
intermediary.
is necessary for me to consider whether those conditions are capable of
enforcement and function to ameliorate the identified risks.
DP v Commonwealth Central Authority
, their Honours Gaudron, Gummow and
Hayne JJ said at [40]:
So far as reg 16(3)(b) is concerned, the first task of the Family Court is
to determine whether the evidence establishes that “there
is a grave risk
that [his or her] return ... would expose the child to physical or
psychological harm or otherwise place the child
in an intolerable
situation”. If it does or if, on the evidence, one of the other conditions
in reg 16 is satisfied, the discretion
to refuse an order for return is
enlivened. There may be many matters that bear upon the exercise of that
discretion. In particular,
there will be cases where, by moulding the conditions
on which return may occur, the discretion will properly be exercised by making
an order for return on those conditions, notwithstanding that a case of grave
have been established. Ensuring not only that there
will be judicial proceedings in the country of return but also that there will
be suitable interim arrangements for the child may loom large at this point in
the inquiry. If that is to be done, however, care
must be taken to ensure that
the conditions are such as will be met voluntarily or, if not met voluntarily,
can readily be enforced.
is no obvious means by which an undertaking to an Australian Court can be
enforced in Singapore.
Full Court in
McDonald & Director-General, Department of Community
Services NSW
(2006) FLC 93-297 at [29]:
It seems to us that if conditions are to be imposed to alleviate what would
otherwise be a grave risk for the return of the child,
then those conditions
need to be clearly defined and be capable of being objectively measured as to
whether or not the conditions
have been fulfilled. The conditions need to be
met before the return can take place. In the event that they are not met, the
needs to contain a mechanism that clearly recognises the return is no
longer required to take place. All this needs to be done within
timetable to meet the requirements of the Convention that is founded upon the
concept that prompt return to the place of
habitual residence is appropriate to
protect a child from the harmful effects of its wrongful removal or retention.
father proposed a number of conditions in a Minute of Order (Exhibit 20):
That the order for the children’s return to Singapore shall be
conditional upon:
4.1. The Applicant causing to be filed within 7 days, in proceedings before the
Family Justice Courts of the Republic of Singapore,
an application by which he
shall seek interim orders with the following effect (and pending a judicial
determination regarding access
and custody of the parties' children):
4.1.1 That he will not approach
or attend any place that the Respondent and children may reside without the
Respondent's written consent
or pursuant to a court order;
4.1.2 That the parties shall not consume alcohol during any period that the
children are in their care nor for 24 hours prior to
the children coming into
4.1.3 That the parties shall not consume medication other than in accordance
with medical advice during any period that the children
are in their care nor
for 24 hours prior to the children coming into their care;
4.1.4 That parties shall appoint an agreed third party to facilitate any access
between the children and the Applicant and each party
shall ensure the parties
do not come into contact;
4.1.5 That the parties shall not expose the children to any form of family
4.1.6 That the Applicant shall not do anything to terminate, alter or otherwise
affect the Respondent's dependent pass or immigration
status in Singapore;
4.1.7 That there shall be no direct communication between the parties other than
in cases of emergency in relation to the children;
4.1.8 That the proceedings be
4.2 That the Applicant shall serve the Respondent with a sealed copy of such
application forthwith and, in any event, prior to the
children's return to
4.3 That the Applicant shall maintain the employment of [the parties’
nanny] for such period as [the parties’ nanny]
is available for employment
unless otherwise agreed between the parties and pending further order of the
Family Justice Courts of
the Republic of Singapore;
4.4 That upon a request being made by the Respondent within 14 days of this
order, the Applicant shall make available to the Respondent
the parties' former
place of residence in Singapore for the Respondent and children to reside and
the Applicant shall permit the
Respondent sole occupation of that property
pending and subject to any order of the Family Justice Courts of the Republic of
4.5 That upon the children's return to Singapore, the Applicant shall facilitate
and permit the Respondent to retrieve any personal
belongings or items for the
children which remain in the Applicant's possession.
the basis of the evidence of the single expert Mr E, I am satisfied that the
laws of Singapore provide a regime whereby the mother
could seek and obtain
orders for personal protection and seek that the father’s time with the
children be subject to condition.
are two bases upon which I have concluded that the making of conditions will not
sufficiently ameliorate risk. Firstly, because
I remain concerned that the
father’s conduct in the past occurred in circumstances where he was unable
to exercise restraint.
As a consequence, I am concerned that protective orders
are not a complete answer to future risk. However, much more significantly
decisively, the existence of orders cannot address the consequences of
exacerbation of the mother’s mental health presentation,
such that I could
be satisfied that the children would not be returned to an intolerable
situation. This was the primary basis upon
which the ICL submitted a return
order ought be refused. I agree.
though I am satisfied that the evidence establishes a defence, I must
nonetheless consider whether, in the exercise of my discretion,
a return order
should still be made. Fundamentally, the very facts which persuade me of risk
speak strongly against return. An additional
factor which persuades me to
dismiss the return application is the parties’ plans to return to
Australia in any event. While
I accept the parties may have changed their mind,
particularly post-separation, they had embarked on renovations and school
arrangements
to effect a return at the end of 2026.
the above findings, it follows that the father’s application will be
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
fifteen (115) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
Honourable Justice
Dated: 19 August 2025
RTF format (572 KB)
Signed PDF/A format