Applications by Telstra Corporation Limited and TPG Telecom Limited [2023] ACompT 1 (17 March 2023)
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
Applications by Telstra Corporation
Limited and TPG Telecom Limited
[2023] ACompT 1
Review from:
Applications by Telstra Corporation Limited and TPG Telecom Limited for
review of Australian Competition and Consumer Commission Merger
Authorisation
Determination MA1000021
File numbers:
ACT 1 of 2022
Determination of:
Justice O’Bryan (President)
Dr J Walker
Ms D Eilert (Member)
Date of determination:
Date of publication of reasons:
Catchwords:
COMPETITION –
applications under
Competition and Consumer Act
for review of
merger authorisation
determination made by the
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (
) – application
for directions under
(2) of the CCA and reg
22(1) of the
Competition and Consumer Regulations 2010
directions requiring the production of documents, the attendance of persons for
questioning and the filing of a further
expert report in connection with the
hearing of the application for review – proper construction of ss 102(9)
and 102(10) of
the CCA – nature of the review undertaken by the Australian
Competition Tribunal in respect of a merger authorisation determination
where information, documents and evidence sought by applicants was in existence
at the time of the determination made by
the ACCC – where information,
documents and evidence not sought for the sole purpose of clarifying
information, documents or
evidence produced or given to the ACCC in connection
with the making of determination – application dismissed
Legislation:
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Competition and Consumer Act
Competition and Consumer Amendment (Competition Policy Review) Act
Competition and Consumer Regulations 2010
(Cth), reg 22
Radiocommunications Act 1992
Trade Practices Amendment (Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
Cases cited:
Application by Medicines Australia Inc
[2007] ACompT 4
; ATPR 42-164
Application by New South Wales Minerals Council
[2021] ACompT
Australian Consumers’ Association’s Application (Re Media
Council of Australia (No 2))
(1987) 82 ALR 115
Brandy v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[1995] HCA 10
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 2 ALD
East Australian Pipeline Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2007] HCA 44
(2007) 233 CLR 229
O’Rourke v Miller
(1985) 156 CLR 342
O’Sullivan v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
[2018] FCA 228
(2018) 160 ALD 233
Pilbara Infrastructure Pty Ltd v Australian Competition Tribunal
[2012] HCA 36
(2012) 246 CLR 379
Re Herald & Weekly Times Ltd on behalf of the members of the Media
Council of Australia
(1978) 17 ALR 281
Queensland Co-operative Miling Association Ltd
Shi v Migration Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR
Tasty Chicks Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue (NSW)
(2011) 245 CLR 446
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for Telstra Corporation Limited:
R Higgins SC with P Strickland
Solicitors for Telstra Corporation Limited:
Gilbert + Tobin
Counsel for TPG Telecom Limited:
G Rich SC with R Yezerski and S Chordia
Solicitors for TPG Telecom Limited:
Corrs Chambers Westgarth
Counsel for Singtel Optus Limited:
C Moore SC with B Lim
Solicitors for Singtel Optus Limited:
Herbert Smith Freehills
Counsel for the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission:
M Hodge KC with D Roche and C Tran
Solicitors for the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission:
Australian Government Solicitor
IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
ACT 1 of 2022
Applications by Telstra Corporation Limited and TPG Telecom Limited for review
of Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
Merger Authorisation
Determination MA1000021
Applicants:
Telstra Corporation Limited and TPG Telecom Limited
Intervenor:
Singtel Optus Limited
DETERMINATION
Justice O’Bryan (Acting President)
Dr J Walker (Member)
Ms D Eilert (Member)
WHERE MADE:
THE TRIBUNAL DETERMINES AND DIRECTS THAT:
Joint Application for Further Directions and Issuing of Summons dated 24
February 2023 be dismissed.
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (
) is required to
furnish to the Tribunal a copy of the model used by the ACCC to undertake the
modelling referred to at [9.132]and
[9.133] of Merger Authorisation
Determination MA1000021.
REASONS FOR
DETERMINATION
THE TRIBUNAL:
A. INTRODUCTION
23 May 2022, Telstra Corporation Limited (
) and TPG Telecom
) lodged an application with the Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission (
) seeking authorisation under
Competition and Consumer Act
) for Telstra
to operate radiocommunications devices under TPG’s spectrum licences
pursuant to the terms of an agreement entered
into between them dated 17
February 2022 and titled Spectrum Authorisation Agreement – MOCN Area
Spectrum Authorisation Agreement
application for authorisation discloses that the Spectrum Authorisation
Agreement is one of three agreements entered into between
Telstra and TPG as
part of the one commercial transaction seeking to establish a Multi-Operator
Core Network (
) in certain regional and urban fringe areas which
comprise around 17% of the Australian population coverage (in the 81.4%-98.8%
coverage area) (
Regional Coverage Zone
). The other two
agreements are the MOCN Service Agreement dated 17 February 2022 and the Mobile
Site Transition Agreement dated 17
February 2022. The application is clear,
however, and Telstra and TPG have acknowledged in this proceeding, that the
application
for authorisation is confined to conduct comprising Telstra’s
use of TPG’s spectrum licences pursuant to the Spectrum
Authorisation
21 December 2022, the ACCC made a determination refusing the application for
authorisation from Telstra and TPG.
23 December 2022, each of Telstra and TPG (collectively, the
filed an application in the Tribunal pursuant to
of the CCA for a review
of the ACCC’s determination. On 24 January 2023, the Tribunal made a
direction pursuant to
of the CCA permitting Singtel Optus Pty Ltd
) to intervene in this proceeding.
is common ground between the parties that the application for authorisation
filed by the applicants is a “merger authorisation”
meaning of the CCA.
of the CCA gives the following
definition:
merger authorisation
means an authorisation that:
(a) is an authorisation for a person to engage in conduct to which
would or might apply; but
(b) is not an authorisation for a person to engage in conduct to which any
provision of
would or might apply.
Radiocommunications Act 1992
(Cth) provides that the
licensee of a spectrum licence may authorise other persons to operate
radiocommunications devices under the
Section 68A(1)
provides that, for
the purposes of
of the CCA (and related provisions), the authorisation
of a person to operate radiocommunications devices under a
spectrum licence is taken to be an acquisition by the person of an asset
another person and conduct engaged in by the person.
a result of those provisions, Telstra’s use of TPG’s spectrum
licences pursuant to the terms of the Spectrum Authorisation
Agreement is taken
to be an acquisition of an asset for the purposes of
of the CCA. As noted
above, the application for authorisation is confined to that conduct and,
accordingly, both limbs of the definition
of “merger authorisation”
are satisfied.
review by the Tribunal of authorisation determinations made by the ACCC is
governed by the provisions of
of the CCA. The statutory framework
governing the grant of authorisations by the ACCC under
of the Act, and
the review by the Tribunal of ACCC authorisation determinations under
the Act, were amended in material ways by the
Competition and Consumer
Amendment (Competition Policy Review) Act 2017
2017 Amendment
). While many aspects of the pre-existing statutory framework governing
authorisations were maintained, new statutory requirements
were introduced with
respect to the review by the Tribunal of merger authorisation determinations.
This is the first occasion on
which those new statutory requirements have been
the subject of consideration by the Tribunal.
discussed in more detail below, a review of a merger authorisation under Pt IX
differs from a review of other authorisations in
two material ways:
(a) first, a review of a merger authorisation is required to be completed by the
Tribunal within a statutory time period (whereas
a review of other
authorisations is not subject to any time limit); and
(b) second, a review of a merger authorisation is not a re-hearing of the matter
(whereas a review of other authorisations is a re-hearing
of the matter) and,
correspondingly, restrictions are imposed on the information, documents and
evidence to which the Tribunal may
have regard in a review of a merger
authorisation (whereas no such restrictions are imposed in a review of other
authorisations).
respect to the statutory time period for the review, broadly stated a review of
a merger authorisation is required to be completed
within 90 days. However,
under s 102(1AD), the Tribunal may determine in writing that the matter cannot
be dealt with properly within
the initial period, either because of its
complexity or because of other special circumstances, and that an extended
period applies
for the review, which consists of the initial period and a
further specified period of not more than 90 days. On 31 January 2023,
Tribunal made a determination in writing to that effect such that the period of
the present review is 180 days (which ends on
21 June 2023).
24 February 2023, the applicants filed a joint application seeking directions
from the Tribunal that would authorise additional
evidence being received by the
Tribunal on the review. The applicants sought the following
directions:
Optus correspondence and modelling
Applicants seek a direction from the Tribunal pursuant to r 22(1)(a) of the
Competition and Consumer Regulations 2010
Regulations
) that, on or
before 5pm on 3 March 2023, Singtel Optus Pty Limited (
serve on the ACCC and the Applicants the following documents, in accordance with
the Confidentiality Regime and to the
extent that such documents have not
previously been produced to the ACCC and the Applicants:
(a) All electronic mail transmissions (including attachments) sent or received
during the period from 21 February 2022 to 21 July
2022 (inclusive) by any
Bayer Rosmarin – Chief Executive Officer, Optus;
Sheridan – Vice President, Regulatory & Public Affairs, Optus;
White – Managing Director of Wholesale & Strategy, and Chief Operating
Officer of Enterprise & Business,
that refer to the Proposed Transaction or that were in connection with, or that
refer to, the Optus business case modelling referred
to at paragraph 152 of the
statement of Mr White dated 19 October 2022 and annexed at Tab 63 - Exhibit
BW-C1 (with document ID 71760.006.019.0873)
Business Case Modelling
(b) all versions of the Business Case Modelling, including all drafts.
Further questions for Optus witnesses
Applicants request that the Tribunal issue a summons under
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(CCA) to each of the following
individuals to attend in person at a time to be scheduled during the hearing of
this matter to answer
questions that will assist the Tribunal to clarify
information, documents or evidence before it pursuant to
(a) Kelly Bayer Rosmarin, Chief Executive Officer, Optus
(b) Benjamin White, Managing Director, Wholesale & Strategy, Optus
(c) Kanagaratnam Lambotharan, Vice President of Networks, Optus
Further report of Dr Jorge Padilla
Applicants seek a direction pursuant to r 22(1) of the Regulations and
of the CCA, or alternatively
(10)(e) of the CCA,
that on or before 24 March 2023 TPG file and serve an independent expert report
of Dr Jorge Padilla not exceeding
10 pages in length which identifies and
explains the extent to which the outcome of Dr Padilla’s modelling
(recorded in his
expert report provided to the ACCC at Annexure E to the
Applicants’ submission in response to Statement of Preliminary Views,
November 2022) of the likely effect of the Proposed Transaction on Optus’
5G investment incentives is affected by adopting:
(a) the assumptions identified in paragraph [9.132] of the ACCC’s Reasons
for Determination; and
(b) the following assumptions:
[Confidential
[Confidential
[Confidential
reasonable assumptions adopted by Optus in the modelling that it produced to the
ACCC in relation to the Authorisation Application
or pursuant to any future
direction of the Tribunal which could materially impact upon the outcome of Dr
Padilla’s modelling.
joint application was supported by an affidavit sworn on 24 February 2023 by
Andrew Herbert John Korbel, a partner at Corrs Chambers
Westgarth, the
solicitors for TPG, and by an affidavit sworn on 27 February 2023 by Simon John
Muys, a partner at Gilbert + Tobin,
the solicitors for Telstra. Each of Telstra
and TPG filed submissions in support of the application dated 10 March
joint application was opposed by Optus and the ACCC. Optus relied on an
affidavit sworn on 8 March 2023 by Linda Catherine Evans,
a partner at Herbert
Smith Freehills, the solicitors for Optus, and written submissions dated 13
March 2023. The ACCC relied on written
submissions dated 14 March 2023.
Tribunal heard the joint application on 15 March 2023 and reserved its decision.
At the hearing, the parties indicated that they
had no objection to the Tribunal
making a determination on the application and publishing reasons subsequently.
On 17 March 2023,
the Tribunal made a determination dismissing the joint
application, but also made a direction pursuant to
requiring the
ACCC to furnish to the Tribunal a copy of the model used by the ACCC to
undertake the modelling referred to at [9.132]
and [9.133] of its authorisation
determination. A copy of that model was produced by the ACCC to the Tribunal
and, subsequently,
a copy was made available to the parties.
are the Tribunal’s reasons for making that determination and that
B. BACKGROUND TO THE JOINT APPLICATION
The Proposed Transaction
disclosed in their applications for authorisation submitted to the ACCC, on 21
February 2022 Telstra and TPG entered into the following
related commercial
agreements:
(a) MOCN Service Agreement dated 17 February 2022;
(b) Spectrum Authorisation Agreement dated 17 February 2022; and
(c) Mobile Site Transition Agreement dated 17 February 2022,
collectively referred to by the applicants as the
Proposed Transaction
agreements seek to establish a Multi-Operator Core Network (referred to above
using the initialism MOCN) pursuant to which Telstra
will share its Radio Access
) with TPG and supply 4G and 5G services in the Regional
Coverage Zon
. TPG will use the MOCN services for its 4G and 5G coverage
in the Regional Coverage Zone as part of its retail and wholesale services.
Under the Spectrum Authorisation Agreement, TPG will authorise Telstra to use
certain spectrum in the Regional Coverage Zone that
TPG currently owns. TPG will
also transfer up to 169 of its existing mobile sites (which refers to active
equipment which is located
on third party towers, poles or rooftops) in the
Regional Coverage Zone to Telstra and intends to decommission the
initial term of the MOCN Service Agreement is 10 years and TPG has two options
to extend the agreement by 5 years. The Spectrum
Authorisation Agreement may
continue after expiry or termination of the MOCN Service Agreement unless
terminated by Telstra or TPG.
and TPG will continue to operate their own mobile core networks in the Regional
Coverage Zone. They will also continue to
operate their own networks in
metropolitan areas where around 81.4% of Australia’s population resides.
The agreement will not
enable TPG to use Telstra's network in remote areas
beyond the Regional Coverage Zone. Telstra will remain as the only provider with
coverage in those areas servicing an additional 0.7% (up to 99.5%) of the
population. Very remote areas, in which 0.5% of the population
resides, have no
mobile coverage.
The ACCC Determination
21 December 2022, the ACCC made a determination refusing to grant authorisation
for Telstra to operate radiocommunications devices
under TPG’s spectrum
licences pursuant to the terms of the Spectrum Authorisation Agreement (being
the conduct for which authorisation
was sought). The ACCC concluded that (at
[1.5] of its determination):
The ACCC is not satisfied, in all the circumstances, that the Proposed
Transaction would not be likely to substantially lessen competition,
or would be
likely to result in a benefit to the public that would outweigh the public
detriment from the Proposed Transaction. Therefore,
the ACCC must not make a
determination granting authorisation to the Proposed Transaction under
of the Act.
ACCC reached its conclusion based on the likely competitive effects, public
benefits and public detriments resulting from the
Proposed Transaction as a
whole rather than those resulting from the Spectrum Authorisation Agreement (the
conduct for which authorisation
was sought). The correctness of the ACCC’s
approach in that regard will need to be examined as part of the Tribunal’s
review of the ACCC’s determination.
present purposes, it is necessary to have regard to only one aspect of the
ACCC’s reasons for its determination which provides
the context for the
joint application. That aspect concerns the information given by Optus to the
ACCC about its current business
strategy with respect to the Regional Coverage
Zone, including its investment incentives, and the likely effect of the Proposed
Transaction
on its business strategy and investment incentives. It is important
to emphasise that the ACCC’s conclusions with respect to
business strategy and investment incentives is only one element of the
ACCC’s overall analysis of the likely
competitive effects, public benefits
and public detriments resulting from the Proposed Transaction. Nevertheless, the
Tribunal accepts
that that element was a material factor in the ACCC’s
ultimate determination.
is convenient to note the following matters recorded in the executive summary to
the ACCC’s reasons for its determination:
(a) As a matter of approach, the ACCC undertook a counterfactual analysis,
comparing what is likely to occur in a future in which
the Proposed Transaction
proceeds (the factual) to the state of affairs if the Proposed Transaction does
not occur (the counterfactual).
The ACCC considered that, while a number of
scenarios may occur if the Proposed Transaction does not proceed, two scenarios
a realistic prospect of occurring: one is that TPG continues largely as it
is now with a ‘targeted build’ to expand its
network; and the other
is that TPG and Optus enter into a roaming or network sharing agreement of some
(b) In relation to the competitive effects of the Proposed Transaction, the ACCC
considered it appropriate to consider the Proposed
Transaction in the context of
national markets for the wholesale and retail supply of mobile services, while
also having regard to
geographic variations in the nature and extent of
competition within these markets due to the different coverage areas of the
operated by the three mobile network operators (
), Telstra,
Optus and TPG. The ACCC observed that MNOs compete on a range of factors to gain
an advantage over their rivals: first,
MNOs compete on the coverage, speed and
other quality dimensions of the mobile services they offer to customers (where
these quality
dimensions are directly influenced by the nature and extent of the
underlying network infrastructure the MNO owns or has access to);
second, for a
given level of network quality at a given point in time, MNOs will compete based
on price and inclusions (including
data, content etc) in their offerings.
(c) The ACCC found that the provision of retail and wholesale mobile services is
subject to considerable barriers to entry and expansion.
This is evident in the
existing market structure where there are only three MNOs and where Telstra has
the largest spectrum holdings,
the most extensive network coverage, the highest
retail prices, and the greatest market share, demonstrating that it has a degree
of market power. The immediate consequence of the Proposed Transaction is that
it will provide Telstra with control over a greater
amount of spectrum (a
critical input and limited resource) and raise barriers to entry and expansion
for firms looking to compete
with Telstra. This will in turn change the ability
and incentives of each MNO to invest further in improving their service
in the Regional Coverage Zone.
(d) The ACCC found that Telstra is the largest supplier of mobile services in
Australia. Its advantage is particularly pronounced
in regional Australia and
the ACCC is concerned that the Proposed Transaction is likely to further
entrench Telstra’s advantage
over the other two MNOs. This is for four
reasons. First, the Proposed Transaction will give Telstra a unique opportunity
its spectrum advantage over its rivals (where spectrum is a scarce
and limited resource, as well as an essential input into the operation
networks, and its scarcity makes it a substantial barrier to entry or
expansion). Second, the Proposed Transaction will
provide Telstra with further
advantages of economies of scale. Third, the Proposed Transaction is likely to
mean TPG and Optus will
not enter a network sharing arrangement so long as the
MOCN Service Agreement remains in place, preventing any threat that
rivals will improve their competitive position through network
sharing. Fourth, Telstra is likely to face less competitive pressure
to maintain its coverage superiority.
(e) The ACCC considered that investment decisions (including the threat of
potential future investments) by Optus is a material influence
on decisions by
Telstra to make investments in its own network. In recent years, Optus has
sought to close its “network gap”
relative to Telstra by approving
plans to significantly invest in its 4G and, more recently, 5G mobile networks.
The lessening of
this competitive pressure could be expected to reduce the
incentives for Telstra to invest to improve elements of its network such
coverage, quality or innovation.
(f) The ACCC found that the Proposed Transaction is likely to dampen
Optus’s ability and incentive to invest in the Regional
Coverage Zone,
relative to the future without the Proposed Transaction. The ACCC reached this
view based on the evidence received,
including of Optus’s 5G business
case, the potential impacts of the Proposed Transaction on its market share, and
costs of a regional 5G roll-out compared to Telstra’s costs.
The ACCC considered that such network investment decisions by
Optus represent a
substantial competitive threat to Telstra. To the extent Optus significantly
decreases its investments in its 5G
network in the Regional Coverage Zone in a
future with the Proposed Transaction, the ACCC considered that this will lessen
the competitive
constraints on Telstra. This lessening of constraint could
manifest itself in decisions by Telstra to invest less, or more slowly,
5G mobile network and/or offer less attractive price and inclusions with its
retail and wholesale mobile services.
above conclusions are elaborated in chapter 9 of the ACCC’s reasons for
determination which discusses the likely competitive
effects of the Proposed
Transaction in detail. The chapter includes a description of submissions made by
interested parties and,
in that context, summarises the evidence and submissions
provided by Optus to the ACCC (see at [9.37] to [9.65]). The chapter also
findings, based on the foregoing evidence and submissions, with respect to the
impact of the Proposed Transaction on Optus’s
incentives to invest in its
network (see at [9.118] to [9.142]). Both of these parts of the ACCC’s
reasons are redacted for
confidentiality. The Tribunal is mindful of the
existing confidentiality restrictions in providing these reasons for its
determination
on the joint application. Nevertheless, the following conclusions
reached by the ACCC are not subject to confidentiality restrictions:
(a) The ACCC considers that Optus has historically played an important role in
driving competition in mobile markets, including in
the Regional Coverage Zone.
For example, it typically invests over $1.5 billion in capital expenditure
annually in its mobile network
and services. The ACCC considers that
Optus’s investments have been shown to challenge Telstra and induce a
response from Telstra,
contributing to infrastructure competition and leading to
consumer benefits across the national market. The Proposed Transaction
against a backdrop of historic competitive intensity in infrastructure
investment between Optus and Telstra (at [9.118]).
(b) Prior to the Proposed Transaction being announced, Optus had committed to
rolling out a 5G national network, having received
board approval (at [9.119]).
The evidence available to the ACCC demonstrates that Optus has contributed
significantly to network
infrastructure competition, having regard to its
history of trying to close its network gap to Telstra and its investment plans
prior to the Proposed Transaction (at [9.120]).
(c) The ACCC considers that Optus’s role in the current state of
infrastructure competition is important context to its assessment
Proposed Transaction (at [9.121]). Following the Proposed Transaction, whether
Optus will accelerate, maintain or decrease
its planned level of investment in
its 5G network in regional Australia has been the subject of considerable debate
and conflicting
submission (at [9.122]).
(d) The ACCC has received a significant volume of expert material that addresses
the issue of Optus’s incentives with conflicting
views between the
applicants and their expert (particularly Dr Padilla) and Optus and its experts
(particularly Analysys Mason Limited)
(at [9.126]). Analysys Mason Limited
analyses the effect of the Proposed Transaction on the relative costs of Optus
and Telstra to
operate their networks in the Regional Coverage Zone. It finds
that Telstra already has a considerable cost advantage (in terms of
its network
costs per gigabyte) and that this will increase further as a result of the
Proposed Transaction. This is because Telstra
will benefit from having
additional volumes on its network on account of the extra traffic it carries for
TPG in the MOCN service
area (at [9.127]). In his report on behalf of the
applicants, Dr Padilla seeks to model both the discounted incremental costs and
revenues for Optus if it were to invest to extend its 5G network coverage. Dr
Padilla concludes that it would be more profitable
for Optus to invest in 2,500
additional 5G sites rather than to cease its 5G network deployment. Critical to
this conclusion are
assumptions he relies upon regarding the number of
subscribers Optus would lose in different areas of the country if it did not
any further investment (at [9.128]). Similarly, Optus has provided material
that seeks to estimate the expected returns on a number
of different 5G
investment scenarios. Like Dr Padilla, this analysis compares the discounted
value of the expected additional cost
of further investment with the expected
future revenues Optus expects it can earn with and without investment (at
(e) Based on its examination of the respective modelling undertaken by Dr
Padilla and Optus, the ACCC notes the models put forward
are very dependent on
the different assumptions regarding market share loss with and without the
Proposed Transaction. The results
are also highly sensitive to assumptions on
margins likely to be earned by Optus on mobile subscribers and the discount rate
to estimate the net present value of future investments. In this respect,
the ACCC considers both sets of modelling contain questionable
assumptions about
the net present value of future investment decisions (at [9.131]).
(f) The ACCC sought to test what the net present value of Optus investing in a
5G regional network would be if it adopted all but
three assumptions Dr Padilla
used in his modelling (at [9.132]). The ACCC considered the effects of different
assumptions preferred
by it in respect of market share declines, the margin
earned on additional customers and the discount rate to be applied. The ACCC
estimates that the adoption of assumptions preferred by the ACCC would cause the
net present value of Optus investing in a 5G network
in regional Australia to
become negative (at [9.133]).
(g) The ACCC considers that there is a real chance that Optus will not continue
with its previously agreed 5G regional investment
plan under the Proposed
Transaction. This is because the Proposed Transaction substantially alters the
structure of the markets for
the wholesale and retail supply of mobile services
in Australia such that Optus’s expected revenues post investment would be
likely to be significantly different (at [9.135]). While the business case
assumptions of Optus are not beyond question, the ACCC
considers the evidence on
these matters submitted by Optus and its parent company, Singapore
Telecommunications Limited (
), including in internal documents and
in sworn evidence, is sufficiently credible for the ACCC to attach weight to it
(at [9.139]).
The ACCC accepts it is possible to conceive of a set of
assumptions (such as those underpinning the analysis of Dr Padilla) under
a regional 5G business case investment might be profitable for Optus. However,
it is not clear to the ACCC that the assumptions
relied on by Dr Padilla are
commercially likely or that these are assumptions Optus and Singtel will make
when they decide whether
to invest in 5G network deployment. The ACCC has not
been provided with any evidence to establish Optus is likely to adopt these
assumptions about future market outcomes when it decides whether to invest in a
regional 5G mobile network (at [9.140]). Based on
the evidence available, while
the ACCC does not accept that Optus is likely to cease all infrastructure
investment in regional Australia
if the Proposed Transaction proceeds, the ACCC
considers that the Proposed Transaction is likely to result in a material
in Optus’s investment incentives. This is in circumstances where
Optus has historically played a critical role in the state
infrastructure-based competition in mobile markets and where it has previously
committed to make extensive investments in a 5G
mobile network in regional
Australia (at [9.142]).
C. EVIDENCE AND SUBMISSIONS ON THE JOINT APPLICATION
noted earlier, each of the parties filed evidence and submissions in respect of
the joint application. That evidence is summarised
below, together with the
parties’ submissions to the extent the submissions addressed the factual
issues arising on the application.
parties’ submissions also addressed the statutory framework which governs
this proceeding, and specifically the statutory
restrictions on the information,
documents and evidence that may be taken into account by the Tribunal on a
review of a merger authorisation.
The ACCC also filed submissions addressing
those matters. Those submissions are addressed in section D below.
Telstra’s evidence and submissions
Muys’s affidavit, filed on behalf of Telstra in support of the joint
application, addressed paragraphs 1 and 2 of that application.
Muys provided a chronology of submissions and evidence provided by Optus to the
ACCC in connection with the authorisation application.
Relevantly, this
(a) a number of submissions lodged on behalf of Optus;
(b) expert reports of HoustonKemp Economists, Analysys Mason Limited, Cambridge
Economic Policy Associates Pty Ltd and AlixPartners
(c) witness statements from a number of Optus executives including Kelly Bayer
Rosmarin, Benjamin White and Kanagaratnam Lambotharan;
(d) production of documents pursuant to a notice issued by the ACCC under
of the CCA; and
(e) examinations of a number of Optus executives including Ms Bayer Rosmarin, Mr
White and Mr Kanagaratnam pursuant to notices issued
by the ACCC under
s 155(1)(c)
of the CCA.
Muys deposed that he has examined the documents produced by Optus to the ACCC
pursuant to the
notice and expressed the opinions that: (i) an unusually
small number of relevant documents had been produced; (ii) the
been narrowly framed; and (iii) as a consequence, the internal processes by
which Optus developed its strategic modelling
and commercial analysis in
response to the announcement of the Proposed Transaction have not been able to
be thoroughly assessed
or tested. Mr Muys deposed that the purpose of paragraph
1 of the joint application is to “test and clarify the 5G investment
plans, cost modelling and other strategic documents prepared and relied upon by
Optus witnesses, or relied on in Optus submissions
and evidence provided to the
Muys further deposed that he has read the witness statements and transcripts of
examination of Ms Bayer Rosmarin, Mr White and
Mr Kanagaratnam. Mr Muys deposed
that the purpose of paragraph 2 of the joint application is to enable the
applicants to question
Ms Bayer Rosmarin, Mr White and Mr Kanagaratnam in
relation to the following topics:
(a) the capital investment incentives and intentions of Optus in respect of its
mobile network if the Proposed Transaction is authorised
or if it is not
authorised;
(b) any commercial or regulatory strategy and analysis of Optus, including any
modelling undertaken by Optus, after it became aware
of the Proposed
Transaction; and
(c) any counterfactual proposed by Optus involving a commercial transaction
between TPG and Optus including the potential nature
and effect of any such
transaction.
Muys expressed the opinion that “additional questions would be likely to
assist to clarify evidence that is currently before
the Tribunal, either because
those questions were not put to witnesses in those examinations, or because they
would test or clarify
answers provided during those interviews”.
submissions were largely based on Mr Muys’s evidence. Telstra submitted
that a salient issue in dispute between
the parties is whether the Proposed
Transaction is likely to affect negatively Optus’s investment in 5G
infrastructure in the
Regional Coverage Zone. Telstra contends that the business
case modelling underpinning Optus’s commercial assessment of the
the Proposed Transaction on its future investment is contrived or otherwise
unreliable.
relation to paragraph 1 of the joint application, Telstra submitted that the
ACCC’s s 155 notice issued to Optus produced
very few documents
referring to the Proposed Transaction or Optus’s business case modelling,
which appears to be a function
of the framing of the
notice. Telstra
submitted that it is likely that key documents evidencing the process and
motivations that led to Optus’s commercial
assessment and modelling in
response to the Proposed Transaction are not before the Tribunal, and that such
material would be centrally
relevant to determining whether Optus’s
assessment and modelling was contrived, unreliable or otherwise commercially
irrational.
relation to paragraph 2 of the joint application, Telstra submitted that, in the
ACCC determination process, Optus provided witness
statements from six senior
executives including Ms Bayer Rosmarin, Mr White and Mr Kanagaratnam who gave
evidence about Optus’s
network investment plans before and after the
Proposed Transaction was announced and Optus’s commercial assessment in
Telstra submitted that, although the ACCC compulsorily examined Ms
Bayer Rosmarin, Mr White and Mr Kanagaratnam under
s 155(1)(c)
of the CCA,
in many instances the ACCC did not test or challenge their evidence. Further,
there was no opportunity for Telstra or
TPG to test or respond to this evidence
while the matter was before the ACCC, because they were not privy to the
evidence given under
compulsory examination.
TPG’s evidence and submissions
Korbel’s affidavit, filed on behalf of TPG in support of the joint
application, addressed paragraph 3 of that application.
Korbel deposed that, for the purposes of the authorisation application, TPG
retained Dr Jorge Padilla, an expert economist, and
submitted three reports from
Dr Padilla to the ACCC. Mr Korbel referred to that part of the ACCC’s
reasons for determination
that discusses Dr Padilla’s modelling of
Optus’s investment incentives with respect to its 5G network (at [9.128]),
the assumptions made by Dr Padilla with respect to such matters as
Optus's costs of deploying 2,500 more sites, the number of subscribers
would lose in different areas of the country if it did not make any further
investment and the margin that would be lost by
Optus on those subscribers. Mr
Korbel deposed that, due to confidentiality restrictions imposed by Optus,
assumptions that underpinned
Optus’s 5G business case were not made
available to Dr Padilla. In the present proceeding, Dr Padilla has now signed a
confidentiality
undertaking and been provided with that information. Dr Padilla
has undertaken further modelling of Optus’s investment incentives
respect to its 5G network. Mr Korbel deposed that Dr Padilla would be willing to
prepare a short report detailing his findings
of that further modelling.
However, as at the time of the hearing, the proposed report was not available
for the Tribunal to consider.
submissions supported Telstra’s submissions with respect to paragraphs 1
and 2 of the joint application. With respect
to Optus’s business case
modelling, TPG submitted that there are cogent reasons to question the
reliability of the modelling
and to think that its content (including its
assumptions) may have been influenced by the circumstances in which it was
(in opposition to the authorisation application). TPG further submitted
that, before the Tribunal reaches any firm views about the
reliability or
probative value of the business case modelling or the impacts of the Proposed
Transaction on Optus’s 5G business
case and incentives, it would be
reasonable and appropriate to clarify how and why the assumptions and inputs
used in that modelling
changed over time.
relation to paragraph 3 of the joint application, TPG submitted that the ACCC
subjected Dr Padilla’s modelling to modifications
that were not put to Dr
Padilla. Specifically, the ACCC modified Dr Padilla’s modelling by
substituting three assumptions provided
by Optus (two of which were modified
further by the ACCC) for three assumptions used by Dr Padilla. The ACCC
concluded that the result
of changing these three assumptions, while holding all
other assumptions in Dr Padilla’s model constant, would cause the net
present value of Optus investing in a 5G network in regional Australia to become
negative (ACCC’s reasons at [9.133]). TPG
submitted that the ACCC did not
disclose its own modelling or reasoning in support of that conclusion. Further,
the ACCC did not
analyse, or if so did not disclose, what the outcome would be
of Dr Padilla’s modelling if other aspects of the Optus’s
case modelling were incorporated in place of assumptions by Dr Padilla (or the
ACCC). TPG argued that the result of the
ACCC’s analysis was a curious
mixture of assumptions, some based on the ACCC’s modification of
Optus’s views, others
based on Dr Padilla’s reports (prepared
without access to Optus’s views). TPG submitted that it is unsatisfactory
the Tribunal to be in a position where the ACCC will presumably seek to rely
on [9.133] of the ACCC’s reasons, when Dr Padilla
has never had an
opportunity to address that analysis. For these reasons, it is reasonable and
appropriate that the Tribunal seek
a further report from Dr Padilla for the sole
purpose of clarifying the evidence he has given, and specifically, the impact on
evidence of the ACCC and Optus’s assumptions.
Optus’s evidence and submissions
Evans’s affidavit, filed on behalf of Optus in opposition to the joint
application, addressed paragraphs 1 and 2 of that
application. Ms Evans
described the extent of the questions asked of Ms Bayer Rosmarin, Mr White and
Mr Kanagaratnam by the ACCC
during their respective
examinations,
particularly in relation to Optus’s investment incentives if the Proposed
Transaction were to proceed, and the
extent of the business documents produced
by Optus to the ACCC pursuant to
notices issued by the ACCC and
separately. Ms Evans also described the extent to which the submissions and
evidence of Optus had
been made available to the applicants during the
authorisation process.
relation to paragraph 1 of the joint application, Optus submitted that the
evidence adduced by the applicants does not establish
that the investigations
undertaken by the ACCC were narrow or inadequate or that there is a significant
gap in the documentary evidence.
Optus argued that the serious allegation that
the ACCC did not thoroughly assess Optus’s evidence rises no higher than
by disappointed applicants.
relation to paragraph 2 of the joint application, Optus submitted that the
applicants have not attempted to identify any specific
ambiguity in the witness
statements provided by Ms Bayer Rosmarin, Mr White and Mr Kanagaratnam
that requires clarification, and
the applicants have not attempted to identify
any specific question that the Tribunal could ask the witnesses in order to
any specific matter. Rather, the proposed questioning would turn the
review into a re-hearing of the likely effect of the Proposed
Transaction on
Optus’s investment incentives and the likely TPG counterfactual.
relation to paragraph 3 of the joint application, Optus submitted that any new
report from Dr Padilla will be of limited assistance
to the Tribunal given the
constrained question to which it is directed: Dr Padilla’s proposed
modelling and analysis is intended
to estimate the net present value to Optus of
it continuing to invest in a regional 5G rollout, but does not attempt to model
value of alternative investments that Optus might undertake. Optus further
submitted that the applicants have chosen to make the
application to adduce a
further expert report without providing the proposed report to the Tribunal and
the parties. As such, the
Tribunal can only assess the application on a
theoretical basis, which creates the potential for prejudice to Optus because
implications of the further evidence (and whether responsive evidence
might be required) cannot be assessed.
Conclusions with respect to the evidence
the extent it is relevant, the Tribunal is not persuaded by the evidence adduced
on this application that the ACCC failed to make
all due enquiries and obtain
relevant information and documents with respect to the likely effect of the
Proposed Transaction on
Optus’s business strategy and investment
incentives. To the contrary, the evidence shows that, in the course of its
consideration
of the authorisation application, the ACCC gave careful
consideration to the submissions and evidence provided by Optus and sought
verify and test that material.
relevantly, the Tribunal considers that the evidence adduced by the applicants
in respect of the joint application has not identified
any aspect of the
information, documents and evidence given to the ACCC that is unclear or
unintelligible and requires clarification.
Instead, the evidence establishes
that, by the joint application, the applicants are seeking an opportunity in
this review proceeding
to test or challenge the submissions and evidence given
to the ACCC by Optus. It will be necessary to consider whether the statutory
framework governing this review permits the Tribunal to receive additional
material for that purpose.
D. STATUTORY FRAMEWORK FOR THE TRIBUNAL’S REVIEW
noted above, the statutory framework governing the grant of authorisations by
the ACCC under
of the Act, and the review by the Tribunal of ACCC
authorisation determinations under
of the Act, were amended in material
ways by the 2017 Amendment Act. The present application requires consideration
of the amendments
relating to merger authorisations (as defined in the CCA), and
specifically the amendments that impose restrictions on the information,
documents and evidence to which the Tribunal may have regard in conducting a
review of a merger authorisation determination made
by the ACCC. As this is the
first occasion on which the new statutory requirements governing such a review
have been the subject
of consideration by the Tribunal, it is helpful to begin
with an outline of the relevant legislative history.
Legislative history
Explanatory Memorandum to the enacting Bill explained that the 2017 Amendment
Act represented the Government’s response
to the recommendations of the
Competition Policy Review that delivered its final report on 31 March 2015
(referred to in the Explanatory
Memorandum as the
Harper Review
9 of the Explanatory Memorandum concerned proposed amendments governing
authorisations, notifications and class exemptions.
In relation to
authorisations generally, the Explanatory Memorandum noted (at [9.3] and
Simplification
9.3 The Harper Review considered that the authorisations and notifications
provisions were unnecessarily complex, generating excessive
regulatory and
administrative costs and creating a focus on technicalities over issues of
9.4 The Harper Review recommended two principal changes to simplify the
authorisations and notifications provisions:
ensuring that only a single authorisation
application is required for a single business arrangement or transaction;
empowering the Commission to grant authorisation on the basis that the
conduct would not be likely to substantially lessen
competition.
relation to merger authorisations, the Explanatory Memorandum noted (at [9.5] to
9.5 Submissions to the Harper Review raised concerns about the
Commission’s formal merger clearance process and the merger
authorisation
processes undertaken by the Tribunal. A merger clearance can only be granted if
the Commission is satisfied that the
merger will not substantially lessen
competition. A merger authorisation can only be granted if the Tribunal is
satisfied that there
will be net public benefits from the merger.
9.6 The Harper Review noted that the formal clearance process has not been used
since it was introduced in 2007, and that the merger
authorisation process has
been used only a few times since it was reformed in 2007.
9.7 Unlike authorisations for other conduct prohibited under Part IV, the
Commission is not currently the decision-maker at first
instance for merger
authorisations. Instead, the Tribunal makes the decision at first instance and
there is no avenue for review
of these decisions other than seeking judicial
review by the Federal Court.
9.8 The Harper Review recommended combining the formal clearance process with
the merger authorisation process to create a single,
streamlined authorisation
process with the following features:
the Commission should be the decision-maker at
first instance (as it is better suited to undertaking investigations);
the Commission should be empowered to authorise a merger if satisfied the
merger would not substantially lessen competition or would
result, or be likely
to result, in a net public benefit;
the formal process should not be subject to prescriptive information
requirements, but the Commission should be empowered to require
the production
of business and market information;
the formal process should be subject to strict timelines that cannot be
extended except with the consent of the merger parties;
decisions of the Commission should be subject to review by the Tribunal
under a process that is also governed by strict timelines;
the review by the Tribunal should be based upon the material that was
before the Commission, but the Tribunal should have the discretion
party to adduce further evidence, or to call and question a witness, if the
Tribunal is satisfied there is sufficient
Explanatory Memorandum explained that: the 2017 Amendment Act simplified the
various authorisation provisions into a single authorisation
provision that
allows the ACCC to authorise conduct that would otherwise be prohibited under Pt
IV (at [9.13]); the 2017 Amendment
Act also repealed the formal merger clearance
and authorisation processes contained in Div 3 of Pt VII so that mergers would
to the general authorisation process in s 88, with the decision-maker
at first instance changing from the Tribunal to the Commission
(at [9.14]).
15 of the Explanatory Memorandum contained a “regulation impact
statement”. That part of the Explanatory Memorandum
discussed aspects of
the Harper Review’s recommendations and the Government’s response to
those recommendations. In relation
to the review by the Tribunal of merger
authorisation determinations, the Explanatory Memorandum stated as
Tribunal review in relation to merger authorisations
15.46 The Harper Review recommended that the review by the Tribunal should be
based upon the material that was before the Commission,
but the Tribunal should
have the discretion to allow a party to adduce further evidence, or to call and
question a witness, if the
Tribunal is satisfied that there is sufficient
15.47 The exposure draft legislation provided for the Tribunal’s review in
relation to a merger authorisation to be a limited
merits review, that is,
reviews would be based only on the material before the Commission at the time of
the Commission’s determination.
This approach was adopted as it would
ensure that parties had the incentive to place all relevant evidence and
information before
the Commission at first instance, and that Tribunal reviews
in relation to merger authorisations could be concluded expeditiously
to unduly prejudice merger transactions.
15.48 However, concerns were raised that a limited merits review is
inappropriate, particularly as this would mean the Tribunal is
unable to take
account of a change in circumstances following the Commission’s decision,
and parties would be unable to produce
evidence or information that they were
not able to produce at the time of the Commission’s decision. Several
options to address
this concern were considered.
15.49 A full merits review (that is, a rehearing) by the Tribunal was considered
to be inappropriate in relation to merger authorisations,
given the time and
commercial sensitivities of such transactions. The prospect of a lengthy merits
review could be open to abuse
by parties seeking to endanger the success of a
merger transaction.
15.50 Ultimately, a ‘hybrid’ merits review, similar to that proposed
by the Harper Review, was adopted. The Tribunal’s
review in relation to a
merger authorisation will be based on the material before the Commission, but
the Tribunal may seek clarifying
information, and the Tribunal may allow the
parties to present new information or evidence which was not in existence at the
of the Commission’s decision. This would appropriately balance
procedural fairness by allowing for a change of circumstances
to be taken into
account, but would prevent parties abusing the authorisation process by choosing
to withhold information from the
Commission at first instance.
revised statutory framework, as applicable to merger authorisations, is
described in this section.
Authorisation
grant of authorisations by the ACCC is governed by Div 1 of Pt VII of the
s 88 the ACCC is empowered to grant an authorisation to a person to engage in
conduct, specified in the authorisation, to which
one or more provisions of Pt
IV specified in the authorisation would or might apply. While the authorisation
remains in force, those
provisions of Pt IV do not apply to the conduct to
the extent it is engaged in by the applicant for authorisation, any other person
named or referred to in the application as a person who is engaged in or who is
proposed to be engaged in the conduct and any other
particular persons or
classes of persons, as specified in the authorisation, who become engaged in the
90 requires the ACCC to make a determination on the application, either granting
such authorisation as it considers appropriate
or dismissing the application,
and to give written reasons for its determination. Section 90(7) stipulates that
(relevantly) the
ACCC must not make a determination granting an authorisation
under s 88 in relation to conduct unless:
(a) the ACCC is satisfied in all the circumstances that the conduct would not
have the effect, or would not be likely to have the
effect, of substantially
lessening competition; or
(b) the ACCC is satisfied in all the circumstances that:
(i) the conduct would result, or be likely to result, in a benefit to the
public; and
(ii) the benefit would outweigh the detriment to the public that would result,
or be likely to result, from the conduct.
Review of an authorisation determination
IX of the CCA governs the review of authorisation determinations by the
Tribunal. The Part is divided into two Divisions: Div
1, comprising ss 101 to
102, is headed “Applications for review”; Div 2, comprising ss 103
to 110, is headed “Procedure
and Evidence”. In making the joint
application, the applicants rely on various powers conferred on the Tribunal
Divisions, as well as powers conferred under reg 22 of the
Competition and Consumer Regulations 2010
Regulations
(which regulation was made pursuant to the regulation making power in s 104 of
the CCA). In determining the joint application, it
is necessary to consider the
powers conferred on the Tribunal under
and their interrelationship.
, Division 1
person dissatisfied with a determination by the ACCC under Div 1 of
apply to the Tribunal for a review of the determination: s 101(1). Section
101(2) states that a review by the Tribunal is a re‑hearing
of the matter,
unless it is a review of a determination by the ACCC in relation to an
application for a merger authorisation. As
noted earlier, the present matter is
a review of a determination by the ACCC in relation to an application for a
merger authorisation.
Thus, s 101(2) stipulates that the review in the present
matter is not a re-hearing. In conducting the review,
relation to the Tribunal in like manner as it applies in relation to the ACCC: s
101(3). In other words, on a review,
the Tribunal must apply the same statutory
test for authorisation as the ACCC.
a review of a determination of the ACCC in relation to an application for an
authorisation, the Tribunal may make a determination
affirming, setting aside or
varying the determination and, for the purposes of the review, may perform all
the functions and exercise
all the powers of the ACCC: s 102(1). A determination
by the Tribunal affirming, setting aside or varying a determination of the
is taken to be a determination of the ACCC: s 102(2). Section 102 also contains
a number of provisions concerning the information,
documents and evidence that
may be taken into account by the Tribunal on the review. Those provisions are as
(6) For the purposes of a review by the Tribunal under this Division, the
member of the Tribunal presiding at the review may require
the Commission to
furnish such information, make such reports and provide such other assistance to
the Tribunal as the member specifies.
(7) For the purposes of a review under this Division, the Tribunal may have
regard to any information furnished, documents produced
or evidence given to the
Commission in connexion with the making of the determination, or the giving of
the notice, to which the
review relates.
(8) Subsections (9) and (10) apply to a review of a determination of the
Commission in relation to:
(a) an application for a merger authorisation; or
(9) For the purposes of the review, the Tribunal may allow a person to provide
new information, documents or evidence that the
Tribunal is satisfied was not in
existence at the time the Commission made the determination.
(10) Despite subsection (1), the Tribunal must not, for the purposes of the
review, have regard to any information, documents or
evidence other than:
(a) information that was referred to in the Commission’s reasons for
making the determination; and
(b) any information or report given to the Tribunal under subsection (6); and
(c) the information, documents or evidence referred to in subsection (7); and
(d) information given to the Tribunal as a result of the Tribunal seeking such
relevant information, and consulting with such persons,
as it considers
reasonable and appropriate for the sole purpose of clarifying the information,
documents or evidence referred to
in subsection (7); and
(e) any information, documents or evidence referred to in subsection (9).
can be seen that subs (6) and (7) of s 102 are of general application to reviews
conducted by the Tribunal of a determination of
the ACCC in relation to an
application for an authorisation, including merger authorisations. In contrast,
subss (9) and (10) apply
only to merger authorisations. Subsection (9) is
permissive and empowers the Tribunal to allow a person to provide new
information,
documents or evidence that the Tribunal is satisfied was not in
existence at the time the ACCC made the determination. Subsection
restrictive and stipulates that, for the purposes of the review, the Tribunal
must not have regard to any information, documents
or evidence other than as
enumerated in the subsection.
Subsections
(8), (9) and (10) were introduced by the 2017 Amendment Act. The Explanatory
Memorandum stated, in respect of those amendments
(at [9.79] to
9.79 Subsection 102(9) grants the Tribunal a power to allow a person to provide
new information, documents or evidence that the
Tribunal is satisfied was not in
existence at the time of the Commission’s determination. This allows the
Tribunal to take
account of a change in circumstances that has occurred since
the Commission’s determination. For example, if there is a new
the relevant market after the Commission’s determination is made, the
Tribunal may allow a person to provide new information
change in circumstances can be taken into account in the Tribunal’s
9.80 The limitations on the information that may be considered by the Tribunal
appropriately balance the interests of all parties
to a review of a merger
authorisation matter. In particular, they are intended to ensure that applicants
for merger authorisation
provide the Commission with all relevant material at
the time of the application, and do not delay production of that material until
later in the process or until Tribunal review. The limitations also facilitate
the Tribunal conducting its review expeditiously,
given the time sensitive
nature of merger transactions.
9.81 Subsection 102(9) ensures that the parties to an application for review
are not unfairly prejudiced by the limitations of the
Tribunal review where
there is genuinely new relevant information, documents or evidence that was not
in existence at the time of
the Commission’s determination.
Part IX, Division 2
noted above, Div 2 of Pt IX is headed “Procedure and Evidence”.
Section 103(1) provides that, in proceedings before
the Tribunal:
(a) the procedure of the Tribunal is, subject to the Act and the Regulations,
within the discretion of the Tribunal;
(b) the proceedings shall be conducted with as little formality and
technicality, and with as much expedition, as the requirements
of the Act and a
proper consideration of the matters before the Tribunal permit; and
(c) the Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence.
104 specifies that regulations may make provision, amongst other things:
(a) for securing, by means of preliminary statements of facts and contentions,
and by the production of documents, that all material
facts and considerations
are brought before the Tribunal by all persons participating in any proceedings
before the Tribunal; and
(b) with respect to evidence in proceedings before the Tribunal, including the
appointment of persons to assist the Tribunal by giving
evidence (whether
personally or by means of a written report).
22 of the Regulations empowers the Tribunal, in any proceeding, to give
directions about those matters.
s 105, the Tribunal is empowered to take evidence on oath or affirmation and to
summon a person to appear before the Tribunal
to give evidence and to produce
such documents (if any) as are referred to in the summons.
Review of a determination relating to a merger
authorisation
the Act was first enacted in 1974 (called, at that time, the Trade Practices
Act), s 101(2) has stipulated that a review by
the Tribunal of an ACCC
authorisation determination is a “re‑hearing”. The word
“re-hearing” has been
consistently construed by the Tribunal as
requiring a hearing
, meaning that the Tribunal conducts a fresh
hearing and determination of the authorisation:
Co-operative Miling Association Ltd
(1976) 8 ALR 481
486 (Woodward J, Mr J Shipton and Prof M Brunt);
Re Herald & Weekly Times
Ltd on behalf of the members of the Media Council of Australia
(1978) 17 ALR
Re Herald & Weekly Times
) at 295-6 (Deane J, Mr J Shipton
and Mr J Walker). The Tribunal must “make its own findings of fact and
reach its own decision
as to whether authorisation should be granted or not and,
if so, any conditions to which it is to be subject”:
Application by
Medicines Australia Inc
[2007] ACompT 4
; ATPR 42-164 (
) at [135] (French J, Mr G Latta and Prof C Walsh). That
function is not performed by considering “whether the ACCC was right
wrong in the conclusion it reached or whether it could have better formulated
its determination”; rather, the Tribunal must
“assess the
applications for authorisation on their merits and by reference to the
information and evidence given to the ACCC
and any material that the parties
wish to put before the Tribunal”:
Medicines Australia
2017 Amendment Act amended s 101(2) such that it now stipulates that a review by
the Tribunal is a re‑hearing of the matter,
unless it is a review of a
determination by the ACCC in relation to an application for a merger
authorisation. It is necessary to
consider the nature of a review under Pt IX of
a merger authorisation determination that is not a re-hearing.
nature of review or appeal rights depends upon the terms of the statute
conferring the rights (see
Tasty Chicks Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State
Revenue (NSW)
(2011) 245 CLR 446
at [5] per French CJ, Gummow, Crennan,
Kiefel and Bell JJ;
Shi v Migration Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
235 CLR 286
) at [25] per Kirby J, at [92] per Hayne and
Heydon JJ and at [132] per Kiefel J;
East Australian Pipeline Pty Ltd v
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
[2007] HCA 44
(2007) 233 CLR 229
per Gummow and Hayne JJ). In
Brandy v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
[1995] HCA 10
(1995) 183 CLR 245
, Mason CJ, Brennan and Toohey JJ observed (at
261, citation omitted):
In considering the nature of the 'review' contemplated by s25ZAC, it is relevant
to note that the expression 'review' is commonly
used in the context of judicial
control of administrative action and in the context of comprehensive
administrative review by an
administrative tribunal of administrative decisions.
But what emerges from the judicial decisions and, for that matter, from statutes
is that 'review' has no settled pre-determined meaning; it takes its meaning
from the context in which it appears.
Pilbara Infrastructure Pty Ltd v Australian Competition Tribunal
[2012] HCA 36
246 CLR 379
Pilbara Infrastructure
), the High Court considered
the nature of a review by the Tribunal of a declaration decision of the
designated Minister under s 44K
of the Act (prior to its amendment by the
Trade Practices Amendment (Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
(Cth)). The
plurality (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ) contrasted a
“re-hearing” by the Tribunal
, which requires deciding an
issue afresh on whatever material is placed before the new decision-maker, and a
“reconsideration”
by the Tribunal under s 44K(4), which requires
reviewing what the original decision-maker decided and doing that by reference
the material placed before the original decision-maker (at [60], [65]). The
amendments to s 44K (and related provisions) made by
Trade Practices
Amendment (Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
(Cth) reinforced the conclusion
that the review required by s 44K is a review by which the Tribunal must make
its own decision with
respect to the matter under review, but based on the
material taken into account by the original decision-maker (the Treasurer)
supplemented
by any additional material obtained by the Tribunal in exercise of
express statutory powers (under ss 44K(6), 44K(6A) and 44ZZOAAA(4)):
Application by New South Wales Minerals Council
[2021] ACompT 4
reasoning is applicable in the context of a review of merger authorisation
determinations. As noted earlier, the 2017 Amendment
Act differentiated the
review of merger authorisation determinations from other authorisation
determinations in two material ways.
First, a review of a merger authorisation
is required to be completed by the Tribunal within a statutory time period.
Second, a review
of a merger authorisation is not a re-hearing of the matter and
restrictions are imposed on the information, documents and evidence
to which the
Tribunal may have regard. In other important respects, however, the statutory
framework governing the review of authorisation
determinations does not
distinguish between merger authorisations and other authorisations. Most
relevantly, ss 102(1) and (2) stipulate
in respect of all reviews of
authorisation determinations by the Tribunal that:
(a) the Tribunal may make a determination affirming, setting aside or varying
the determination of the ACCC;
(b) for the purposes of the review, the Tribunal may perform all of the
functions and exercise all the powers of the ACCC; and
(c) the Tribunal’s determination is taken to be a determination of the
language of those subsections is similar to that found in many statutes that
provide for review by an administrative tribunal
of administrative decisions
including, for example,
and (6) of the
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth). The combined effect of ss 102(1) and (2)
indicate that the Tribunal’s review task is to determine whether the
made by the ACCC was objectively the correct or preferable decision to
be made: cf
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
at 78 (Smithers J). In that sense, the Tribunal “stands in the
shoes” of the ACCC:
O’Sullivan v Australian Securities and
Investments Commission
[2018] FCA 228
(2018) 160 ALD 233
[40], [100] and [134]. The substance of those provisions have remained unchanged
since the Act was first enacted and the provisions
have been consistently
interpreted in that manner: see for example
& Weekly Times
Australian Consumers’
Association’s Application (Re Media Council of Australia (No 2))
(1987) 82 ALR 115
at 126 (Lockhart J, Prof M Brunt and Dr B Aldrich);
Medicines Australia
at [135] and [138].
distinction between the two forms of review of authorisation determination can
therefore be expressed as follows. In respect of
authorisation determinations
other than merger authorisations, the Tribunal must conduct a rehearing, making
its own decision with
respect to the application of the statutory criteria in s
90(7) based on whatever material is placed before it in the re-hearing.
respect of merger authorisation determinations, the Tribunal must conduct a
review of the ACCC’s determination, making its
own decision with respect
to the application of the statutory criteria in s 90(7) having regard to only
that material that is enumerated
in s 102(10).
The proper construction of ss 102(9) and (10)
the joint application, the parties were in dispute as to the meaning and effect
of paragraphs (d) and (e) of s 102(10), and the
interrelationship of s 102(10)
with the powers conferred on the Tribunal in Div 2 of
102(10) stipulates that the Tribunal must not, for the purposes of the review,
have regard to any information, documents or
evidence other than:
(a) information that was referred to in the Commission’s reasons for
making the determination;
(b) any information or report given to the Tribunal under subs (6);
(c) the information, documents or evidence referred to in subs (7);
(d) information given to the Tribunal as a result of the Tribunal seeking such
relevant information, and consulting with such persons,
as it considers
reasonable and appropriate for the sole purpose of clarifying the information,
documents or evidence referred to
in subs (7); and
(e) any information, documents or evidence referred to in subs (9).
(a) is clear on its terms and refers to information that was referred to in the
ACCC’s reasons for making the determination.
(b) refers to any information or report given to the Tribunal under subs (6).
That subsection states that the member of
the Tribunal presiding at the review
may require the ACCC to furnish such information, make such reports and provide
such other assistance
to the Tribunal as the member specifies. This is a power
exercisable by the presiding member at a review and enables the Tribunal
assistance from the ACCC whether by furnishing information, making reports or in
some other manner.
(c) refers to the information, documents or evidence referred to in subs (7).
That subsection states that the Tribunal may
have regard to any information
furnished, documents produced or evidence given to the ACCC in connexion with
(relevantly) the making
of the determination to which the review relates. Thus,
paragraph (c) expands upon paragraph (a) (which refers to information that
was referred to in the ACCC’s reasons for making the determination) to
incorporate the body of information, documents and evidence
that was before the
ACCC in making its determination.
(d) empowers the Tribunal to seek information, and to consult with persons, as
it considers reasonable and appropriate for
the sole purpose of clarifying the
information, documents or evidence referred to in subs (7); viz, the information
furnished, documents
produced or evidence given to the ACCC in connexion with
(relevantly) the making of the determination to which the review relates.
applicants submitted that paragraph (d) should not be construed as being
confined to a purpose of illuminating ambiguous material.
They argued that the
ordinary meaning of the word “clarify” is to make clear, pure, or
intelligible (as per the Macquarie
Concise Dictionary, Sixth Edition). The
applicants submitted that the process of rendering information, documents and
evidence intelligible
includes obtaining material that would place a document or
evidence in its full and proper context and, once having done so, testing
reliability or credibility of that evidence. They argued that
“clarifying” information, documents or evidence includes
the Tribunal to develop a clearer understanding of that material, including by
revealing the circumstances or context in
which it was created or given.
the purposes of the present application, it is unnecessary to attempt an
exhaustive definition of paragraph (d). It is important,
though, to note the
entirety of the language used in the paragraph. The paragraph empowers the
Tribunal to have regard to “information
given to the Tribunal as a result
of the Tribunal seeking such relevant information” and “consulting
with such persons,
as it considers reasonable and appropriate”, for the
sole purpose of clarifying the information, documents or evidence referred
subs (7). Thus, with the sole purpose of clarifying material given to the ACCC
in the course of making its determination, the
Tribunal is empowered to
“seek ... relevant information” and “consult with persons as
it considers reasonable and
appropriate”. The powers given to the
Tribunal, to seek relevant information and to consult with persons, are
consistent with
the ordinary meaning of the word “clarify”, which is
to make clear or intelligible.
at a level of generality, the Tribunal accepts that, in certain circumstances,
“clarifying” information, documents
or evidence may include
assisting the Tribunal to develop a clearer understanding of that material,
including by reference to contextual
material. For example, data and statistics
may not be able to be understood or properly interpreted without information
the source of the underlying data or the methodology applied in
generating the data and statistics. The Tribunal does not, however,
applicants’ broader submission that “clarifying” information,
documents or evidence ordinarily extends
to testing the reliability or
credibility of that material. To clarify means “to make clear”. The
Tribunal must consider
that something in the information, documents or evidence
before the ACCC is or may be unclear before it is permitted to seek information
or consult with persons for the sole purpose of clarifying it. Testing the
reliability or credibility of information, documents or
evidence is not a
process of clarification; it is a process of evaluation of the cogency and
weight of the material.
(e) refers to any information, documents or evidence referred to in
subs (9). Under subs (9), the Tribunal is empowered
to allow a person to
provide new information, documents or evidence that the Tribunal is satisfied
was not in existence at the time
the ACCC made the determination.
applicants submitted that the phrase “in existence” in subs (9) can
take one of three meanings: bare existence (ie,
material not created at all);
the existence of materials before the ACCC (ie, whether the materials were
furnished to the ACCC);
or the existence of materials known to a party to the
review of the determination. The applicants argued that each construction is
available on the text, but the second and third constructions are consistent
with the legislative policy of striking a balance between
affording parties
procedural fairness and preventing parties from withholding information from the
ACCC during its consideration
of the application. In that regard, Telstra placed
reliance on the Explanatory Memorandum at [9.79]-[9.81] and [15.50].
Tribunal rejects those submissions. They do not accord with the ordinary meaning
of the language of subs (9) and are not supported
by the statutory context and
purpose, including particularly the statutory purpose as disclosed in the
extrinsic materials. Again,
it is important to begin with the statutory language
as a whole. The subsection empowers the Tribunal to
a person to
information, documents or evidence that the Tribunal is
satisfied was
not in existence
at the time the Commission made the
determination. The ordinary meaning of the word “allow” is to
permit; the subsection
does not, on its terms, contemplate the Tribunal using
powers of compulsion such as the power in s 105(2) to summon a person to appear
and give evidence or produce documents. In context, the word “new”
contrasts the information, documents and evidence
referred to in subs (7) (being
the material before the ACCC in connection with the making of the determination
under review). Thus,
subs (9) contemplates the Tribunal permitting a person to
provide to the Tribunal information, documents or evidence that was not
the ACCC. It can be accepted that there is a degree of ambiguity in the
descriptor “in existence at the time the Commission
determination” when used to qualify the phrase “information,
documents or evidence”. Taken literally,
the descriptor could refer to an
affidavit or expert report that is only brought into existence after the ACCC
made its determination,
but which contains information or evidence about facts
and matters that existed before the ACCC made its determination. Read in context
and in light of the statutory purpose as revealed by the extrinsic materials,
however, it is clear that the descriptor is intended
to confine the
Tribunal’s discretion so as to permit the provision of new material
concerning facts and matters that did not
exist at the time the ACCC made its
determination.
statutory purpose is evident from s 101(2) and ss 102(8), (9) and (10), which
stipulate that a review of a merger authorisation
is not a re-hearing, and the
Tribunal is required to conduct its review on the basis of the material before
the ACCC subject to the
circumscribed exceptions. The statutory purpose is also
confirmed by the extrinsic materials. As set out above, the Explanatory
explains that: the limitations on the information that may be
considered by the Tribunal by s 102(10) “appropriately balance
interests of all parties to a review of a merger authorisation matter”;
the limitations “are intended to ensure that
applicants for merger
authorisation provide the Commission with all relevant material at the time of
the application, and do not
delay production of that material until later in the
process or until Tribunal review”; and the limitations also
“facilitate
the Tribunal conducting its review expeditiously, given the
time sensitive nature of merger transactions” (at [9.80]). The
Explanatory
Memorandum also confirms that the purposes of s 102(9) is “to take account
of a change in circumstances that has
occurred since the Commission’s
determination” (at [9.79]) and that the subsection “ensures that the
an application for review are not unfairly prejudiced by the
limitations of the Tribunal review where there is genuinely new relevant
information, documents or evidence that was not in existence at the time of the
Commission’s determination” (at [9.81]).
Procedural fairness
Tribunal notes that, in aid of their contentions concerning the construction of
paragraphs (d) and (e) of s 102(10), the applicants
placed reliance on
procedural fairness considerations. The applicants submitted that they had not
been afforded an opportunity to
test and challenge evidence provided to the ACCC
by Optus in confidence during the ACCC determination process. Implicitly, the
applicants’
contention was that part of the purpose of paragraphs (d) and
(e) of s 102(10) is to allow the Tribunal to afford parties the opportunity
test and challenge such evidence that was provided to the ACCC.
Tribunal does not accept those contentions. It is not in dispute that, in
determining an authorisation application, the ACCC must
afford the applicant
procedural fairness. However, the content of the requirements of procedural
fairness varies according to the
statutory context.
respect to confidential material, s 89 of the CCA expressly contemplates that,
in the course of an authorisation application,
a person may provide documents or
submissions to the ACCC and request that the document or submission be treated
as confidential,
and the ACCC is empowered to determine such a request. That
power is important in the context of applications for authorisation which
immunity from the competition law prohibitions in
of the CCA and
where the ACCC is frequently required to solicit confidential information from
market rivals. Section 89(7) stipulates
that the ACCC may disclose such
confidential information to such persons and on such terms as it considers
reasonable and appropriate
for the purposes of making its determination on the
authorisation application. Thus, the ACCC is empowered to receive information
a confidential basis and determine the manner in which, and the extent to which,
such information is disclosed in order to satisfy
the requirements of procedural
fairness. It is not the case that a failure to reveal confidential information
to an applicant for
authorisation will necessarily constitute a breach of the
requirements of procedural fairness by the ACCC. Nor is a review by the
a process to correct perceived failures of procedural fairness by the ACCC.
respect to the examination of persons who provide witness statements or
affidavits to the ACCC, administrative decision making
does not always require
the decision-maker to afford a person affected by the decision with a right to
cross-examine persons who
give evidence to the decision-maker: see for example
O’Rourke v Miller
(1985) 156 CLR 342
at 353 (Gibbs CJ, with whom
Mason J and Dawson J agreed at 354 and 363 respectively) and at 360-361 (Wilson
J). There is nothing
in the statutory framework that suggests that the ACCC must
afford an applicant for authorisation an opportunity to cross-examine
from whom the ACCC receives written or oral evidence. The ACCC is not required
to conduct a hearing at which evidence is
received and the evidence is tested by
cross-examination. Rather, s 90 contemplates that the ACCC will proceed by
inviting submissions
from interested persons and seeking information from the
applicant and other persons. In the case of a merger authorisation, the
not required to comply with the requirements of s 90A (which, in the case of
other authorisation applications, requires the
ACCC to produce a draft
determination and conduct a conference if requested by the applicant or an
interested person). The ACCC is
empowered by s 155(1) and (2)(b)(iii) to
require a person to produce information or documents or to appear before the
ACCC to give
implicit contention of the applicants that a review of the ACCC’s
determination by the Tribunal is intended to afford an
applicant an opportunity
to test and challenge evidence that was received by the ACCC is not supported by
the language of ss 102(9)
and (10) nor the extrinsic materials. As discussed
above, paragraph (d) of s 102(10) is directed to clarifying material that was
before the ACCC, and paragraph (e) (which refers to s 102(9)) is directed to
information, documents and evidence that was not in
existence at the time of the
ACCC’s determination. The Explanatory Memorandum explained that those
provisions “would
appropriately balance procedural fairness by allowing
for a change of circumstances to be taken into account, but would prevent
abusing the authorisation process by choosing to withhold information
from the Commission at first instance” (at [15.50]).
This confirms that
the procedural fairness concern that is sought to be addressed by those
provisions is the possibility of a change
in circumstances after the
ACCC’s determination was made.
E. DETERMINATION OF THE JOINT APPLICATION
Paragraph 1 of the joint application
paragraph 1 of the joint application, the applicants sought a direction from the
Tribunal pursuant to reg 22(1)(a) of the Regulations
compelling Optus to file
and serve on the ACCC and the applicants the following documents:
(a) emails (including attachments) sent or received during the period from 21
February 2022 to 21 July 2022 by Ms Bayer Rosmarin,
Mr Andrew Sheridan, and Mr
White that refer to the Proposed Transaction or that were in connection with, or
that refer to, the Optus
business case modelling; and
(b) all versions of the Optus business case modelling.
applicants sought the direction on two bases. First, they submitted that
s 102(10)(d) is engaged because it would be reasonable
and appropriate for
the Tribunal to seek this information for the sole purpose of clarifying the
Optus business case that was before
the ACCC under s 102(7). Second, they
submitted that the information sought would be new documents or evidence under s
102(9), because
they were not relevantly “in existence” (in the
sense of being before the ACCC) at the time the ACCC made its
determination.
evidence and submissions filed by the applicants in support of paragraph 1 of
the joint application made clear that the applicants
consider that the ACCC did
not adequately or sufficiently interrogate the evidence given by Optus to the
ACCC, including particularly
Optus’s business case modelling that modelled
the impact of the Proposed Transaction on Optus’s 5G investment business
case. The applicants seek the above information to test and challenge the
veracity or reasonableness of Optus’s business case
modelling. Telstra
submitted that the information would be centrally relevant to determining
whether Optus’s assessment and
modelling was contrived, unreliable or
otherwise commercially irrational.
the Tribunal’s view, the information sought by the applicants does not
satisfy the criteria in either ss 102(10)(d) or 102(9).
In relation to s
102(10)(d), the applicants did not identify any aspect of Optus’s business
case modelling that was unclear
and required clarification. For the reasons
given earlier, s 102(10)(d) does not permit the Tribunal to seek additional
information
for the purpose of testing or challenging information that was
before the ACCC. The Tribunal’s function is not to conduct a
and its information gathering powers are strictly constrained by the provisions
of s 102(10). In relation s 102(9), the
information being sought by the
applicants was in existence at the time that the ACCC made its determination and
is therefore outside
the purview of that provision.
those reasons, the Tribunal rejects the request under paragraph 1.
Paragraph 2 of the joint application
paragraph 2 of the joint application, the applicants requested the Tribunal to
issue a summons under s 105(2) to each of Ms Bayer
Rosmarin, Mr White and Mr
Kanagaratnam to attend the hearing to answer questions to be put by the
applicants (in other words, to
be cross-examined).
the evidence and submissions filed by the applicants in support of paragraph 2
of the joint application make clear that the
applicants consider that the ACCC
did not adequately or sufficiently interrogate the evidence given by those Optus
executives to
the ACCC. In his affidavit, Mr Muys confirmed that the purpose of
paragraph 2 is to enable the applicants to question Ms Bayer Rosmarin,
and Mr Kanagaratnam in relation to the following topics:
(a) the capital investment incentives and intentions of Optus in respect of its
mobile network if the Proposed Transaction is authorised
or if it is not
authorised;
(b) any commercial or regulatory strategy and analysis of Optus, including any
modelling undertaken by Optus, after it became aware
of the Proposed
Transaction; and
(c) any counterfactual proposed by Optus involving a commercial transaction
between TPG and Optus including the potential nature
and effect of any such
transaction.
submitted that there was no opportunity for the applicants to test or respond to
the evidence of Ms Bayer Rosmarin, Mr White
and Mr Kanagaratnam while the matter
was before the ACCC, because the applicants were not privy to the evidence given
under compulsory
examination.
similar reasons as expressed in respect of paragraph 1, the applicants have not
satisfied the Tribunal that the request satisfies
the criteria in either ss
102(10)(d) or 102(9).
relation to s 102(10)(d), the applicants did not identify any aspect of the
evidence given by Ms Bayer Rosmarin, Mr White and Mr
Kanagaratnam that was
unclear and required clarification. The Tribunal is not permitted to seek
additional information for the purpose
of testing or challenging information
that was before the ACCC.
relation s 102(9), the Tribunal does not consider that cross-examining Ms Bayer
Rosmarin, Mr White and Mr Kanagaratnam with respect
to evidence they have
previously given to the ACCC, for the purpose of testing and challenging that
evidence, would satisfy the statutory
criteria. Such questioning would not
adduce information or evidence that was not in existence at the time the ACCC
made the determination
in the sense contemplated by the provision. The answers
would not concern events and circumstances that came into existence after
date of the ACCC’s determination but would concern events and
circumstances that existed prior to that date.
and the ACCC advanced a further contention that the application under paragraph
2 should also be refused because neither ss
102(10)(d) nor 102(9) empowers the
Tribunal to issue a summons under s 105(2). Optus and the ACCC argued that
neither the reference
to “consulting” with persons in s 102(10)(d),
nor the reference to “allowing a person to provide new information,
documents or evidence”, includes compelling a person to attend a hearing
to give evidence. It is unnecessary to express a concluded
view on that
contention for the purposes of the present application. It may be accepted that
the language of “allowing a person
to provide new information, documents
or evidence”, does not easily accommodate the notion of the Tribunal
issuing a summons
to a person to attend and give evidence. In contrast, however,
the power given to the Tribunal by s 102(10)(d) to “seek such
information” is broadly stated and may enliven the procedural powers given
to the Tribunal to obtain evidence in Div
those reasons, the Tribunal rejects the request under paragraph 2.
Paragraph 3 of the joint application
paragraph 3 of the joint application, the applicants seek a direction pursuant
to reg 22(1) of the Regulations and s 102(10)(d)
of the CCA, or alternatively s
102(9) of the CCA, allowing TPG to file and serve an independent expert report
of Dr Jorge Padilla
which identifies and explains the extent to which the
outcome of Dr Padilla’s previous modelling of the likely effect of the
Proposed Transaction on Optus’s 5G investment incentives is affected by
(a) the assumptions identified at [9.132] of the ACCC’s reasons for
determination; and
(b) certain assumptions adopted in Optus’s business case modelling.
noted earlier, the applicants did not provide the Tribunal with a copy of Dr
Padilla’s proposed further report for the purposes
of considering the
present application. This had the result that the Tribunal was required to
consider the application on a somewhat
theoretical basis.
regard to the submissions advanced by the applicants, and in the absence of the
proposed further report from Dr Padilla, the
Tribunal is not persuaded that the
report would satisfy the criteria in s 102(10)(d), being information that would
clarify the modelling
evidence that was otherwise before the ACCC. The evidence
and submissions advanced on the application did not identify any aspect
modelling evidence that was unclear or ambiguous. Rather, the further report
would express the findings and opinions of Dr
Padilla with respect to the net
present value of Optus investing in a 5G regional network on a different set of
assumptions.
is room for debate whether s 102(9) permits the Tribunal to receive an expert
report based on a set of assumptions that were
not considered or analysed by the
ACCC in reaching its determination. It is difficult to characterise assumptions
used in relation
to a business model that forecasts future earnings as being
“in existence” at any particular point in time. The assumptions
predictions about future events. An expert report based on a set of assumptions
that were not considered or analysed by the ACCC
in reaching its determination
may be characterised as information or evidence that was not in existence at the
time the ACCC made
the determination.
the present case, it is unnecessary to resolve the question whether s 102(9)
permits the Tribunal to receive Dr Padilla’s
proposed further report. Even
if the Tribunal is permitted to receive the report, the Tribunal does not
consider it appropriate in
the circumstances of this case. The evidence filed on
this application shows that Optus provided to the ACCC modelling with respect
the effects of the Proposed Transaction on Optus’s 5G business case. The
applicants provided alternative modelling undertaken
by Dr Padilla. The ACCC
then undertook its own modelling, varying certain of the assumptions used by
Optus and by Dr Padilla. The
Tribunal considers that the parties are able to
advance submissions in this review on the basis of the competing models that
before the ACCC when making its determination. The Tribunal notes, in that
regard, that the ACCC’s own modelling was referred
to in the ACCC’s
reasons for its determination (at [9.132] and [9.133]), and is therefore
information to which the Tribunal
may have regard under s 102(10)(a). To ensure
that the ACCC’s modelling is available to the parties, and for the
of any doubt, the Tribunal will give a direction under s 102(6)
requiring the ACCC to furnish to the Tribunal a copy of the ACCC’s
referred to at [9.132] and [9.133] of its reasons for determination. On the
basis of those various models, it will be open
to the parties at the hearing to
advance submissions with respect to the modelling outcomes if different
assumptions are used, and
to advance submissions about the evidence that was
before the ACCC that provides support for the adoption of particular
assumptions.
The Tribunal is not precluded by s 102(10) from receiving
submissions of that nature (or indeed from undertaking its own calculations
the basis of different combinations of assumptions).
those reasons, the Tribunal rejects the request under paragraph 3 and will give
a direction under s 102(6) requiring the ACCC
to furnish to the Tribunal a
copy of the ACCC’s model referred to at [9.132] and [9.133] of its reasons
for determination.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
seven (107) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination
Honourable Justice O'Bryan, Dr J Walker and Ms D
Dated: 13 April 2023
RTF format (611 KB)
Signed PDF/A format