Logan v Otis Elevator Co Pty Ltd [1999] IRCA 4 (22 June 1999)
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Logan v Otis Elevator Co Pty Ltd
[1999] IRCA 4
INDUSTRIAL LAW - Claim for entitlements under award - Appellant local
representative of elevator company in country area and obliged
emergency assistance always available - Whether appellant was entitled to
"standing by" payments at ordinary time during
all non-working hours -
Appellant held entitled to overtime and "call back" payments - Whether employer
was entitled to deduct difference
between actual wages paid and moneys payable
under award for ordinary time - What constitutes reasonable notice of
termination of
employment.
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - Appeal - Application for leave to appeal - Appeal
against orders in relation to preliminary questions - Application
made out of
time because of confusion as to the identity of the court having jurisdiction -
Leave granted.
Industrial Relations Act
Workplace Relations Act
Rules of Industrial Relations Court of Australia
Poletti v Ecob (1989)
31 IR 321 followed
PETER ANTON CHARLES LOGAN v OTIS ELEVATOR COMPANY PTY LIMITED
N218 of 1999
WILCOX CJ, MARSHALL and MADGWICK JJ
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
ON APPEAL FROM A JUDGE OF THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT
OF AUSTRALIA
ANTON CHARLES LOGAN
ELEVATOR COMPANY PTY LIMITED
CJ, MARSHALL and MADGWICK JJ
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. Leave to appeal be granted.
2. The appeal be upheld in part.
3. The orders made by Moore J on 11 March 1999 be varied by:
(i) deleting order 4; and
(ii) adding to the said orders the following additional order:
8. The claim of the applicant, Peter Anton Charles Logan, be assessed on the
bases that:
(a) the respondent, Otis Elevator Company Pty Limited, was bound to give to the
said applicant three months' notice of termination
of employment or to pay
three months' salary in lieu of notice; and
(b) the said respondent is not entitled to set-off against its liability to
make payments in respect of overtime and call-backs,
pursuant to clause 14(a)
and (d) of the
National Metal and Engineering On-Site Construction Award
1989, the difference between the salary paid by the said respondent to the said
applicant and the amount payable to him under the
said award for ordinary
4. The appeal be otherwise dismissed.
Note: Settlement and entry of orders is dealt with in Order 36 of the
Industrial Relations Court Rules.
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
ON APPEAL FROM A JUDGE OF THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT
OF AUSTRALIA
ANTON CHARLES LOGAN
ELEVATOR COMPANY PTY LIMITED
CJ, MARSHALL and MADGWICK JJ
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
1 THE COURT:
Peter Anton Charles Logan seeks leave to appeal against
three aspects of orders made by a judge of the Court (Moore J) on 11 March
1999. In order to explain the need for leave, it is desirable to recount the
history of the proceeding.
The proceeding
2 Mr Logan was employed by Otis Elevator Company Pty Limited ("Otis"), the
respondent, from 1968, shortly before he commenced an
apprenticeship as a lift
mechanic, until 8 February 1995, when his employment was terminated by Otis;
with the exception of two breaks
in the 1970's when he left Otis to assist in
his father's trucking business. From 1985 until his dismissal, Mr Logan was
as Otis' local representative in the Orange area. That area spanned a
substantial portion of New South Wales, reaching as far away
as Coonabarabran,
Nyngan and Coonamble, each of which is about four hours' drive from Mr Logan's
3 On 16 February 1995 Mr Logan filed in this Court an application for a remedy,
pursuant to s170EA of the
Industrial Relations Act
, as the statute
was then known. This application came before Judicial Registrar Walker who
conducted a four-day hearing in July
and September 1995. On 30 October 1995 Mr
Walker made an order awarding Mr Logan $20,000 compensation. He declined to
reinstatement.
4 On 17 November 1995 Otis filed a Notice of Motion seeking review of the
Judicial Registrar's decision. Mr Logan responded, on
24 January 1996, by
filing a Statement of Claim in which he sought orders that Otis pay to him
various sums of money that were said
to be payable to him under the
Industry Award
1984 ("the 1984 award" ). The claims were for "standing by"
and working excess hours. Mr Logan based his claim both on the award
law of contract.
5 On 19 February 1996, Moore J directed that Mr Logan file an application under
of the Act, to cover the claim for award entitlements. This was done. At
a directions hearing on 8 March 1996, Moore J ordered
that the issues of the
applicability of the award to the employment of the applicant and the existence
of an implied term of the
contract of employment, upon which Mr Logan relied,
be heard prior to, and separately from, issues of the quantum alleged to be
to Mr Logan, and these preliminary issues be heard together with the
unlawful termination claim.
6 On 18 October 1996 Mr Logan filed a Further Amended Statement of Claim in
which he referred both to the 1984 award and the
National Metal and
Engineering On-site Construction Industry Award
1989 ("the 1989 award").
7 The hearing proceeded in October and December 1996. On 20 June 1997 Moore J
published reasons for judgment in which he dealt
with the unlawful termination
claim and the preliminary issues. His Honour did not make any formal orders
but directed that short
minutes of orders be brought in, after consultation
between the parties. It was not until 29 January 1999 that short minutes were
submitted. On 11 March 1999, after again hearing the parties, Moore J made the
following formal orders:
THE COURT ORDERS AND DECLARES THAT:
The termination of employment of the applicant was in contravention
of s170DE of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
The respondent pay the applicant $20,000 within 28 days.
That part of the claim of the applicant pleaded in paragraphs 10, 11
and 12 and Schedule 1 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim
October 1996 is dismissed.
That part of the claim of the applicant pleaded in paragraphs 21, 22,
23 and 24 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim filed on
18 October 1996 is
In the period 1988 until the termination of his employment the work
undertaken by the applicant was work comprehended by the classification
electrician special class within the meaning of clause 3(e) of the National
Metal and Engineering On-Site Construction Industry
Award 1989.
Costs reserved.
The matter be listed for directions on 25 March 1999 at
8 On 19 March 1999 Mr Logan's solicitors filed a Notice of Appeal in the
Federal Court of Australia. This course was apparently taken
pursuant to two
erroneous assumptions: first, that the effect of the transitional provisions
contained in Schedule 16 of the
Workplace Relations Act
Legislation Amendment Act
1996 was that any appeal lay to the Full Court of
the Federal Court, rather than the Full Court of this Court; second, that the
made by Moore J were final orders, so it was unnecessary to obtain leave
9 Mr Logan's advisers quickly realised that the latter assumption was
incorrect. On 24 March 1999 they filed a Notice of Motion
seeking leave to
appeal to the Full Federal Court. Before that motion was heard, on 14 April
1999, a Full Court of the Federal Court
published reasons for judgment in
Autistic Association of New South Wales v Dodson
[1999] FCA 715.
reasons dealt with the transitional provisions in some detail and made clear
that, in circumstances like those attending Mr
Logan's case, any appeal must be
to the Full Court of the Industrial Relations Court, not the Full Federal
Court. However, more
than 21 days had now elapsed since the making of Moore
J's orders; accordingly it was necessary for Mr Logan to obtain leave to file
the application for leave to appeal: see Order 52 rule 5 of the Rules of this
Court. On 19 April 1999 Wilcox CJ granted leave.
The application was filed
four days later. Wilcox CJ directed that argument be presented on the
application for leave, as on the
appeal itself.
10 At the hearing before us, three issues were argued:
(i) whether Mr Logan was entitled to recover, under s179 of the Act, payments
for "standing by", whilst employed as Otis' local
representative at Orange;
(ii) whether the difference between the remuneration received by Mr Logan as
Otis' local representative at Orange and the amount
payable to him for ordinary
time pursuant to the 1989 award should be set off against the payments due to
Mr Logan under the award
for "standing by", if applicable, "call back" and
overtime; and
(iii) whether Moore J erred in holding that Otis' payment of one month's salary
in lieu of notice constituted reasonable notice
of the termination of Mr
Logan's employment.
11 No issue is raised by Otis, whether by application for leave to appeal or
cross-appeal or by the filing of a Notice of Contention,
following findings of Moore J:
(a) that Otis' termination of Mr Logan's employment constituted a contravention
of s170DE of the
Industrial Relations Act
in respect of which Otis
should pay $20,000 compensation (orders 1 and 2);
(b) that from 1988 until the termination of his employment, Mr Logan undertook
work falling with the classification of electrician
special class within the
meaning of the 1989 award (order 5).
12 Paragraphs 10 to 12 and Schedule 1 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim
relate to Mr Logan's "standing by" claim. That
claim was dismissed by Moore
J's order 3. Paragraphs 21 to 24 contain Mr Logan's claim about the length of
the notice of termination.
That claim was dismissed by Moore J's order 4. In
the result Mr Logan seeks to appeal only against orders 3 and 4. However, in
anticipation of a hearing on quantum fixed by Moore J for later this month, he
also seeks to argue the issue of set-off, Moore J
having already expressed a
view about that matter adverse to his interests.
Leave to appeal
13 Counsel for Otis, Mr Peter Hall QC and Mr John de Meyrick, opposed the
granting of leave to appeal, basically because of the
length of time that
elapsed between the delivery of Moore J's reasons for judgment on 20 June 1997
and the filing of the first Notice
of Appeal on 19 March 1999. However, until
orders were made, it was not competent for Mr Logan to file a Notice of Appeal
or Application
for Leave to Appeal. Appeals lie against
court, not against reasons for judgment; see
Driclad Pty Limited v
Commissioner of Taxation
[1968] HCA 91
(1968) 121 CLR 45
Ah Toy v Registrar
of Companies
(1985) 10 FCR 280.
If Otis had felt Mr Logan was guilty of
undue delay between June 1997 and January 1999, it could and should have taken
up that question
with Moore J. Mr Logan acted promptly after 11 March. It is
true his first document was misconceived. He should have filed an
Application
for Leave to Appeal, not a Notice of Appeal. However, he rectified this error
with a few days; well within the period
of 21 days stipulated in the Rules of
the Federal Court: see Order 52
The document was filed in the
incorrect Court, but this misapprehension of jurisdiction was widely shared.
Within a few days of
the decision in
, Mr Logan's solicitors made
an application in this Court.
14 The matters sought to be raised are substantial. They have been fully
argued. It is appropriate to grant leave and so enable
this Court to rule on
those matters in advance of the projected quantum hearing. We will grant leave
The "standing by" claim
15 Clause 11 of the 1989 award provides for a 38 hour week. Clause 14 deals
with overtime. It relevantly provides;
Payment for working overtime (other than shift
For all work done outside ordinary hours the rates of pay shall be
time and a half for the first two hours and double time thereafter,
such double
time to continue until the completion of the overtime work.
Except as provided in this subclause or subclause (c) hereof in computing
overtime each day's work shall stand alone.
For the purposes of this clause ordinary hours shall mean the hours worked
fixed in accordance with clause 11 of this award.
The hourly rate, when computing overtime, shall be determined by dividing the
appropriate weekly rate by 38, even in cases when
an employee worked more than
38 ordinary hours in a week.
Requirement to work reasonable overtime
An employer may require any employee to work reasonable overtime at
overtime rates and such employee shall work overtime in accordance
requirement.
The assignment of overtime by an employer to an employee shall be based on
specific work requirements and the practice of `one
in, all in' overtime shall
Rest period after overtime
(d) An employee recalled to work overtime after leaving the site (whether
notified before or after leaving the site) shall be paid
for a minimum of four
hours work or where the employee has been paid for standing by in accordance
with subclause (g) hereof shall
be paid for a minimum of three hours work at
the appropriate rate for each time he is so recalled; provided that, except in
of unforseen [sic] circumstances arising the employee shall not be
required to work the full three or four hours as the case may
be if the job he
was recalled to perform is completed within a shorter period. This subclause
shall not apply in cases where it
is customary for an employee to return to his
employer's site to perform a specific job outside his ordinary working hours,
the overtime is continuous (subject to a reasonable meal break) with
the completion or commencement of ordinary working time.
Overtime worked in the circumstances specified in this subclause shall not be
regarded as overtime for the purpose of subclause
(c) hereof when the actual
time worked is less than three hours on such recall or on each of such
Standing by
(g) Subject to any custom now prevailing under which an employee is required
regularly to hold himself in readiness for a call back,
an employee required to
hold himself in readiness to work after ordinary hours shall until released be
paid standing-by time at ordinary
rates from the time which he is so to hold
himself in readiness."
16 Mr Logan contends it was a requirement of his employment as Otis' local
representative at Orange that he be always available for
call out. The Further
Amended Statement of Claim sought payment at ordinary hourly rates in respect
of 48 weeks (excluding four
weeks' annual holidays) in each of the six years
immediately prior to his termination of employment; for 16 hours per day Monday
to Friday and 24 hours for each Saturday and Sunday. The claim totalled
$685,977.60.
17 Counsel for Mr Logan, Mr Wayne Haylen QC and Mr Rabih Alkadamani, point to
the Job Description of local representatives, issued
by Otis on 22 July 1994.
Item 4 reads:
"Maintains a twenty-four hour service for Otis equipment in
their territory providing prompt attention to reported
Ross Gardiner, New South Wales manager of Otis, agreed it was the
responsibility of local representatives "to man a call out facility
24 hours per day and seven days per week". He also agreed that local
representatives were required to notify their supervisor
before leaving their
area, even at weekends; although he said permission was not refused if the
local representative had arranged
for a local contractor to be on standby for
emergency calls.
18 In rejecting the "standing by" claim, Moore J said:
"It is at least arguable that, apart from the effect of the
opening words of para (g) concerning custom, Mr Logan would be entitled
payment under that paragraph. However, in my opinion, there was plainly a
custom prevailing at the time the 1989 Award was made,
and during the period in
which the paragraph might otherwise have applied, that Mr Logan and other local
representatives were required
regularly to hold themselves in readiness for a
call-back. It is thus unnecessary to determine whether the word `now' directs
to the time the 1989 Award was made or the time at which the
provisions were said to operate and the entitlement was said to arise.
In relation to the opening words of para (g), counsel for Mr Logan made two
submissions. First, that they were a qualification on
an entitlement and it
was incumbent upon Otis to establish that the qualification applied and, in
particular, prove the existent
of the custom. Second, that there needed to be
evidence that the custom relied on is well known and acquiesced in, notorious
certain in the way discussed in
Con-stan Industries of Australia v
Norwich Winterthur Insurance (Australia) Ltd
[1986] HCA 14
(1986) 160 CLR 226
reference was also made to
Byrne & Frew v Australian Airlines
105 CLR 410.
However these authorities concern the existence of custom that
would justify the implication of a term in a contract. For my
see why the opening words of para (g) should be approached on the same
Moore J went on to discuss a number of authorities relating to the word
"custom", always in the context of an argument that a particular
implied in a contract. He then said:
"However, in the present case, in my opinion, it is only
necessary that it be demonstrated that a class of employee, namely local
representatives, was required regularly to hold itself in readiness for a
call-back. In my opinion, the evidence clearly enables
an inference to be
drawn that that was feature of the employment of local representative. Mr
Bull's evidence was that as a local
representative between 1968 and July 1984
he was remunerated for time spent on callouts and other work undertaken outside
hours. It was a matter that, on his evidence, he raised with Mr Logan
when the latter was appointed a local representative in Orange.
discussed, Mr Logan was aware of that aspect of his employment. Moreover the
draft job description for local representatives,
dated 13 April 1994, which I
referred to earlier in this judgment, refers to a duty of a local
representative as maintaining ""a
24 hour service for Otis equipment'. Indeed
Mr Logan's evidence was that he was required to be on 24 hours callout.
From this evidence I can reasonably infer that at the time Mr Logan was
appointed local representative in 1985 and before and following
that time local
representatives were required to make themselves available to attend to
emergency breakdowns and the like. It was
an ongoing feature of their
employment. In my view, the exception found in the opening words of cl 14(g)
applied to local representatives.
That the award would operate in this was is
readily comprehensible. It is intended to confer upon employees a benefit if,
on specific
occasions, they are required to hold themselves in readiness to
work outside ordinary hours. ...In those circumstances the employee
compensated for putting themselves in a position where they are ready to do
what might be required of them. The qualification
in the opening words is
intended to exempt from its operation employees who traditionally and regularly
might be required to return
to work by way of a callback. As I have just
discussed, local representatives were of this latter class.
Insofar as Mr Logan was called back after he had ceased his day's work or at
weekends, I am satisfied he is entitled to payment under
cl 14(d) of the 1989
Award. It is true that the clause speaks of being recalled to work "after
leaving the site" and, impliedly,
applies only to circumstances when an
employee leaves a particular site and is recalled to work at that site.
However it is to be
remembered that cl 14(d) is in
, which is a part of
the 1989 Award dealing with on-site construction. Its application to lift
maintenance and repair by operation
renders inappropriate a literal
application of the provisions in
drafted, as they were, to apply to
on-site construction. The purpose of cl 14(d) is to compensate an employee who
is required to
of reasoning a lift mechanic who is required to return to work, albeit
lift that he or she may not have been work on that day, after ceasing work is
entitled to payment under cl 14(d). Mr Logan
is entitled to such payments.
If, however, he was called to an emergency breakdown during his working day and
consequently worked
excess hours then those excess hours, would simply attract
an overtime payment and not the minimum of four hours arising under cl
19 Counsel for Mr Logan contend that Moore J erred in interpreting the word
"custom" differently than in cases concerning the implication
of a contractual
term. They say the word "custom" requires demonstration that the relevant
practice is notorious, reasonable and
certain. They say it must have existed
from time immemorial, or at least from a date before the insertion of a clause
like cl 14(g)
of the 1989 award in predecessor awards; apparently in the 1930s.
The latter proposition stems from the inclusion of the word "now"
in the term
"custom now prevailing".
20 We do not accept these contentions. We agree with Moore J but do not rest
our opinion solely on the word "custom". The clause
must be construed as a
whole. It seems to us that the purpose of cl 14(g) is to provide compensation
to employees for being placed
on a specific alert. The sub-clause operates
where an employee is "required to hold himself in readiness to work after
hours". The employee shall "until released" be paid standing by time
at ordinary rates "from the time which he is to hold himself
in readiness".
The sub-clause envisages both a requirement by the employer that the employee
hold himself in readiness to work on
a specific occasion and a release from
readiness. Standing by payments apply during the period between those
notifications. The
sub-clause is to operate on an
basis, as and
when stand by instructions are given by an employer.
21 It seems to us the opening words of the sub-clause do no more than emphasise
this interpretation; the sub-clause does not apply
where there is a "custom"
under which the employee is
required to hold himself in
readiness for a call back. In this context the word "custom" means no more
than a prevailing and accepted
practice. Moore J held there was such a
practice in relation to Otis' local representatives.
22 We think Moore J acted correctly in dismissing the claims made in paras 10
to 12 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim.
23 Moore J held that "to the extent that Mr Logan was paid a salary exceeding
the wage to which he was entitled as an electrical
mechanic under the 1989
Award, Otis is entitled to off-set that amount against any amount ultimately
found to be due to Mr Logan
as payment for overtime and ... call backs." He
said the relevant principle is that enunciated by Sheldon J in
[1967] AR (NSW) 471
and adopted by a Full Court of the Federal Court
Poletti v Ecob
(No.2)(1989) 31 IR 321 at 333. Moore J described the
principle in this way:
"It is that the payment of an amount as wages can be relied on
by an employer in satisfaction of an award obligation to pay wages
relation to wages for ordinary time, overtime, weekend penalty rates or any
other like monetary entitlement under the
award. However if a payment is made
under a contract either expressly or impliedly for some purpose other than the
payment of wages,
such as for fares or for a uniform allowance where there is
no award entitlement to fares or a uniform allowance this cannot be relied
as a set off for monies payable under the Award."
24 Ray v Radano
concerned a claim by a chef for overtime payments.
The wages he had received exceeded what was payable to him under the award for
ordinary time. A majority (Richards and Sheehy JJ) of the New South Wales
Industrial Commission held the employer was entitled to
set-off the excess
against the amount due for overtime. Sheldon J dissented. At 478-479 he
"... if by contract, express or implied, the whole or part of
the payment made to the complainant has been in respect of matters which
outside the award entitlement, the payment to that extent cannot be set off.
This may include amounts allocated, say, for fares
or as a uniform allowance
where there is no award entitlement in respect of such matters. This, of
course, is recognized in the
majority judgment.
But at this stage I must part company from that judgment because I can see
no difference in principle between an amount promised in
excess of the award
requirement whether the promise is for, say, a uniform allowance or for a
payment confined to ordinary time only.
In each case, the employee works on
the basis that he will receive an extra-award payment and, in my opinion, it is
not to the point
that in one case its subject matter is clothing and in the
other additional remuneration for a nominated period of work. If one
set off, neither can the other because their essential character is identical
ie, both are payments in fulfilment of a
promise extraneous to the award
obligation. The award obligation re clothing may be nil, in regard to ordinary
time it may be $X.
The extraneous promise is to pay $Y and, whether it is in
respect of clothing or ordinary time, it is $Y beyond what the award requires.
To put it in more concrete terms, if the award rate for 40 hours work is $40
with overtime payable in addition but the employer agrees
to pay a uniform
allowance of $5 per week, it is common ground that it is no answer to a claim
for $40 ordinary time and $5 overtime worked to show that in fact $45
went into the employee's' pocket. If this is so, I regard
it as equally no
answer if he got $45 only because the employer agreed to pay him that amount
for no more than 40 hours work. In
each case, as I see it, the employer cannot
allocate to one subject matter what he has already paid in pursuance of a
promise related
to another subject matter. That would be approbating and
reprobating."
Pacific Publications Pty Ltd v Cantlon
(1983) 4 IR 415
South Wales Industrial Commission in Court Session adopted the view of Sheldon
J, rather than Richards and Sheehy JJ, in
determining that an amount of money
paid to an employee as a "special gratuity" on retrenchment could not be
set-off against money
payable to him in lieu of notice.
26 A Full Court of the Federal Court (Keely, Gray and Ryan JJ) reviewed these
decisions in
Poletti v Ecob
). At 332-333 the Court
"It is to be noted that there are two separate situations dealt
with in the passage from the judgment of Sheldon J which has been
quoted and in
the reasoning of the Commission in
Pacific Publications.
situation is that in which the parties to a contract of employment have agreed
that a sum or sums of money will be paid
and received for specific purposes,
over and above or extraneous to award entitlements. In that situation, the
contract between
the parties prevents the employer afterwards claiming that
payments made pursuant to the contractual obligation can be relied on
satisfaction of award entitlements arising outside the agreed purpose of the
payments. The second situation is that in which
there are outstanding award
entitlements, and a sum of money is paid by the employer to the employee. If
that sum is designated
by the employer as being for a purpose other than the
satisfaction of the award entitlements, the employer cannot afterwards claim
have satisfied the award entitlements by means of the payment. The former
situation is a question of contract. The latter situation
is an application of
the common law rules governing payments by a debtor to a creditor. In the
absence of a contractual obligation
to pay and apply moneys to a particular
obligation, where a debtor has more than one obligation to a creditor, it is
open to the
debtor, either before or at the time of making a payment, to
appropriate it to a particular obligation. If no such appropriation
then the creditor may apply the payment to whichever obligation or obligations
he or she wishes. See
Halsbury's Laws of England,
vol 9, pars 505 and 506."
The Court went on to observe that the principles discussed by Sheldon J in
Ray v Radano
and by the New South Wales Industrial Commission in
Pacific Publications
appeared not to have been discussed in terms by the
Federal Court. However, the Court noted two Federal Court decisions that were
consistent with those principles:
Lynch v Buckley Sawmills Pty Ltd
(1989) 3 FCR 503 and
Poulos v Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd
The Court held it was appropriate to apply those principles which,
they said, were "specific applications of general principles
relating to
contracts and debtors and creditors".
27 In the present case, Otis may not have realised that the 1989 award (or any
other award) would apply to Mr Logan in his position
as local representative at
Orange. Before he was appointed to that position, Mr Logan was treated as an
award employee and paid
for overtime and call-backs. When he was offered the
position at Orange, it was on the basis of an annual salary, higher than
time wages calculated in accordance with the award. There was an
issue before Moore J as to the content of the discussions at that
However, his Honour accepted that Mr Logan and the relevant Otis officers were
all aware "the salary included an amount intended
to compensate for all
overtime including call-outs". His Honour did not find this compensation
accounted for the whole of the difference
between an award wage and the agreed
salary. He would not have been able to make such a finding; there was no
evidence to that effect.
None of the witnesses attempted to apportion the
excess between overtime and call-backs, on the one hand, and the
responsibilities,
additional to those of an electrician special class under the
award, being undertaken by Mr Logan as a local representative, on the
hand. These additional responsibilities were significant. They included
administrative work and sales activities and ensuring
an emergency service 24
hours per day, 365 days per year, either by making himself available for
call-out or arranging for a local
electrical contractor to be available. Mr
Logan was the local "face" of Otis with important public relations
responsibilities.
28 No doubt the reason why no witness sought to apportion the excess is that
nobody considered that question at the relevant time,
when the appointment was
made. It is in the interests of the parties now to adopt contrasting positions
excess. This was demonstrated during argument.
When we asked Mr Hall how the Court should determine what part of the excess
attributed to overtime and call-outs, as distinct from Mr Logan's status
and responsibilities as a local representative, he asserted
it was reasonable
to attribute almost all the excess to overtime and call-outs. Mr Haylen
suggested the opposite. The truth is
the Court has no basis for preferring one
view to another; for doing what the parties refrained from doing until they
found themselves
in court. In this situation it is important to pay attention
to principle. We think it is appropriate to follow
Poletti v Ecob,
being a decision of a strong industrial court made after consideration of all
the relevant authorities. Moreover, the decision
is carefully founded on
relevant principles of contract and common law.
29 We do not, with respect, think the principle applied in
was correctly enunciated by Moore J in the passage from his reasons we
have quoted in para 23 above. That passage propounds a dichotomy
obligation to make a money payment in respect of wages (whether for ordinary
time, overtime, weekend penalty rates or
otherwise) and an obligation relating
to a matter such as fares or uniform allowance. That dichotomy attracted the
majority in
Ray v Radano
but was rejected by Sheldon J and subsequent
decisions have endorsed his dissenting view. The subsequent decisions focus on
matter of designation and appropriation rather than the nature of the
outstanding obligation.
30 The present case is not the "first situation" discussed in the passage from
Poletti v Ecob
quoted in para 26 above; the parties did not agree that
the difference between the moneys that would be due under the award and the
moneys actually paid "will be paid and received for specific purposes over and
above or extraneous to award entitlements". The case
is that of the second
situation: "there are outstanding award entitlements, and a sum of money is
paid by the employer to the employee".
However, prior to the hearing of the
appeal, neither party sought to designate or appropriate the excess, or any
part of it, to
any particular obligation owed by Otis to Mr Logan. The whole
of the excess was paid and received as an amount appropriate to reflect
difference between the position of a local representative, with all that
entails, and an ordinary electrician special class.
It is not open to Otis now
to change that situation by asking the Court to make a retrospective
designation between the various
elements that differentiate the situation of a
local representative and an ordinary electrician special class. Without such a
designation,
none of the excess can be reasonably identified as a payment on
account of overtime and call-backs and, accordingly, set-off against
overtime and call-back payments due to Mr Logan under the 1989 award.
31 In our opinion Moore J erred in holding that the excess is available for
set-off against the overtime and call-back payments.
In the absence of an
agreement or timely designation, there is no basis for holding that any part of
the excess is available for
Notice of termination
32 In relation to this issue, Moore J said:
"It is contended by Mr Logan that he was entitled to reasonable
notice and the payment in lieu of notice he received, one month's
pay, does not
represent reasonable notice. The evidentiary foundation for the contention is
not made out. At one stage Mr Logan
conceded, in effect, that one month's
notice would be adequate. Counsel for Mr Logan has not demonstrated the
position was one for
which a longer period of notice would, by implication,
have been adopted by the parties had they turned their mind to it when
formulating
or considering the contractual arrangements between
33 His Honour's reference to a concession seems to be a reference to the
following evidence of Mr Logan in cross-examination:
"Well, now had you given notice in February '95 instead of being
dismissed, what notice would you have given?---Well, I would've presumed
to give a month's notice but I would've given more notice than that.
But you would have presumed you would have given a month's
notice?---Yes.
Was that your understanding of the notice that other local representatives
and other salaried employees of Otis gave?---Well, I don't
know. I never
discussed it with them because I didn't see it as an imminent thing. In my
opinion it was something that wasn't necessary.
Was that common knowledge as far as you are concerned?---Was what common
That a month's notice was the custom and usage within Otis?---I presumed
that was, yes. I presumed that was the situation. "
However, Mr Logan was asked further about this matter in re-examination:
"Yesterday you said you would have given more notice but you
presumed one month's notice; you presumed something about one month's
Why did you presume one month's notice?---The only reasoning I had was when I
was on a weekly wage it was my opinion - well,
it was my understanding, I
should say, that it was a week's notice, and because I was being paid on a
monthly basis I presumed that
the reasoning would be a month's
34 Particularly having regard to Mr Logan's explanation, we are unable to
read his evidence in cross-examination as a concession that
one month would
constitute reasonable notice of the termination of his employment. On the
contrary, he said he would have given
more than a month's notice; obviously
because he would have thought one month to be unreasonably short. The
reference to one month
seems merely to be a reflection of the common
misapprehension that the length of reasonable notice is directly related to pay
Anyway it is for the Court to determine what length of notice would
be reasonable under the circumstances; even a direct concession
by an applicant
would not determine that issue. Compare the Full Court's treatment, in
Rhone-Poulenc Agrochimie SA v UIM Chemical Services Pty Ltd
at 487-488 and 504, of a concession by an applicant that his conduct
had been "dishonest", "deceptive" and "misleading".
35 We do not agree that the question of what constitutes reasonable notice is
to be determined as if the Court were considering
what term ought to be implied
into the contract of employment at the time it was made. In the absence of
agreement between the parties
on the subject, their contract is to be taken as
importing a requirement of reasonable notice of termination. What is
is a matter to be considered in the light of the circumstances
applying at the date of notice, not the date of the original contract:
Martin Baker Aircraft Co Limited v Canadian Flight Equipment Limited
[1955] 2 QB 556
36 Counsel for Mr Logan contend the Court should determine that six months'
notice was required. They point out that, at the date
of the notice, Mr Logan
had been Otis' representative in Orange for about ten years and was earning
had worked for Otis throughout his whole career,
except for two relatively short breaks assisting his father. He was resident,
his family, at Millthorpe. Employment opportunities for elevator
electricians are more limited in rural areas than in major cities.
37 Counsel for Otis note that the 1989 award requires only one weeks' notice.
They do not suggest this provision has contractual
or other decisive
significance but say it is a matter that ought to be taken into account in
determining what constituted reasonable
notice. They also observe that Otis
offered to transfer Mr Logan to Sydney, rather than terminate his employment,
but he refused
that offer. Counsel argue Moore J was correct in determining
that one month constituted reasonable notice.
38 All of the matters mentioned by counsel are relevant to making a judgment,
which is really a matter of impression, as to the
appropriate length of notice.
We think one month is too short a time; it would have been extremely difficult
to Mr Logan to have
found suitable employment during that time. On the other
hand, six months is too long. We think the appropriate allowance is three
months. We need not consider any effect of this determination on the award of
compensation for unlawful termination. There is no
appeal or cross appeal in
respect of that item, so Moore J's decision about it remains unaffected.
39 We propose to grant leave and uphold the appeal to the extent that order 4
will be set aside. We will add an order that compensation
be assessed on the
bases that:
(i) Otis was bound to give to Mr Logan three months' notice of termination of
employment or to pay three months' salary in lieu
of notice; and
(ii) Otis is not entitled to set-off against its liability to make payments in
respect of overtime and call-backs, pursuant to clause
14(a) and (d) of the
1989 award, the difference between the salary paid to Mr Logan from time to
time and the amount payable to him
under that award for ordinary time.
The appeal will otherwise be dismissed.
certify that the preceding thirty-nine (39) numbered paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Judgment herein of the Honourable
Chief Justice Wilcox and
the Honourable Justices Marshall and Madgwick.
Dated: 22 June 1999
for the Appellant:
Haylen QC and R Alkadamani
for the Appellant:
for the Respondent:
M Hall QC and J de Meyrick
for the Respondent:
of Hearing:
No downloadable files available