Sun-Wizard Holding Pty Ltd v Key Logic Pty Ltd [2017] ADO 8 (17 October 2017)
DESIGNS ACT 2003
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE
REGISTRAR OF DESIGNS WITH REASONS
for examination by Sun-Wizard Holding Pty Ltd of design number 201012310
(registered design number 332890) in the name
of Key Logic Pty Ltd
REPRESENTATION: Owner: David Logan of Queens Counsel, instructed by Paul
Davis of Fisher Adams Kelly Callinans Patent & Trade
Mark Attorneys
Requestor: Susan Gatford of Counsel, instructed by Michelle Wilson of
Wynnes Patent & Trade Mark Attorneys
Designs Act 2003
third party request for
examination of a design under
– whether email to a number of
associates of owner confidential – design forms part of prior art base -
registration
to be revoked
7 June 2010 (‘
the Priority Date
’) Exlites Pty Ltd
the Previous Owner
’) filed an application under the
Designs Act 2003
’). The design number
allocated to the sole design in the application was
Design was registered on 24 September 2010 and allocated registration number
. The product to which the Design relates
is described as a ‘Solar bollard ’. It carries the following
Statement of Newness
and Distinctiveness
The entire design is new and
distinctive.
following are the representations contained in the
registration:
14 October 2011 a request for examination of the Design was filed by the
Previous Owner. An initial examination report issued on
indicated that the examiner considered grounds for revocation of the Design
existed on the basis that the design
was not new and distinctive. Following a
response from the Previous Owner a second examiner was satisfied that the Design
fact new and distinctive and that no grounds for revocation existed. The
Design was certified on 13 January 2012.
14 July 2014 the registration was updated to reflect an assignment of ownership
of the design from the Previous Owner to
Logic Pty Ltd
16 February 2015 a third party,
Holding Pty Ltd
the Requestor
’), requested examination
as permitted under
of the Act. The request asserted that the Design was not
new and distinctive and was accompanied by material to support this view.
Design was examined again and notice was issued to the parties indicating that
no ground of revocation existed. The notice provided
the Requestor an
opportunity to be heard. On 7 July 2015 the Requestor availed itself of
this opportunity.
18 April 2016 directions were made which provided the parties an opportunity to
provide evidence. The Requestor filed the following
Declaration made on 17 June 2016 by Ian Fry, a director of the Requestor, with
Exhibits IF-1 to IF-8 (‘
Declaration made on 17 June 2016 by Earl Andrew Palfrey, owner and manager of
All Round Supplies Pty Ltd, with Exhibits
EAP-1 to EAP-4 (‘
the Palfrey
declaration
Declaration made on 15 June 2016 by Michelle Wilson, a registered Trade Marks
Attorney employed by Wynnes Patent and Trade
Mark Attorneys, the legal
representatives of the Opponent, with Exhibit MLW-1; and
Declaration made on 11 May 2017 by Ian Fry, with Exhibit IF-1.
Owner filed the following evidence:
Declaration made
on 5 September 2016 by Michael John Arieni, the Managing Director of the Owner,
with Exhibits MA1 to MA4 (‘
declaration
The hearing
heard the matter in Canberra on 1 August 2017 as a delegate of the Registrar of
Designs. David Logan of Queens Counsel, instructed
by Paul Davis of Fisher Adams
Kelly Callinans Patent & Trade Mark Attorneys appeared for the Owner.
Mr Logan’s oral submissions
were supplemented by a written summary of
submissions filed on 14 July 2017. Susan Gatford of Counsel,
instructed by Michelle Wilson
of Wynnes Patent & Trade Mark Attorneys,
appeared for the Requestor. Ms Gatford’s oral submissions were
supplemented by
a written summary of submissions filed with IP Australia on
21 July 2017.
the hearing Mr Logan referred to two cases which were not referred to in his
written summary of submissions. I allowed Ms Gatford
seven days following
the hearing to provide further short written submissions addressing those two
cases. Ms Gatford filed those
further submissions on
8 August 2017. The Owner filed short submissions in response to
Ms Gatford’s further submissions on
11 August 2017.
The prior relationship between the parties
Since 2003 I have been the Managing Director of Joshmika
Pty Ltd, which is involved in the, electrical and mechanical design of mobile
and stand-alone solar powered devices. Since 2003 I have also been the owner and
manager of Irradiance Energy, which undertakes technical
and electrical design
and development in standalone and transportable solar powered extra low voltage
lighting for billboards, parks,
roadways, paths, jetties, road works and related
In 2008/2009 I was approached by Mike Arieni (Mike). At the time Mike was a
director of [the Previous Owner] (Exlites). Mike asked
me to become his business
partner, and to assist him in both developing and funding a solar bollard for
Exlites. I agreed.
Between 2008/2009 and 2013 I provided technical and design input as well as
funding ... working with Mike and others to develop and
commercialise a solar
bollard for Exlites. I was a director of Exlites from 25 January 2010 until
22 March 2013.
to the Arieni declaration:
In late 2008 I met [Ian Fry (Ian)] who was a reseller of
Orca Solar Lighting. Orca Solar Lighting were the product distributors for
Exlites form 2007.
Over the next few months I built a relationship with Ian who was building solar
lighting towers and wanting to use a light produced
by Exlites (not a solar
bollard light).
Ian sold some of the earlier solar bollard lights that Exlites provided prior to
him joining Exlites as a Director. Ian became a
Director of Exlites in January
2010, one month after the tooling for the solar bollard was commenced ie the
solar bollard shown in
[the Design].
Ian was never involved in the design of the solar bollard
The Legislative Framework
Registrar must examine a registered design if any person requests that the
Registrar do so.
In examining a
design the Registrar must consider whether a ground for revocation
The grounds for revocation
include that the design is not a registrable
A design is a registrable
design if the design is new and distinctive when compared with the prior art
base for the design as it
existed before the priority date of the
The prior art base for a
design consists of:
(a) designs
publicly used in Australia; and
(b) designs
published in a document within or outside Australia; and
(c) designs in
relation to which each of the following criteria is satisfied:
(i) the design
is disclosed in a design application;
(ii) the design
has an earlier priority date than the designated design;
(iii) the first
time documents disclosing the design are made available for public inspection
is on or after the priority date of the designated
design is new unless it is identical to a design that forms part of the prior
A design is distinctive
unless it is substantially similar in overall impression to a design that forms
part of the prior art base
provides some factors to be considered in assessing substantial similarity, and
(1) If a person
is required by this Act to decide whether a design is substantially similar in
overall impression to another design,
the person making the decision is to give
more weight to similarities between the designs than to differences between
(2) The person
(a) have regard
to the state of development of the prior art base for the design; and
design application in which the design was disclosed included a statement (a
statement of newness and distinctiveness
) identifying particular
visual features of the design as new and distinctive:
particular regard to those features; and
(ii) if those
features relate to only part of the design—have particular regard to that
part of the design, but in the context
of the design as a whole;
(c) if only
part of the design is substantially similar to another design, have regard to
the amount, quality and importance of that
part in the context of the design as
a whole; and
(d) have regard
to the freedom of the creator of the design to innovate.
design application in which the design was disclosed did not include a statement
of newness and distinctiveness in respect
of particular visual features of the
design, the person must have regard to the appearance of the design as a
(4) In applying
subsections (1), (2) and (3), the person must apply the standard of a person who
is familiar with the product to which
the design relates, or products similar to
the product to which the design relates (the
standard of the informed
(5) In this
section, a reference to a person is a reference to a court.
‘informed user’ was considered by Kenny J in
Review 2 v Redberry
wherein her Honour stated:
In summary, the standard of the informed user is an
objective one. ... The informed user is not an expert, but must be more than
informed. The focus for consideration is on eye appeal and not on
internal or less visible manufacturing features. ...
Thus, whilst there will be some women who subscribe to fashion magazines (such
that illustrated the prior art in this
case) and have particular knowledge of, and familiarity with, fashion trends,
there will be
many other women who lack such knowledge and familiarity.
Precedent and the text of
indicate that it is from the perspective of
someone closer to the former group that the newness and distinctiveness of the
Design and the similarity of the Redberry garments in terms of overall
impression must be
a ground for revocation exists the Registrar must give the relevant parties a
notice stating that the registration of the design
is revoked and make an entry
in the Register.
Requestor submitted that the prior art base in this matter includes the
representations of the Exlites solar heads and solar bollards shown in Exhibits
IF-1 to IF-5 inclusive of Fry 1; and
representations of the Exlites solar bollards shown in Exhibits EAP-1 to EAP-3
inclusive of the Palfrey declaration.
is stated in the Palfrey declaration that Mr Palfrey was the founder of All
Round Supplies Pty Ltd (‘
’). Mr Palfrey described ARS as
‘the leading distributor of electrical infrastructure products to utility
contractors
in Australia’. Mr Palfrey further declared:
[The Previous Owner] supplied a variety of solar
lighting products to ARS over the years. From 2009 Mike Arieni ... sought to
ARC promote and sell a solar bollard that [the Previous Owner] was
developing. During that time he provided me with the following
documentation
concerning [the Previous Owner’s] solar bollard to use to market the
(b) an email dated 21 April 2010 which attached a document titled ‘Exlites
Bollard Comparisons v2’. Now shown to me and
marked EAP-2 is a copy of the
21 April 2010 email and attachment; and
(c) an email dated 3 May 2010 which attached a document which refers to
‘New 2010 GENII Design Features’. Now shown to
me and marked EAP-3
is a copy of the 3 May 2010 email and attachment.
email in Exhibit EAP-2 (‘
the first GEN-II email
attachment which is somewhat in the nature of a data sheet and is two pages
long. The first page is headed ‘NEW
BOLLARD COMPARISON V2’. The
second page is headed NEW BOLLARD POLE TEST. At the bottom of each page are the
2003-2010 EXlites Pty Ltd Australia – All rights
reserved’. The attachment contains on the first page, amongst other
material, the following images:
The first of the four images shows what is referred to in this matter as the
GEN-I solar bollard. The remaining images show what is
referred to as the GEN-II
solar bollard.
email in Exhibit EAP-3 (‘
the second GEN-II email
single page attachment which, although described in the email as ‘a
pre-release data sheet’ is, in my view,
more in the nature of a flyer. It
bears, at the bottom, a copyright notice with identical wording to that found in
the attachment
to the first GEN-II email. The attachment is headed, ‘SOLAR
BOLLARD’, with a sub-heading ‘2010 “Australian
Global Design’. Underneath the headings appears the following
EXlites are proud to presents [sic] our latest
generation of heavy duty and vandal resistant SOLAR BOLLARDS for use in all
infrastructure applications throughout the
The flyer contains, amongst other material the following images:
the oral hearing it was conceded by the Owner that the GEN-II images in the
emails disclose the Design. However, the Owner
contends that these images of the
Design do not constitute part of the prior art base because the first GEN-II
email and the second
GEN-II email were confidential since they were sent to
their recipients in circumstances which imported an obligation of confidence
as a consequence were not ‘published’ for the purposes of
The Requestor, on the other hand, submits the emails were not
confidential and therefore constitute publication of the GEN-II images.
result, submits the Requestor, the images in the attachments to the emails
constitute part of the prior art base and disclose
the Design.
The meaning of ‘published’
is general agreement between the parties in this matter that for there to be
relevant publication, the document containing the
design must be made available
to a member of the public without any restriction as to secrecy or
confidentiality. The Owner referred
to the discussion surrounding ‘prior
art information ... made publicly available’ in
Stanway Oyster
Cylinders Pty Ltd v Marks
That form of wording appears in
Patents Act 1990
that case, Drummond J stated that:
‘[P]ublicly available’ involves, in addition
to it being accessible to the public, that a person to whom the information
disclosed in that person’s capacity as a member of the public is free, in
law and equity, to make use of the
information.
statement of the law is reflected in
, section DO7.3.2 of the Design
Examiner’s Manual which states:
A design is published in a document if ... a person not
bound by express or implied confidentiality has knowledge of the content of
Were the contents of the emails confidential?
Owner submitted that the contents of the emails and the attachments in
Exhibit EAP-2 and Exhibit EAP-3 ‘were confidential
and received in
circumstances importing an equitable obligation of confidence in the recipient,
Palfrey and ARS’. There is
general agreement between the parties with
respect to the principles and law surrounding the equitable obligation of
confidence;
however the Requestor refutes the assertion that the emails are
confidential when those principles are properly applied.
principal authority concerning confidential information in equity is
AN Clark (Engineers) Ltd
can be taken from the judgement of Megarry J that—apart from where
confidentiality is imposed by contract—there are
two requirements which
must be satisfied before information is considered to have been provided with an
obligation of confidence.
Firstly, the information must have the necessary
quality of confidence about it. Secondly, that the information must have been
in circumstances importing an obligation of
confidence.
With respect to the
first requirement Megarry J stated:
However confidential the circumstances of communication,
there can be no breach of confidence in revealing to others something which
already common knowledge. But this must not be taken too far. Something that has
been constructed solely from materials in the
public domain may possess the
necessary quality of confidentiality: for something new and confidential may
have been brought into
being by the application of the skill and ingenuity of
the human brain. Novelty depends on the thing itself, and not upon the quality
of its constituent parts. Indeed, often the more striking the novelty, the more
commonplace its
components.
respect to the second requirement Megarry J stated:
However secret and confidential the information, there
can be no binding obligation of confidence if that information is blurted out
public or is communicated in other circumstances which negative any duty of
holding it confidential. From the authorities cited
to me, I have not been able
to derive any very precise idea of what test is to be applied in determining
whether the circumstances
import an obligation of confidence. ... It may be that
that hard-worked creature, the reasonable man, may be pressed into service
more: for I do not see why he should not labour in equity as well as at law. It
seems to me that if the circumstances are such
that any reasonable man standing
in the shoes of the recipient of the information would have realised that upon
reasonable grounds
the information was being given to him in confidence, then
this should suffice to impose upon him the equitable obligation of confidence.
In particular, where information of commercial or industrial value is given on a
business-like basis and with some avowed common
object in mind, such as a joint
venture or the manufacture of articles by one party for the other, I would
regard the recipient as
carrying a heavy burden if he seeks to repel a
contention that he was bound by an obligation of confidence. ... I merely add
I doubt whether equity would intervene unless the circumstances are of
sufficient gravity; equity ought not to be invoked merely
to protect trivial
tittle-tattle, however
confidential.
is useful to reproduce the body text of the GEN-II emails at this point. The
first GENII email contains the following:
As promised here it is. I will let the document speak for itself.
I put the blue LED into the mix as well as so you get an idea of what the static
LED colours (blue, red, green, yellow/orange) will
be like as well.
I am considering reducing the milliamp draw from the PCB by 20%-25% in each
model as we are far more brighter than we have ever been
before with these new
versions (with reflector enhancement still to come) and would like your opinions
as most of you that this has
been emailed to re-sell these for us into your
markets globally.
Benefits will be:
Lower battery
cycle increased life
Quicker recharge
due to less daily draw down
Better operating
ability in lower peak sunlight locations
Mike Arieni
second GEN-II email contains the following:
To All EXlites Associates,
Attached for you is a pre release data sheet on the new 2010 solar bollard.
This will show you exactly the size difference between the current version and
the old model.
This is also to give you all new system design facts prior to the new product
information brochure that will be completed shortly
once all certifications have
been completed.
We will receive the new PCB’s this week to do the lux trials and make the
final decision on PCB’s (LED’s) that
will be available. These ones
coming have the power draw reduced and we have other variants coming to trial
just to see how low we
can take the new 3 LED version but still keep it better
than the previous 6 LED version and what we can do with the new 6 LED
As you can see the % increases in battery capacity and solar panel input are
much higher than any previous version which will offer
us I believe the best
stand alone solar lighting product in Australia and globally.
We again apologise for all the delays and frustrations caused to some of you but
as I have explained it has been out of our direct
control as we are using
another local Australian company to arrange the tooling for us and the delays
are with them and their tool
All going to plan this will be finished very soon so we can start
production.
Mike Arieni
emails contain text below the signature block which is in a smaller font size
and is typical of text included by default at the
bottom of corporate type
emails, being, in this case:
Please consider the environment before printing this
Confidentiality: This E-Mail is from EXlites. The contents are confidential and
are intended only for the named recipient. The recipient
is hereby notified that
any use, copying, disclosure or distribution of the information contained in the
E-Mail is strictly prohibited.
If you have received this E-Mail in error, please
reply to us immediately at info@exlites.com.au. Please delete the document from
your E-Mail system.
Viruses: Any loss or damage caused by using this material is not the
sender’s responsibility. EXlites will be limited to re-supplying
material. No warranty is made that this material is free from computer virus or
other defect.
Owner submitted that the two requirements discussed in
are satisfied
in respect of both GEN-II emails because:
First, the information provided in the email attachments
was confidential in nature:
(a) It is clear from the covering emails that the attachments clearly related to
products still being developed. That implies that
the information is not in the
public domain or for further dissemination at that stage. ...
(b) None of these data sheets was in the form of a product brochure to be
provided to the public, quite unlike that provided at the
trade fair in
Technologies v
Secondly, the information was imparted in circumstances
importing an obligation of confidence:
(a) The person who communicated the information, Mr Arieni, says [in the Arieni
declaration] the information to update resellers
on product development, was
provided with ‘an expectation that any of the material I provided ... was
kept confidential until
the product was available for distribution’. It
was information ‘for the resellers knowledge only and ... clearly not
marketing material for wider distribution’.
(b) The confidentiality restriction in the email footer restricting the use of
confidential content catches these attachments, being
confidential in
(c) The fact that a similar email footer may have been used by Mr Arieni, in
2012 (after the priority date), to communicate non-confidential
information to
another person ([Fry 1]) is irrelevant. It does not affect the operation of that
confidentiality restriction, before
the priority date, so as to require Mr
Palfrey (and his company) as recipient of confidential information contained in
an email attachment
to ensure such information remained
confidential.
referred to by the Owner, above, concerned an importer
and wholesaler of household goods and electrical appliances
’), another importer and wholesaler of household consumer
items, including vacuum cleaners (‘
’) and a manufacturer
of vacuum cleaners, Suzhou Fak Electric Co Ltd (‘
Following discussions in late 2004, SF agreed that WT would be granted exclusive
rights to distribute, in Australia, a vacuum
cleaner which SF manufactured
’). On 16 June 2005, WT applied for registration
of the design of the MC801 in Australia. The Chinese Export Commodities Fair
held in Guangzhou over the period 1620 April 2005. The MC-801 was on
display at the fair. At the fair SF provided Tempo with
a brochure for the
MC-801. It was unclear from the evidence in the case whether SF indicated to
Tempo that the exclusive right to
distribute the MC801 in Australia had already
been granted to WT. Justice Jessup considered that the provision of the brochure
Tempo at the fair amounted to publication of a disclosed design which was
substantially similar in overall impression to the MC801
Owner referred to two other cases to support their submissions. The first was
Del Casale v Artedomus (Aust) Pty Ltd
case concerned use of information acquired by employees during their employment
and whether the employees were entitled to use
that information after leaving
that employment. Campbell JA referring to the judgment in
On Megarry J’s account, the information is
‘of a confidential nature’ if it is not ‘public property and
knowledge’ or if it is ‘constructed solely from materials in
the public domain’, to which ‘the skill and
ingenuity of the human
brain’ has been applied. ...
This is a fairly undemanding
JA further explored the requirements in
and stated:
When one is deciding whether a piece of information is
the subject of an enforceable equitable obligation of confidence, the first
of the inquiry ... is directed to whether the information has the fairly low
level of intrinsic confidentiality that his Honour
identified. The ‘second
step’ identified by Megarry J in
, really has two quite
distinct elements. The first element amounts to whether the information was
imparted in circumstances where
a reasonable person must have realised, on
reasonable grounds, that he or she was not free to deal with the information as
her own, or must have realised that he or she could deal with the
information only within certain limitations. The second element
has nothing to
do with the circumstances of imparting the information but involves a return to
the intrinsic nature of the information
itself. It involves whether the
information has the degree of intrinsic importance to warrant equitable
intervention.
Owner referred also to
Streetscape Projects (Australia) Pty Ltd v City of
This case concerned
the use of information acquired during the performance of a comprehensive
written contract. The Owner noted that
Barrett JA cited with approval the words
of Campbell JA at para 103 in
, and stated:
The confidential quality of information does not depend
on its being in the nature of a trade
Barrett JA also stated:
Implicit in the statement of principle are two
propositions of particular relevance to this appeal: first, that particular
information
is specifically identified; and, second, that the confidential
nature of the identified information is established.
The need for specificity in the identification of the information said to be
confidential ... comes from the fact that the court
must make an assessment of
the quality of that information, that is, whether it is in truth of a
confidential nature. An aspect of
that inquiry may turn on whether the whole or
some part has become the subject general disclosure or notoriety. Precise
delineation
of the subject matter is accordingly essential. ...
O’Brien v Komesaroff
Mason J said that ‘the accepted
conception of confidentiality’ in substance ‘involves the person
seeking to protect
the information largely keeping it to
Australian Medic-Care Co Ltd v Hamilton Pharmaceutical Pty Ltd
noted that the essential attribute of confidential information is
‘relative secrecy’
and went on to say:
Whether this attribute exists in a given case will often
be a question of degree and a variety of criteria have been invoked in various
contexts to sharpen the inquiry to be made:
(i) is the information in question widely known, or publicly available in the
relevant industry, trade, etc;
(ii) has the confider made the information public by using it in its
manufactured products and placing it on the market ...
(iii) did the confider produce or obtain the information only after the
expenditure of time and/or money by way of research or in
the application of
skill and ingenuity;
(iv) what steps has the confider taken to preserve the secrecy of the
information and to prevent it becoming public knowledge;
(v) is the information intrinsically valuable or is it valuable to the confider
or to a competitor or other interested party; and
(vi) would a reasonable person in all the circumstances recognise the
information to be the ‘property’ of the
Owner submitted that all of the inquiries from
, above, are
answered in favour of the GEN-II emails being confidential, asserting in oral
submissions:
The information
was not widely known or publicly available;
emails are talking about a new product that is still being developed;
The evidence is
that the GEN-II solar bollard was not available for sale until 2012;
The product
would not be capable of being reversed engineered as the GEN-II solar bollard
was not ‘out there’;
The evidence
supports a view that the Owner expended a significant sum of money on tooling
for the GEN-II solar bollard;
The steps taken
to preserve the secrecy of the information were: the confidentiality notice at
the bottom of the GEN-II email; the
in the attachment to the GEN-II email;
The information
is valuable to the confider because we are talking about a product which the
evidence indicates is new, was not on
the market and was something that was
evidently valuable to the provider of the information; and
It is certainly
the case here that a reasonable person would recognise the information as the
property of the Owner.
respect to the confidentiality notice at the bottom of the GEN-II emails the
Owner submitted:
Whether or not it may have been a standard form of
It won’t make something confidential that’s not, but if there is
confidential information included in an email ... it
will attach and will
prevent someone who receives that information from using or disclosing
inappropriately that information.
Owner further submitted in respect of the confidential nature of the disclosure
that there may be other information that is confidential,
but the images of the
GEN-II solar bollard, at least, are confidential. The Owner referred to the text
of the first GEN-II email:
in particular, the reference to ‘reducing the
milliamp draw from the PCB’, the reference to the ‘reflector
enhancement
still to come’, and that Mr Arieni was seeking the opinions of
the recipients of the email ‘as most of you that this
has been emailed to
resell these for us’. The Owner submitted that Mr Arieni was keeping the
Owner’s resellers updated,
he was asking their opinion and was talking
to whether a duty of confidentiality attaches to the second GEN-II email, the
Owner has submitted that it ‘is even stronger’.
The Owner has
submitted that the attachment is a pre-release data sheet, ‘it’s
information for resellers’, ‘it’s
pre-production’, all
of which are indicated by the text of the email. The Owner stressed the
‘newness’ aspect of
the design and that ‘something is going to
come and be disseminated, but that’s not this’. The Owner also
in respect of the second requirement that:
Mr Palfrey and his company would have understood that
this is not information that they were free to use as they
wished—disseminate
it, publish it, disclose it—but it was for their
information at this point in time.
Owner referred also to the Arieni declaration wherein it was declared:
As is normal in any commercial relationship I kept all
my resellers up to date with progress in relation to new products. There was
expectation that any of the material that I provided to my resellers was kept
confidential until the product was available for
distribution. To further
reinforce this fact I placed a confidentiality statement on the bottom of my
Owner also noted in oral submissions, that despite being put on notice by the
Arieni declaration about the asserted confidential
nature of the GEN-II emails
Mr Palfrey did not indicate that he made any use of the attachments to the
GEN-II emails.
response the Requestor noted that the burden is on the Owner to establish
confidentiality and submitted the following:
While my learned friend made much of the fact that
it’s not public information so it’s confidential, I seriously cavil
with that: that is not the test. ... The test is, ‘Is it
confidential?’.
the hearing the Requestor also addressed some of the authorities put forward by
the Owner and submitted that the criteria that
will apply in the assessment of
confidentiality will depend on the context. It was noted that many of cases
concerned manufacture
of secret formulas or secret ways of making something;
none deal with the present situation where a manufacturer is providing
information
to an existing customer. It was submitted, ‘The only reason to
give it to them is that they are going to sell.’
respect of the Owner’s reliance (to some extent) on the footers of the
GEN-II emails and the copyright notices in the attachments,
it was submitted by
the Requestor that these are:
Really last gasp grabs for things. What it is, is trying
to pin some sort of communication of the obligation of [confidentiality]
something is really confidential—and it has to be really confidential to
be protected under breach of confidence—you
don’t just rely on your
email footer ... and you don’t just rely on your copyright notice, because
that relates to copyright.
Requestor submitted that the case closest to the matter at hand is ‘the
brochure at the trade fair case’: the
Requestor’s words, ‘there was a prototype’, ‘it was a
pre-release brochure’ being handed out
with the implication that
‘this is what we will make for you if you place an order’.
the following reasons, I am not satisfied that the attachment to the second
GENII email, at least, was imparted in circumstances
importing an obligation of
confidence. I am not persuaded that the confidentiality notice at the bottom of
the email has the effect
submitted by the Owner. Case law on the effectiveness
of such notices is scant to say the least. Nevertheless, it is apparent that
notices of that type are added almost universally by businesses as a matter of
course beneath the signature blocks of their emails
regardless of the content of
the email to which they are appended. It is unlikely that any recipient of an
email in a business setting
reads beyond the signature block every time they
receive an email. It is far more likely that they never read beyond the
block. While a recipient is likely aware that there is probably such a
notice lurking there—should they happen to turn their
mind to the
question—the ubiquitous presence of such notices means that they are
unlikely to have the effect asserted by the
Owner, regardless of the nature of
the material either in the email or attached to it. It seems to me that in cases
where what is
contained in emails is truly confidential, and a sender wishes to
make that known, a confidentiality notice at the beginning of an
email is far
more likely to be effective in importing an obligation of confidence to the
does the copyright notice on the attachment to the second GEN-II email assist
the Owner. Similar copyright notices appear
frequently on a myriad of documents
which are not confidential, for example, published works of fiction.
Confidentiality and copyright
are two quite different things.
second GEN-II email was not, for example, sent to a single manufacturer who was
to produce the solar bollard on behalf on of the
Owner. Rather it was sent to
‘All EXlites Associates’. How many recipients this constitutes is
unclear, but it is apparent
that most of the recipients are sellers of the
Owner’s products. I am not satisfied that the wording of the email is
of confidentiality at all: it looks instead like an attempt to create
a marketing ‘buzz’ regarding what is described
in the email as
‘the best stand-alone solar lighting product in Australia and
globally’. The reasonable person standing
in the shoes of the recipient
would be justified in considering the email in that light and to pass on the
information contained
in the email to their own customers: perhaps by showing
them the attachment and indicating that this is what is shortly to be available.
is not sufficient that Mr Arieni had an expectation that the material he
provided in the email was kept confidential. That expectation
was not clearly
communicated nor was it apparent from the circumstances in which the email was
sent. To paraphrase Mason J, quoted
if the Owner sought to
protect the Design by keeping it confidential, he ought to have kept it to
have found that the second GEN-II email was not imparted in circumstances
importing an obligation of confidence, thus, the second
requirement in
has not been met. Consequently, there was no equitable obligation of
confidence surrounding the email. The images of the GEN-II solar
bollard in the
second GEN-II email were therefore published. As the publication occurred before
the priority date it follows that
the Design is not new and distinctive when
compared to the prior art base, and consequently is not a registrable design. A
for revocation of the Design therefore exists.
am satisfied that a ground of revocation has been made out. I direct that
Registration Number
be revoked one
month from the date of this decision. If the Registrar is served with a notice
of appeal from this decision before
that time, I direct that revocation shall
not occur until either the appeal is withdrawn or a court so orders.
Requestor has sought an award of costs in its favour. I see no reason to depart
from the general rule that costs follow the event.
As the Requestor has
established the existence of a ground of revocation, I award costs against the
Owner under
of the Act.
Robert Wilson
Hearings and Oppositions
Designs Act 2003
Designs Act 2003
s 65(2)(a).
Designs Act 2003
Designs Act 2003
Designs Act 2003
[2008] FCA 1588
(2008) 79 IPR 214
[26]-[27], approved by the Full Federal Court in
LED Technologies Pty Ltd v
Roadvision Pty Ltd
[2012] FCAFC 3
Designs Act 2003
(1996) 35 IPR
(1968) 1A IPR 587
was cited with approval by
Gleeson CJ in
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v Lenah Game Meats Pty
(2001) 208 CLR 199
[2007] FCA 114
(2007) 71 IPR 307
[2007] NSWCA 172
(2007) 73 IPR
Ibid 346 [103]
(emphasis added by Owner).
Ibid 353 [133].
[2013] NSWCA
[1982] HCA 33
(1982) 150 CLR 310
Streetscape Projects
(Australia) Pty Ltd v City of Sydney
[2013] NSWCA 2
[158]-[161].
Ibid (citations
See for example:
Mattel, Inc. v. MGA Entertainment, Inc.
, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 102461, 23
(C.D. Cal. Sept. 22, 2010).
Streetscape Projects (Australia) Pty Ltd v City of Sydney
[2013] NSWCA 2
788, [158]-[161].
RTF format (14.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format