Shaw v University of Queensland [1999] IRCA 3 (14 April 1999)
NO QUESTION OF PRINCIPLE
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Shaw v University of Queensland
[1999] IRCA 3
DR ROSLYN MARY SHAW v UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND
QI 1008R OF 1996
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
DISTRICT REGISTRY
ROSLYN MARY SHAW
OF QUEENSLAND
MINUTES OF ORDER
THE COURT ORDERS:
1. That the application be dismissed.
Note: Settlement and entry of orders is dealt with in Order 36 of the
Industrial Relations Court Rules.
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
DISTRICT REGISTRY
ROSLYN MARY SHAW
OF QUEENSLAND
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
1 This is an application pursuant to s 170EA of the
Industrial Relations Act
"). The applicant had been employed by the respondent ("the
University") pursuant to various contracts of employment under which
various temporary and fixed-term lectureships between July 1983 and June 1994.
On 1 July 1994 the applicant was appointed
by the University to the position of
Lecturer in the Faculty of Dentistry for a period to expire on 31 December
2 The Vice-Chancellor of the University, Professor Wilson, wrote to the
applicant a letter dated 23 August 1995 which included the
"Following my review of your file and extended consultation with
relevant officers of the University, I have reached the conclusion
`capacity to perform the duties of [your] office is in doubt' [Clause 14(a)].
Specifically, I am concerned that your continuing
disruptive behaviour is
evidence of disturbance in your mental state, of a kind that compromises the
effective performance of your
I therefore require you, in accordance with Clause 14(b), to undertake a
medical examination at the University's expense to assess
whether you are able
to perform your duties. Please contact Dr Tony Arklay at the University Health
Service in the first instance.
Dr Arklay will refer you to the appropriate
specialist(s) for consultation...
In the circumstances, I believe it is in the interests of your health and
welfare for you to be relieved of your departmental duties
until the necessary
medical consultations have been completed. Accordingly, you are hereby
relieved of the performance of your duties
pending the outcome of the medical
examinations. Your salary will continue to be paid as normal."
3 On 23 August 1995, the applicant telephoned Dr Arklay at the University
Health Service and informed him that she had been required
by Professor Wilson
to undergo a psychiatric examination. The applicant made an appointment to see
Dr Arklay on 25 August 1995.
In an affidavit sworn 1 July 1996 Dr Arklay
deposed as follows:
"5. I met with Dr Shaw on 25 August 1995. Dr Shaw asked me a
number of questions about the basis of the allegations and the reports
psychiatrists. We discussed the award process. She said that she was very
upset about the process that the University
had embarked upon. She denied any
problems. She said she was popular and successful in the Department and saw
the requirement that
she undergo a psychiatric examination as a conspiracy by
the university. I assured her that it would be a fair assessment by an
independent psychiatrist. We also discussed whether she would wait for two
months to elapse as she was entitled to do pursuant to
the awards, or whether
she would attend the examination early. She thought about it and indicated
subsequently that she would wait
the two months.
7. I then gave consideration to selecting a psychiatrist to conduct the medical
examination. I sought advice from a number of psychiatrists
and formed the
view that the most appropriate person would be a reputable, experienced and
independent psychiatrist with no connection
with the University. I decided
upon Dr Martin Nothling.
9. An appointment was arranged for Dr Shaw to see Dr Nothling on 30 October
1995. I informed Dr Shaw of that in a telephone conversation
on 29 August 1995
and confirmed the details in a letter to Dr Shaw dated 30 August
4 That letter was in these terms:
"Further to our telephone conversation of 29 August 1995, I wish
to confirm that your appointment to see Dr Martin Nothling, psychiatrist,
Silverton Place, 101 Wickham Terrace, is at 1.00pm on Monday 30 October 1995.
I understand this appointment will be a lengthy
one (up to four hours) and
several consultations probably will be required. If you have any questions
to contact me."
5 Dr Chiswell, President of the National Tertiary Education Union, wrote to
Professor Wilson, presumably on behalf of the applicant,
by letter dated 30
August 1995 requesting that Professor Wilson reconsider his decision to relieve
the applicant of teaching duties
in her Department. Dr Chiswell's letter
contained this passage:
"I have learnt from Dr Shaw that Dr Arklay is `briefing' medical
practitioners who may possibly agree to undertake the medical examination
your letter to Dr Shaw requires. It would appear to me that such `briefing'
could be extremely prejudicial to the outcome of
any medical examination that
Dr Shaw may undertake. While in no way suggesting that the medical
practitioner who undertakes the
examination will operate but at the correct
professional level, it does seem apparent that if all the `adverse' material
assume that the University possesses) is given to the practitioner,
he/she could be perceived to start the procedure with a bias.
Certainly Dr
Shaw sees the `briefing' actions in this light, and consequently sees herself
as having to `defend' herself against
psychiatric inquiry."
6 Dr Chiswell again wrote to Professor Wilson on 8 September 1995 reiterating
the matters raised in his earlier letter and requested
that Dr Shaw be provided
"all that material that has been used by you to form your `opinion'
that Dr Shaw should undergo medical examination".
7 Following written advice from Mr Porter, the University's Secretary and
Registrar, Professor Wilson wrote to Dr Chiswell a letter
dated 15 September
1995 in which he agreed to release to the applicant medical opinions concerning
her together with the relevant
file material. The letter contained the
following passage:
"I do not accept your arguments that the release of the file
material to the designated medical examiner would be prejudicial. I
thought that it was essential. I know that Dr Arklay is also of that view and
has received similar advice from Dr Lawrence
as well as a request from the
designated medical examiner. We must be guided by the medical advice in this
8 The applicant did not keep her appointment on 30 October 1995 with Dr
Nothling. In a letter dated 7 November 1995, Professor
Wilson wrote as follows
to the applicant:
"I have been informed that you did not keep your appointment
with Dr Nothling, scheduled for Monday, 30 October.
I should draw your attention to Clause 16(i) of the award governing academic
conditions of employment. [The award has been renamed
the Universities and
Post Compulsory Academic Conditions Award 1995, following variations handed
down by the IRC this year. Clause
16 deals with termination on the grounds of
ill health]. The relevant section reads:
`A Chief Executive Officer may construe a failure by a staff member to undergo
a medical examination in accordance with these procedures
within 3 months of a
written notification to do so as prima facie evidence that such a medical
examination would have found that
the staff member is unable to perform his or
her duties and is unlikely to be able to resume them within 12 months, and may
act accordingly...'
I would therefore remind you of the requirement to meet with Dr Nothling.
Since my letter initiating the procedures under this clause was dated 23 August
1995, the three-month period expires on 23 November.
Since I am writing to you
six working days after your failure to attend the appointment, I am prepared to
extend the period within
which the appointment should take place until 1
December 1995.
Please advise me when you have arranged a further appointment."
9 The applicant did not attend for an appointment with Dr Nothling by 1
December 1995. In a letter dated 12 December 1995, Professor
Wilson wrote to
the applicant in the following terms:
"I wrote on 7 November 1995 reminding you of my requirement that
you attend a medical examination with Dr Nothling by 1 December 1995.
As you have not undergone a medical examination as notified, I have decided
to construe your failure to do so as prima facie evidence
that such medical
examination would have found that you are unable to perform your duties and are
unlikely to be able to do so within
Clause 6 of the Award provides that I may offer you the opportunity to
submit a resignation and I do so now. If I have not received
your written
offer of resignation by 5pm Friday 15 December 1995, I shall terminate your
employment with six months."
10 On 20 December 1995 a meeting was held between the applicant, her legal
advisers and the legal representatives of the University
including Mr Byrom,
the University's legal officer. On the same day, Mr Byrom wrote this letter to
Professor Wilson:
"The meeting this morning between Dr Shaw and her solicitors on
the one side and myself and Mr Bartley of Corrs Chambers Westgarth
University was unable to reach any common ground over the termination of Dr
Shaw's employment with the University.
Accordingly, as we have previously discussed, I recommend you act under the
Award to terminate her employment with 6 months and I
attach a suitable letter
for your signature."
11 A letter dated 21 December 1995 from the applicant's legal advisers to the
legal advisers of the University included this passage:
"We refer to our meeting of 20 December 1995. We confirm the
offer put at that meeting that our client will attend and obtain a psychiatric
report from a psychiatrist nominated by her. As part of that assessment our
client would be prepared to provide to the psychiatrist
the material obtained
by our client under the Freedom of
Information Act
which, it would appear, was
provided to the two psychiatrists relied upon by the university in relation to
the action it has taken.
Alternatively, and this is not a matter we raised in the meeting yesterday,
our client is prepared to nominate two psychiatrists and
the Vice-chancellor or
his representative can choose from those two. An examination would then be
carried out on the same basis
12 In the meantime Professor Wilson had written this letter to the applicant
dated 20 December 1995:
"As I foreshadowed in my letter of December 12
1995, and acting under clause 16 of the Universities and P[o]st Compulsory
Academic Conditions Award 1995, I hereby terminate your
employment with six
months notice."
13 On 4 January 1996 the applicant applied pursuant to s 170EA of the
relief against unlawful termination of employment. Attached to that
application was a document headed "Application" in these
"Application under the
Industrial Relations Act
In addition to the relief sought in the attached form the Applicant seeks
the following additional relief: -
1. An order imposing a penalty upon the Respondent as a consequence of breach
of clause 16 of the Universities and Post Compulsory
Academic Conditions Award
2. A permanent injunction restraining the Respondent from breaching or
continuing to breach clause 16 of the Universities and Post
Compulsory Academic
Conditions Award 1995.
3. A declaration that it is an implied term of the applicant's contract of
employment that the respondent would not conduct itself
in a manner likely to
damage or destroy the relationship of confidence and trust between the parties
as employer and employee.
4. An injunction restraining the respondent from breaching or continuing to
breach the clause referred to in paragraph 3 hereof.
5. An order specifically enforcing the applicant's contract of employment
with the employer.
6. Damages for breach of contract of employment.
7. Such further or other relief as this Honourable Court deems fit and
14 It was submitted by Ms Dick of Counsel for the applicant that the University
had been in breach of what, since 11 May 1995, had
been known as cl 14 of the
Universities and Post Academic Conditions Award 1995 ("the Award"). That
clause, so far as is relevant,
was in the following terms:
"Clause 14 - TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT ON THE GROUNDS OF
(a) The Chief Executive Officer may require, in writing, any staff member whose
capacity to perform the duties of his or her office
is in doubt to undergo a
medical examination by a medical practitioner chosen by the institution at the
expense of the institution.
(b) The Chief Executive Officer shall provide a staff member with written
notice of not less than 2 months that a medical examination
is required. Where
the staff member elects to apply to the staff member's superannuation fund,
prior to the expiry of the period
of the notice, for ill-health retirement or
temporary disability benefit pursuant to the rules of the superannuation fund,
the requirement
for a medical examination under subclause (a) hereof shall
lapse forthwith and no further action shall, subject to subclause (c)
be taken by the Chief Executive Officer under this clause.
(d) A copy of the medical report made by the medical practitioner pursuant to
subclause (a) hereof shall be available to the Chief
Executive Officer and to
the staff member.
(e) If the medical examination reveals that the staff member is unable to
perform his or her duties and is unlikely to be able to
resume them within a
reasonable period, being not less than 12 months, the Chief Executive Officer
may, subject to subclause (f)
hereof, terminate the employment of the staff
member in accordance with the notice required by the staff member's contract of
or where no notice is specified a period of 6 months. Prior to
taking action to terminate the employment of a staff member, the
Executive Officer may offer the staff member the opportunity to submit a
resignation and, if such a resignation is offered,
shall accept it forthwith
and not proceed with action to terminate employment.
(f) If within 14 days of the report being made available, if the staff member
or a person acting on their behalf so requests, the
Chief Executive Officer
shall not terminate the employment of the staff member in accordance with
subclause (e) hereof unless and
until the findings of the report are confirmed
by a panel consisting of three medical practitioners, one of whom shall be
by the institution, one by the staff member or by a person acting on
his or her behalf, and one by the President of the State or
Territory Branch of
the Australian Medical Association. The panel shall not include the
practitioner who made the initial report.
(i) A Chief Executive Officer may construe a failure by a staff member to
undergo a medical examination in accordance with these
procedures within 3
months of a written notification to do so as prima facie evidence that such a
medical examination would have
found that the staff member is unable to perform
his or her duties and is unlikely to be able to resume them within 12 months,
may act accordingly; provided that such a refusal by a staff member in
these circumstances shall not constitute misconduct nor lead
to any greater
penalty or loss of entitlements than would have resulted from an adverse
medical report."
15 I did not understand Counsel for the applicant to dispute that allegations
had been made with respect to the applicant's behaviour
at work. However,
Counsel sought to characterise those allegations, not as indicating a
disturbance of the applicant's health, but
rather as relating to what Counsel
termed "employment problems". It followed, so it was submitted, that the
allegations related
to the "employment problems" of the applicant were amenable
to the disciplinary procedures established pursuant to the Award and
matters comprehended by the procedures established under the Award for
investigating alleged incapacity on the ground of
ill-health. It was not open
to the University to, as Counsel put it, "misuse" the Award by initiating a
procedure pursuant to cl
14 of the Award which resulted in the termination of
the applicant's employment. Mr Murdoch of Counsel for the University, however,
submitted that, notwithstanding that the University had been empowered to
proceed pursuant to the disciplinary procedures in the
Award if the applicant's
conduct was capable of being characterised as "unsatisfactory performance",
"misconduct", or "serious misconduct",
Professor Wilson was also able to invoke
cl 14 of the Award upon his forming a doubt as to the capacity of the applicant
her duties.
16 Sub-clause 14(a) of the Award, it will be remembered, provides:
"The Chief Executive Officer may require, in writing, any staff
member whose capacity to perform the duties of his or her office is
in doubt to
undergo a medical examination by a medical practitioner chosen by the
institution at the expense of the institution."
17 That sub-cl confers on the Chief Executive Officer a discretion to require a
staff member to undergo a medical examination provided
that two criteria are
satisfied. First, the power is to be exercised if, and only if, the person
required to undergo the medical
examination is a staff member whose capacity to
perform the duties of her office
"is in doubt".
Secondly, I infer from
the use of the expression
(emphasis added), that the
doubt must exist contemporaneously with the exercise of the discretion by the
Chief Executive Officer.
18 While sub-cl (a) does not specifically require that the doubt be that of the
Chief Executive Officer, it would, in my view, be
inappropriate to read the
sub-clause as allowing the Chief Executive Officer to exercise a discretion to
require a staff member to
undergo a medical examination where the Chief
Executive Officer did not hold, or at least share, a doubt as to the staff
capacity to perform the duties of his or her office.
19 It follows, in my view, that any decision by the Chief Executive Officer to
require a staff member to undergo a medical examination
pursuant to sub-cl
14(a) of the Award must be based upon a doubt presently held, at the very least
by the Chief Executive Officer,
as to the staff member's capacity to perform
his or her duties.
20 Furthermore, the doubt as to the capacity of a staff member to perform the
duties of his or her office must, I consider, be a
reasonable one in the sense
that it must be reasonably open to the Chief Executive Officer upon the
evidence. However, it is also
to be borne in mind that the existence of the
doubt by the Chief Executive Officer as to the capacity of the staff member to
his or her duties is merely the first operative requirement for the
invocation of the procedure stipulated by cl 14 of the Award.
In this context,
and in the light of the other requirements contained in cl 14, the Award, in my
view, contemplated that, although
the University bears the onus of establishing
the reasonableness of the doubt, that onus is not a high one.
21 The evidence discloses that the Secretary and Registrar of the University,
Mr Porter, sent a memorandum dated 5 March 1995 to
Professor Wilson, the
Vice-Chancellor of the University. That memorandum was in the following
"The attached memorandum from the Director of Personnel Services
catalogues a series of recent incidents and interactions involving
Dr Ros Shaw
in the Department of Dentistry.
The Pro-Vice-Chancellor (Health Services), the Head of Dentistry and the
Director of Personnel Services are at a complete loss as
to how to deal with
her persistent allegations and complaints. She appears to have continuing
difficulty in accepting direction
from her Head of Department and in working
harmoniously with her colleagues.
Would you be prepared to talk to her to see if we can get her to settle down
and concentrate on achieving tenure rather than in pursuing
what increasingly
appears to be a vendetta against pretty well everyone in the University with
whom she has any formal contact?"
22 That memorandum had attached to it another memorandum dated 27 February 1995
to Mr Porter from the Director, Personnel Services
at the University, Mr
Feeney, and also included what was described in Mr Feeney's memorandum as a
"summary of the situation with
Dr Shaw for the Vice-Chancellor, in preparation
for the proposed meeting with her." On 1 June 1995 Professor Wilson had a
with the applicant. Professor Wilson's affidavit sworn 29 May 1996
included these paragraphs:
"13. On 1 June 1995 I had a 45 minute meeting with Dr Shaw. In
the context of her desire to obtain tenure, we discussed her teaching
research performance and relationships within the department. I reiterated the
comments made in my letter of 13 July 1994 ...
collegial relations in the effective operations of any department. When I
referred to complaints from women
staff, Dr Shaw claimed that Mrs Symons had
perjured herself in court, spreading slanderous remarks about her. She alleged
Symons had acted unprofessionally in saying that she would ensure that
Dr Shaw would not get promotion. The inference was clear;
Dr Shaw regarded Mrs
Symons as less well qualified than herself.
16. In about June 1995, I had a meeting with Mr Feeney and Mr Porter, the
Secretary and Registrar to discuss Dr Shaw's employment.
Mr Feeney informed me
that the Head of the Dental School and his office staff felt as though they
were under siege. He said that
Dr Shaw's relationship with a number of her
colleagues in the School had broken down and her long, emotive and at times
phone calls were causing distress to a range of staff members in the
Dental School as well as in the central administration. We discussed
that inordinate time was taken up in dealing with Dr Shaw in person or by phone
and in producing file notes of the interactions.
Mr Feeney said that he had
serious concerns about the state of Dr Shaw's mental health and suggested that
her behaviour raised the
question whether proceedings under the relevant clause
of the award governing academic staff entitled `Termination on the Grounds
Ill Health' (`the clause') were indicated. We discussed the serious
implications of deciding to proceed under the clause. The
Personnel Services
Department had maintained a file containing documents concerning Dr Shaw since
her July 1994 appointment. It was
suggested that to enable me to decide whether
to proceed under the clause, a senior psychiatrist should be requested to
review that
file and offer an opinion on Dr Shaw's state of mind.
17. It was agreed that Dr Feeney should assemble the personnel file on Dr Shaw
in chronological order and send it to Professor Raphael
in the Department of
Psychiatry with a view to her advising me about the appropriateness of moving
under the `Termination on the
Grounds of Ill Health' clause. I also requested
Mr Byrom to provide me with advice to assist me in making a decision about how
deal with employment problems effecting [sic] Dr Shaw."
23 Mr Byrom, the legal officer of the University, wrote to Professor Wilson on
24 July 1995 a letter which began:
"You have asked me to provide comment and advice in relation to
certain steps that you are contemplating to assist you to make a decision
how to deal with employment problems affecting Dr Shaw and, in particular,
whether to deal with her case under the provisions
of the Academic Staff Award
that deal with termination of employment on the grounds of ill health.
Under that clause, for you to take action you must form the judgement that
Dr Shaw is a staff member whose capacity to perform the
duties of her office is
in doubt. You have received some advice to suggest that this may be so and I
confirm my view that it is
entirely appropriate for you to seek written advice
the staff of, or associated with, the University."
24 Professor Raphael, a psychiatrist and Head of the University's Department
of Psychiatry, wrote to Professor Wilson on 4 August
1995 attaching a copy of
what she described in a covering letter as a "report provided from records made
available to me concerning
Dr R Shaw." That report began:
"The following is an opinion given for the Vice-Chancellor on
examination of file notes concerning Dr R Shaw. It is an opinion on
of information of this kind and is not put forward in any way as a psychiatric
assessment of an individual. The matters
outlined below indicate a cause for
concern about the distress reported to be perceived as being experienced by a
staff member and
by descriptions provided by others of the behaviour of that
staff member. It is recognised in providing this opinion that such information
forms only one part of the information that would be available to make an
assessment of an individual's ongoing mental state or the
presence or absence
of a psychiatric disorder. Nevertheless, as will be outlined below, it is my
opinion that significant evidence
exists within the notes provided to be a
cause for concern and a reason for seeking further assessment. Such assessment
in the interest of the numerous independent individuals who report
distress from interactions with Dr Shaw and in the interests of
It is recognised that these reports may only be hearsay but the frequency
and independence of the reports must be a source of concern,
not only about
distress being presented, or as presented by, M/s Shaw, but also about the
disturbance caused to the functioning of
the University by the allegations put
forward by M/s Shaw.
The nature of the information on which this opinion is based covers the
period chiefly from April 1994 through until June 1995. Information
available from earlier than this time."
25 After considering the evidence contained in the notes from Dr Shaw's file,
the report concluded:
"For all these reasons, there is cause to be concerned about Dr
Shaw, both in terms of her behaviour within the Department of Dentistry
University and the distress which she openly acknowledges, as well as the
threat she perceives in her environment, and her failure
to recognise the
impact of her behaviour on others, about whom she indicates no concern
whatsoever.
It is therefore my opinion on the matter as it is presented to me, that this
warrants an assessment of Dr Shaw's mental state and
Dr Shaw's condition. To
make such an assessment would provide a basis for examining the potential
source of Dr Shaw's difficulties
and provide ways in which these could be
addressed. It is my view that such an assessment would be in Dr Shaw's
interests, particularly
in view of the apparent escalating level of her
distress and the escalating nature of her accusations and threatening behaviour
the University and members of the Department of
Dentistry."
26 On 7 August 1995 Dr Lawrence, a psychiatrist and Clinical Associate
Professor in Psychiatry within the University, wrote a letter
to Professor
Wilson which contained this passage:
"On the material supplied to me I am convinced that Dr Ros Shaw
displays evidence of a paranoid disorder. Initially one might consider
the difficulties reflected a paranoid personality disorder with grandiosity,
paranoia and narcissism. Such a condition is not
considered to be a true
mental illness. It is a type of personality disturbance however which can
interfere with a person's functioning
ability and particularly affect the
cooperative relationships which are necessary for efficient performance in a
workplace, no matter
what the task. However, in my opinion, the material
indicates an escalating disorganisation of thought with the development of what
must be regarded as delusions and increasingly disorganised behaviour and
affect, to the point where the question of mental illness
becomes a strong
possibility. Her ability to efficiently perform her duties and to function are
likely, in my opinion, to be significantly
jeopardised by such a
I would stress that this opinion is based on the material provided. One
obviously cannot make a diagnosis on an individual without
examination and possible further investigation. However, I would earnestly
recommend that Dr Shaw be requested to undergo
an independent psychiatric
assessment for the purpose of determining her fitness to continue her
27 Professor Wilson deposed in paragraphs 22 and 23 of his affidavit:
"22. Because of the serious nature of the decision before me, I
considered both reports very carefully.
23. Following my consideration of the reports received from Professor Raphael
and Dr Lawrence, I formed the view that Dr Shaw's
capacity to perform the
duties of her office was in doubt. I decided to require her to undergo a
medical examination in accordance
with the academic staff award."
28 As previously observed, I did not understand Counsel for the applicant to
dispute that various matters had been raised concerning
the conduct of the
applicant in the course of her employment. The evidence discloses, for
example, that a memorandum from Mr Porter
to Professor Wilson dated 5 March
1995 referred to a "series of recent incidents and interactions involving Dr
Ros Shaw" and also
commented that certain staff members "were at a complete
loss as to how to deal with her persistent allegations and complaints".
result of that memorandum, Professor Wilson had a 45 minute meeting with the
applicant on 1 June 1995. At that meeting the
applicant raised various matters
which were referred to in paragraph 13 of Professor Wilson's affidavit quoted
above. However, the
evidence discloses that the meeting of 1 June 1995 between
Professor Wilson and the applicant failed to resolve the matter. The
also reveals that it was at this stage that Professor Wilson entertained a
doubt as to the capacity of the applicant to
perform her duties and was
inclined to proceed pursuant to cl 14 of the Award. Professor Wilson was asked
by the Judicial Registrar
in the proceedings before the Judicial Registrar:
"So when was it that you gave serious consideration to the
mental health aspect?"
29 Professor Wilson replied, in reference to the matters referred to above in
paragraph 16 of his affidavit:
"At this meeting in June".
30 In my view, on the evidence before Professor Wilson at the time of his
decision in early June 1995 to proceed pursuant to cl
14 of the Award, his
entertaining a doubt as to the capacity of the applicant to perform her duties
was reasonable. Not only had
members of the applicant's Department expressed
doubts to Professor Wilson about the state of her health, but he also had
him the written medical opinions of two psychiatrists which, I note, the
Award did not specifically require him to obtain. Those
opinions, expressly
qualified as having been prepared in the absence of a direct assessment of the
applicant, were nevertheless based
upon the documents in the applicant's file.
31 Upon the non-attendance of the applicant within three months of a written
request to attend for a medical examination by a medical
practitioner chosen by
the University, Professor Wilson was authorised by sub-cl 16(i) of the Award to
construe a failure of that
kind as prima facie evidence that such a medical
examination would have found that the applicant was unable to perform her
and was unlikely to be able to resume them within 12 months. Professor
Wilson was then empowered to "act accordingly".
32 In my view, the use of the expression " to act accordingly" in the context
of sub-cl 16(i) confers a power upon the Chief Executive
Officer to act in a
manner consistent with the discretion conferred by that sub-cl. As the sub-cl
empowers the Chief Executive Officer
to deem a failure to attend for a medical
examination to be prima facie evidence that such a medical examination, if it
had occurred,
would have found evidence of inability, for reasons of
ill-health, to perform duties, the expression "to act accordingly" in my view,
consistently with the sub-cl, reposes in the Chief Executive Officer a
discretion to dismiss the employee concerned on medical grounds.
33 Professor Wilson deposed in paragraph 35 of his affidavit:
"Following Mr Byrom's advice that his meeting with Dr Shaw and
her legal advisers had been unproductive, I reviewed again the documentation
the case. I determined that I should proceed to terminate Dr Shaw's employment
with the University of Queensland, and so advised
Dr Shaw in writing on 20
December 1995."
34 Before the Judicial Registrar, Professor Wilson was asked in
cross-examination by Ms Linnane of Counsel for the applicant what
had taken into account in exercising his discretion to terminate the employment
of the applicant.
35 Professor Wilson replied as follows:
"...the most important element in it was the fact that Dr Shaw
had indicated previously that she was happy to...follow the direction
the external psychiatrist. And I was really taken aback to learn at the
beginning of November that she had not kept that
appointment, and as you're
aware, I wrote to her advising her that time was running out and extending the
time in order that she
would take seriously the implications, because, of
course, the...paragraph that is here was in that letter. And my view was that
if she - if I did not take this action, the University would be left in a - in
a position where it could hardly resume the whole
action again, and
consequently the attempt to alleviate the distress within the department would
fail, and really there was nowhere
else to go".
36 Professor Wilson continued:
"...that was the major element, but I think I can say that I
took account the fact that at no time did I have any evidence that Dr
intended to reverse her tactics within the department and the best thing for
all of us was to separate."
37 No evidence was proffered to support the conclusion that in deciding to
dismiss the applicant for reasons of ill-health, Professor
Wilson had been
actuated by considerations other than those to which he had deposed in his
affidavit and of which he gave oral evidence
under cross-examination before the
Judicial Registrar. Moreover, if, as the applicant submitted, the University
had sought to "misuse"
the Award, the applicant could have thwarted the
endeavour by attending for a medical interview as requested.
38 Counsel for the applicant, however, further submitted that the applicant's
non-attendance at a medical examination should not
have put her in a worse
position than that which she would have occupied had she, in accordance with
the provisions of the Award,
attended for a medical examination and been the
subject of an adverse medical report. It was submitted that, pursuant to
16(f) of the Award, the applicant was entitled to have any adverse
medical report confirmed by a panel of three medical practitioners.
39 Sub-clause (f) includes a direction that "...the Chief Executive Officer
shall not terminate the employment of the staff member
in accordance with
sub-cl (e) hereof
unless and until the findings of the report are confirmed
by a panel consisting of three medical practitioners..." (emphasis added).
In my view the review procedure erected by sub-cl (f) is
clearly predicated
upon the existence of a medical report the findings of which are confirmed or
otherwise by a panel of three medical
practitioners. It follows that the
review procedure afforded by sub-cl 16(f) does not extend to the review of a
decision by the
Chief Executive Officer pursuant to sub-cl 16(i) of the Award
to construe a failure to attend for a medical examination as prima
evidence that such an examination, if it had occurred, would have produced a
medical report adverse to the applicant.
40 The applicant has also lodged a claim alleging unlawful termination of
employment in contravention of s 170DE(1) of the
. That section
"An employer must not terminate an employee's employment unless
there is a valid reason, or valid reasons, connected with the employee's
capacity or conduct or based on the operational requirements of the
undertaking, establishment or service."
41 It was submitted by Counsel for the applicant that the termination of the
applicant's employment was not for a valid reason if
the termination was
purportedly effected pursuant to a provision of the Award which it was not
open to the respondent to rely upon.
Counsel submitted that to "manipulate"
the Award in this manner, as Counsel put it, was to avoid according to the
applicant the
rights and entitlements which would have been available to her if
the University had (correctly) applied those clauses of the Award
relating to
unsatisfactory performance, misconduct or serious misconduct.
42 In my view a valid reason for termination of employment "connected with the
employee's capacity" is established if the employer
can show a reasonably held
belief upon the evidence available at the time of the termination of
employment, that the employee's capacity
to perform the duties required
pursuant to the contract of employment had been diminished to such an extent
that the employee was
no longer able to perform those duties required of him or
her pursuant to the contract of employment.
43 The expression "employee's capacity" as used in s 170DE(1) comprehends the
employee's capacity to perform, in the future, the
duties required pursuant to
the contract of employment. If an employer has a reasonably held view that an
employee's state of health
has significantly diminished that employee's
capacity to perform his or her duties pursuant to the contract of employment,
employer has a valid reason for termination under s 170DE(1) of
44 In the present case no investigation was conducted by the University into
any allegations made against the applicant and I did
not understand the
University to submit that its resort to the procedure afforded by cl 14 of the
Award was actuated by anything
other than a desire to resolve a doubt as to the
applicant's capacity to perform her duties. As already observed, in my view,
doubt held by Professor Wilson as to the applicant's capacity to perform
her duties was reasonable upon the evidence before him.
45 Mere compliance with the provisions of an award will not of itself establish
that at the time of the termination of employment,
an employer had a reasonably
held belief that an employee's capacity to perform his or her duties was
diminished to such an extent
that it could be reasonably apprehended by the
employer that the employee was no longer able to perform the duties required by
contract of employment. However, compliance with the provisions of an
award may nevertheless be relevant to the extent that the
award provides an
agreed or accepted procedure or mechanism to be followed by an employer before
deciding to terminate the employment
of an employee.
46 As previously observed, Professor Wilson had written to the applicant in a
letter dated 23 August 1995 which contained the following
"Following my review of your file and extended consultation with
relevant officers of the University, I have reached the conclusion
"capacity to perform the duties of [your] office is in doubt" [Clause 14(a)].
Specifically, I am concerned that your continuing
disruptive behaviour is
evidence of disturbance in your mental state, of a kind that compromises the
effective performance of your
I therefore require you, in accordance with Clause 14(b), to undertake a
medical examination at the University's expense to assess
whether you are able
to perform your duties. Please contact Dr Tony Arklay at the University Health
Service in the first instance.
Dr Arklay will refer you to the appropriate
specialist(s) for consultation...
In the circumstances, I believe it is in the interests of your health and
welfare for you to be relieved of your departmental duties
until the necessary
medical consultations have been completed. Accordingly, you are hereby
relieved of the performance of your duties
pending the outcome of the medical
examinations. Your salary will continue to be paid as normal."
47 Dr Arklay at the University Health Service had arranged for the applicant to
attend for a medical examination with a psychiatrist,
Dr Nothling, on 30
October 1995. The applicant did not keep that appointment. Professor Wilson
had then written to the applicant
in a letter dated 7 November 1995 in which he
drew to the applicant's attention the possible consequences pursuant to sub-cl
of the Award of a failure by the applicant to attend for a medical
examination. He also extended to 1 December 1995 the period within
applicant was required to attend for a medical examination with Dr Nothling.
Furthermore, although Dr Chiswell, President
of the National Tertiary Education
Union, had written to the University, presumably on behalf of the applicant, in
relation to certain
matters, at no stage before Professor Wilson wrote to the
applicant terminating her employment on 20 December 1995, did the applicant
communicate with the University her intention in connection with the medical
examination she was required to attend.
48 In my view, therefore, the University had, in the absence of any explanation
by the applicant, evidence from which it could reasonably
apprehend that the
applicant's capacity to perform her duties had been significantly
diminished.
49 It was not disputed that, at a meeting between the applicant, her legal
representatives and Mr Byrom, the University's Legal
Officer on 20 December
1995, the applicant's legal representatives proposed that the applicant be
permitted to obtain a psychiatric
report from a psychiatrist nominated by her.
Mr Byrom deposed in paragraph 25 of his affidavit sworn 5 July 1996:
"...I rejected that offer. Later that day I sent a memorandum
to the Vice-Chancellor in which I recommended that he act under the
terminate Dr Shaw's employment with six months notice."
50 Before the Judicial Registrar, Mr Byrom had stated, in cross-examination by
Ms Linnane of Counsel for the applicant:
"The University had taken the view that it had acted correctly
under the clause of the award in nominating Dr Nothling as the appropriate
person to do the job. It wanted Dr Nothling to do that job because on the
advice it had received he was the best person in Brisbane
at the time to do
that job. He was a person who had absolutely no prior involvement with the
University and we had carefully chosen
somebody who we believe was
appropriately neutral. Dr Shaw had refused to deal with Dr Nothling, and we
were not prepared to consider
seriously a proposition that instead the
University would allow Dr Shaw to nominate either a single or two psychiatrists
we had to choose."
51 On the hearing of the review of the Judicial Registrar's decision, Mr Byrom
was asked in cross-examination by Ms Dick of Counsel
for the applicant,
as far as you were concerned, no such suggestion was going to be significantly
considered?"
52 Mr Byrom replied:
"The suggestion on the 20
that we should abandon
the Award process, abandon Dr Nothling and have Dr Shaw examined by a
psychiatrist of her own choosing was
not seriously considered."
53 Later in his oral evidence Mr Byrom stated:
"...had there been a concession that there was a failure to
adhere to the Award process by Dr Shaw having failed to go to Dr Nothling,
might have been considered in that way. But it certainly would not have been
considered in that way when what was suggested was
that it was wrong of the
University to have insisted on her going to see Dr Nothling."
54 In cross-examination by Ms Linnane of Counsel, before the Judicial
Registrar, Professor Wilson stated:
"Mr Byrom's instructions from me in going to that meeting were
to see whether there was any way to facilitate the termination. He
authority to negotiate any new issue ... I am aware of the fact that there was
a potential move to go back earlier in the
proceedings and that, of course, is
identified in the final paper which I got. But he had no authority to move
from a position that
the letter was to be sent and the letter of 20 December
was sent by me before, in fact, I received the letter confirming the fact
Dr Shaw had offered to meet a psychiatrist..."
55 It is clear from the evidence of Professor Wilson that, by 20 December 1995
he had made a decision to terminate the applicant's
employment and that the
purpose of the meeting on that day was, as Professor Wilson put it, to
"facilitate the termination". It
is also clear from the evidence of Mr Byrom
that if, at the meeting he attended on 20 December 1995, the applicant had
excuse or explain her failure to attend before Dr Nothling and
requested an extension of time in which to comply with the Award procedure,
that could have been a matter which Mr Byrom may have considered relevant to
any recommendation to Professor Wilson in respect of
a decision to terminate
the applicant's employment. However, no such excuse or explanation was offered
by the applicant.
56 In circumstances where an employee is the subject of investigation by an
employer and the employee has provided a reasonable
explanation for a failure
to comply with the procedural requirements specified in an award, the employer
may not have a valid reason
for terminating the employment of that employee
where the employer unreasonably insists on strict adherence to those award
provisions.
Putting to one side any considerations of natural justice imported
by s 170DC of the
, the University would not, I consider, have had a valid
reason for terminating the applicant's employment if the University had sought
to rely upon cl 14(i) of the Award to terminate the applicant's employment
where the applicant had not been apprised of the requirement
to attend for a
medical examination. However, it is clear from the evidence that the applicant
had been fully apprised of the requirement
to attend for a medical examination
and chose instead not to attend.
57 As I have already observed, a termination of employment "connected with the
employee's capacity" will be for a valid reason if
an employer reasonably
concludes upon the evidence available at the time of the decision to terminate
that the employee's capacity
had been diminished to such an extent that it
could be reasonably apprehended by the employer that the employee was no longer
to perform the duties required under the contract of employment. The
assessment of an employee's future capacity to perform duties
pursuant to the
contract of employment will necessarily involve an examination of the
employee's past work performance and behaviour.
58 Section 170DC of the
"An employer must not terminate an employee's employment for
reasons related to the employee's conduct or performance unless:
(a) the employee has been given the opportunity to defend himself or herself
against the allegations made; or
(b) the employer could not reasonably be expected to give the employee that
opportunity."
59 In my view the expression "conduct or performance" in s 170DC of the
denotes past conduct and performance. It follows, therefore, that s 170DC of
is applicable to an examination by an employer of the capacity of an
employee for reasons of ill-health to perform duties pursuant
employee's contract of employment. A proposed termination of employment for
reasons of ill-health, although connected with
an employee's "capacity" as that
term is used in s 170DE(1) of the
, is also related to an employee's past
performance, and therefore attracts the application of s 170DC of the
60 In this regard I construe the word "allegations" in s 170DC as including
assertions that the employee is suffering from ill-health.
It follows,
therefore, that an employer who contemplates terminating an employee for
reasons of ill-health is required by s 170DC
to give that employee
an opportunity "to defend himself or herself against the allegations made".
Gibson v Bosmac Pty Ltd
(1995) 60 IR 1
at 7, Wilcox CJ
Nicholson v Heaven & Earth Gallery Pty Ltd
at 209; 57 IR 50 at 59 I discussed the significance of s 170DC. I
observed that the section imposed an important limitation on an
power of dismissal. Ordinarily, before being dismissed for reasons related to
conduct or performance, an employee must
be made aware of the particular
matters that are putting his or her job at risk and given an adequate
opportunity of defence. However,
I also pointed out that the section does not
require any particular formality. It is intended to be applied in a practical,
commonsense
way so as to ensure that the affected employee is treated fairly.
Where the employee is aware of the precise nature of the employer's
to this concern, this is enough to satisfy
the section."
62 In the present case the applicant had received three letters from the
University alerting her to the requirement that she attend
for a medical
examination, two from Professor Wilson and one from Dr Arklay at the University
Health Service. The applicant had
also been informed of the basis on which the
examination was required. Moreover, the University had indicated the possible
consequences
entailed by the Award if the applicant failed to attend for a
medical examination. Although the applicant was given an extension
which to attend for a medical examination, she declined to attend or to offer
any explanation for that omission. In my
view, the University had discharged
the obligation imposed on it by s 170DC to give the applicant "an
opportunity to defend herself
against the allegations made". Accordingly, in
my view the University has, therefore, not been in breach of s 170DC of
63 In her application the applicant also sought:
"3. A declaration that it is an implied term of the applicant's
contract of employment that the respondent would not conduct itself
in a manner
likely to damage or destroy the relationship of confidence and trust between
the parties as employer and employee.
4. An injunction restraining the respondent from breaching or
continuing to breach the clause referred to in paragraph 3 hereof.
5. An order specifically enforcing the applicant's contract of employment
with the employer.
6. Damages for breach of contract of employment."
64 I did not understand Ms Dick of Counsel for the applicant to make any
submissions in respect of these matters. In any event,
in the light of the
views I have expressed and the conclusions I have reached, it is unnecessary to
give further consideration to
those additional matters.
65 Accordingly, for the reasons given, the application must be dismissed.
certify that the preceding sixty-five (65) numbered paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Judgment herein of the Honourable
Justice Ryan.
Dated: 14 April 1999
for the Applicant:
for the Applicant:
for the Respondent:
J E Murdoch
for the Respondent:
Chambers Westgarth
of Hearing:
21, 23 and 24 April 1997
of Judgment:
No downloadable files available