Palmer v Australian Securities and Investments Commission [2025] FCAFC 151 (24 October 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Palmer v Australian Securities and
Investments Commission
[2025] FCAFC 151
Leave to appeal from:
Palmer v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
File number:
VID 1130 of 2024
Judgment of:
BEACH, BANKS-SMITH and OWENS JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
CORPORATIONS
— fragmentation of
criminal proceedings — prosecution for an alleged contravention of
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) — examination under
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
— civil proceedings challenging the lawfulness of the exercise of
power by ASIC — operation of ss 49, 68 and 76 of the ASIC Act
— fruits of s 19 examination given to Commonwealth DPP
civil proceedings fragmenting criminal proceedings — discussion of the
concept of fragmentation — permanent
stay of civil proceedings refused at
first instance — grant of a temporary stay — whether primary judge
had jurisdiction
to entertain the civil proceedings —
s 39B(1A)(c)
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) — discussion of effect of
Corporations Act
— extension of time given —
leave to appeal granted — appeal dismissed
Legislation:
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission Act 2001
Corporations Act 2001
Judiciary Act 1903
s 39B(1A)(c)
Cases cited:
Alqudsi v Commonwealth of Australia
[2015] HCA 49
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Australia and New
Zealand Banking Group Ltd
[2019] FCA 964
(2019) 138 ACSR 42
Babet v Electoral Commissioner
[2023] FCAFC 164
(2023) 300 FCR 81
Bell v The Queen
[2020] SASCFC 116
(2020) 286 A Crim R 501
Bunning v Cross
[1978] HCA 22
(1978) 141 CLR 54
Cain v Glass (No 2)
(1985) 3 NSWLR 230
Chief Executive Officer of Customs v Jiang
[2001] FCA 145
(2001) 111 FCR 395
Clyne v Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth)
[1984] HCA 56
(1984) 154 CLR
Crouch v Commonwealth of Australia
[1948] HCA 41
(1948) 77 CLR 339
Ex parte Bucknell
[1936] HCA 67
(1936) 56 CLR 221
Flanagan v Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police
Frugtniet v State of Victoria
(1997) 148 ALR 320
Gamage v Riashi
[2023] NSWSC 390
Gedeon v Commissioner of the New South Wales Crime Commission
[2008] HCA 43
236 CLR 120
GLJ v The Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of
[2023] HCA 32
(2023) 414 ALR 635
Hausfeld v Commissioner of Police
[2018] NSWSC 1540
Hutson v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Huynh v Commonwealth of Australia
[2025] FCA 531
Johns v Australian Securities Commission
[1993] HCA 56
(1993) 178 CLR 408
McCarthy v Commissioner of Taxation
[2013] FCA 715
(2013) 249 FCR 140
Mudginberri Station Pty Ltd v Australasia Meat Industries
Employees’ Union
(1986) 12 FCR 10
Obeid v The Queen
[2016] HCA 9
(2016) 329 ALR 372
Ousley v The Queen
[1997] HCA 49
(1997) 192 CLR 69
Palmer v Magistrates Court of Queensland
[2024] QCA 8
Pan Laboratories Pty Ltd v Commonwealth of Australia
(1999) 73 ALJR
Phong v Attorney-General of the Commonwealth of Australia
[2001] FCA 1241
[2015] NSWCCA 212
(2015) 90 NSWLR 134
[2021] HCA 38
(2021) 273 CLR 413
[1994] HCA 11
(1994) 120 ALR 193
Rochfort v John Fairfax and Sons Ltd
[1972] 1 NSWLR 16
Rogers v The Queen
[1994] HCA 42
(1994) 181 CLR 251
Samsung Electronics Company Ltd v Apple Inc
(2011) 217 FCR 238
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
Shapowloff v Dunn
[1973] 2 NSWLR 468
General Division
National Practice Area:
Commercial and Corporations
Regulator and Consumer Protection
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicants:
Mr P Dunning KC, Mr M Karam, Ms S Palaniappan and Mr K Byrne
Solicitors for the Applicants:
Robinson Nielsen Legal
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Mr P Holdenson KC and Mr A Petridis
Solicitors for the First Respondent:
Norton Rose Fulbright
Counsel for the Second Respondent:
Mr T Begbie KC and Mr P Melican
Solicitors for the Second Respondent:
Australian Government Solicitor
VID 1130 of 2024
CLIVE FREDERICK PALMER
PALMER LEISURE COOLUM PTY LTD
Second Applicant
AUSTRALIAN SECURITIES AND INVESTMENTS
First Respondent
COMMONWEALTH DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
Second Respondent
BEACH, BANKS-SMITH AND OWENS JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
applicants be granted an extension of time within which to file and serve their
application for leave to appeal.
to appeal be granted.
appeal be dismissed with costs, including the costs of and incidental to the
extension of time and leave to appeal applications.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
present applicants, Mr Clive Palmer and Palmer Leisure Coolum Pty Ltd (PLC),
have applied for an extension of time seeking leave
to appeal against the
decision of the primary judge in which her Honour temporarily stayed their
proceeding against the Australian
Securities and Investments Commission and the
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions.
proceeding below concerned a challenge to ASIC’s exercise of its coercive
statutory power under
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission Act 2001
(Cth) concerning Mr Palmer who was required to
examination on 7 July 2016.
the proceeding below, the applicants sought declarations and injunctive relief
against ASIC and the CDPP relating to the alleged
unlawfulness of the
examination of Mr Palmer and the use or potential use of the resultant
transcripts, including in relation to both actual and potential
criminal or
other proceedings against the applicants.
the applications of both ASIC and the CDPP seeking a permanent stay of the
proceeding, her Honour granted a temporary stay of the
proceeding in order to
prevent the fragmentation of Queensland criminal proceedings brought against
both Mr Palmer and PLC.
applicants have asserted before us that the primary judge’s grant of the
stay involved essentially the following errors
as set out in their proposed
notice of appeal, which proposed grounds we have slightly re-ordered.
it is said that her Honour, in finding that it would be an abuse of process for
this Court to deal with the alleged unlawfulness
examination when
that question might arise in the course of a subsequent evidentiary ruling in
the criminal proceedings, misapprehended
the concept of fragmentation (ground
1). The applicants have said that this ground gives rise to a significant issue
the application of the proper test of fragmentation of criminal
proceedings as described in
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1
26 per Gibbs ACJ.
it is said that her Honour erroneously found that the proceeding before her and
the criminal proceedings involved the same
central issue, when the alleged
unlawfulness of the
examination arose in the context of distinct
issues (ground 2).
it is said that her Honour erred in finding that merely because the lawfulness
examination could be challenged in the context of an
evidentiary ruling in the criminal proceedings, it could not be pursued in the
proceeding before her absent compelling reasons (ground 3).
it is said that her Honour departed from the fundamental principle that parties
are entitled to have their claims heard absent
exceptional circumstances (ground
4). The applicants have said that this ground gives rise to a significant issue
concerning the
principle which permits the circumscribed occasion for departure
from what was said to be the fundamental principle stated in
Rochfort v John
Fairfax and Sons Ltd
[1972] 1 NSWLR 16
at 19 per Sugerman ACJ.
it is said that her Honour erred in taking into account the perceived wealth and
power of Mr Palmer in dealing with the stay
applications brought by the
respondents (ground 6).
it is said that there was no rational basis for her Honour to order a temporary
stay in the circumstances (ground 5). The applicants
have said that this ground
gives rise to a significant issue concerning the distinction in principle
between considerations relevant
to the grant of a temporary stay and
considerations relevant to the grant of a permanent stay.
the applicants require an extension of time within which to file and serve their
application for leave to appeal. But such an
extension is not opposed and
accordingly we will grant it.
terms of justifying the grant of leave to appeal, the applicants have made a
number of points.
is said that the application of the principle stated in
such as the present where no direct attack is made on the rulings of a criminal
trial court is of general importance. It
is said that so too is whether it is
appropriate to order a temporary stay in circumstances where an abuse of process
based on the
fragmentation of criminal proceedings is alleged.
it is said that the primary judge’s decision deprived the applicants of
their fundamental right to have their civil
claim heard, and it is said that
they will suffer substantial injustice if that decision is not reversed such
that it is in the interests
of justice for leave to be granted.
Contrastingly,
ASIC and the CDPP say that leave to appeal should be refused as the applicants
have not satisfied the well-known two-pronged
test for the grant of leave. But
if leave is granted, they say that the appeal should be dismissed.
ASIC and the CDPP say that the applicants’ present challenge forms part of
a long history of collateral attacks brought
by the applicants against criminal
proceedings, presently in the Magistrates Court of Queensland, in which the
applicants are charged
with offences against the
Corporations Act 2001
CDPP and ASIC say that the challenge to the lawfulness of the
examination
of Mr Palmer conducted by ASIC and the challenge to the alleged use and
disclosure of the transcript of that examination
by ASIC and the CDPP can be
raised in the criminal proceedings.
they say that the relief sought by the applicants before the primary judge, if
granted, would affect the conduct of the criminal
proceedings, including in
respect of matters as foundational as the formulation of the charges, evidence
that could be adduced and
the involvement of investigators and prosecutors in
the prosecution.
the reasons that follow, we will grant leave to appeal but dismiss the
have granted leave to appeal because we consider that there are points of
principle concerning the interface between the civil
and criminal proceedings
that have been raised which have sufficient significance such that we should
determine them even if only
to inject further clarity, assuming that to be
absent which is, of course, contestable.
although the two-pronged test set out
Electronics Company Ltd v Apple Inc
(2011) 217 FCR 238 at [26] per Dowsett,
Foster and Yates JJ is usually the appropriate test to apply, that is not
definitively so
in all circumstances, particularly where as here one is not
dealing with just a matter of practice or procedure. Further, the outcome
her Honour’s order granting a temporary stay does have significant
consequences as to the forum in which the applicants
can pursue their challenge
as to the lawfulness of the
examination and in that sense has finally
determined the priority question between the parties as to where that issue
should be addressed.
It may be said that a prima facie case for the grant of
leave can be made out where the effect of the interlocutory order is to
determine an important issue in the proceeding, as is the case here (see
[1936] HCA 67
(1936) 56 CLR 221
at 225 to 227).
we have indicated, we will grant leave to appeal but it is convenient to
continue to refer to the applicants as such given their
status before us prior
to these reasons being delivered. We should deal with one other preliminary
Appropriately
but nevertheless belatedly, the CDPP raised before us but not before the primary
judge a jurisdictional argument to
the effect that the primary judge did not
have jurisdiction to entertain the proceeding before her either under
s 39B(1A)(c)
Judiciary Act 1903
Corporations Act
are three short points to make here. First, this argument says nothing about
our appellate jurisdiction to correct for error.
Second, if we take the view,
as we have, that the challenge to her Honour’s order for a temporary stay
ought to be dismissed
on its merits, we can so proceed without deciding the
Babet v Electoral
Commissioner
[2023] FCAFC 164
(2023) 300 FCR 81
to [74] per Besanko, Wheelahan and
Stewart JJ). Third, and alternatively to the second point, if we need to decide
the jurisdictional
question, in our opinion the better view is that her Honour
did have jurisdiction in relation to some aspects of the relief sought
ASIC itself. It is convenient to return to this issue at the end of our reasons
after we have addressed the applicants’
arguments on their merits.
proceeding to directly address the grounds of appeal, it is necessary to say
something concerning the nature of the applicants’
pleaded case below, the
criminal proceedings on foot against the applicants and then the primary
judge’s consideration of the
issues raised before her.
The applicants’ pleaded case
statement of claim set out allegations that provided direct links between the
alleged unlawfulness asserted by the applicants
concerning the examination under
s 19 of the ASIC Act and its fruits and criminal proceedings against the
applicants. It contained
inter-alia the following allegations.
the parties were described in the following terms:
[3] The First Respondent (ASIC):
(e) caused the compulsory examinations pursuant to s19 of the ASIC Act pleaded
in paragraph [102] below to occur;
(f) caused the following prosecutions to be begun and/or carried on:
(i) a complaint - general purpose - made, and summons dated 22 February 2018
commencing criminal proceedings in the Magistrates Court
of Queensland at
Brisbane against PLC, CDPP File No QC16100658 (PLC Complaint); and
(ii) a complaint - general purpose - made, and summons dated 22 February 2018
commencing criminal proceedings in the Magistrates
Court of Queensland at
Brisbane against C Palmer, CDPP File No QC161006JBA (C Palmer Complaint),
(collectively the Commonwealth Criminal
Proceedings).
[4] The Second Respondent (CDPP) is, and was at all times material to this
proceeding:
(a) the Director of Public Prosecutions (Director) appointed pursuant to
subsection 5(1)
Director of Public Prosecutions Act 1983
(Cth) (DPP Act);
(b) the officer who is conducting the Commonwealth Criminal Proceedings, on
behalf of ASIC;
(c) conducted assessments of the proposed charges from its Melbourne office in
the State of Victoria, engaging counsel in Victoria.
Part E described the asserted unlawfulness in the following terms:
examination was unlawful
[95] On 29 October 2015, purportedly pursuant to s13(1) of the ASIC Act, ASIC
commenced an investigation of PLC and Mr Palmer in
relation to suspected
contraventions of, inter alia, s 631(1) of the Act.
[98] On its proper construction, s49(1) of the ASIC Act requires that it appears
to a relevant officer of ASIC, or objectively it
should appear to such a
relevant officer of ASIC, that a person may have committed an offence against
the corporations legislation
and ought to be prosecuted for the offence.
[99] By no later than 7 October 2015, ASIC had obtained the evidence and formed
the view, such that Mr Palmer was a person within
the purview of s49(1) and, by
virtue of the operation of s49(4), not able to be examined, ...
[100] By document dated 17 May 2016, ASIC purported to summons Mr Palmer to a
compulsory interview.
[102] On 7 July 2016, Mr Palmer was interviewed by representatives of ASIC as
follows: ...
[103] The compulsory examination was not voluntary.
[104] At the examination, Mr X claimed privilege on behalf of Mr Palmer and
advised that Mr Palmer was there under compulsion.
[105] Mr Palmer efficaciously claimed privilege against self-incrimination on 49
occasions during the interview.
[106] In the premises of paragraphs [95] to [105] above:
(a) the summons issued to Mr Palmer dated 17 May 2016 compelling him, pursuant
to s 19 of the ASIC Act, to be subjected to examination
under oath, and to
provide reasonable assistance to ASIC in relation to its investigation, was
unlawful and in contravention of s49(1)
and (4) of the ASIC Act;
(b) the examination of Mr Palmer purportedly pursuant to s 19 of the ASIC Act
conducted by ASIC on 7 July 2016, was unlawful;
(c) the transcripts of the compulsory examination of Mr Palmer under s 19 of the
ASIC Act were unlawfully obtained;
(d) any dissemination of the transcripts of the compulsory examination was
therefore also unlawful.
Part F described the consequences of the alleged unlawfulness in the following
F: The use and dissemination of the transcript was unlawful
[107] Pursuant to s68(2) and (3) and 76(1) of the ASIC Act:
(a) information provided by a person examined by ASIC (and the fact of that
person signing a record of examination) the person claims
might tend to
incriminate the person or make the person liable to a penalty is not admissible
against that person in any subsequent
criminal proceeding or proceeding for the
imposition of a penalty;
(b) any information, document or other thing derived or obtained as a direct or
indirect consequence of the person examined providing
that original information
(or signing a record of examination) which the person claims might tend to
incriminate the person or make
the person liable to a penalty is not admissible
against that person in any subsequent criminal proceeding or proceeding for the
imposition of a penalty.
[108] On a date the Applicants cannot presently particularise:
(a) ASIC provided transcripts of a compulsory examination of Mr Palmer to the
(b) ASIC and/or the CDPP disseminated the transcripts within CDPP and to counsel
retained by CDPP.
[109] On a date prior to 22 February 2018, ASIC used the transcripts of a
compulsory examination of Mr Palmer to formulate the PLC
Complaint and the C
Palmer Complaint, as follows ...
[110] The PLC Complaint was served on PLC on 2 March 2018.
[111] The C Palmer Complaint was served on C Palmer on 2 March 2018.
[112] On a date prior to 11 June 2018, ASIC used the transcripts of the
compulsory examination of Mr Palmer to draft a summary of
facts (SOF).
[113] On 11 June 2018, the SOF was served on Alexander Law.
[114] ASIC and CDPP were not authorised by the ASIC Act, or otherwise:
(a) to use the transcripts of the compulsory examination of Mr Palmer to:
(i) formulate the PLC Complaint and the C Palmer Complaint;
(ii) draft the SOF;
(b) adduce into evidence, and rely on in evidence, the SOF in any court; or
(c) disseminate to third parties the transcripts of the compulsory examination.
[115] In the premises:
(a) providing the transcripts of the compulsory examination of Mr Palmer to the
CDPP, was unlawful;
(b) using the transcripts of the compulsory examination of Mr Palmer to
formulate the PLC Complaint and the C Palmer Complaint, was
(c) using transcripts of the compulsory examination of Mr Palmer to draft the
SOF, was unlawful;
(d) preparing evidence for court proceedings, was unlawful.
Part G linked the alleged unlawfulness to two well known criminal law principles
in the following terms:
G: The compulsory examination breached a companion principle of criminal
[116] It is a fundamental principle of the accusatorial system of criminal
justice that the onus of proof beyond reasonable doubt
rests on the Crown
(Fundamental Principle).
[117] A companion rule to the Fundamental Principle is that an accused person
cannot be required to testify to the commission of
the offence charged
(Companion Principle).
[118] A further companion principle is, or ought to be held to be, that the
decision to use compulsive investigative powers in relation
to whether an
offence has been committed, such as those in s19, or s49, of the ASIC Act, must
be for the sole purpose of investigating
whether such offence has been committed
(and if it appears that it has, its prosecution) and not for any other or
additional purpose
or consideration (the Sole Purpose of Investigating an
Offence Principle).
[119] The Investigation had, as an additional purpose or consideration, ASIC
assisting with the TPC Purpose, as alleged in section
[120] In the premises:
(a) the summons issued to Mr Palmer dated 17 May 2016 compelling him, pursuant
to s 19 of the ASIC Act, to be subjected to examination
under oath, and to
provide reasonable assistance to ASIC in relation to its investigation, was
(b) the examination of Mr Palmer purportedly pursuant to s 19 of the ASIC Act
conducted by ASIC on 7 July 2016, was unlawful;
(c) the transcripts of the compulsory examination of Mr Palmer under s 19 of the
ASIC Act were unlawfully obtained.
both the statement of claim and the originating motion set out the relief
paragraph A relief was in the following terms:
A Declarations that:
(i) The purported exercise by the First Respondent of the power contained in
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
(Cth) (ASIC
Act) to compulsorily examine the Applicant on 7 July 2016 was unlawful;
(ii) the summons issued to Mr Palmer dated 17 May 2016 compelling him, pursuant
to s 19 of the ASIC Act, to be subjected to examination
under oath, and to
provide reasonable assistance to ASIC in relation to its investigation, was
(iii) the examination of Mr Palmer purportedly pursuant to s19 of the ASIC Act
conducted by ASIC on 7 July 2016, was unlawful;
(iv) the transcripts of compulsory examination of Mr Palmer under s19 of the
ASIC Act were unlawfully obtained;
(v) the transcript of the compulsory examination by ASIC, and which has been
provided to the CDPP, may not be used for any purpose
(1) formulating the charge;
(2) preparing, relying on, or adducing into evidence, the summary of
paragraphs B to D relief was in the following terms:
order restraining ASIC and the CDPP from using, directly or indirectly, the
transcripts of the compulsory examination of Mr Palmer
purportedly under
s 19 of the ASIC Act, including by restraining any person, whether within
ASIC the CDPP or elsewhere, from having
any further involvement in relation to
any matter concerning the subject matter of the s19
order requiring ASIC and the CDPP to file an affidavit deposing to whom the
transcripts of the compulsory examination of Mr Palmer
purportedly under s 19 of
the ASIC Act were disseminated.
order requiring ASIC and the CDPP to deliver up to the applicant all copies of
the transcripts of the compulsory examination of
Mr Palmer purportedly under s
19 of the ASIC Act.
at this point, it is well apparent that the proceeding below and the allegations
made emerge from the investigation and prosecution
of the applicants. Each
section of the statement of claim builds on earlier allegations in the pleading,
culminating in Parts F
and G and then the prayer for relief. There is a close
link between the nature of the allegations made and the extant criminal
proceedings.
is said that the examination of Mr Palmer was unlawful. And it is said that the
transcripts of that examination were unlawfully
obtained, and any dissemination
of the transcripts was unlawful.
is said that ASIC provided the transcripts to the CDPP which were used to
formulate two criminal complaints, and then used to draft
a summary of facts in
connection with the criminal proceedings.
us, the applicants have maintained the position that the proceeding below was
not about the criminal proceedings but about
the lawfulness of the s 19
examination. But in our view this was not an accurate characterisation in the
sense that the assertion
as to the latter was being used as the foundation for
challenging aspects of the former including the formulation of the criminal
charges and the associated summary of facts. This is all well apparent from the
pleaded allegations and the relief sought.
applicants have also said that the proceeding below had no direct impact on the
criminal proceedings. It was said that there
was no order sought staying the
criminal proceedings and no challenge to any ruling in the criminal proceedings.
And it was said
that as the proceeding below has no impact on the criminal
proceedings, it can proceed in tandem.
in our view such a perspective is too narrow. First, it reflects an incorrect
view of the fragmentation question as we will discuss
later. Second, the
proceeding below does seek to challenge aspects of the prosecution including the
formulation of the charges and
the summary of facts. And it does seek to
restrain any further use of the fruits of the s 19 examination in the criminal
proceedings.
Moreover, the fact that the relief sought is broader, and some of
it is outside the ambit of the criminal proceedings, does not
application of the fragmentation principle but rather fortifies her
Honour’s determination which was to grant a temporary
stay rather than a
permanent stay so that any residual questions and remedies could be dealt with
later after the conclusion of the
extant criminal proceedings.
is appropriate at this point to identify more precisely the applicants’
argument concerning the unlawfulness of the exercise
of the s 19
The nature of the alleged unlawfulness
applicants assert that the s 19 notice issued to Mr Palmer by ASIC was
unlawful, being in contravention of s 49(1) and (4) of
the ASIC Act.
19 is in the following terms:
19 Notice requiring appearance for examination
(1) This section applies where ASIC, on reasonable grounds, suspects or believes
that a person can give information relevant to a
matter that it is
investigating, or is to investigate, under Division 1.
(2) ASIC may, by written notice in the prescribed form given to the person,
require the person:
(a) to give to ASIC all reasonable assistance in connection with the
investigation; and
(b) to appear before a specified member or staff member for examination on oath
or affirmation and to answer questions.
49 is in the following terms:
49 ASIC may cause prosecution to be begun
(1) This section applies where:
(a) as a result of an investigation; or
(b) from a record of an examination;
conducted under this Part, it appears to ASIC that a person:
(c) may have committed an offence against the corporations legislation; and
(d) ought to be prosecuted for the offence.
(2) ASIC may cause a prosecution of the person for the offence to be begun and
carried on.
(a) ASIC, on reasonable grounds, suspects or believes that a person can give
information relevant to a prosecution for the offence;
(b) the offence relates to matters being, or connected with, affairs of a body
corporate, or to matters including such matters;
ASIC may, whether before or after a prosecution for the offence is begun, by
writing given to the person, or to an eligible person
in relation to the body,
as the case may be, require the person or eligible person to give all reasonable
assistance in connection
with such a prosecution.
(3A) An offence under subsection 63(3) relating to subsection (3) of this
section is an offence of strict liability.
(4) Subsection (3) does not apply in relation to:
(a) the person referred to in subsection (1); or
(b) a person who is or has been that person’s lawyer.
would seem that the applicants’ point under s 49 is that Mr Palmer, at the
time or prior to the exercise of power under s
19, was a person who fitted
within the description of s 49(1). Accordingly, it seems to be said that he
fell within s 49(4), and
so s 49(3) could not be utilised by ASIC.
then seems to be said, somehow, that necessarily implicitly, this all entailed
that ASIC could not then exercise its power under
s 19 concerning Mr Palmer if
it appeared to ASIC that he met the description under s 49(1).
there are both legal and factual questions involved in such an argument.
factual question involves an inquiry as to whether it so appeared to ASIC at the
relevant time that Mr Palmer fitted the description
in s 49(1), which inquiry
seems to be quite fact intensive.
legal question involves a consideration as to whether s 49 by necessary
implication could limit ASIC’s exercise of power
under s 19 even if Mr
Palmer met the description under s 49(1) at the time ASIC exercised its s 19
power. The content of the obligation
under s 49(3) is to be contrasted with the
content of the obligation under s 19(2). Further, there are potentially
different time-frame
parameters for the exercise of power, and s 49(3) has a
focus on “in connection with such a prosecution” as distinct
the investigative focus of s 19(2). Further, for s 49(3) and s 63(3), strict
liability is imposed (s 49(3A)). Further, s 63
applies differently to s 19(2)
(s 63(1)) as compared to s 49(3) (s 63(3)).
do not need to trouble ourselves further on these questions. Moreover, no
argument was put to the primary judge that she could
or should deal with only
the legal question. Further, the magistrate or judge dealing with the criminal
proceedings is well able
to deal with all legal and factual questions concerning
the applicants’ s 49 argument. We should elaborate further on the
criminal proceedings.
The criminal proceedings
prosecution was commenced against PLC on 22 February 2018. The criminal
complaint alleges that contrary to
Corporations Act
did not make an offer for securities in The President’s Club Ltd within
two months of publicly proposing to make a takeover
Proposing or announcing a bid
(1) A person contravenes this subsection if:
(a) either alone or with other persons, the person publicly proposes to make a
takeover bid for securities in a company; and
(b) the person does not make offers for the securities under a takeover bid
within 2 months after the proposal.
The terms and conditions of the bid must be the same as or not substantially
less favourable than those in the public proposal.
criminal complaint was also lodged against Mr Palmer on 22 February 2018. It
alleges that Mr Palmer aided, abetted, counselled
or procured PLC to commit the
said offence.
CDPP is prosecuting these complaints. As we have said, the applicants allege
that ASIC and the CDPP wrongfully used the
transcripts to formulate the
criminal complaints, and to draft a summary of facts in those prosecutions.
at the time of the hearing before us the prosecutions remained at the
pre-committal stage, although we note that a committal hearing
is scheduled for
later this year.
the complaints were made in February 2018, the prosecutions have been mentioned
in the Queensland Magistrates Court at least
36 times including administrative
adjournments. Numerous applications have been made in the proceedings.
addition to these two criminal proceedings, on 6 February 2020 a further
proceeding was commenced by a complaint on ASIC’s
behalf against
Mr Palmer for offences under
s 184(2)(a)
Corporations Act
408C(1)(d) of the
Criminal Code
(Qld). This is an unrelated prosecution
that remains at the pre-committal stage. We will put this to one side and
simply refer
to the other two complaints as the prosecutions or criminal
proceedings.
as we have said, before the primary judge, ASIC and the CDPP each lodged an
application seeking a permanent stay of the proceeding
below, alternatively
summary dismissal of the proceeding, on abuse of process grounds.
and the CDPP contended that the proceeding below was an abuse of process on the
basis that it sought to fragment the criminal
process and to have determined
questions that can and should be determined in the criminal proceedings in
relation to which the transcripts
were allegedly used by ASIC and the CDPP.
is convenient at this point to briefly address one other topic before addressing
the primary judge’s consideration of the
issues raised.
is unclear as to how the fruits of Mr Palmer’s s 19 examination will be or
could be used in the prosecutions.
would seem that for anything but innocuous topics, Mr Palmer claimed the
privilege against self-incrimination in relation to many
of his answers during
the s 19 examination. Accordingly, such answers could not be tendered as
evidence against him in his prosecution
(see s 68(3) and s 76(1)(a) of the ASIC
it would seem that derivative use could be and has been made of such answers in
any event for the purposes of the prosecutions.
The transcripts of the
examination have been given by ASIC to the CDPP for the purposes of the
prosecutions in terms of formulating
the charges and preparing a summary of
facts (see generally ss 17, 18, 27 and 127 of the ASIC Act and
Australian Securities Commission
[1993] HCA 56
(1993) 178 CLR 408
at 424 and 425 per
Brennan J).
it would seem arguable at least that further derivative use could be made in the
prosecutions of information in the transcripts
notwithstanding that they could
not be directly tendered in a context where ss 68(3) and 76(1)(a) applied. There
appears to be authority
to this effect as Mr Paul Holdenson KC for ASIC pointed
out and notwithstanding the principle of legality (see
[2015] NSWCCA 212
to [124] per Bathurst CJ).
if the transcripts were sought to be tendered in circumstances where there was
no s 68(3) and s 76(1) question, then a
Bunning v Cross
[1978] HCA 22
and the transcripts so procured unlawfully obtained.
completeness, we should also note that although the applicants have raised a s
49 point as we have identified, it is unclear to
us whether in the prosecutions
they may also challenge the derivative use of the transcripts containing answers
otherwise covered
by ss 68(3) and 76(1)(a), even if the s 19 examination was
held to be lawful.
the magistrate or judge dealing with the prosecutions is well able to deal with
such questions.
is now convenient to turn to the primary judge’s reasons.
The primary judge’s reasons
primary judge recognised (at [46]) that the grant of a permanent stay to prevent
an abuse of process has been said to involve
“an ultimate decision that
permitting a matter to go to trial and the rendering of a verdict following
trial would be irreconcilable
with the administration of justice” (
v The Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of Lismore
[2023] HCA 32
(2023) 414 ALR 635
per Kiefel CJ, Gageler and Jagot JJ). The
ultimate decision is one of “last resort”, only justifiable in an
exceptional
Honour said (at [47]) that the plurality’s statements in
to be understood in their context given that what was being considered was
whether there should be a permanent stay of proceedings
to vindicate a right in
circumstances where the grant of a permanent stay would forever sterilise, as
her Honour described it, the
right said to have been infringed.
Honour said that cases where a stay is sought to avoid fragmentation of the
criminal justice process are different. Cases involving
fragmentation often
involve an attempt to use the civil courts to obtain relief when the point that
the accused seeks to agitate
falls within the ambit of the criminal justice
process and should be heard and determined by the criminal courts, whether
immediately
or at a subsequent stage of the process, for example, after
committal or on appeal after conviction. As such, those cases do not
any permanent sterilisation of asserted rights.
Honour pointed out (at [48]) that the varied circumstances in which use of a
court’s processes will amount to an abuse do
not lend themselves to
exhaustive statement. But one class of case in which a stay, or another course
not involving determining
the case advanced, may be warranted is where
proceeding to hear and determine the claim brought in civil jurisdiction would
the fragmentation of criminal proceedings.
said at 26:
a court will be reluctant to make declarations in a matter which impinges
directly upon the course of proceedings in a criminal matter.
Once criminal
proceedings have begun they should be allowed to follow their ordinary course
unless it appears that for some special
reason it is necessary in the interests
of justice to make a declaratory order.
principle was stated in
Flanagan v Commissioner of the Australian Federal
(1996) 60 FCR 149
at 187 per Beaumont, Ryan and Lindgren JJ as
The principle is well-established that criminal proceedings should not be
fragmented by other courts’ entertaining, except
in exceptional or
extraordinary circumstances, applications of various kinds by or against one or
more of the participants in the
criminal trial.
concerned an application for judicial review of decisions to apply for, and
issue, a telephone intercept warrant, the fruits of which,
being records of
telephone conversations, aided in the bringing of criminal proceedings.
Honour recognised (at [55]) that the undesirability of civil courts permitting
their jurisdiction to be exercised so as to give
rise to the fragmentation of
criminal proceedings has been confirmed on many occasions.
Further, her
Honour noted (at [58]) that one of the vices of fragmentation is the potential
for an accused to seek to raise the same
point in multiple courts.
her Honour referred (at [59]) to other reasons for “the basic rule of
restraint” canvassed by Kirby P (in dissent
in the result) in
v Glass (No 2)
(1985) 3 NSWLR 230
at 235 as follows:
At the stage of committal, whether by declaration or otherwise, superior courts
do well to limit their intervention to exceptional
or special cases. This
principle is well-established: [citations omitted] ... It is important,
therefore, to understand the
rationale behind the rule of restraint.
reasons include: (1) the undesirability of discontinuity,
disruption or
in committal proceedings; (2) the superior knowledge of the committing
magistrate concerning the whole facts and circumstances of
the case under his
consideration; (3) the undesirability of the beneficial remedies of declaration
or the prerogative writs being
misused to justify transfer to the superior
courts of matters committed by law to the magistracy; (4) the cost, much of it
by the public purse, of proliferating litigation, especially at an
interlocutory stage, which diverts attention from the real substance
accusations brought and concentrates instead upon peripheral and often
procedural matters; (5) the
undue advantage that may be given to rich and
powerful defendants to interrupt and delay the operation of the criminal law
in a way not so readily available to ordinary citizens; and (6) the power of the
Attorney-General to present an ex officio indictment
or to refuse to present an
indictment, whatever the outcome of the committal proceedings.
(emphasis added by the primary judge)
Honour pointed out (at [63]) that Gibbs CJ returned to the subject in
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth)
[1984] HCA 56
(1984) 154 CLR 640
, observing (at 643)
This Court has in a number of cases said that it is wrong that the ordinary
course of proceedings in the criminal courts should be
interrupted by
applications for declarations as to
questions that will or may arise
the criminal proceedings.
(citations omitted) (emphasis added by the primary judge)
as her Honour recognised, fragmentation is not only an issue in respect of
questions that are already live in the criminal proceedings,
or that are certain
to arise. As Gibbs CJ stated, the question of fragmentation extends to questions
that “may arise”.
Honour pointed out that other expressions have also been used to identify the
nature of the necessary connection with criminal
proceedings. Her Honour went
on to discuss a number of authorities including the following.
Hausfeld v Commissioner of Police
[2018] NSWSC 1540
, Fagan J referred (at
[21]) to the “determination of issues which bear upon the conduct of
criminal proceedings”. In
that case t
plaintiff sought a declaration that a search of his premises, and the seizure of
items from the premises, was not lawful due to
a defect affecting the issue of
the warrant. He sought an order quashing or declaring the warrant to be invalid
and an order for
the delivery up of items that were seized. He also sought an
injunction to restrain police from acting on or taking any further
relation to the material seized. The defendants sought that the summons be
dismissed as an abuse of process, the ground
being that permitting the summons
to be litigated would fragment the criminal proceedings, in which the plaintiff
had been indicted
on charges that were based on the evidence seized under the
impugned warrant. Fagan J considered that the challenge could be mounted
criminal court and dismissed the summons.
Honour said (at [64]) that the fact that the issue in question could be raised
in the course of the criminal proceedings, and
an answer obtained in that forum,
often features prominently in reasons explaining why a civil court has declined
to address the
question posed in the separate civil proceedings.
Honour said (at [65]) that the capacity of the criminal court to address the
asserted issue, even at a later stage of proceedings,
for example, after
committal for trial, is an important consideration in determining whether
exceptional circumstances exist, warranting
the exercise of jurisdiction.
as the primary judge recognised (at [66]), many of the authorities involve what
might be described as direct, albeit collateral
attacks on rulings in criminal
proceedings, or on the continued progress of the prosecution in its entirety, in
the sense that in
a civil proceeding orders are sought that directly challenge a
ruling made in the criminal proceeding or seek to stay the prosecution.
Nevertheless,
as her Honour recognised (at [67]), not all cases in which civil courts have
declined to exercise jurisdiction on grounds
of fragmentation involve that kind
of direct, but collateral, attack.
Honour made reference (at [67] to [70]) to
Bell v The Queen
[2020] SASCFC 116
(2020) 286 A
, which was a case where the accused appealed against a ruling of a
District Court judge dismissing his application for a permanent
stay on the
basis of the alleged misuse of powers by the Independent Commissioner Against
Corruption. Separately, the Commissioner
sought declaratory relief on matters
concerning the Commissioner’s powers and in relation to the impugned
actions. Kourakis
CJ, Peek and Blue JJ upheld the District Court judge’s
dismissal of the stay application, but declined to make the declarations
by the Commissioner. Their Honours observed that “civil courts exercise
great caution before hearing and determining
civil proceedings that raise common
issues that are to be determined in criminal proceedings” (at [407]).
Their Honours acknowledged
that the declarations sought by the Commissioner
“would not directly interfere in the criminal proceeding”, but would
address issues that “are very closely aligned (if not identical) to those
arising for decision in the criminal proceeding”
(at [416]). Further,
another reason for caution is that the precise
formulation of declarations may have unforeseen consequences in the criminal
proceeding.
Their Honours deferred addressing the application for declaratory
relief until after the final determination of the criminal proceedings.
stay was temporary, not permanent.
primary judge (at [71]) also discussed
Gamage v Riashi
[2023] NSWSC 390.
The plaintiff had been charged with 13 offences arising out of an investigation
undertaken by the Independent Commission Against
Corruption. The hearing of the
charges had not yet commenced at the time the plaintiff brought proceedings
seeking to obtain a copy
of the application for a warrant, as he wished to mount
an argument that the telephone recording of him said to be authorised by
warrant was improperly obtained and could not be used in the impending criminal
proceedings. Chen J dismissed the application.
He said (at
In my view, the plaintiff's summons should be dismissed. That is because:
(1) First, the avoidance of fragmenting the criminal process, and the fact that
the challenge that the plaintiff seeks to make in
connection with the warrant
can be pursued in, and decided by, the Local Court are decisive considerations
against granting the plaintiff
the relief sought.
that was a case in which the fragmentation principle was applied to dismiss a
civil proceeding which did not have an immediate
and direct effect on criminal
proceedings.
Honour said (at [74]) that whether or not any particular case is exceptional, so
as to warrant hearing and granting relief in
an application brought separately
and outside the criminal justice process, will depend on the facts of the case.
the primary judge made reference (at [75]) to
Hutson v Australian Securities
and Investments Commission
[2023] QCA 167
per Mullins P and said
is also instructive in stressing the importance of focusing
on, and determining, the threshold question of whether the court should
even proceed to consider the merits of an application for declaratory
relief. The potential for the matters in issue to be raised
before the criminal
court, and for any adverse pre-trial rulings to be appealed within the criminal
justice system, were identified
as powerful factors tending against permitting
fragmentation by considering the issue in question when advanced in separate
declaratory
relief proceedings. Further, in considering where the interests of
justice lie, consideration is given to the practical and not
just strictly legal
consequences of the civil court’s decision on the criminal
proceedings.
the primary judge noted (at [76] and [77]) authorities to the effect that the
applicant’s capacity to agitate a point
in any appeal against conviction
is important in determining that a case may not be exceptional so as to warrant
fragmentation of
the trial process, once set in motion. Moreover, there may be
potential events during a criminal trial which may mean the questions
would not need to be answered, and, in any event, could be addressed on appeal
from any conviction.
her Honour referred (at [77]) to
Phong v Attorney-General of the Commonwealth
of Australia
[2001] FCA 1241
(2001) 114 FCR 75.
In that case, the trial judge in the
criminal proceeding was fully seized of the issues that the accused sought to
raise in the
Federal Court, including, relevantly, a claim for an order
permanently restraining the respondents from proceeding upon an indictment.
was held that even if the Court had jurisdiction, it should decline to exercise
unnecessary and undesirable
fragmentation of the criminal process.
her Honour referred (at [77]) to
Palmer v Magistrates Court of Queensland
[2024] QCA 8
where Dalton JA said (at [5]) that “[t]here was no reason
demonstrated why such points of legal argument or defence as the
wished to raise could not be determined in the criminal courts in the ordinary
her Honour said (at [79]) that where an application raises complaints about
matters that may never transpire, that tells
against there being exceptional
circumstances warranting exercise of jurisdiction in a way that fragments the
criminal process.
Honour said (at [80]) that the principle against fragmentation clearly
encompasses issues concerning procedural or evidentiary
matters, but it is not
confined to procedural or evidentiary matters. So, for example, in
Commonwealth of Australia
[2015] HCA 49
(2015) 327 ALR 1
French CJ applied (at [21] and
[22]) the principle against fragmentation to a situation where there was a
constitutional challenge
to legislation.
as her Honour recognised (at [89]), where an application is made to stay or
summarily dismiss a proceeding, it is necessary
to consider the implications of
making, or declining to make, the orders sought. And her Honour said that in
the case before her,
those matters arise for consideration in relation to the
prosecution and the capacity of the parties to argue, and the criminal courts
determine, the question of the illegality of the s 19 examination of Mr
Palmer, and the capacity of the applicants to raise the
question of the
illegality of the s 19 examination of Mr Palmer in subsequent civil
proceedings.
her Honour said (at [91] to [93]) that issue estoppel can not only arise where
the court’s orders are in the form of
declarations, but also where a
matter of fact or law has been determined in the course of determining an issue
where relief such
as declaratory relief is refused. And in determining the
impact of issue estoppel, it is necessary to focus on the issues of fact
that were necessarily resolved as a step in reaching the ultimate determination,
including where the determination is constituted
by a dismissal.
as her Honour said (at [94]), when regard is to be had to the future conduct of
criminal proceedings, account must be taken of
the fact that the criminal law
does not recognise issue estoppel, as that doctrine has developed in civil
Rogers v The Queen
[1994] HCA 42
(1994) 181 CLR 251
at 275 to 280 per Deane
and Gaudron JJ.
after addressing the relevant authorities and identifying the parties’
arguments before her, her Honour went on to apply
the principles that she had
identified.
Honour first considered (at [146] to [152]) an argument put by the CDPP that the
proceeding before her should be permanently stayed
on the basis that there was a
multiplicity in proceedings or a “re-litigation” that constituted an
abuse of process.
But her Honour did not accept that ground (at [153]). This
ground has not been re-agitated before us, there having been no proposed
of contention sought to be relied on. We need say nothing further about that
Honour then turned to consider whether there was an abuse of process based upon
the fragmentation ground (at [154] et seq). And
in this respect her Honour
first addressed a threshold question being whether or not the proceeding before
her involved any fragmentation
at all (at [156]).
her Honour noted (at [157]), the applicants contended that the civil proceeding
they had initiated did not involve fragmentation
at all. ASIC and the CDPP said
it did. The difference between the parties arose from the narrower view of
fragmentation taken by
the applicants. The applicants contended that, in order
to give rise to concerns associated with fragmentation, the civil proceeding
must have a direct impact on the criminal proceedings. The applicants contended
that the relief they sought in the proceeding did
not have a direct effect, or,
as they would have it, any effect at all, on the criminal proceedings and
therefore could not be said
to involve fragmentation.
primary judge did not accept the applicants’ contention for the following
Honour said (at [160]) that the nomenclature of “fragmentation”, or
the other terms used, such as “disruption”
“dislocation”, must not be allowed to obscure the underlying policy
concerns that the High Court, and intermediate
courts of appeal, have identified
as standing behind the restraint shown by civil courts when it comes to
proceedings that intersect
with criminal proceedings.
concerns include the undesirability of disruption or delay to criminal
processes, the superior knowledge of the judge or magistrate
seized of the
criminal proceedings in respect of the facts and circumstances underlying the
criminal case, the public cost of proliferating
litigation and, according to the
primary judge, the undue advantage that may be afforded to rich and powerful
defendants to delay
and interrupt the operation of the criminal law.
Honour said (at [161]) that all of the applicants’ previous challenges to
the prosecution have involved frontal assaults
on the applicants’
prosecution. Not only was the Magistrates Court of Queensland a party to all of
the previous challenges
other than the first challenge, but orders were sought
to stop the criminal proceedings in their tracks, in particular, orders staying
the prosecution and/or restraining the Magistrates Court, the CDPP and ASIC from
proceeding with the prosecution.
such, the applications brought by the CDPP and ASIC seeking to dispose of those
proceedings clearly called for consideration of
the authorities on
fragmentation.
Honour said (at [162]) that the current proceeding stands apart from the
blueprint of the applicants’ former frontal assaults
on the criminal
proceedings. The Magistrates Court of Queensland is not a party to this
proceeding. The relief sought in the present
proceeding does not include orders
staying the prosecution.
Honour recognised (at [163]) that most of the cases where the principles
concerning fragmentation are discussed involve what the
primary judge referred
to as direct, collateral attacks. Such attacks have commonly taken the form of
a civil application seeking
orders staying a prosecution, enjoining the criminal
court or the prosecution from taking certain steps, and seeking judicial review
of decisions made by the judicial officer conducting the committal or trial. The
orders sought in such cases would, if made, have
a direct and immediate effect
on the criminal proceedings.
her Honour said (at [164]) that civil proceedings can intersect with criminal
proceedings in a variety of ways. Not all involve
the direct impact on criminal
proceedings that the applicants contended must be present in order for a civil
case to give rise to
concerns about fragmentation.
Honour said (at [166]) that the question, then, is what is the nature of the
intersection, if any, between the present civil proceeding
prosecution?
Honour said (at [167] and [168]) that the applicants focused on the relief
sought in in the present proceeding, but the relief
sought cannot be considered
in a vacuum. Rather, it must be considered in light of the pleading of the
matters said to warrant that
relief. The relief sought must also be considered
from a practical standpoint, addressing the realities of how this matter
to trial and judgment may affect the prosecution.
the statement of claim is read from start to finish, and the relief sought is
evaluated in that context, it is clear that the
applicants seek relief that has
a close nexus with the prosecution.
seek declarations regarding the unlawfulness of the s 19 examination and
the transcripts being unlawfully obtained. The relief
sought also includes a
declaration that the transcripts may not be used for “any purpose”
including formulating the charge,
which is the very subject of the prosecution,
or the summary of facts in those criminal proceedings.
Honour said (at [169]) that even if a declaration in those terms would also
operate in relation to any future and different criminal
charges, it is clear
from the statement of claim that the charge and the summary of facts referred to
in the relief sought are those
presently pleaded in the statement of claim.
Those paragraphs of the statement of claim set out the use of the transcripts
culminating
in the laying of the charges that constitute the prosecution, and
the summary of facts in that prosecution.
Honour said that there is an air of unreality in the applicants’
submissions that the present claim has no sufficient point
of intersection with
the prosecution so as to bring the fragmentation principle into focus. The
present proceeding seeks to impugn,
as “unlawful”, steps that
constitute foundations of the prosecution.
primary judge did not accept that the principles concerning fragmentation have
no application simply because the relief that touches
on the criminal
proceedings has been framed so that the nexus with the criminal proceedings is
indirect and has been pursued in a
court of federal jurisdiction.
Honour said (at [170]) that the relief sought also includes mandatory and
prohibitive injunctions seeking to restrain any future
use of the transcripts
and to require ASIC and the CDPP to deliver up the transcripts and detail, on
oath, to whom they have been
provided. Her Honour said that again, there is an
air of unreality in the suggestion that orders of this kind would have no impact
on the prosecution, in circumstances where it is a key part of the
applicants’ case in this proceeding that the transcripts
of the s 19
examination were unlawfully used by ASIC and the CDPP to formulate the two
complaints that initiated the prosecution,
and were unlawfully used to draft the
summary of facts deployed in the prosecution.
Honour said (at [171]) that the nexus between the civil and criminal proceedings
must be assessed in a practical manner. The suggestion
that the present
proceeding could be run to trial and judgment with no impact on the prosecution
has an air of unreality about it.
Even if one adopts a more technical approach
and considers the impact of this proceeding being run to trial and judgment by
to the applicable legal doctrines, it is clear that running the
present proceeding to trial and judgment would not, as the applicants
have no impact on the criminal proceedings.
Honour noted (at [172]) that the parties agreed that, if this proceeding were
run to trial and judgment, and if one was to conclude
that the s 19
examination was unlawful, neither the CDPP nor ASIC to the extent it has a role
in the prosecution would contend in
the prosecution that the s 19
examination was lawful.
noted that whilst ASIC and the CDPP accepted they would be precluded from
mounting such an argument on abuse of process grounds,
the applicants considered
they would be so constrained as a matter of convention.
Conversely,
and as the primary judge noted (at [173]), if this matter were run to trial and
judgment, and if one was to conclude that
the s 19 examination was lawful,
ASIC and the CDPP accepted there would not be an absolute bar on the applicants
contending in the
prosecution that the s 19 examination was unlawful. ASIC
said that there is a possibility, which ASIC described as theoretical, that
applicants could be permitted to mount such an argument in the prosecution, but
that that possibility would only arise if there
were some prospect that
questions of evidence or the higher standard of proof in criminal proceedings
might justify that inconsistency
in result. The applicants contended that there
would be no constraint at all.
her Honour said (at [174]), it was not necessary for her to reach a concluded
view on the extent to which an adverse decision in
the present proceeding on the
issue of the legality of the s 19 examination would constrain the
applicants in the future conduct
of the prosecution. Nevertheless, she said that
the fact that the parties have disagreed, as they have, on this point reinforces
the intersection between the present civil and criminal proceedings. In her
view, the fact, and nature, of the disagreement between
the parties illustrates
that having this proceeding run to trial gives rise to the clear potential for
additional issues to arise
in the criminal proceedings concerning the impact of
an adverse ruling in this Court.
Honour said (at [175]) that the authorities on fragmentation make it clear that
where a point can be raised in extant criminal
proceedings, absent exceptional
circumstances that warrant determining the point in the separate civil
proceedings, it should be
raised in the criminal court, and not by way of a
separate civil proceeding.
Honour said (at [176]) that it was common ground that a challenge may be made in
the prosecution at the committal or trial stage
to the admissibility of
evidence, premised on the s 19 examination being unlawful.
was also accepted that the question of the lawfulness of the s 19
examination may arise if an application were made in the District
Queensland (post-committal) to have the prosecution stayed on the basis that the
s 19 examination was unlawful, although
the applicants contended such an
application would be unlikely to arise in that way, or to exclude evidence.
such, her Honour said that this is a case where the central point regarding the
legality of the s 19 examination could be raised
within the criminal
Honour said (at [177]) that it follows that the central question raised by the
applicants in the present proceedings, namely,
whether the s 19 examination
of Mr Palmer was lawful, is a question that will or may arise in the criminal
proceedings.
it is not necessary, in order for fragmentation concerns to arise, that the
questions will definitely or inevitably arise in
the criminal proceedings, the
primary judge noted that the applicants did not suggest that the question of the
illegality of the
s 19 examination would not arise in the criminal
proceedings.
completeness, her Honour noted (at [178]) that she did not accept the suggestion
of the applicants that the principal question
raised for determination in this
proceeding would be fundamentally different from the question as it may arise in
the criminal proceedings
because the issue there would concern the admissibility
of evidence. In either case, the same point would arise: was the s 19
examination
Honour said (at [179]) that given that the issue regarding the legality of the
s 19 examination can be determined in the criminal
courts, the authorities
emphasise that, absent exceptional circumstances, the accused should pursue the
relevant issue through the
criminal courts, rather than civil courts weighing in
with declaratory or other relief.
to the present case, her Honour said (at [180]) that this means that because the
applicants can pursue the question of the
legality of the s 19 examination
in the criminal proceedings, they should do so unless there are compelling
reasons that would justify
the question being determined in the civil
Honour went on to discuss whether there were such compelling reasons but
concluded that there were not (at [181] et seq).
Honour pointed out (at [183]) that the applicants stressed that Mr Palmer is
entitled to have his view, being that the s 19 examination
was unlawful,
vindicated and for the applicants to have the benefit of relief which ensures
that the transcripts of that examination
cannot be used adversely to their
interests in the future.
Honour said that whilst the applicants identified other causes of action that
might theoretically be mounted, one of which is
statute barred, there is no
suggestion that anyone is actually pursuing or preparing to pursue any other
adverse action in which
the transcripts may be used. The impugned s 19
examination took place in July 2016.
only material identified by the applicants as suggesting there was any inkling
that potential causes of action were to be pursued
against them mostly pre-dated
ASIC in fact taking action, and otherwise involved claims and proceedings which
have concluded.
would note here that the applicants before us did not take issue with these last
observations.
primary judge accepted (at [184]) that the relief sought by the applicants goes
beyond the relief that might be afforded by the
criminal courts in the context
of the prosecution, either in the committal or trial phase. Depending on how the
issue were to arise
in the criminal courts, the relief may be constituted by an
interlocutory decision on the admissibility of evidence. The applicants
not then have the benefit of a general and final declaration that the s 19
examination was unlawful, assuming success on that
point. Her Honour said that
this suggests that the present proceeding does have some potential utility to
the applicants, whilst
recognising that the interests of justice are not
confined to the interests of the litigants themselves.
seemed to the primary judge (at [185]) that the proceeding did have potential
utility to the applicants even though, if the proceeding
went to trial, there
would be a serious question as to whether the Court would grant declaratory
relief in the general terms sought
given that there is no present indication
that there is a real prospect of the transcripts being put to any use that is
the interests of the applicants. Her Honour said that it must be
apparent that the declaration will be productive of foreseeable
consequences for
the parties, whereas relief will not be granted if the question is hypothetical,
in the sense that it is claimed
in relation to circumstances that have not
occurred, and may never happen.
Honour then went on to consider (at [186]) the question of whether the
applicants’ interests would be adversely affected
by a permanent stay, or
summary dismissal, of the proceeding. Her Honour recited that the parties agreed
that, were the present proceedings
to be permanently stayed or summarily
dismissed by reason of concerns regarding fragmentation, the applicants would be
able to run
the illegality point in the criminal proceedings. The parties were,
however, at odds regarding whether a permanent stay or summary
dismissal would
prejudice the applicants’ ability to raise the illegality issue in
subsequent civil proceedings. Before her
Honour, the applicants contended that
there would be a res judicata that would preclude future civil proceedings on
this issue. The
applicants said that the prospect of further civil proceedings
arises given the constraints on the nature of the relief that the
courts may order and the potential for the s 19 transcripts to be used in
the future, in ways adverse to the applicants.
the primary judge’s view (at [187]), the wider ambit of the present
proceeding and the possibility that future civil proceedings
may be met with a
res judicata argument suggested that the interests of justice were best served
by a temporary, rather than a permanent,
stay or dismissal of the proceeding.
8 October 2024 her Honour made orders in the following terms:
proceeding be stayed pending the hearing and final determination, including any
appeals, of the criminal prosecutions brought
against the Applicants by
complaints dated 22 February 2018 (CDPP File Nos. QC16100658 and QC16100658A),
or until further order.
parties inform the Court as soon as possible of the determination of the
proceedings referred to in paragraph 1.
proceeding be listed for a case management hearing within 14 days of the
determination of the proceedings referred to in paragraph
be liberty to apply on three days’ notice.
will return to her Honour’s consideration (at [187] to [194]) of this
temporary stay question later.
is appropriate to now address the specific appeal grounds which we have slightly
re-ordered.
Did her Honour misapprehend the core concept of
“fragmentation”? (ground 1)
applicants say that her Honour misapprehended the core concept of
“fragmentation”, which is that fragmentation involves
proceedings challenging discrete evidentiary and/or procedural rulings by a
criminal court, which challenge fragments the criminal
proceedings.
say that this central error was disclosed in her Honour’s reasoning (at
[164]) that:
What the cases expose, however, is that civil proceedings can intersect with
criminal proceedings in a variety of ways. Not all involve
the direct impact on
criminal proceedings that the Palmer parties contended must be present in order
for a civil case to give rise
to concerns about fragmentation.
was said that her Honour in engaging in such reasoning relied on
, but did not consider relevant statements from
Gedeon v Commissioner of the New South Wales Crime
[2008] HCA 43
(2008) 236 CLR 120
[2021] HCA 38
(2021) 273 CLR 413.
applicants say that
detract from the definition of fragmentation that the applicants advance.
relation to
, the applicants said that although the Court stated (at
[416]) that “the Commissioner does not seek to interfere in the criminal
proceeding and granting the declarations sought...would not directly interfere
in the criminal proceeding”, when viewed in
context, the Commissioner
sought in a civil proceeding to challenge a discrete procedural ruling by the
criminal trial court, which
was considered to be “fragmentation” in
the applicants say that
both concerned
challenges brought in civil proceedings to warrants for the purpose of objecting
to the use of evidence proposed to
be used in pending criminal proceedings.
the applicants say that unlike those cases, here the applicants seek separate
and distinct relief by their civil proceeding that,
as a separate proceeding,
could not be said to give rise to any fragmentation of the criminal proceedings
as that concept is properly
understood.
the applicants say that their definition of fragmentation is consistent with the
endorsement by Gibbs ACJ in
of the reasoning of Jacobs P in
Shapowloff v Dunn
[1973] 2 NSWLR 468
at 470 that the relevant reluctance
is in respect of “...declarations in a matter which impinges directly upon
the course of
proceedings in a criminal matter.”
the applicants say that their reading of Gibbs ACJ’s reasoning is
consistent with the other members of the Court.
J expressed his conclusion that declaratory relief should be granted by
reference to the fact that it was “no mere question
of the admissibility
of evidence in any ordinary sense” that was in issue, and Aickin J
generally agreed with Stephen J. Further,
it was said that this passage of
Stephen J was adopted by all members of the Court in
the applicants say that any broader statement of principle adopted in
Frugtniet v State of Victoria
(1997) 148 ALR 320
Laboratories Pty Ltd v Commonwealth of Australia
(1999) 73 ALJR 464
involve cases that predate
Obeid v The
[2016] HCA 9
(2016) 329 ALR 372.
it was said that
Pan Laboratories
each concerned
attempts to injunct the progress of a criminal proceeding.
concerned a collateral application for a stay of a criminal proceeding.
was an application for a stay pending a special leave application
concerning an interlocutory ruling in a criminal proceeding. And
concerned the removal of a portion of a criminal proceeding into the High Court.
applicants do not deny that such scenarios fall within the ambit of the
fragmentation principle stated in
. But they say that these cases
are what the primary judge referred to (at [66]) as “direct, collateral
attacks ... on the
continued progress of the prosecution in its
the applicants say that
is explicable by reference to the
applicants’ understanding of
the applicants say that
did not consider the ambit of the rule
against fragmentation stated in
, but rather whether the exception
to that rule applied.
our view, the applicants’ statement of the relevant principle is too
narrow and their analysis of the relevant authorities
is problematic and
distorted by their incorrect focus. The primary judge rejected a narrow
expression of the principle, and in our
view her Honour was right to do so.
are a number of points to be made concerning Gibbs ACJ’s observations in
. But before proceeding further, it is necessary to set out a more
extensive extract of his reasons (at 25 and 26) where he said
In any case in which a declaration can be and is sought on a question of
evidence or procedure, the circumstances must be most exceptional
to warrant the
grant of relief. The power to make declaratory orders has proved to be a
valuable addition to the armoury of the law.
The procedure involved is simple
and free from technicalities; properly used in an appropriate case the use of
the power enables
the salient issue to be determined with the least possible
delay and expense. But the procedure is open to abuse, particularly in
cases, and if wrongly used can cause the very evils it is designed to avoid.
Applications for declarations as to the admissibility
of evidence may in some
cases be made by an accused person for purposes of delay, or by a prosecutor to
impose an additional burden
on the accused, but even when such an application is
made without any improper motive it is likely to be dilatory in effect, to
the proceedings and to detract from the efficiency of the criminal
process. I am not intending to criticize those concerned with
the conduct of
Bourke v. Hamilton
(23), or to show any disrespect for the careful
judgments delivered in that matter — indeed I have derived much assistance
from them — when I say that that case provides an example of the way in
which criminal proceedings may be needlessly protracted
if they are interrupted
by an application for a declaration — in the end the declaration sought
was refused but the proceedings
had been delayed for the space of almost a year.
The present case itself is another regrettable example of the delay that can be
caused by departures from the normal course of procedure. For these reasons I
would respectfully endorse the observations of Jacobs
P. (as he then was) in
Shapowloff v. Dunn
(24), that a court will be reluctant to make
declarations in a matter which impinges directly upon the course of proceedings
criminal matter. Once criminal proceedings have begun they should be
allowed to follow their ordinary course unless it appears that
for some special
reason it is necessary in the interests of justice to make a declaratory order.
Although these remarks may be no
more than mere “administrative
cautions” (cf.
Ibeneweka v. Egbuna
(25) I nevertheless consider
that if a judge failed to give proper weight to these matters it could not be
said that he had properly
exercised his discretion.
it would seem that Gibbs ACJ was the first to use the verbial form of
“fragmentation” in his phrase “to fragment
proceedings”.
he was not purporting to be exhaustive of the circumstances as to when
impermissible fragmentation could be involved.
phraseology such as “caused by departures from the normal course of
procedure”, that is, the way things are happening
in the criminal process,
indicate a degree of flexibility.
his response to what Jacobs P said in
and Gibbs ACJ’s
encapsulation that “a court will be reluctant to make declarations in a
matter which impinges directly
upon the course of proceedings in a criminal
matter”, is not a statement that direct impingement is a necessary
condition in
all cases. Indeed, Gibbs ACJ’s next statement that
“[o]nce criminal proceedings have begun they should be allowed to
their ordinary course unless it appears that for some special reason it is
necessary in the interests of justice to make a
declaration order”
indicates that he was not taking a narrow or tight view.
Jacobs P in
at 470 was also not purporting to be exhaustive.
And his statement concerning direct impingement also follows the more flexible
statement that:
Not only should I express the reluctance of the Court of Appeal to deal with
this matter rather than to remit it in the ordinary
way, but I should also
express the reluctance of the court to take a step by way of any form of relief,
including declaration, when
there are current proceedings before a magistrates,
in which the point may be raised, and in which the point of law may be litigated
on appeal, either to the District Court in its Criminal Jurisdiction or to the
Supreme Court, by way of an order in the nature of
a prohibition.
at 80, Stephens J (Aickin J agreeing) more flexibly expressed
It being a matter of discretion, this Court should, in the particular
circumstances of this case, grant such declaratory relief as
the parties are
entitled to. In many like cases an exercise of discretion in the contrary sense
may be called for so as to avoid
interference with the due and orderly
administration of the law and with the proper exercise by magistrates of their
functions in
committal proceedings. The past history of this case, to which
sufficient reference has already been made, is such that these considerations,
often proper to be taken into account and which may even prove decisive, are
here of little if any weight.
J at 82 also expressed himself flexibly.
agree with the respondents that Gibbs ACJ was not seeking to mark the boundaries
of the fragmentation principle. His Honour was
simply explaining the principle
as it applied to the facts before the Court.
Importantly,
his Honour went on to explain (at 26) the perils of criminal proceedings being
“interrupted by an application for
a declaration” and that a court
“will be reluctant to make declarations in a matter which impinges
directly upon the
course of proceedings in a criminal matter”.
, no other judge limited the fragmentation principle by
reference to questions of evidence or procedure.
it is clear that Gibbs ACJ was expressing no narrow view. In
643, Gibbs CJ said:
This Court has in a number of cases said that it is wrong that the ordinary
course of proceedings in the criminal courts should be
interrupted by
applications for declarations as to questions that will or may arise in the
criminal proceedings.
he expressed himself flexibly and on the basis inter-alia of
referred to “questions that will or may arise” rather than
“would arise”. And he did not use the language
impingement.
has taken no narrow view of
. At [23] it was
With respect to the exercise of the power to make the declaratory orders now
sought by the applicants, authority in this Court affirms
an important general
principle. This is that power to make declaratory orders should be exercised
sparingly where the declaration
would touch the conduct of criminal proceedings.
The fragmentation of the criminal process is to be actively discouraged. In any
event, a declaration may be of limited utility where founded, as would be the
case here, on facts admitted only for the purposes
of the satellite litigation.
phraseology used was very general. There was no necessary requirement for
direct impingement. The expression used was “touch
the conduct of
criminal proceedings”.
, and as the respondents rightly point out, the High Court affirmed
the general principle that the power to make declaratory orders
exercised sparingly where the declaration would touch the conduct of criminal
proceedings. Relevantly, the Court went
on to quote the passage from
in which Gibbs ACJ endorsed the observations of Jacobs P in
, referred to above. The Court did not refer to Gibbs
ACJ’s narrower statement with respect to questions of evidence and
a broad formulation was used. At [32] it was said:
This Court has emphasised on many occasions how rare it is to make orders which
would have the effect of fragmenting the ordinary
course of criminal
proceedings. The reasons why it is highly undesirable to do so are obvious.
They include delay and its effects.
the word or concept “fragmentation” is itself an umbrella term or
characterisation rather than a formal test
as the respondents point out, cases such as
Laboratories
were not confined to a challenge to a
discrete evidentiary or procedural ruling by the relevant criminal court.
the observations of Gageler J (as he then was) in
point against any
narrow focus. His Honour said (at [15]):
There is a longstanding and general reluctance on the part of this Court in
point of policy to make orders which would have the effect
of fragmenting a
criminal process which has already been set in train. The generality of that
reluctance is sufficiently illustrated
by the decision and reasoning of the Full
Court in the course of refusing special leave to appeal from interlocutory
decisions in
criminal proceedings in
Yates v Wilson
, and by the much more recent decision of French CJ in
Commonwealth (Matter No S119/2015)
, which concerned applications for both
removal to, and remitter from, this Court in circumstances where an accused in
pending criminal
proceedings sought to challenge the validity of legislation
creating the offence with which the accused was charged.
are several observations to make. The first sentence is not consistent with the
applicants’ narrow focus. The start
of the second sentence viz
“[t]he generality of that reluctance...” is also not consistent with
the applicants’
narrow focus. Moreover, the cases cited are given only as
illustrations and in any event go beyond just challenges to procedural
evidentiary rulings of a criminal court. Each aspect of Gageler J’s
observations is against the applicants’ narrow
focus. Moreover,
both post-dates and can be taken to be quite consistent with
and how they should be understood
and applied.
of these High Court authorities including the single justice decisions, which
have significant persuasive value to say the least,
have endorsed the narrow
definition of the fragmentation principle for which the applicants contend. Now
true it is that some cases
do address the narrower focus; see for example the
scenario dealt with by Dawson J in
[1994] HCA 11
(1994) 120 ALR 193
But to point out that some cases on their facts deal with the narrower focus
does not entail that the boundaries and content
of the principle itself is so
intermediate appellate courts have not taken
to impose a narrow
test. Numerous intermediate appellate courts have also considered and applied
the principle in ways which make
it clear that it is not confined in this way.
for example, in
Chief Executive Officer of Customs v Jiang
[2001] FCA 145
(2001) 111 FCR
, O’Loughlin, North and Weinberg JJ said “[t]he High Court has
repeatedly stressed the need for civil courts to avoid
becoming involved in
aspects of the criminal justice system including, in particular, the committal
process” (at [7]). They
also noted “the importance of avoiding
discontinuity, disruption and delay in the well-established procedures of the
law” (at [8]). None of this is supportive of any narrow view of
they went on to say at [12]:
The civil courts also appreciate the need to ensure that the work of the
criminal courts is not frustrated by such applications,
particularly those which
are quite unmeritorious and designed to achieve little more than delay. Most
complaints regarding decisions
taken in the context of the criminal justice
process can adequately be addressed by the criminal courts. Civil courts
generally deny
judicial review of such decisions on discretionary grounds.
of this is consistent with the applicants’ narrow focus on the formulation
used by Gibbs ACJ in
. And the views of an eminent criminal law
jurist such as Weinberg J are highly persuasive in treating fragmentation as
umbrella concept in covering different possibilities of impingement
on the criminal process or criminal proceedings.
is not necessary that direct impingement be shown. And it is not necessary that
the fragmentation be shown to challenge evidentiary
or procedural rulings in the
criminal proceeding.
, which was favourably discussed by McHugh J in
Ousley v The
[1997] HCA 49
(1997) 192 CLR 69
at 101, 104 and 105, the applicants, who were due to
stand trial, commenced proceedings in the Federal Court in which they challenged
the lawfulness of telecommunication interception warrants, including on the
basis of that the application for the warrants was made
for an improper purpose.
The applicants sought declaratory and injunctive relief, and damages for alleged
misfeasance in public office
relating to the AFP members who applied for the
Ryan and Lindgren JJ observed that where a claim for discretionary relief
involved “pure questions of law, emerging
from a context of undisputed
facts” and was “brought forward at an appropriate time”, it
may fall within the exception
to the fragmentation principle (at 188).
Conversely, a claim “based substantially on contentious matters of fact,
questions of mixed fact and law” does not (at 188). Applying
those principles, the Court proceeded to determine discrete questions
based on uncontentious facts but declined to decide whether the application for
the warrant was vitiated by an improper purpose
or a failure to disclose
material matters (at 188, 202 and 213). That was because those claims raised
“questions entirely
within the jurisdiction of the [criminal court]”
and that “[w]e do not, and should not, express a view on those
(204; see also 217 and 218).
because the claim for damages for the tort of misfeasance in public office,
which was brought as of right, was “inextricably
bound up with the issues
of improper purpose and non-disclosure”, the Court concluded that the
resolution of those claims should
not be embarked upon until after the
completion of the criminal proceeding (at 219 and 220).
, it was explained (at [407]) that “civil courts exercise great
caution before hearing and determining civil proceedings that
raise common
issues that are to be determined in criminal proceedings”. And their
Honours said (at [416]) that whilst granting
the declarations sought by the
Commissioner would not directly interfere in the criminal proceedings, they
“would address issues
that are very closely aligned (if not identical) to
those arising for decision in the criminal proceedings”. And in those
circumstances, it was in the interests of justice for the Court to defer making
any declarations until after the final determination
of the criminal proceedings
(at [419]).
our view the primary judge correctly observed (at [164]) that the authorities
demonstrate that civil proceedings can intersect
with criminal proceedings in a
variety of ways, including where they raise common issues.
the applicants say that the relief sought in the proceeding below was separate
and distinct from matters raised in the criminal
proceedings and, therefore, no
issue of fragmentation of the criminal proceedings arises. But we agree with
the respondents that
the relief sought by the applicants cannot be considered in
a vacuum, but must be viewed in light of the pleading of the matters
warrant that relief. As the respondents correctly contend, one should look to
the substance rather than the form of the
relief in determining whether a civil
proceeding may engage the principle against fragmentation.
is clear from the extracts of the statement of claim that we have set out
earlier that the current proceedings emerge from the
investigation and
prosecution of the applicants. As we have set out, Part F focuses entirely on
allegations regarding the use and
disclosure of the transcript of the s 19
examination for the purpose of commencing the prosecutions, including
formulating the charges
and preparing a summary of facts. And those pleaded
facts are the foundation for the relief sought, which has a close nexus with
criminal proceedings, which relief includes a declaration that the s 19
examination was unlawful, a matter which, it was common
ground, may be raised by
the applicants in objecting to the admissibility of evidence in the criminal
proceedings.
we have set out, and as the respondents correctly point out, the relief sought
by the applicants includes orders that would obviously
affect the conduct of the
criminal proceedings, including the charges formulated, the summary of facts and
other matters involving
the further use of the transcripts. Indeed, the
applicants have gone so far as to seek an order restraining investigators and
prosecutors
from having any further involvement in the criminal proceedings.
Paragraph B of the prayer for relief provides:
An order restraining ASIC and the CDPP from using, directly or indirectly, the
transcripts of the compulsory examination of Mr Palmer
purportedly under
s 19 of the ASIC Act, including by restraining any person, whether within
ASIC the CDPP or elsewhere, from having
any further involvement in relation to
any matter concerning the subject matter of the s19 notice.
those circumstances, and as the primary judge rightly observed, there is
“an air of unreality in the Palmer parties’
submissions that the
present claim has no sufficient point of intersection with [the prosecutions] so
as to bring the fragmentation
principle into focus” ([169]) or that
“orders of this kind would have no impact on [the prosecutions]”
Indeed, as we have just indicated, some of the relief sought might
have the tendency to derail the prosecutions at least temporarily.
primary judge was right to conclude that the principle against fragmentation was
therefore engaged. Her Honour’s conclusion
is well justified. To use the
terminology of some of the cases that we have referred to, the question of the
lawfulness of the s
19 examination “will or may arise”
at 643 per Gibbs CJ) in the criminal proceedings. And the
criminal court could determine that question (
at 204). Further,
the relief, if granted, would “touch” the conduct of the criminal
proceedings (
the lawfulness of the s 19 examination was not a discrete question of law based
on uncontentious facts. Rather, as the
primary judge correctly observed (at
[196]), “the proceeding involves a long and complex factual
narrative” going back
many years and that it “would be unsafe to
assume that there would not be substantial contested factual issues requiring
in the course of the trial”.
1 is not made out.
Do the primary proceeding and the criminal proceedings involve
the same “central issue”? (ground 2)
applicants say that the primary judge (at [176] to [178]) mischaracterised the
primary proceeding and the criminal proceedings
as involving the same
“central issue” of the lawfulness of the s 19 examination.
applicants say that that is an error in the characterisation of the nature of
the respective points that arise in the primary
proceeding and (potentially) the
criminal proceedings. It is said that the overwhelming likelihood is that any
point about s 19
would arise in that proceeding only by way of an evidentiary
applicants say that illegality would not be the central issue, but only an issue
limited to whether particular evidence could
be admitted in order to prove a
fact in dispute at the criminal trial. And even then, it would only be a
potential basis on which
that evidence might be excluded.
applicants say that the primary judge was right to speak (at [176]) of a
potential evidentiary objection as being premised on
the unlawfulness of the s
19 examination, because that is just one integer of such an objection. The
magistrate or trial judge would
Bunning v Cross
discretionary power weighing the competing interests of obtaining evidence for
the enforcement of the criminal law on the one
hand, and avoiding unfairness to
a criminal defendant on the other. So, by definition, in the exercise of the
Bunning v Cross
discretion, illegality could never be “the central
applicants say that this was a misconception permeating her Honour’s
applicants say that the relief sought in the proceeding below is not articulated
in terms of any question that could arise before
the magistrate or trial judge
in the criminal proceedings.
is said that the applicants do not seek declarations that evidence drawn from
the s 19 examination is inadmissible, nor that the
prosecutions be stayed,
because of the unlawfulness of the examination. The applicants say that that
species of clear, collateral
attack is the typical case of fragmentation found
in the authorities.
applicants say that the relief sought in the proceeding below is not directed
towards the conduct by the magistrate or trial judge
of the criminal proceeding.
Nor is it of a kind that could be granted in the criminal proceedings.
the applicants say that neither the respondents nor the primary judge sought to
grapple with what the nature of any determination
in the criminal proceedings
would be and the circumstances in which it would have any finality between the
the applicants say that even if the facts alleged in the statement of claim have
a close nexus with the criminal proceedings,
this does not meet the description
by Gibbs ACJ of an impermissible direct impingement by one proceeding on the
at 26). And the applicants say that the cases of indirect
impact do not establish any precedent for mere factual overlap between
proceedings justifying the application of the fragmentation rule.
the applicants say that even if the relief sought by the applicants includes
orders that would affect the conduct of the
criminal proceedings, including a
declaration that charges cannot be formulated, and the summary of facts cannot
be prepared, relied
upon or adduced into evidence, by reference to the s 19
transcript, such relief is only a specific manifestation of generally framed
relief in the proceeding below in the form of a declaration that is directed
towards and would have the effect that an unlawfully
obtained transcript could
not be used for any purpose.
the primary judge held, in our view correctly, that the lawfulness of the
s 19 examination was a central issue in the civil
proceeding before her. As
she said (at [177]):
It follows that the central question raised by the Palmer parties in the present
proceedings — whether the s 19 examination
of Mr Palmer was lawful —
is a question that “will or may arise” in the criminal proceedings:
at 643 (Gibbs CJ). While it is not necessary, in order for
fragmentation concerns to arise, that the questions will definitely or
inevitably arise in the criminal proceedings, I note that the Palmer parties did
not suggest that the question of the illegality
of the s 19 examination would
not arise in the criminal proceedings.
she went on to say (at [178] and [179]):
For completeness, I note that I do not accept the suggestion of the Palmer
parties that the principal question raised for determination
in this proceeding
would be fundamentally different from the question as it may arise in the
criminal proceedings because the issue
there would concern the admissibility of
evidence. In either case, the same central point would arise: was the s 19
examination unlawful?
Given that the central issue regarding the legality of the s 19 examination can
be determined in the criminal courts, the authorities
referred to above —
at 245 (Priestley JA);
at [12] (O'Loughlin,
North and Weinberg JJ) and
at [24] (Fagan J) — emphasise
that, absent exceptional circumstances, the accused should pursue the relevant
issue through
the criminal courts, rather than civil courts weighing in with
declaratory or other relief.
she was not there saying that a central issue in the criminal proceedings was
the lawfulness of the s 19 examination. What she
was saying was that the same
point would arise in the criminal proceeding, being the “central
point” or the “central
issue” of the civil proceeding. The
adjective “central” was only characterising the issue in the civil
proceeding,
albeit perhaps that there was some infelicity of expression, rather
than characterising the issue in the criminal proceedings.
clearly, and as the respondents correctly contend, there is no question that the
lawfulness of the s 19 examination is the central
issue in the proceeding below.
And as they point out, that issue may also arise as the premise for an objection
to the admissibility
of evidence in, or an application for a stay of, the
prosecutions.
we agree with the respondents that it is of no moment that the issue of
lawfulness of the s 19 examination would arise in
a different context as between
the criminal and civil proceedings. The primary judge was correct in finding
that the question in
the different proceedings was the same: was the s 19
examination unlawful? That was so regardless of whether it was asked as part
an objection to the admissibility of evidence or some other derivative use in
the criminal proceedings or an application for declaratory
relief in the civil
proceeding.
it is incorrect to assert that the relief sought in the proceeding below is not
articulated in terms of any question that
could arise in the criminal
proceedings. But in any event that perspective is too narrow. It is important
to look at the substantive
effect of the relief sought in the civil proceeding
rather than its mere form in considering the fragmentation question.
Latham CJ said in
Crouch v Commonwealth of Australia
[1948] HCA 41
(1948) 77 CLR 339
As a general rule the Court would not make a declaration so as,
(though not in form), to intercept proceedings in a criminal court
passing upon the validity of a statute or regulation with an offence against
which an accused person was charged. If the accused
relied upon the invalidity
of an enactment he could raise his contention as a defence in the criminal
proceedings.
(our emphasis)
is convenient here to make a few other points.
is little doubt that in the criminal proceedings the applicants can fully argue
out the point as to the unlawfulness of the
s 19 examination and to obtain any
relief that is appropriate preventing further use of the fruits of the s 19
examination in the
criminal proceedings, whether on any admissibility questions
or otherwise. Indeed, if it is appropriate, relief could be obtained
preventing any derivative use more generally and the return of the
transcripts.
Contrastingly,
there are various difficulties if this Court was now to decide the lawfulness of
the s 19 examination. Let us address
the two possibilities.
possibility is that this Court might decide that the s 19 examination was
unlawful. Now issue estoppel would not apply in the
criminal proceedings
). But the CDPP says that it could not and would not re-agitate
the point in the criminal proceedings because it would be an abuse
of process.
But contrastingly, the applicants say that the CDPP could re-agitate the issue.
But in any event the applicants say
that if the CDPP did not, the CDPP could
still push for the relevant fruits of the examination to be admitted under a
Bunning v Cross
other possibility is that this Court might decide that the s 19 examination was
lawful. But if that be so, both the CDPP and
the applicants seem to agree that
in any event the applicants would nevertheless be free to re-agitate the point
in the criminal
proceedings.
under either possibility there would be an undesirable outcome in terms of
potential duplication and inconsistency.
is convenient to make one other point here. In terms of any threatened use of
the fruits of the s 19 examination, there is only
the extant criminal
proceedings where there has been any actual or threatened use. There is no
other actual or threatened civil
or criminal proceedings against the applicants
where it is suggested that there would or could be such use of the fruits. And
is significant in this context that the s 19 examination occurred on 7 July
2016. It would seem unlikely, after all these years,
that apart from the extant
criminal proceedings, there will be other proceedings, civil or criminal, where
such threatened use may
occur. Of course that does not mean that the applicants
are not entitled to seek a vindication of their broader rights. But they
so in any event and at the appropriate time being after the finalisation of the
criminal proceedings, given that her Honour
only ordered a temporary stay.
2 is not made out.
Is it only questions going to evidentiary/procedural rulings
that must, subject to exceptional circumstances, be raised in the criminal
court? (ground 3)
Honour stated (at [175]) that:
The authorities on fragmentation make it clear that where a point
raised in extant criminal proceedings, absent exceptional circumstances that
warrant determining the point in the separate civil
proceedings, it
be raised in the criminal court, and not by way of a separate
civil proceeding.
[original emphasis; citations omitted]
her Honour stated (at [180]) that because the applicants:
pursue the question of the legality of the s 19 examination in
the criminal proceedings, they should do so unless there are compelling
that would justify the question being determined in the civil jurisdiction.
(emphasis in original)
applicants take issue with what they say are two overbroad and incorrect
statements of applicable legal tests by the primary judge.
And the applicants
say that the natural meaning of [175] and [180] reflect her Honour’s
erroneous conclusions.
applicants say that the primary judge erred in holding (at [180]) that merely
because the applicants can pursue the legality of
the s 19 examination in the
criminal proceedings, they should be foreclosed from seeking the relief they
seek in this Court “unless
there are compelling reasons that would justify
the question being determined in the civil jurisdiction”.
the applicants say that this is not what the authorities establish.
Honour referred in this regard to
. The applicants made the following points as to
the context of these cases.
involved fragmentation because the civil proceeding sought to deal with a
discrete evidentiary or procedural ruling in a pending
criminal proceeding.
, the appellants sought declaratory relief from the NSW Supreme Court
to the effect that the magistrate who had conducted their committal
erroneously upheld a public interest immunity claim over documents identifying
witnesses the appellants wished to call in their
, the essence of the relief sought was an injunction (claim 10)
seeking to halt the appellant’s prosecution. The appellant
essentially
sought an order in the nature of a permanent stay from the Federal Court when
the criminal trial court had “ample
powers” to provide the relevant
relief. Beaumont J said (at [53]):
It follows, in my view, that at trial, the County Court will have the power, in
any appropriate circumstance, to grant a permanent
stay of a prosecution. Such a
stay would be the practical equivalent of the injunction sought in Claim 10.
That being so, there is
no need for, or utility in, this Court granting judicial
review in response to Claim 10, when the existence of the ample powers of
County Court to prevent unfairness and injustice are taken into account.
, the applicants essentially sought declarations that, inter-alia,
the prosecution was an abuse of process or bad in law and ought
applicants say that what these authorities establish is nothing more than that
questions going directly to the conduct of a criminal
proceeding are,
ordinarily, to be raised in those criminal proceedings and not in a collateral
civil proceeding in another court.
The applicants say that that is nothing more
than a restatement of what the applicants assert to be the key principle in
the applicants say that that principle does not bear on the present case.
applicants say that the primary judge correctly accepted (at [184]) that
“the relief sought by the Palmer parties goes beyond
the relief that might
be afforded by the criminal courts ... either in the committal or trial
phase”. Indeed, her Honour accepted
(at [184] and [185]) that the primary
proceeding had “potential utility to the Palmer parties” beyond the
confines of
the criminal proceeding by way of a “general and final
declaration that the s 19 examination was unlawful”.
the applicants say that they should not in those circumstances be required to
show any “exceptional circumstances”
in order to obtain relief.
the applicants say that no attempt is made to reconcile the inconsistency of the
primary judge’s reasoning with the
decision in
Mudginberri Station Pty
Ltd v Australasia Meat Industries Employees’ Union
(1986) 12 FCR 10
13. We will deal with that assertion under ground 4.
as the respondents point out, her Honour found that the principle against
fragmentation was enlivened not merely because the legality
of the s 19
examination could be raised in the criminal proceedings but also because the
relief sought by the applicants would affect
the conduct of the criminal
proceedings.
is a standard application of the principle against fragmentation as explained in
the High Court cases discussed above, and applied
in cases such as
, each of which was considered by
the primary judge.
applicants have complained about her Honour’s use of phrases such as
“exceptional circumstances” and “compelling
but it is not appropriate to parse each and every phrase used by her Honour,
particularly when it is clear that she
carefully considered and applied the
relevant authorities.
have no difficulty with her Honour’s reference to compelling reasons but
perhaps, on one connotation of the phrase, “exceptional
circumstances” is too strong.
howsoever one views her Honour’s form of expression, her Honour correctly
identified the fragmentation principle and correctly
identified that the
proceeding below involved fragmentation. And that being the foundation and as
her Honour correctly concluded,
there was no compelling reason shown why the
criminal proceedings should be allowed to be fragmented.
the fact that the relief sought in this proceeding goes beyond what could be
granted in the criminal proceedings does not
take this matter outside the reach
of the principle against fragmentation.
as the respondents point out, it was in recognition of the fact that the relief
sought went beyond what could be granted
in the criminal proceedings that the
primary judge ordered a temporary, rather than permanent, stay, which we will
address later
under ground 5.
present purposes it is sufficient to observe that a temporary stay does not
foreclose the applicants from seeking relief in these
proceedings. Rather, it
simply defers their ability to do so. Further, they can also apply to lift the
stay in the civil proceeding
if there is a change in circumstances warranting
that course.
3 is not made out.
The correct starting point — an entitlement to have the
civil claim heard (ground 4)
applicants say that her Honour’s statement (at [180]), which we have set
out earlier, inverts the principle stated in
Rochfort v John Fairfax &
[1972] 1 NSWLR 16
at 19 per Sugerman ACJ, which is that a moving
party has a right to have a claim, regularly commenced in a court of competent
heard and determined other than in exceptional circumstances.
applicants say that it is not permissible to ask whether there is within a civil
proceeding some question that could be raised
in the criminal proceedings (here,
the legality of the s 19 examination) and, if so, conclude that the civil
proceeding must be stayed
“unless there are compelling reasons that would
justify the question being determined in the civil jurisdiction”.
applicants say that this is putting the issue the wrong way around.
applicants pray in aid what was said by Moshinsky J in
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd
[2019] FCA 964
(2019) 138 ACSR 42
that a plaintiff is prima facie entitled to have his
civil action tried in the ordinary course and so a stay requires justification
on proper grounds. The applicants also refer to what was said in
Mudginberri
at 13 that this is so “[e]ven in the context of a pending
criminal proceeding involving substantially similar issues”.
applicants say that it is the staying of a civil action on the apprehension of
fragmentation (if it be that) of criminal proceedings
that is the exceptional
course of action.
agree with the respondents that the primary judge expressly considered that
principle, as discussed in
. Her Honour was also cognisant that
a court is ordinarily very reluctant to prevent a party from prosecuting a case
regularly commenced
within the court’s jurisdiction. The primary judge
did not invert the principle. Rather her Honour properly reconciled it
principle against fragmentation.
as the respondents point out, the principle stated in
absolute rule.
Sugerman ACJ explained (at 19), the principle is “subject only to an
exercise of judicial discretion on proper grounds as
part of the court’s
inherent powers”. So, he did not question the inherent or implied
a stay of proceedings in the interests of
every case in which a civil proceeding has been stayed because it would fragment
a criminal proceeding is an acknowledgement
that those circumstances fall within
an exception to the so-called “fundamental principle”.
in our view,
Mudginberri Station
says little of relevance on the
fragmentation question given that it was dealing with a scenario concerning two
civil cases and whether
one should be adjourned pending the disposition of the
other. In obiter, the Court said (at 13):
Even in the context of a pending criminal proceeding involving substantially
similar issues, upon an application for an adjournment
to accord priority to
that criminal proceeding, “The burden is on the defendant in a civil
action to show that it is just and
convenient that the plaintiff’s
ordinary rights should be interfered with”: see
Cameron’s Unit
Services Pty Ltd v Kevin R Whelpton Associates (Aust) Pty Ltd
[1984] FCA 406
(1984) 4 FCR
at 431. As the Court of Appeal division of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales (Sugerman ACJ, Holmes and Mason JJA) made clear
Rochfort v John
Fairfax & Sons Ltd
[1972] 1 NSWLR 16
, that is not a light burden.
even that observation is not directly addressing the fragmentation scenario
where an accused in actual or potential criminal proceedings
has brought a civil
suit to address an issue that could be addressed in the criminal
proceedings.
their Honours were there commenting on was the type of scenario dealt with by
Moshinsky J in
, where the plaintiff in the civil suit, who is
sought to be restrained, is not the accused or related to the accused or a
in actual or pending criminal proceedings.
is in that context where courts have made observations of the type made in
Mudginberri Station
or as Moshinsky J said in
... [A] plaintiff is prima facie entitled to have his, her or its civil action
tried in the ordinary course and a stay therefore
requires justification on
proper grounds (with the applicant for a stay bearing the burden of
demonstrating proper grounds): see
McMahon v Gould
... [A] court will not grant a stay of a civil proceeding merely because related
charges have been brought against an accused and
criminal proceedings are
pending; a stay of the civil proceeding may be warranted if it is apparent that
the accused is at risk of
prejudice in the conduct of his, her or its defence in
the criminal trial: see
CFMEU v ACCC
at [22]; see
Corporations Act
. The risk of prejudice must be real: see
CFMEU v ACCC
at [22] per Jagot J. As to possible
prejudice to an accused, the following have been recognised as relevant factors:
(a) prejudice to the accused’s right to silence or privilege against
self-incrimination: see
at [42]–[47];
CFMEU v ACCC
at [24]–[30];
at [4]; and
(b) the possibility of publicity that might reach and influence jurors:
CFMEU v ACCC
at [44]–[46].
clearly that is all where the accused has not launched the civil suit. Rather,
it is the accused or, say, an employer of the
accused that is seeking to stay
the civil suit. Indeed, the accused may not even be a party to the civil
proceeding. But if he
was, he would be in the position of the defendant seeking
the stay of the civil case because of actual or potential prejudice to
the criminal proceedings.
4 is not made out. We will now deal with ground 6 before returning to ground
Policy concern with wealthy or powerful defendants —
whether it bears on the application of the rule against fragmentation (ground
applicants have complained about what they say were gratuitous and irrelevant
direct and indirect references by the primary judge
to Mr Palmer’s
say that her Honour (at [1]) commenced her reasons by noting that that Mr Palmer
“needs little introduction”. They
say that thereafter, significant
to her Honour’s reasoning in support of there being fragmentation in this
case, was what she
said (at [160]):
The nomenclature of “fragmentation” (or the other terms used, such
as “disruption” or “dislocation”)
must not be allowed to
obscure the underlying policy concerns that the High Court, and intermediate
courts of appeal, have identified
as standing behind the restraint shown by
civil courts when it comes to proceedings that intersect with criminal
proceedings. Those
concerns, as canvassed by Kirby P (as his Honour then was) in
(at 235) and summarised above, include the undesirability of
disruption or delay to criminal processes; the superior knowledge of
or magistrate seized of the criminal proceedings in respect of the facts and
circumstances underlying the criminal case;
the public cost of proliferating
litigation; and the undue advantage that may be afforded to rich and powerful
defendants to delay
and interrupt the operation of the criminal law. See also
at [55] and [59] (Black CJ, Tamberlin and Katz JJ) and
at [6]–[7] (O’Loughlin, North and Weinberg JJ) ...
the applicants say that her Honour’s reasoning discloses an erroneous
slippage between, on the one hand, the content
of the fragmentation principle as
properly formulated and, on the other hand, the policy concern behind that
applicants say that
make the distinction between
principle and policy clear.
, Kirby P said (at 235) that:
there is a basic rule of restraint. At the stage of committal...superior courts
do well to limit their intervention to exceptional
or special cases... It is
important ... to understand the rationale behind the rule of restraint. The
reasons include ... (5) the
undue advantage that may be given to rich and
powerful defendants to interrupt and delay the operation of the criminal law in
not so readily available to ordinary citizens.
, O’Loughlin, North and Weinberg JJ said (at [6])
[t]hose responsible for law enforcement in this country have for many years
argued that steps should be taken to prevent individuals
with the means to do so
from fragmenting the criminal justice process.
applicants say that the primary judge’s concern that the doctrinal concept
of fragmentation not “obscure” a
policy concern about wealthy
litigants must mean that her Honour took her assessment that Mr Palmer was
“rich and powerful”
into account in deciding whether there was in
fact any fragmentation.
the applicants say that the distinction between the content of the fragmentation
principle and its rationale is drawn for good
reason. They say that it could
not be right that a court could determine whether a particular civil proceeding
should be stayed
by reference to the wealth or power of the particular criminal
defendant involved. To do so would be to accept that ceteris paribus
a wealthier
defendant had less recourse to the “fundamental right” stated in
to have a claim heard and determined.
the applicants say that her Honour (at [59]) added emphasis to a quotation from
to single out just two of six policy justifications for the rule
against fragmentation listed by Kirby P, which two singled out were,
undesirability of disruption or delay in committal proceedings and, second, the
undue advantage that may be given to rich
and powerful defendants to interrupt
and delay the operation of the criminal law.
say that the primary judge can be taken to indicate that these justifications
were relevant to and potentially decisive of the
proceeding before her. The
applicants pose the question: why else would her Honour draw attention to
agree with the respondents that the primary judge’s opening observation
that Mr Palmer “needs little introduction”
falls well short of the
primary judge considering that her perception of Mr Palmer as “rich and
powerful” was significantly
relevant to the disposition of the
respondents’ stay application(s).
it is true that her Honour (at [59]) referred to and emboldened the fifth factor
referred to by Kirby P in
at 235. And it is also true that her
Honour (at [160]) picked out four of the six factors referred to by
Kirby P, one of the four
being the fifth factor referred to by Kirby P
referring to the “undue advantage that may be given to rich and powerful
defendants...”.
our part, and with respect, we would not have identified such a factor, as Kirby
P did, or emphasised it, as the primary judge
the applicants’ suggestion that the primary judge erroneously slipped
between “the
of the fragmentation principle ... and the
policy concern
that principle” (original emphasis) is not
completely devoid of merit in the sense that it could only be a policy rationale
rather than a factor to be applied against Mr Palmer in the application of the
fragmentation principle, and it would seem that her
Honour was unclear as to how
she was using the point.
at the end of the day none of this, including her Honour’s references on
this aspect and the applicants’ criticisms,
seem to go anywhere.
are not able to conclude that any of this amounted to an operative error in
terms of either her Honour’s evaluative exercise
in terms of determining
not to grant a permanent stay or her Honour’s discretionary exercise in
terms of granting a temporary
her Honour arrived at the conclusion that the proceedings would involve
fragmentation as a result of a careful analysis
of how the two proceedings
intersected with one another. The reference to Mr Palmer’s status was
nothing more than a speck
of superfluity on an otherwise detailed and careful
analysis of all issues.
6 is not made out.
Was there a proper basis for a temporary stay? (ground
is appropriate for us to begin with her Honour’s consideration before
addressing the applicants’ arguments.
Honour considered (at [187]) that a temporary stay, until the conclusion of the
prosecution, and any appeals, would ensure that
the interests of the applicants
were not compromised by a permanent stay or summary dismissal whilst also
preventing any disruption
or fragmentation of the criminal proceedings. In the
circumstances of the case, her Honour considered that it was not necessary
order a permanent stay in order to avoid the Court’s procedures being
Honour considered (at [188]) that a temporary stay would also be subject to
further order of the Court. This meant that if it
should transpire that action
that was adverse to the applicants was being taken that in some way uses the
transcripts of the
examination, the applicants would be able to apply
to the Court to lift the stay.
Honour did not accept (at [188]) the applicants’ submission that a
temporary stay would require the ongoing supervision
of this Court. She said
that it is not uncommon for civil proceedings to be temporarily stayed whilst
related criminal proceedings
against the same defendant are on foot.
primary judge did not accept (at [189]) the applicants’ submission that a
temporary stay would be inappropriate as the applicants
may be left in limbo if
the CDPP were not to present the indictment for trial following committal. Her
Honour considered that if
the CDPP did not present the indictment following
committal, the applicants would not be left in limbo; rather, they could apply
for the temporary stay to be lifted. In any event, in Queensland there are
legislated timeframes for presenting an indictment following
a committal, so it
is unlikely that the prosecution would be left in limbo. Her Honour said that
whilst it is not generally desirable
for a case to remain on the Court’s
docket unresolved for a substantial period of time, there are occasions in which
a temporary
stay, which may be prolonged, is appropriate. This was one such
Honour said (at [190]) that both ASIC and the CDPP sought a permanent stay of
this proceeding. But she noted that the CDPP accepted
that a temporary stay
until the conclusion of the prosecution would address her concerns. Further,
she noted that ASIC ultimately
did not disavow the appropriateness of a
temporary stay, were its preference for a permanent stay to be rejected. But
the applicants
contended that the applications had to be determined on an all or
nothing basis. They said that either there was fragmentation warranting
permanent stay or there was not.
Honour noted (at [191]) that the CDPP and ASIC brought their applications for a
permanent stay, inter-alia, under
Federal Court of Australia
(Cth). This is a power to make such orders as the Court thinks
“appropriate”
It is not a power confined to the making of a
permanent stay.
her Honour noted (at [193]) that the power of the Court to order a temporary
stay is an aspect of its general power to control
its own proceedings. And her
Honour said that ASIC’s and the CDPP’s applications were framed so
as to invoke the Court’s
broad powers, which extend to the making of
orders temporarily staying a proceeding.
primary judge considered (at [194]) that it was open to the Court to order a
temporary stay. And her Honour determined that it
was the appropriate outcome in
the circumstances.
the foregoing reasons, her Honour considered that a temporary stay was warranted
in the interests of justice.
us then turn to the applicants’ position who have contended that there was
no rational or juridical basis for the grant
of a temporary stay.
applicants say that a permanent stay is granted because the litigation of the
proceedings in question would be an abuse of process.
But they say that a
temporary stay, on the other hand, assumes the opposite of the underlying
proceedings, that is, they are fit
to be litigated, but for other reasons
continued litigation must await the occurrence of another event.
the primary judge referred to recent examples of civil proceedings which were
temporarily stayed while related criminal proceedings
went forward. But the
applicants say that each of those cases concerned a stay to ensure a defendant
to a civil proceeding was not
prejudiced in their defence of a simultaneous and
overlapping criminal proceeding. They cannot and do not assist. No part of the
proceedings the subject of the temporary stays were of their nature an abuse of
applicants say that the primary basis on which the primary proceeding was said
to be an abuse of process, and the only basis on
which the primary judge granted
the temporary stay below, was that the primary proceeding would cause the
fragmentation of the criminal
proceedings. That was in essence because the
question of the lawfulness of the
examination raised in the primary
proceeding was a question that will or may arise in the criminal proceedings.
applicants say that if the basic vice with the primary proceeding is that it
raises a legal point that may also arise in the criminal
proceedings, it is not
clear why that vice would be cured by the resolution of the criminal
proceedings.
applicants say that if evidentiary objections premised on the illegality of the
examination were to be decided against the applicants in the criminal
proceedings, would it not be a collateral attack on that ruling
in the same
sense to then proceed to agitate the
point in this Court?
that kind of collateral attack on a ruling already made in a criminal trial is
the typical case of fragmentation.
applicants say that the primary judge’s preference for the grant of a
temporary stay was not the correct approach and finds
no support in any decision
relied on by her Honour.
applicants say that her Honour’s approach was not consistent with the
course adopted in cases such as
there was a rational basis for her Honour’s grant of a temporary
it was within the relief claimed by the CDPP and ASIC at first instance.
her Honour under s 23 of the FCA Act and
Federal Court Rules
(Cth) had the power to grant a temporary stay; see her discussion at
[191] to [194].
the grant of a temporary stay is not out of the ordinary where it is said that
it is not desirable for civil proceedings to
continue whilst criminal
proceedings are on foot.
, the claim for damages for misfeasance in public office was
postponed to a later occasion (see 218 to 220). There was no permanent
that claim. The Full Court permitted the claim to proceed to trial subsequent
to the criminal proceeding.
, there was postponement. The Court deferred the making of
certain declarations in the civil proceeding until after the final conclusion
the criminal proceeding. The Court said (at [416] to [419]:
In the present case, the Commissioner does not seek to interfere in the criminal
proceeding and granting the declarations sought
(to the extent otherwise
appropriate) would not directly interfere in the criminal proceeding. However,
the declarations sought would
address issues that are very closely aligned (if
not identical) to those arising for decision in the criminal proceeding.
the declarations would not be directly binding on the parties to the
criminal proceeding (in the sense that an issue estoppel would
arise), insofar
as they decided issues of law, they would represent an authoritative decision of
this Court binding on the District
Court under the doctrine of binding
The precise formulation of the declarations might have presently unforeseen
consequences in the criminal proceeding. In general,
an important factor
weighing against the exercise of the discretion is that it is preferable that
issues arising in the criminal
proceeding be determined in the context of the
criminal proceeding without the superadded complication of this Court making
declarations
in the civil proceeding. The same restraint would be called for if
it were Mr Bell who were seeking declarations to the opposite
effect to those
sought by the Commissioner.
The position may or may not have been different if there had been no appeal or
reservation of questions in the criminal proceeding.
However, given the
existence of those appellate proceedings in respect of the criminal proceeding,
and this Court's determination
of them, the prejudice to the Commissioner if
declarations are not granted at this stage in the civil proceeding is
substantially
lessened due to the doctrine of binding precedent referred to
In all of the circumstances, it is in the interests of justice for this Court to
exercise caution to avoid the risk of unforeseen
consequences of the making of
declarations and defer making any declarations until after the final
determination of the criminal
proceeding against Mr Bell.
as the primary judge recognised, it was to the advantage of the applicants to
grant only a temporary stay rather than a permanent
stay. As her Honour said
(at [186] and [187]:
That, then, links to the question of whether the Palmer parties' interests would
be adversely affected by a permanent stay, or summary
dismissal, of the
proceeding. The parties agreed that, were the present proceedings to be
permanently stayed or summarily dismissed
by reason of concerns regarding
fragmentation, the Palmer parties would be able to run the illegality point in
the criminal proceedings.
The parties were, however, at odds regarding whether a
permanent stay or summary dismissal would prejudice the Palmer parties' ability
to raise the illegality issue in subsequent civil proceedings; the Palmer
parties contended that there would be a res judicata that
would preclude future
civil proceedings on this issue. The prospect of further civil proceedings
arises given the constraints on
the nature of the relief that the criminal
courts may order — most likely an interlocutory decision on the
admissibility of
evidence — and the potential for the s 19 transcripts to
be used in the future, in ways adverse to the Palmer parties.
In my view, the wider ambit of the present proceeding, and the possibility that
future civil proceedings may be met with a res judicata
argument, suggests that
the interests of justice are best served by a temporary, rather than a
permanent, stay or dismissal of the
proceeding. A temporary stay, until the
conclusion of the PLC Prosecution, and any appeals, will ensure that the
interests of the
Palmer parties are not compromised by a permanent stay (or
summary dismissal) while also preventing any disruption or fragmentation
criminal proceedings. In the circumstances of this case, it is not necessary to
order a permanent stay in order to avoid this
Court's procedures being abused.
as the respondents correctly point out, this ground relies on the false premises
that the proceedings before the primary
judge were either an abuse of process,
which may only be addressed by way of a permanent stay, or not an abuse of
process, in which
case there is no basis for ordering a stay of any kind.
is no reason why the primary judge was constrained by that binary analysis.
agree with the respondents that the primary judge was correct to conclude that
it would be an abuse of the Court’s processes
to allow the proceedings to
continue at this point because to do so would fragment the criminal proceedings
and there were no compelling
reasons to permit that course. That is a
well-established category of abuse of process.
issue her Honour had to then confront was the relief that should be ordered in
those circumstances.
regard to the breadth of the relief sought by the applicants and the possibility
that future civil proceedings may be met with
a res judicata argument if the
proceeding below was permanently stayed, it was open to the primary judge to
find that the interests
of justice were best served by a temporary stay. This
was the better option than the last resort of a permanent stay.
granting of a temporary stay addressed the vice that the proceedings before the
primary judge effected a fragmentation of the
criminal proceedings. It did so by
ensuring the criminal proceedings could continue without interference or
intrusion by the civil
proceeding. The vice of fragmentation would
self-evidently dissipate once the criminal proceeding had concluded.
applicants suggest that re-enlivening these proceedings at that point would
involve a collateral attack on rulings made in the
criminal proceedings. Whether
that is so may depend on how the criminal proceedings and these proceedings
evolved. But that possibility
is beside the point. That is because the principle
against fragmentation gives precedence to issues being determined in extant
proceedings.
that principle was enlivened and no compelling reasons existed for fragmenting
the criminal proceeding, the primary judge was
right to stay the proceedings and
it was open to her Honour to do that on a temporary basis.
5 is not made out.
General — the nature of the task
has not been necessary for us to dwell on the nature of the task before her
Honour. It may be accepted that in considering whether
to grant a permanent
stay her Honour was engaged in an evaluative exercise for which there was only
one correct answer (
). But as to her Honour’s decision to grant
a temporary stay, there are three ways to look at it. Given that the grant of
the temporary stay implicitly involved the refusal of a permanent stay, the
first way to look at it is the same way as just discussed.
The second way to
look at it is to consider it as a discretionary judgment to be assessed as a
House v The King
bifurcation. That part of the decision to refuse a permanent stay could be
as an evaluative task with only one correct answer. The latter part of the
decision to grant a temporary stay could be seen
as a discretionary judgment.
But such a bifurcation is not a clean split where the decision to refuse a
permanent stay is informed
and influenced by the fact that a temporary stay is
the preferable solution. Where that is so, it would seem preferable to treat
all aspects of the decision as involving the one evaluative task refusing the
permanent stay. Indeed, the parties before us treated
her Honour’s
decision in that fashion. The applicants said under ground 5 that it was an
error in refusing the permanent stay
to have opted for the temporary stay. It
was said that her Honour only had the binary choice of either granting the
permanent stay
or refusing the permanent stay, nothing more.
the circumstances of this case, we are content to treat all aspects of her
Honour’s reasons in the same fashion as the parties
have done, that is, as
involving the one overall evaluative task for which there was only one correct
answer. Moreover, there was
no separate attack on the grant of the temporary
stay outside the argument that it should not have been used as a circumstance
to justifying the refusal of the permanent stay.
in any event, nothing may turn on any of this given that we have found no
operative error on the part of the primary judge under
any of the grounds of
summary, and as is apparent, we have rejected all of the grounds of appeal
advanced. So, we would dismiss the appeal on its merits.
And that being the
case, it is unnecessary to resolve the jurisdictional issue raised by the CDPP
that we have identified at the
outset of these reasons (see
to [74]). But if we did need to resolve the jurisdictional question, in our
opinion the better view is that her Honour did
have jurisdiction as to some
aspects of the relief sought in the proceeding below. And it is to that
question that we now turn.
the primary judge, the applicants submitted that the Court had jurisdiction to
hear the matter pursuant to
s 39B(1A)(c)
Judiciary Act
. ASIC submitted
that the Court had jurisdiction, but said that it was under
Corporations Act
, rather than s 39B(1A)(c). The CDPP did not address the
point before her Honour.
the CDPP now contends before us that the better view is that neither s
39B(1A)(c) nor
confer jurisdiction on the Federal Court in
respect of the proceeding brought by the applicants below. In order to address
question, it is necessary to set out some of the relevant statutory
provisions.
1337A Operation of Division
(1) This Division deals with:
(a) the jurisdiction of courts in respect of civil matters arising under the
Corporations legislation; and
(b) the jurisdiction of courts in respect of matters arising under the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
involving or related
to decisions made under the Corporations legislation by Commonwealth authorities
and officers of the Commonwealth;
(c) the jurisdiction of courts in civil matters in respect of decisions made by
officers of the Commonwealth to prosecute persons
for offences against the
Corporations legislation and related criminal justice process decisions.
(2) This Division operates to the exclusion of:
section 39B
Judiciary Act 1903
(3) This Division does not limit the operation of the provisions of the
Judiciary Act 1903
section 39B.
(4) Without limiting subsection (3), this Division does not limit the operation
subsection 39(2)
Judiciary Act 1903
in relation to civil
matters arising under the Corporations legislation.
(5) Nothing in this Division affects any other jurisdiction of any court.
1337B(1) and (6) provide:
(1) Jurisdiction is conferred on the Federal Court of Australia with respect to
civil matters arising under the Corporations legislation.
(6) This section has effect subject to section 1337D.
1337B thus has effect subject to s 1337D. Section 1337D relevantly
(2) Subject to subsection (3), at any time when:
(a) a prosecution for an offence against the Corporations legislation is before
a State or Territory court; or
the following apply:
(c) neither the Federal Court nor the Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia (Division 1) has jurisdiction with respect to
any matter in which the
person who is or was the defendant in the prosecution seeks a writ of mandamus
or prohibition or an injunction
against an officer or officers of the
Commonwealth in relation to a related criminal justice process decision;
(d) jurisdiction with respect to any such matter is conferred on the Supreme
Court of the State or Territory in which the prosecution
or appeal is before a
(5) Subsections (1), (2), (3) and (4) have effect despite anything in this Act
or in any other law. In particular:
(a) neither this Act, nor any other law, has the effect of giving the Federal
Court or the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Division 1)
(b) neither section 9 of the A
dministrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act
, nor any other law, has the effect of removing from a State or
Territory Supreme Court the jurisdiction given to that Court by subsection
(6) In this section:
related criminal justice process decision
, in relation to an
offence, means a decision (other than a decision to prosecute) made in the
criminal justice process in relation
to the offence, including:
(a) a decision in connection with the investigation, committal for trial or
prosecution of the defendant; and
(b) a decision in connection with the appointment of investigators or inspectors
for the purposes of such an investigation; and
(c) a decision in connection with the issue of a warrant, including a search
warrant or a seizure warrant; and
(d) a decision requiring the production of documents, the giving of information
or the summoning of persons as witnesses; and
(e) a decision in connection with an appeal arising out of the prosecution.
“Corporations
legislation” is defined to include, relevantly, the
Corporations Act
the ASIC Act (s 9). “Civil matter” is defined to mean a matter
other than a criminal matter (s 9). “Criminal
matter” is not
the CDPP says that these provisions invoke the ordinary concept of a
“matter” as being the subject matter for determination
proceeding rather than the legal proceeding itself. And the CDPP says that in
this case the “matter” is
the justiciable controversy about the
lawfulness of an examination conducted under s 19 of the ASIC Act, having regard
to the meaning and application of ss 19 and 49 of the ASIC Act.
Accordingly, the proceeding brought by the applicants is a civil
matter arising
under the Corporations legislation, as referred to in s 1337B(1). But by virtue
of s 1337A(2), any jurisdiction otherwise
conferred by s 39B(1A)(c) is
CDPP then says that the matter before the primary judge came within
s 1337D(2) and so the Court’s jurisdiction was completely
The CDPP says that so much can be seen by taking the relevant parts of that
sub-section in turn.
is said that s 1337D(2)(a) is satisfied by the prosecution of the applicants
before the Magistrates Court of Queensland for offences
against the
Corporations
: see the definition of “court” in
it is said that
s 1337D(2)(c)
is satisfied because the proceeding before the
primary judge involves a matter in which the applicants, who are the defendants
the prosecution, seek an injunction against an officer or officers of the
Commonwealth in relation to a related criminal justice
process decision. As to
the different aspects of this requirement, the following points were made.
is said that the relief sought in at least paragraphs B, C and D of the prayer
for relief are, in substance and effect, injunctive.
And it is said that that
relief is sought against an officer or officers of the Commonwealth, being
officers of the first and second
respondent.
it is said that on the case pleaded by the applicants, such relief against those
officers is “in relation to”
a related criminal justice process
decision. So, it is alleged that ASIC issued a summons to Mr Palmer under s 19
of the ASIC Act,
ASIC purported to exercise that power by compulsorily examining
him, ASIC provided the transcripts of that examination to the CDPP,
transcripts were used in formulating the charges, the transcripts were used by
ASIC to draft a summary of facts for the prosecution,
and the transcripts were
used to prepare evidence for the prosecution.
CDPP says that such pleaded decisions come within at least paragraphs (a) and
(d) of the definition of “related criminal
justice process decision”
as they are alleged to have been made in the criminal justice process in
relation to the offences
for which the applicants are now being prosecuted.
it is said that in this context the phrase “in relation to” is one
of wide import. As such, it requires no more
than a relationship between the two
subject-matters which it connects, being the nature of the relief sought by the
applicants and
the related criminal justice process decisions which the
applicants plead. In this regard it is said that the phrase “in relation
to” can encompass direct and indirect connections. And it is said that
one subject matter can “relate to” another
one even though the first
subject matter also relates to other things.
it is said that the better view on the plain language of the provisions is that
this Court did not have jurisdiction in the
“matter” in that it did
not have jurisdiction with respect to the whole of the justiciable controversy
regarding the
lawfulness of the s 19 examination.
in our view there is a question, which appears to be unresolved, as to whether a
provision such as s 1337D(2) operates to take
away jurisdiction with
respect to only those parts of the matter in which the applicants seek relief of
the kind identified in the
McCarthy v Commissioner of Taxation
[2013] FCA 715
(2013) 249 FCR 140
, Robertson J in
dealing with a statutory analogue said (at [62] to [66]):
There are two competing constructions of s 39B(1C): a broader construction which
emphasises the words “with respect to any
matter in which a writ of
mandamus or prohibition or an injunction is sought” and a more limited
construction which emphasises
the words “in relation to a related criminal
justice process decision”. In
Pratten v Director of Public
Prosecutions
(Cth), the court seems to have favoured the latter view: see
the judgment at [123]-[124], [141] and [215]. I was told however by
before me who appeared for the plaintiff in that case that those matters were
not argued in the Supreme Court in that case.
The more limited construction is consistent with the purpose of the provision
which was identified in the Second Reading Speech as
being to avoid the use of
unmeritorious delaying tactics in the criminal justice process, by removing the
“collateral access
of defendants to federal administrative law procedures
and remedies”. Similarly, the Explanatory Memorandum said that s 39B(1C)
provided that the Federal Court did not have jurisdiction to hear an application
made by the defendant under s 39B(1) in relation
to a decision made in the
criminal justice process in relation to that offence and that the Supreme Court
in which the prosecution
was being heard was given jurisdiction with respect to
such applications for injunctions and writs of prohibition and mandamus against
a Commonwealth officer in relation to those decisions. Put differently, except
in cases where the proceedings in the Federal Court
consisted only of claims
relevant to the criminal proceedings, the broader construction would confer on
the court hearing the criminal
proceedings exclusive jurisdiction with respect
to issues having no bearing on the criminal proceedings.
The difficulty, in my opinion, does not stem from the phrase “in relation
to” having, as it does, a content largely dependent
on context: see
[2012] HCA 26
(2012) 246 CLR 601
per French CJ and the cases there cited.
Rather, the difficulty arises from the coincidence in language between the grant
of jurisdiction
effected by s 39B(1) and the removal of jurisdiction effected by
s 39B(1C). Section 39B(1C) seems to have been drafted on the basis
relevant proceedings in the Federal Court would consist only of claims relevant
to the criminal proceedings. I accept that
the jurisdiction of the Federal Court
may be defined by reference to part of a matter (see
Abebe v Commonwealth
(1999) 197 CLR 510
at [26], [226] and [281]) but the question remains whether
that is the effect of the words used in s 39B(1C).
A further aid to construction is that a grant of jurisdiction is not to be read
by making implications or imposing limitations which
are not found in the
express words (
Owners of Shin Kobe Maru v Empire Shipping Company Inc
(1994) 181 CLR 404 at 421), while, conversely, laws excluding jurisdiction are
construed narrowly: see M Leeming,
Authority to Decide
(2012) at p 132
and the cases there cited in footnote 55.
In my opinion, although it is unnecessary for me to decide the point in light of
the conclusions I have come to above, bearing in
mind the mischief to which the
provision is directed, the inconvenient and apparently unintended consequences
of the broader construction
and the principle referred to in the immediately
preceding paragraph, the better construction is that s 39B(1C) operates to take
away jurisdiction from this Court only in respect to the part or parts of the
matter in which the defendant seeks the prescribed
relief in relation to the
criminal justice process decision and that this is to be tested by the effect of
the relief claimed, if
it were granted, on the criminal proceedings.
Contrastingly,
Huynh v Commonwealth of Australia
[2025] FCA 531
, Bromwich J in
dealing with a statutory analogue said (at [24] to [29]):
In an application of the principles enunciated in
, Robertson J in
McCarthy v Commissioner of Taxation
[2013] FCA 715
249 FCR 140
held that the Federal Court has no jurisdiction in respect of at least the
parts of the application before his Honour which impugned
the validity of the
the destruction of that material.
In relation to the balance of the claims, his
Honour did not expressly decide whether the carve out in 39B(1C) would apply to
this Court of jurisdiction, on the basis that even if the Court
continued to have jurisdiction to hear and determine them, it would
inappropriate to do so:
at [50]-[51]. However, his Honour made
the following comments in obiter at [66] ...
The substance of the applicant’s case on jurisdiction seems to be that he
is not challenging the seizure, sharing and retention
of the Seized Items to
impede the prosecution against him, but rather to prevent the AFP and/or the
Department from retaining them
for a purpose collateral to that criminal
proceeding. In that context, he contends that
Judiciary Act
and also s 9A(1) of the ADJR Act
below, should be interpreted so as not to exclude this Court’s
That argument should be rejected because I am unable to accept that the
statutory construction task in this case should be conducted
in that way. More
generally, legislation may be enacted deliberately to cover a wider field, or a
narrower field, than the circumstances
that motivated its enactment. It may
also go further than intended or fail in an aspiration to go as far as intended.
Either way,
extrinsic material cannot be used to change the meaning of what has
been legislated, as opposed to a more limited role in assisting
to ascertain
what that meaning is ...
The carve out provisions in the
Judiciary Act
and the ADJR Act are broad
in their expression, and in particular are overtly wider in scope than the
specific object sought to be
achieved, as identified in the extrinsic material,
of avoiding fracturing of the criminal process and delay. The definition of
related criminal justice process decision
” captures a wide
range of decisions made in the criminal justice process. That cannot be
regarded as other than deliberate.
As such, although the Legislature’s
decision to insert the carve out provisions was evidently informed by concerns
and delay in the criminal justice process, the final form of
the legislation went much further than solely addressing that concern.
Extrinsic material cannot be used to change the meaning of the legislation by
creating an additional requirement that does not arise
from the words used.
This broad view of the operation of the carve out provisions, despite the more
limited ambit of the objectives and concerns expressed
in the extrinsic
material, is consistent with the observations of the Full Court in
at [14]-[15], reproduced above.
this may bear upon whether some parts of the purely declaratory relief sought by
the applicants were within the jurisdiction
of the Court, and also the relief
sought against ASIC which is not an “officer of the
Commonwealth”.
the applicants say that this Court has jurisdiction to grant the declaration
sought in paragraph A of the prayer for relief pursuant
to s 21 of the FCA Act,
which provides as follows:
Declarations of right
(1) The Court may, in civil proceedings in relation to a matter in which it has
original jurisdiction, make binding declarations
of right, whether or not any
consequential relief is or could be claimed.
(2) A suit is not open to objection on the ground that a declaratory order only
applicants say that the existence of this jurisdiction in respect of certain of
the relief sought is dispositive adversely to
the point raised.
the applicants say that once that point is arrived at, it is neither necessary
nor desirable to determine any contentious issues
of jurisdiction for part of
the relief sought. The applicants say that where there is a factual basis
asserted, founding a claim
for certain relief, that is within the jurisdiction
of the Federal Court, then there is a justiciable controversy regularly engaged.
And they say that this is unaltered by whether any additional relief sought
relying on some or all of that factual basis may be asserted
to be outside
in our view s 21 does not itself confer jurisdiction on the Court to grant the
declaratory relief sought. That provision confers
on the Court a power to make
binding declarations of right “in civil proceedings in relation to a
matter in which [the Court]
has original jurisdiction”. So, the provision
confers a power which may be exercised only if the Court
the applicants say that this Court has original jurisdiction by reason of s
39B(1A)(c).
applicants say that s 1337A(2)(b) provides that the relevant Division including
s 1337D operates to the exclusion of
Judiciary Act
, but only to the
extent that s 1337D is engaged. But that is not so. Even if s 1337D was not
is still excluded as s 1337A(2)(b) makes plain.
the applicants say that the relief sought in paragraph A of the prayer for
relief by way of declaration is not, in terms,
caught by the exclusion in s
1337D(2), regardless of whether the remainder of the relief sought in paragraphs
B, C and D are precluded.
as to the relief sought against ASIC itself, ASIC is of course not an
“officer of the Commonwealth”.
applicants say that where the relevant relief captured by s 1337D(2) is limited
to “a writ of mandamus or prohibition or
an injunction”, s 1337D(2)
does not curtail this Court’s jurisdiction to grant declaratory relief in
the terms sought
in paragraph A or against an entity that is not an
“officer of the Commonwealth”.
they say that jurisdiction to decide the declaratory relief is sufficient for
the Court to be seized of the matter.
the CDPP does not agree that s 1337D(2) operates only so as to exclude
it free to determine
claims for declaratory relief relating to the same matter.
CDPP says that the focus of the inquiry is on whether the Court has jurisdiction
in the “matter”, not on whether discrete
claims for relief falling
within the scope of that matter would themselves, in isolation, fall within the
Court’s jurisdiction.
Section 1337D(2) states that the Federal Court does
not have jurisdiction “with respect to any matter”. The CDPP says
that jurisdiction is excluded with respect to the “matter”, which is
not limited as to the forms of relief that may be
granted. It is said that there
is a single “matter” here, being the controversy concerning the
lawfulness of the
examination. Moreover, the CDPP would appear to also say
that any claim against ASIC itself, although not an officer of the Commonwealth,
is also part of that “matter”.
CDPP says that the Court either does or does not have jurisdiction with respect
to that “matter”. And the CDPP says
that the better view on the
plain language of s 1337D(2) is that the Federal Court does not have
in our view, and notwithstanding the usual width given to the concept of
“matter” and also the phrase “in relation
to” as pointed
out by the CDPP, we are inclined to prefer the approach of Robertson J in
, if we had to decide the point, for the following reasons.
his analysis is consistent with the principle that laws excluding jurisdiction
should be construed narrowly.
the breadth of the relief sought goes beyond the criminal proceedings and
applies to any use of the fruits of the
examination in any context
including future civil proceedings or any other possible use of the
transcripts.
relief is sought against ASIC itself which is not an officer of the
Commonwealth.
as the applicants have pointed out, declaratory relief is also sought, although
in our view this is not such a strong point
in the applicants’ favour on
the jurisdictional point save as against ASIC itself.
these reasons there is force in Robertson J’s analysis, but there is much
to be said on either side. Fortunately, we do
not need to decide the point. But
if we had to we would prefer Robertson J’s analysis to the extent of
saying that the primary
judge had jurisdiction to grant some of the relief
claimed by the applicants against ASIC itself such as a declaration tailored to
unlawfulness question only or to orders precluding the use of the
transcripts outside the extant or other criminal proceedings, say,
use in future
civil proceedings.
the foregoing reasons, we will grant the extension of time sought by the
applicants and grant leave to appeal, but we will dismiss
the appeal. We see no
good reason why costs should not follow the event.
I certify that the preceding three hundred and
sixty (360) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
Honourable Justices Beach, Banks-Smith and
Dated: 24 October 2025
RTF format (789 KB)
Signed PDF/A format