Anduli & Malik [2025] FedCFamC2F 1084 (29 July 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Anduli & Malik
[2025] FedCFamC2F
File number(s):
DGC 869 of 2023
Judgment of:
JUDGE O'SHANNESSY
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Final parenting orders
– undefended hearing – where the father did not appear at the final
hearing – where
the court is satisfied to proceed in the absence of the
father – where the court is satisfied to proceed undefended –
the children live with the mother – where the mother have sole parental
responsibility for the children – where
the children have no contact or
communication with the father.
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
The Applicant:
No appearance
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Cathleen Corridon and Associates
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Robert Halliday and Associates
DGC 869 of 2023
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
JUDGE O'SHANNESSY
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Mother be allocated sole decision making authority for all major long term
decisions concerning the children V born in 2014, W
born in 2015, X born in
2016, Y born in 2018 and Z born in 2022 (‘the children’).
children live with the Mother.
children have no contact or communication with the Father.
to section 11(1)(b) of the
Australian Passport Act 2005
(Cth), the Mother
is authorised to sign and execute any documents necessary for the children to
obtain an Australian passport or
to extend any existing passports, without first
obtaining the written consent of the Father.
Mother be at liberty to provide a sealed copy of these Orders on the Australian
Passports Office.
section 65Y
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), the Mother is authorised
to remove the children from the Commonwealth of Australia for the purpose of
travel at her discretion
without first notifying the Father or obtaining his
written consent.
Mother be permitted to provide a copy of these Orders to:
(a) Any school, childcare, kindergarten or day care or educational facility that
the children may attend.
(b) Any hospital, General Practitioner, medical specialist, allied health
professional that the children attend upon or may attend
(c) Any Australian Commonwealth or Victorian State Court as required.
(d) Any other person/organisation who is required to obtain information in
relation to the children.
appointment of the Independent Children’s Lawyer be and is hereby
discharged.
AND THE COURT NOTES THAT:
Family Law Act 1975
the particulars of the
obligations these orders create and the particulars of the consequences that may
follow if a person contravenes
these orders are set out in Annexure A and these
particulars are included in these orders.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE O’SHANNESSY
are the settled reasons of a judgment delivered
reasons were delivered orally. These settled reasons have been corrected from
the transcript where appropriate to correct
grammatical errors, to add
citations, passages of authorities and evidence, and to attempt to make the
orally delivered reasons easier
to read. The substance is unchanged.
the matter of Anduli & Malik, the matter comes before me for final hearing
listed on the basis that it would take three days.
The matter was set down for
final hearing at the compliance and readiness hearing before Judge Glass on 28
January 2025. The Father,
Mr Anduli (‘the Father’) was represented
by solicitors at that time and continued to be represented until 15 May 2025.
The Father had issued proceedings back in March 2023, and the respondent,
Ms Malik (‘the Mother’) responded promptly
to the Father’s
application. The proceedings concern the parents' five children aged between 11
Father has not attended Court this day and the Mother's counsel, Mr Korke, seeks
that I proceed on an undefended basis. The counsel
for the Independent
Children’s Lawyer (‘ICL’), Mr Metaxes, supports that
application, and the ICL supports the
orders sought by the Mother.
Proceed undefended?
proceed on the basis that I must answer or address three questions or issues in
the proceedings:
(1) the first being whether I should proceed today at all in the absence of one
of the parties;
(2) the second is whether I should proceed on an undefended basis; and
(3) the third is the issue of the merits of the application.
is important to note that a party's position does not necessarily succeed in
this Court, particularly child-relating proceedings,
merely because the other
parent has not attended or participated in the proceedings. A judgment of the
merits of the application
must be made.
Proceed in the absence of a party
then to the first question, I am satisfied that it is appropriate to proceed in
the absence of the Father this day. I am
satisfied of that because the Father
can be taken to have full knowledge and information about the matter being
listed for trial
in July of this year because he was represented by solicitors
at the compliance and readiness hearing on 28 January 2025 when the
fixed for trial yesterday, Monday, 28 July 2025. At that time, based on
submissions, the matter was assessed to likely
take three days of court hearing
time. The Father continued to be represented until his solicitors filed a
notice of ceasing to
act on 15 May 2025 (3 and a half months later).
Family Report non attendance
the meantime, at public expense, the Court had provided to the parents the
opportunity to be interviewed and assessed by a Court
Child Expert for the
purpose of a Family Report. That opportunity was to be interviewed on 30 April
2025. It is apparent from the
family report, which I have read, that the court
child expert attempted to contact Father and endeavoured to have him participate
in that process. He did not.
am satisfied (because he was represented at that time) that he had the
opportunity to participate in that process if he wished to.
Father was served with the Mother’s material
Mother served her trial affidavit (essentially restating earlier interim
affidavits) as directed by the Court on Friday, 11 July
2025. That was emailed
to the Independent Children's Lawyer and what is known as cc'd or copied or
emailed at the same time to the
Father's email address. The email address had
been obtained from the information of the notice of ceasing to act filed by the
former solicitors being exhibit C1.
notice of ceasing to act had the Father's contact details as the email address.
The notice of ceasing to act was filed on 15
May 2025. Further, at the
time the Father initiated the proceedings, in his initiating application, he
provided the email address.
I do take account of the potential for an email to
be sent and not received, whether it has been placed in a spam folder or not
able to negotiate its way through the various security matters that now sensibly
apply to email communication.
Nonetheless,
it is clear enough that the Father has had every opportunity to participate in
the proceedings, to become aware of the
Mother's allegations and to rebut them
if he chose. In those circumstances, I am satisfied it is appropriate to
proceed in his absence
Proceed undefended?
terms of the question of whether to proceed undefended, I adopt the same reasons
in regard to the question of whether I should
proceed today. In addition, I am
told by counsel and accept that the Mother's affidavits filed on 3 July 2023 and
24 May 2023, in
substance, contain the same history and allegations and, in
particular, allegations of family violence as covered in the Mother's
affidavit. In that sense, the Mother's trial affidavit can be regarded as a
convenient consolidating affidavit.
tells me and I accept that the Father's affidavits, when he was participating in
proceedings, responded to the Mother's allegations
in those affidavits and,
broadly speaking, denied the allegations. Those circumstances reinforce the
overwhelming case that the
matter should proceed undefended.
am satisfied that it is in the interests of justice
best interests of the children
the parties that the
proceedings come to an end. It is the Court's function to end
controversies.
The merits of the application
now turn to the merits of the application. The background is that the Mother
came to Australia with her family of origin as a child
in about 2006 and has
lived permanently in Australia since. She came from Country B. She is an
Australian citizen.
is now aged 30 years. The Father, Mr Anduli, is aged 34 years and, on the
information available to the Mother, now lives in Country
B, having returned
there on at least one or more occasions since the parties ceased to cohabit.
The parties married in Country B
in 2011. The Mother was then 20 years old.
She returned to Australia and lived with her family, and thereafter,
sponsored the Father to migrate to Australia
on a partner visa. The
marriage relationship was a disaster. It was a disaster notwithstanding that
the Mother has lived in Australia
since childhood, she has travelled back to
Country B and did so in about 2013.
this time, the eldest child was conceived. The Mother returned to Australia,
pregnant with the eldest child. The eldest child
was born in 2014 and is now at
school in grade 6. The parent's next child was born in 2015 and is now at
school in grade 4. The
party's third child was born in 2016 and is in grade 3
at school. The party's fourth child was born in 2018 and is now 7 years and
grade prep at the same school as her siblings. The parent's youngest child is
now aged 3 and attends family daycare.
parents separated on a number of occasions but finally separated on 5 November
The youngest child had not
yet been born and was in utero at the time of that separation. As far as the
Mother can tell, the Father
has lived the bulk of the time since separation in
Country B. He has not spent any time with the children at all. and has
met the youngest child.
acknowledge that the Father issued proceedings on 16 March 2023, whereby he
sought interim orders that the parents have equal shared
responsibility for
long-term decisions relating to the children, that the children live with the
Mother and that they spend time
with him every Saturday from 12 pm to 5 pm. It
is clear enough that at this time the Father was in Australia.
say that the marriage was not a success because of the following tragic
circumstances. The Mother has raised these children in
very difficult
circumstances as set out within her trial affidavit.
Anduli] perpetrated extensive family violence against both me and the children
throughout our relationship.
was physically and verbally abusive towards the children and me. He was also
sexually abusive toward me and extended significant
control over all aspects of
Anduli] regularly assaulted me, both physically and sexually. He would punch and
slap me, drag me by the hair and force himself
on me, often weekly.
I resisted him or refused sexually, he would bite me with such force that it
would break the skin. He would then proceed to rape
Anduli] did not allow me to use contraception. Following [Y]’s birth in
2018, I had an Implanon inserted with[out] his
knowledge. When he later
discovered I had undertaken this procedure, he forced me to have it
abuse was often trigged by minor issues, such as delays in household tasks like
ironing his clothes.
Anduli] would call me into the toilet after him and order me to flush it,
stating that it was a woman’s role.
was solely responsible for caring for the children and managing all household
duties, including cooking, cleaning, laundry and
gardening. [Mr Anduli] refused
did not allow me to have a phone or maintain social relationships. I was
extremely isolated and had no friends.
Anduli] treated me as though I was his servant and would punish me if I did not
meet his expectations.
Anduli] often yelled at the children over trivial matters. On more than one
occasion, he threatened to kill the children if they
spoke to anyone about what
was happening at home.
2016, [Mr Anduli] asked me to sign forms to support his application for
permanent residency. I refused, as I did not understand
what I was signing. He
then held an electric shaver to my throat and cut me, causing bleeding. While I
was holding our 7-day-old
baby, [Mr Anduli] proceeded to punch me. Out of fear,
I signed the documents. He then took photos of me and the children to include
with the application.
further incident occurred in 2016 after we had a verbal altercation, [Mr Anduli]
became angry and shoved me to the ground, putting
his knee to my head and
threatening to kill me. I managed to escape and sought the assistance of a
Department of Families, Fairness and Housing (DFFH) became involved with our
family this time. They recommended [Mr Anduli] undertake
courses, including a
Men’s Behaviour Change Program.
2019, [Mr Anduli] disappeared for a period of 12 months to live with friends.
When he returned home again, he continued his tirade
14 December 2020, I confronted [Mr Anduli] after I discovered he had taken money
from my bank account to send overseas. He reacted
by punching me in the face and
holding me by the throat against a wall. He told me he was going to eat me and
bit my on the shoulder
blade. I still have the bite mark.
accept that evidence. I accept it because it is the uncontested allegation made
on oath or affirmation by the Mother and it is
just implausible that she would
make these events up.
Unfortunately
it is one of those cases where there is a human reaction to hope that somehow
there has been a mistake and it is not
true. But unfortunately in this case, I
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities in accordance with section 140 of
the Evidence
Act, that those allegations are true.
SECTION 60CC FACTORS
all those circumstances, I now turn to
section 60CC
Family Law Act
(Cth). Pursuant to
section 60CA
, I must determine a parenting order
regarding the best interests of the children as the paramount consideration. In
determining
what is the paramount consideration for these children,
General considerations
What arrangements would promote the safety of the
of the factual findings that I unfortunately make as described above, the only
arrangement that would promote the safety of
the children and the Mother is that
the children and the Mother are able to live their life without connection or
exposure to the
Any views expressed by the children
then must also consider any views expressed by the children. In the
circumstances, I place little weight on the children's views.
However, it is
clear that the views of the children are largely to live with their Mother.
When interviewed, none of the children
have expressed a view that they wish to
spend time or communicate with the Father. This is unsurprising in the
circumstances of
the family violence they have been exposed to.
The developmental, psychological, emotional and cultural
needs of the child.
am satisfied that their Mother will appropriately deal with, has and will deal
with, all of those matters.
Capacity to provide for developmental, psychological,
emotional and cultural needs.
must take into account the capacity of each person proposed to have parental
responsibility. In this case, the Mother. I am satisfied
that she has the
capacity to provide for the children's developmental, psychological, emotional
and cultural needs.
Benefit of a relationship with the child’s parents
& other (significant) people (if) safe
must take into account the benefit of the children being able to have a
relationship with each of the child's parents. It is overwhelmingly
there is not only a benefit but a real need for the children to have a
relationship with their Mother who has and will
continue to care for them. I am
not satisfied in the circumstances of the factual findings made above that there
is any benefit
to the children in having a relationship with their Father, and
in any event, I am not satisfied that it is safe to do so.
all of those circumstances, I am satisfied that it is in the children's best
interest that I make the orders as sought by the Mother
and the ICL. I note
order number 3, which was pressed by the Mother, that is, the children have no
the Father. In this case, I am satisfied that
such a drastic order should be made.
note that this would and will prevent the Mother from permitting the children to
have any time with the Father even were she to
come to that view in the future.
She will need to apply to the Court to amend that order as she would otherwise
be in breach of
a court order. Whether anyone would prosecute her for that
breach is another matter. But as that order is drafted, she does not
choice. That order is also pressed by counsel for the ICL.
am satisfied that it is in the best interest of the children that that order be
made, effectively imposing a restriction on the
Mother. That is because of the
potential for her to be subject to direct intimidation and indirect intimidation
because of the Father's
threats to her and to her family.
Ordinarily,
the orders and the reasons will be emailed to the Father at that 308 address and
there is no application to prevent that.
I note that these orders and the
reasons for them will be posted on the Court portal, and, further, because the
Father is unrepresented,
I will direct my associate to email those reasons and
orders direct to the Father's email.
further order that the independent children's lawyer be discharged.
are my reasons.
I certify that the preceding thirty-four (34)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Judgment of Judge
O'Shannessy
Dated: 7 August 2025
I have long since had a footer
to my emails that state, "Do not assume I have read your email because you have
For authority for that
proposition see for example D
’orta-Ekenaike v Victoria Legal Aid
[2005] HCA 12
See paragraph
8 of the Mother’s trial affidavit.
RTF format (361 KB)
Signed PDF/A format