Polaris IP Pty Ltd v Brolock Pty Ltd 2025 & TCT Group Pty Ltd v Brolock Pty Ltd [2025] APO 30 (16 September 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
PATENT OFFICE
Polaris IP Pty Ltd v Brolock Pty Ltd
TCT Group Pty Ltd v Brolock Pty Ltd
[2025] APO 30
Patent Application: 2021271942
Title: A hinge
Patent Applicant: Brolock Pty
Opponents: Polaris IP Pty Ltd;
TCT Group Pty
Delegate: Dr W.E. Guinea
Decision Date: 16 September
Hearing Date: 19 & 20 February 2025, in Canberra, by
videoconference
Catchwords:
– s59 – opposition by two opponents
TCT opposition
– novelty – no claims found to lack
novelty – inventive step – no claims lacking inventive step –
– no claims lacking clarity – clear enough and complete
disclosure – lack of clear enough and complete enough disclosure
claims – support – lack of support for all claims – utility
– no claims lacking utility – best
method – no failure to
provide best method – Reg 5.23 request – Reg 5.23 request refused
– TCT opposition
successful – costs – costs awarded against
applicant –
Polaris opposition
– priority date – Reg
5.23 considered – priority does not affect grounds raised – Reg 5.23
unnecessary –
inventive step – s60(3) considered – s60(3)
unnecessary – no claims lacking inventive step – clear enough
complete disclosure – Reg 5.23 considered – Reg 5.23 unnecessary
– no claims lacking clear enough and complete
disclosure – support
– no claims lack support – best method – no failure to provide
best method – utility
– no claims lacking utility – Polaris
opposition unsuccessful – costs – costs awarded against
Representation: Patent Attorney for the Applicant: Lorne Wood-Roe of Adams
Counsel for TCT Group Pty Ltd: Gilbert Tsang
Patent attorney for TCT Group Pty Ltd: Philip Gehrig of Wrays
Counsel for Polaris IP Pty Ltd: Angela McDonald
Patent attorney for Polaris IP Pty Ltd: Simon Reynolds, David
Müller-Wiesner & Andrew Bayliss of GLMR
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Application: 2021271942
Title: A hinge
Patent Applicant: Brolock Pty Ltd
Decision: 16 September 2025
The opposition by TCT Group Pty Ltd
The opposition by TCT Group
Pty Ltd under s59 is successful. I am satisfied that the invention as claimed
in claims 1 to 7 fail under
s40(2)(a) as the complete specification fails to
disclose this invention in a manner which is clear enough and complete enough
the invention to be performed by a person skilled in the art. I am also
satisfied that claims 1 to 7 lack support under s40(3).
No other grounds of
opposition are made out.
I award costs according to Schedule 8 against Brolock Pty Ltd.
I allow the Applicant
two (2) months
from the date of this decision to
propose amendments that address the defects outlined in the decision concerning
the opposition
by TCT Group Pty Ltd.
The opposition by Polaris IP Pty Ltd
The opposition by Polaris IP Pty Ltd under s59 is
unsuccessful. None of the grounds of opposition were made out.
I award costs according to Schedule 8 against Polaris IP Pty Ltd.
Subject to final determination in the opposition by TCT Group Pty Ltd, I
direct that the application proceed to grant.
REASONS FOR DECISION
application 2021271942 (the “
application
specification
”) entered national phase on 23 November 2021
from PCT/AU2021/050427. PCT/AU2021/050427 was filed on 10 May 2021 in the name
of Brolock Pty Ltd (the “
”). The application has an earliest priority date of
11 May 2020 from AU 2020901504 (the “
priority document
IP Pty Ltd (“
”) and TCT Group Pty Ltd
”) separately filed notices of opposition to the
application under s59 of the
Patents Act 1990
”) on 27 April 2022. The respective statements of
grounds and particulars (“
”) for each of the s59
oppositions were filed on 27 July 2022. Importantly, while this decision
concerns both oppositions the
oppositions have not been joined and stand to be
separately determined on their merits. Amendments, which were allowed, were
to the Polaris SGP on 24 November 2022 and to the TCT SGP on 8 July
2024. Hereon, references to the Polaris SGP and the TCT SGP
will be to these as
they stand after amendment.
to the specification were requested on 30 December 2022. While both Polaris and
TCT opposed these amendments, Polaris
subsequently withdrew its opposition.
Ultimately, TCT was unsuccessful in its opposition under s104 as per
TCT Group Pty Ltd v Brolock Pty Ltd
The amendments were incorporated into the specification on 22 March 2024.
References to the specification from hereon are to the
specification as it
stands as a result of those amendments.
evidence in support (“
”) was completed for the TCT
opposition on 27 October 2022. This consisted of:
declaration by Mr William Samuel Hunter (“
”), dated 27
October 2022, with supporting annexures WSH-1 to WSH-12; and
a declaration by
Mr Philip Walter Gehrig (“
”), dated 27 October
2022,with supporting annexures PWG-1 to PWG-3.
filing of evidence in answer (“
”) for the TCT opposition
was completed on 31 January 2023. This consisted of:
a declaration by
Mr Michael Murauer (“
”), dated 30 January 2023, with
supporting annexure MM-1; and
a declaration by
Mr Robert Graham (“
”), dated 24 January 2023, with
supporting annexure RG-1.
filing of evidence in reply (“
”) in the TCT opposition was
completed on 30 March 2023. This consisted of:
declaration by Mr William Samuel Hunter (“
”), dated 29
March 2023, with supporting annexures WSH-13 and WSH-14.
filing of EIS was completed for the Polaris opposition on 27 October 2022. This
consisted of:
declaration by Mr Craig Schroder (“
”), dated 27
October 2022, with supporting annexures CS-T1 and CS-T2 and CS-1 to
filing of EIA for the Polaris opposition was completed on 27 January 2023. This
consisted of:
a declaration by
Mr Michael Murauer (“
”), dated 25 January 2023, with
supporting annexure MM-1; and
a declaration by
Mr Robert Graham (“
”), dated 24 January 2023, with
supporting annexures RG-1 and RG-2.
filing of evidence in EIR in the Polaris opposition was completed on 30 March
2023. This consisted of:
declaration by Mr Craig Schroder (“
”), dated 30
March 2023, with supporting annexure CS-11.
convenience, I note that annexures MM-1 to Murauer1 and Murauer2 are identical.
I will therefore simply refer to MM-1 in either
opposition without distinction
to each of the declarations. Similarly, RG-1 to Graham1 and Graham2 are also
identical, and will
also be referred to without distinction to each of the
declarations.
10 July 2024, TCT filed a further declaration by Mr Hunter dated 9 July 2024
”) with supporting annexures WSH-15 and
TCT requested that the
Commissioner consider the filed documents pursuant to Reg 5.23 of the
Patents Regulations 1991
”). A delegate of the Commissioner wrote to TCT and the
Applicant on 26 July 2024, informing them that TCT’s Reg 5.23
would be considered as part of determining TCT’s substantive opposition to
the application, and that both parties should
put forward their views on the Reg
5.23 request in their written and oral submissions for the TCT opposition.
TCT opposition was heard on 19 February 2025, whilst the Polaris opposition was
heard on the following day. For the TCT opposition,
TCT filed its written
summary of submissions (“
”) on 5 February 2025, while the
Applicant filed its written summaries of submissions (“
on 12 February 2025. For the Polaris opposition, Polaris filed its written
summary of submissions (“
”) on 6 February 2025, while the
Applicant filed its written summary of submissions (“
13 February 2025.
The invention as described
invention for this application relates to a hinge, particularly those used in
the context of glass panels for pool gates or showers,
as apparent from the
“Technical Field” given on page 1, lines 4 to 6.
specification then comprises a “Background” section that extends
from page 1, line 8 to page 2, line 2. This discusses
some features and issues
with hinges as known in the prior art. It is noted that prior art hinges
typically include a spring that
biases the gate towards the closed position,
whilst it is also known to use a damping mechanism that retards the force of the
so as to prevent the gate being slammed shut under the influence of the
spring. The specification notes that such dampers typically
include what would
be understood as a type of hydraulic plunger i.e. a movable plunger mounted in a
fluid filled chamber, with movement
of the plunger into the chamber forcing the
fluid through a small aperture.
specification then observes that:
“The hinges are typically attached to glass door or fence panels by way of
insert components which locate in an aperture provided
in the glass panel. The
dampers are located inside the insert components and move in a direction which
is orthogonal to the hinge
axis and coplanar with the panel i.e. lying between
the planes of the two planar surfaces of the panel.
The dampers are selected so that they provide an overall damping effect such
that the door closes slowly, but does not take a very
long time to close.
However, it has been found that the damping action of these hydraulic dampers is
somewhat variable and it can
be difficult to achieve the desired damping
characteristics.
There remains a need for improved hinges.”
“Summary of the Invention” then runs from page 2, line 5 to page 3,
line 5. This simply comprises consistory statements
that appear commensurate
with somewhat broader claims than as presently on file, or, for that matter, as
accepted. However, like
the claims as they presently stand, and as accepted,
the consistory statements refer to the hydraulic damper being located outside
the planes which describe the faces of the glass panel and inside one of the
hinge portions, with the damper moving in a direction
substantially parallel to
the hinge axis.
then follows a “Brief Description of the Drawings” and
“Detailed Description of the Preferred Embodiment”
which comprise
the remainder of the description.
The nature of the invention described is best understood by reference to the
figures. A first embodiment of a hinge
in the closed position is
illustrated by figures 1 to 5, of which figures 1 and 2 are reproduced below.
comprises first and second hinge portions
with respective first and second hinge members
and first and
second clamping members
can be seem from figures 3 and 4, reproduced below, the hinge
attached to glass panels
by locating insert portions
in recesses machined in glass panels
. The glass panels
are then clamped between hinge members
clamping members
using fasteners
. Spring tensioner
is housed in hollow barrel portion
of first hinge
and comprises tensioning member
and coupling
. Although there is some discussion of the spring
tensioner assembly
and associated features, for present purposes it is
sufficient to simply note that spring
operates so as to bias the hinge
towards the closed position as discussed earlier in this
also comprises damper
housed within sleeve
and located in a cavity of the second hinge member
attached to arm
of hollow barrel portion
. Consequently, cam
pushes against sloped surface
is in a compressed state. Opening of the hinge
moving from bearing on the upper part of sloped surface
towards the lower part of the sloped surface
such that the
moves from a compressed state towards an extended position.
will then provide a damping action as it is progressively
compressed as the hinge moves back towards the closed position. It is apparent
that the damper
moves in a direction parallel to the hinge axis.
The specification also notes
“The damper 51 is not mounted inside the insert component. As best seen in
figure 3, it is mounted outside of the glass panel,
to one side of the glass
panel in a well in one of the hinge members. This means that the length of the
damper is not constrained
to fit inside the inert
, which in turn
must fit inside the edge aperture formed in the glass panel. This allows use of
a damper of longer length, which can
provide a more significant damping effect
when compared with damper of shorter length.”
alternative embodiment is illustrated by figures 6 to 8, and is said to be
“...used with with a pool fence and gate which
are formed from square or
round cross section tubular metal
components.
Figures 6 and 8 are
reproduced below. These show a hinge
comprising first and second
hinge portions
. Although not shown, a spring arrangement
similar to that of the first embodiment biases the hinge
towards the
closed position. In use, respective planar engagement surfaces
of the first and second hinge portions
are fixed to surfaces of
gate and fence members without the use of recesses in the fence members as was
the case for the first embodiment.
is located in cavity
of second hinge portion
. Respective upper and lower sleeves
are provided
at the upper and lower ends of damper
. Respective upper and lower
cam regions
are provided on first hinge portion
engage respective helical surfaces
of the upper and lower
. In the fully open position, cams
are not in contact with helical surfaces
such that damper
is extended. When hinge
is at a 35 degree open position,
come into contact with helical surfaces
, thereby progressively compressing damper
as the hinge
moves towards the closed position and damping the closing action of
9 (not shown) illustrates a variation of the embodiment of figures 6 to 8, where
the cams are provided in form of rollers.
The hinge of figure 9 is otherwise
the same as hinge
discussion of the embodiments of the invention it is noted
“It can be seen that embodiments of the invention have at least one of
following advantages:
The hydraulic
damper is mounted in a cavity in one of the hinge members and lies outside of
the plane of the panel. This further allows
for longer damper travel when
compared with hinges in which the dampers are mounted inside one of the hinge
insert components and
further improves the predictability of the speed and
smoothness of the closing action.
The hydraulic
damper is mounted so that it moves in a direction which is parallel to the hinge
axis. This allows for longer damper
travel in a smaller assembly which in tum
spreads the resistance force over a longer distance for a more predictable and
closing action.”
application comprises seven claims of which claim 1 is the only independent
claim. Claim 1 is reproduced below; the full claim
set can be found at Annex A
to this decision. For convenience I have provided feature labels for claim 1.
1.1 A hinge including:
1.2 a first hinge portion;
1.3 a second hinge portion;
1.4 a biasing spring; and
1.5 at least one hydraulic damper;
1.6 the first and second hinge portions are connected together and are arranged
to pivot with respect to one another about a hinge
axis between an open
condition and a closed condition;
1.7 the biasing spring is arranged to bias the hinge towards the closed
1.8 in use the at least one hydraulic damper is compressed from an extended
condition to a retracted condition as the hinge moves
from the open condition to
the closed condition;
1.9 the first hinge portion includes a first hinge member, and a first clamping
1.10 the hinge is arranged to attach to a glass panel which is provided with an
edge recess, the first hinge portion is arranged
to attach to the glass panel by
sandwiching the glass panel between the first hinge member and the first
clamping member;
1.11 and when attached to the panel in use the at least one damper is located
outside of the planes which describe the faces of the
glass panel and inside the
first hinge member; and
1.12 wherein the damper moves in a direction which is substantially parallel to
the hinge axis.
The oppositions
application was filed on 16 February 2017. Consequently, substantive amendments
Act 1990 (the
brought about by the
Intellectual Property Laws Amendment (Raising the Bar) Act
apply to the application. This includes the amendment to subsection
60 (3A) that allows the Commissioner to refuse a patent application
if satisfied
on the balance of probabilities that a ground of opposition exists. Notably
each Opponent’s bears the onus of
proving their case to the requisite
standard in each of their oppositions.
there are two distinct oppositions, I will consider each of these in turn,
starting with the TCT opposition.
THE TCT OPPOSITION
the TCT SGP, TCT pursued grounds under:
s18(1)(b)(i) – the invention as claimed is not novel in view of the prior
art base as it existed before the priority
date of the claims;
s18(1)(b)(ii) – the invention as claimed is not inventive in view of the
prior art base as it existed before the
priority date of the claims;
the specification does not comply with s40(3), in that the claims are not clear
and succinct;
the specification does not comply with s40(3), in that the claims are not
supported by matter in the specification;
s18(1)(c) – the claimed invention lacks utility;
the specification does not comply with s40(2)(a); and
the specification does not comply with s40(2)(aa).
of these grounds were pursued by TCT in its written submissions and at the
note that TCT’s SGP comprised an allegation that the claims were only
entitled to claim priority from the filing date of the
application, rather than
the priority document, but this was not pressed in the TS or at the hearing. I
have decided the TCT opposition
on the basis that the priority claim is correct.
I note that my decision concerning Polaris’s opposition includes an
of whether the priority date is valid, and casts doubt over whether the
claims may in fact take priority from the priority document.
However, given the
publication dates, and the disposition of the documents pressed by TCT for both
novelty and inventive step as
discussed further below, it will make no
difference to the outcome in the TCT opposition whether the claims are entitled
priority from the priority document or not. Consequently, I have not
contemplated raising any priority date issues in the TCT opposition
s60(3), or, to the extent necessary, Reg 5.23.
TCT’s Reg 5.23 request
observed earlier, TCT filed a Reg 5.23 request which I must necessarily
determine as part of deciding the TCT opposition. As noted
Instruments Asia Pacific Pty Ltd v Minnovare Limited
[2017] APO 8
of factors are relevant to whether Regulation 5.23 should be invoked with
respect to a document. These include:
a) the circumstances leading up to the evidence not being filed
b) what the evidence shows and whether the information is likely to be crucial
to the delegate’s decision;
c) the public interest; and
d) the balance of convenience of the parties if the information is
considered.
there are four factors listed, what the evidence shows and whether it is likely
to be crucial to my decision is of preponderant
weight in the present
circumstances. If the material concerned helps make out a ground of opposition
that would not otherwise be
made out without it, then admission of the material
is clearly in the public interest and outweighs any balance of convenience
or why the material was not filed earlier in the present
circumstances.
Conversely, if the
material does not lead to a ground of opposition being made out in its absence,
then any further delay brought
by introduction of the material is clearly not in
the public interest, would simply lead to further unnecessary inconvenience to
both parties, all of which would outweigh any considerations in favour due to
why the material was not filed earlier. Hence, my
approach will be to consider
the Reg 5.23 request as though the material concerned was actually in evidence,
and use this through
the lens of the relevant analysis for the grounds to which
the Reg 5.23 request relates to inform whether I should invoke Reg 5.23
requested by TCT.
Who is the skilled addressee?
skilled addressee is taken to be a non-inventive worker in the art with respect
to the invention concerned, is taken to possess
the common general knowledge
”) in the art, and could be a team of people; see
Root Quality Control Pty. Ltd. v Root Control Technologies Pty. Ltd
[2000] FCA 980
Root Quality
Catnic Components Limited and Another v Hill & Smith Limited
at 242 to 243 and
Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co.
Beiersdorf (Australia) Ltd.
[1980] HCA 9
[1980] HCA 9
at 292. In particular in
Root Quality Control
Finkelstein J. stated that “... the
patent is directed to a person
interested in making, constructing, compounding or using
invention...”
was little discussion by the parties on the nature of the skilled addressee,
either in the written submissions or at the hearing.
The nature of the skilled
addressee, and the suitability of the expert declarants to represent the same,
was simply absent in written
and oral submissions by the Applicant. At the
hearing, Mr Tsang noted that Mr Hunter had been accepted as a skilled addressee
TCT Group Pty Ltd v Polaris IP Pty Ltd
[2022] FCA 1493
”) but otherwise referred to the OS at
section E concerning the skilled addressee. No comment has been provided by the
concerning the suitability of the Applicant’s experts to
represent the skilled addressee, leading to the rather rare absence
of a dispute
over which party has the better experts. At [19] of the OS, the Opponent has
reiterated Justice Burley’s formulation
of the skilled addressee from
at [86], which I also adopted in
TCT Group Pty Ltd v Polaris
[2024] APO 5
”) at [39].
Given the matters concern the same field, I again adopt this formulation of the
skilled addressee for this matter,
namely “...a person engaged in, or who
has experience in, the design of mechanical devices and, in particular, in
hinges used in domestic and commercial applications”.
the lack of disagreement, I have reviewed the declarations, and, where given,
the CVs provided by each of the expert declarants,
and I am satisfied that each
is able, at least in some way, to adequately represent the views of the skilled
addressee as I have
defined it. In this regard I note that:
Mr Hunter is a
mechanical engineer with bachelor’s and master’s degrees in that
discipline.
He has extensive
experience in product design and development, including of
Mr Murauer is a
director of the Applicant and has worked for/in the Applicant for about 25 years
designing and manufacturing tools
and mechanical
components.
Mr Murauer has not
provided a CV/resume and does not claim any formal qualifications but states
that he is a mechanical engineer,
as well as being the inventor for the opposed
application.
Mr Graham is an
owner and operator of Lox Locking Pty Ltd, a company that “designs and
distributes various items of door hardware
including door and gate locks,
cabinet locks and latches, door closers and door
retainers”.
Mr Graham has
a Bachelor of Education (Industrial Arts) and has gained extensive knowledge and
understanding of doors, gates, and
their associated hardware through his line of
Particularly
given the lack of dispute, I do not propose to make any general statements or
conclusions here about the relative suitability
of any of the experts to
represent the skilled addressee. Suffice to state that where the declarants
disagree on a factual point
that I intend to rely upon, or where I seek to make
findings of fact based on the expert evidence, it will be up to me to weigh each
declarant’s evidence accordingly in view of the particular context
concerned and their skills, knowledge and experience.
statutory basis for clarity is given at s40(3) of the
which states
that the claims must be clear and succinct. The requirement for the claims to
be clear does not mean that terms used
in claims must be precise or absolute, as
Flexible Steel Lacing Company v Beltreco Ltd
[2000] FCA 890
[2000] FCA 890
(2001) 49 IPR 331
at 349 (and cited with approval in
Austal Ships Sales
Pty Ltd v Stena Rederi Aktiebolag
[2008] FCAFC 121
(2008) 77 IPR 229)
Austal Ships
”) at [14]:
“Lack of precise definition in claims is not fatal to their validity, so
long as they provide a workable standard suitable
to the intended use...The
consideration is whether, on any reasonable view, the claim has meaning...In
determining this, the expressions
in question must be understood in a practical,
commonsense manner... Absurd constructions should be avoided...and mere
technicalities
should not defeat the grant of protection...”
particular one can consider that the claims provide a workable standard if a
third party could, without difficulty, determine whether
an act falls within the
scope of the claim; see
Monsanto Company v Commissioner of Patents
“There will, I think, in the present case be no
difficulty in a third party ascertaining whether or not what he proposes to
falls within the ambit of the claim...For these reasons I do not regard the use
of the adjective ‘substantial’ as
giving rise to any
uncertainty.”
only claim the Opponent has objected to for lack of clarity is claim 6. In the
OS, the Opponent argues:
“113. Claim 6 lacks clarity for the simple reason that it refers to
‘contact between the cam and the housing’ in
circumstances where
none of the previous claims on which it depends introduces or identifies
‘the housing’.
114. Claim 3 refers to the damper being ‘housed inside a sleeve’,
but that only serves to highlight the problem. ‘Housed’
is used here
as a verb. The only noun is the word ‘sleeve’. The skilled addressee
is therefore left to guess or presume,
as Mr Hunter did (see Hunter 3, [37]),
that the ‘housing’ in claims 6 is in fact the ‘sloped surface
of the sleeve’. However that residual uncertainty is precisely
what s 40(3) is intended to prevent.”
Tsang did not add anything further regarding the clarity of claim 6 at the
hearing, merely referring to the TS and noting that
the Applicant conceded the
issue in the ATS and was amenable to an amendment to rectify the
Mr Wood-Roe confirmed
this at the hearing.
cessation of hostilities between the parties over this issue, I do not accept
that claim 6 is unclear as argued by TCT. Claim
6 is directly appended to only
claim 5 and indirectly appended to claim 3 via claims 4 and 5, with claims 4 and
5 respectively dependent
on only claims 3 and 4. As noted by TCT, claim 3
refers to the hydraulic damper being housed “inside a sleeve”.
suggestion that “housed” is used in claim 3 as a verb is
clearly correct, but the notion this somehow makes the nature
“housing” in claim 6 unclear seems little more than a metaphysical
abstraction. If an object is housed by a thing,
then that thing is undoubtedly
a housing – to entertain, particularly in the present context, the
alternative is merely an
apagoge that undermines TCT’s position. I am not
satisfied that claim 6 lacks clarity.
test for determining novelty is often expressed in the form of the reverse
infringement test as given in
Meyers Taylor Pty Ltd v Vicarr Industries Ltd
[1977] HCA 19
(1977) CLR 228
at page 235;
[1977] HCA 19
at page 611
Meyers Taylor
“The basic test for anticipation or want of novelty is the same as that
for infringement and generally one can properly ask
oneself whether the alleged
anticipation would, if the patent were valid, constitute an infringement.”
determining whether a disclosure comprises an infringement, it is convenient to
consider the principles laid down in
General Tire & Rubber Company v The
Tyre and Rubber Company Limited
[1972] RPC 457
485-486) (“
General Tire & Rubber
what a skilled addressee would do based on the disclosure in question:
“...if carrying out the directions contained in the prior
inventor’s publication will inevitably result in something being
done which, if the patentee’s patent were valid, would constitute an
infringement of the patentee’s claim, this
circumstance demonstrates that
the patentee’s claim has in fact been anticipated.
If, on the other hand, the prior publication contains a direction which is
capable of being carried out in a manner which would infringe
patentee’s claim, but would be at least as likely to be carried out in a
way which would not do so, the patentee’s
claim will not have been
anticipated, although it may fail on the ground of obviousness. To anticipate
the patentee’s claim
the prior publication must contain clear and
unmistakeable directions to do what the patentee claims to have invented ... A
however clear, upon the road to the patentee’s invention will
not suffice.”
relevance to this decision, s7(1)(c) of the
provides for prior art
information for the purposes of “whole of contents” novelty by
referring to subparagraph (b)(ii)
of the definition of “prior art
base” in Schedule 1 of the
. This subparagraph provides
criteria that determine whether a document may be used as prior art information
for the purposes of
whole of contents novelty as follows:
in relation to deciding whether an invention is or is not novel:
(ii) information contained in a published specification filed in respect of a
complete application where:
(A) if the information is, or were to be, the subject of a claim of the
specification, the claim has, or would have, a priority date
earlier than that
of the claim under consideration; and
specification was published after the priority date of the claim under
consideration; and
information was contained in the specification on its filing date and when it
was published.”
respect to “whole of contents” objections, it was noted by Justice
Danisco A/S v Novozymes A/S (No 2)
[2011] FCA 282
“A ‘whole of contents’ objection
under s 7(1)(c) and paragraph (b)(ii) of the definition of
‘prior art base’
in the Dictionary in Schedule 1 to
the Act attracts additional considerations. The usual rules as to
clarity of disclosure to the
skilled addressee apply but, in addition, it must
be possible to draft a notional claim (assuming there is not an actual claim to
the relevant subject matter) that is fairly based on the disclosure of the prior
specification relied upon (
E I Du Pont de Nemours & Co v ICI Chemicals
& Polymers Ltd
[2005] FCA 892
(2005) 66 IPR 462
Emmett J).”
TCT’s novelty arguments
novelty case is premised on AU 2020277205 A1 (“
CN 110259302 A (“
”). D1 was published on 18
February 2021, but has an earliest priority date of 29 July 2019. D1
therefore nominally qualifies
as prior art for the purposes of “whole of
contents” novelty. D3 is the Chinese family member of D1, and a
translation
of this is in evidence as WSH-9. Whilst having the same priority
date as D1, D3 was published on 20 September 2019, and therefore
prior art for novelty without any need for “whole of contents”
considerations. Unsurprisingly, except for immaterial
formatting differences,
D1 and D3 are identical, and it is therefore somewhat unusual that TCT seeks to
press both of these documents
separately and to rely on D1 on a whole of
contents basis when D3 alone would suffice. As the TS and TCT’s oral
submissions
at the hearing primarily proceeded by way of D1, I will consider D1
below for novelty purposes, on the understanding that my findings
will equally
apply to D3.
AU 2020277205 A1 – D1
discloses a hinge. The embodiment of D1 most relevant for present purposes is
illustrated in figures 1 and 2, reproduced below.
As may be seen on these
figures, the hinge is suitable for glass doors and comprises a hinge body
with first and second clamp plates
which are able to clamp
glass panels within the hinge via opposing plates, fasteners, gaskets and
inserts - these last features are
visible on figure 2, but are unlabelled. D1
also comprises a damping mechanism
. As may be seen by reference to
figures 2 and 5 and 6, also reproduced below, the damping mechanism
comprises a pair of hydraulic dampers
each with its own fixed pressure
and movable pressure block
connected to respective
ends of the hydraulic damper
. Each movable pressure block
has a first inclined surface
, whilst each fixed pressure block
has a second inclined surface
. The hydraulic dampers
are respectively accommodated in first and second clamp plates
and reside on respective damper bases
, and are arranged parallel
to the hinge axis.
may be appreciated from figure 2, the hydraulic dampers
are arranged
in the hinge in an opposed manner such that the first inclined surface
associated with one hydraulic damper
can abut the second inclined
associated with the other hydraulic damper
versa. In use, each of the moveable pressure blocks
can displace
along a line parallel to the hinge axis such that the first inclined surface
moves along the second inclined surface
of respective fixed
pressure blocks
so as compress the hydraulic dampers
allow them to extend, depending on the direction of movement. Although various
modes of action between the inclined surfaces
are discussed in
it is clear that the
hydraulic dampers
reach their maximum possible extension when the
hinge is open and are progressively compressed as the hinge closes, the hinge
biased towards the closed position by torsion spring
only feature of claim 1 in dispute between the parties, in terms of whether it
is disclosed in D1 or not, is feature 1.11, discussed
as feature 1(k) by the
parties. I agree that D1 discloses all the other features of claim 1.
relied upon Mr Hunter’s evidence in support of its case that feature 1(k)
is disclosed in D1. Specifically, TCT referred to
[85] to [88] of Hunter1 and
Mr Hunter’s annotated partial copy of figure 2 of D1. These are
reproduced below:
“85. As can be seen in Fig. 2 and Fig. 5 of D1, the damper base 2 includes
a rectangular cavity for accommodating the hydraulic
damper 33 with the fixed
pressure block 31 and movable pressure block 32 of the damping mechanism 3. As I
have noted above, part
of the damper base 2 forms an insert portion to be
received in the edge recess of the glass panel. Fig. 2 of D1 shows bosses
from an underside of one of the two damper bases 2, which bosses will
sit within the conventional rounded regions of the ‘mouse-eared’
shaped edge recess in the glass panel. This shape is also seen in the gaskets
lying below the damper bases 2 in the exploded view
of Fig. 2. On a close
inspection of the drawings in D1, it is clear, however, that not all of the
rectangular cavity accommodating
the hydraulic damper 33 will, in use, sit
within the edge recess of the glass panel - i.e., the rectangular cavity will
not lie entirely
within the plane of the glass panel.
86. To illustrate this point, an excerpt from Fig. 2 of D1 is reproduced below
in Figure 9 of this declaration. As can be seen in
Figure 9 below, the
triangle-shaped and angled extensions are provided on flanges which extend from
the sides of the rectangular
cavity. As shown by the two red lines, the bottom
of these flanges is set below the top of the rectangular cavity. In addition,
bottom of these flanges presents a surface against which the gasket (shown
in green) bears when the hinge is assembled. That is,
the gasket (in green) is
sandwiched between these flanges of the damper base 2 and the outer face of the
glass to protect the glass
from excessive stress as the front and rear plates of
the hinge clamp are tightened. The green line (i.e., below the two red lines)
thus illustrates where the gasket would lie in relation to the rectangular
cavity housing the damping mechanism 3.
87. It is therefore apparent from Fig. 2 of D1 that about two thirds of the
cavity housing the damping mechanism 3 will lie within
the edge recess of the
glass panel, noted by marking ‘x’ in Figure 9 above. As the fixed
pressure block 31 appears dimensioned
to closely fit or match the rectangular
cavity and the hydraulic damper 33 itself appears only marginally smaller than
pressure block 31 which holds it, one can then appreciate that a
considerable portion of the damper 33 will not be within a plane
of the glass
panel. The portion of the damper 33 which is outside the plane of the glass
panel has been coloured in red and green
to correspond with the red and green
lines marked against the width of the rectangular cavity.
88. In my view, therefore, D1 discloses all the features 1(a) to 1(k) of claim
1. In this connection, I consider that feature 1(k)
is satisfied because this
feature does not require or specify that the
of the damper must
be located outside of the planes which describe the faces of the glass panel and
inside the first hinge member.
This feature is therefore realised when
of the damper is located outside of the planes of the glass. As
such, in my view, D1 discloses all the features of claim 1.”
(emphasis in
further reason TCT made in support of its views are
“Mr Hunter interprets the language of integer 1(k) as requiring that only
the damper be located outside of the planes of the glass panel.
Mr Hunter holds this view because nothing in the claim requires or
of the damper must be located outside of the planes
describing the faces of the glass panel: Hunter 1, [88]. Consistently with this,
Mr Hunter observes that having the ability to use a longer damper – being
one of the professed advantages of the Opposed Application
(see p 6, lines
28-29) – does not require that the entire damper be located outside of the
panel at all. This is because, as
Mr Murauer has himself observed, ‘if the
dampener was mounted in the hinge in a vertical orientation, then this would
allow a longer dampener to be used’ (Murauer, [11]). In other words,
it would be sufficient to simply change the dampener’s
orientation (from
that of the Polaris 120 as depicted in Annexure MM-1) to be parallel to the
hinge axis. This is precisely the orientation
of the dampeners shown in D1.
Further, Mr Hunter observes that a damper need not be constrained in its length
when part of the damper
lies within the plane of the glass panel – i.e.,
when the damper lies only
outside of the glass panel, as is
apparent from D4 and D5. That is, it is not necessary for the damper to be
located wholly or entirely
outside of the glass panel in order to achieve a
longer damper. (Hunter2, [11]).” (emphasis in original)
Tsang essentially reiterated the same arguments at the hearing.
Applicant contested TCT’s position in the
by reference to the evidence
of Mr Murauer and Mr Graham:
“55. This view of Mr Hunter is contradicted in the declarations of
, at paras 21 and 22:
21. It does not make sense to me for something that is mostly
‘inside’ something to be considered to be ‘outside’
it. That is not the normal meaning of the word ‘outside’.
22. Furthermore, the dampener in D1 is located inside the insert portion of the
hinge which in use locates in the mouse-ear cutout
in the glass. The dampener in
D1 is therefore constrained in size because it must fit within the mouse-ear cut
out in the glass.
The definition in the claims of the Opposed Application that
damper is located outside of the planes which describe the faces of
the glass panel
was not intended to include arrangements like
D1 and I believe this is clear from a reading of the specification of the
Opposed Application.
at paras 16 to 18:
16. The inventor has explained that by locating the dampener outside of the
planes of the faces of the glass panel, that this allows
use of a longer
dampener. However, in D1, this is not the case. The length of the dampener is
still constrained by being located
within an insert component which in turn
locates inside a cut out in the glass. I therefore do not think that the
inventor intended
the meaning of the phrase ‘
located outside of the
planes of the glass
to encompass the arrangement seen in D1.
17. I do not think that the normal meaning of the word “outside”
means only a small portion of something is outside.
I also do not think that
this is the intended meaning of the word in the context of the claims of the
Opposed Application.
18. I do not think that feature 1(k) is seen in D1.
58. Applicant therefore rejects the complaint that claim 1, or any of the
dependent claims, are not novel in light of D1. The same
considerations apply to
D3.” (emphasis in original)
Wood-Roe essentially reiterated these arguments at the hearing but noted that
the Applicant would not have a problem with further
defining the claim to avoid
the issue as raised by TCT.
is perhaps helpful to reproduce the relevant passage from claim 1 the centre of
the dispute:
“...the at least one damper is located outside of the planes which
describe the faces of the glass panel...”
Macquarie Dictionary Online
www.macquariedictionary.com.au, Macquarie Dictionary Publishers, an imprint of
Pan Macmillan Australia Pty Ltd (the “
”) defines “locate” as:
(located, locating)
to discover the
place or location of:
to locate a leak in a pipe.
to set, fix, or establish in a place, situation, or
locality; place; settle:
to locate one’s headquarters in Norfolk
Australian History
(land) to settlers:
grants of 50 acres were
to establish (oneself, someone) in a place
with a view to settling:
they located themselves on undeveloped
to refer (something), as by opinion or statement, to a
particular place:
locate the garden of Eden in Babylonia.
to find a suitable
location: the new Sydney airport must locate somewhere.”
present purposes, the verb form of definition 2 is most appropriate. That is
“located” as used in claim 1 refers
to setting, fixing, situating,
placing etc. the damper in a certain way. That “way”, of course, is
“outside the
planes which describe the faces of the glass panel”.
As far as that goes, the
Macquarie Dictionary
defines the noun
“outside” as:
the outer side, surface, or part; the exterior.
the external aspect or appearance.
something merely external.
the space without or beyond an enclosure, boundary, etc.
seaward, beyond the point where the waves break.
Rugby Football
any player other than a forward.
the world outside prison.”
4 is most apposite for present purposes. That is the damper is set, fixed,
placed, situated etc. without or beyond the
planes which describe the faces of
the glass panel. Applying this to Mr Hunter’s annotated copy of figure 2
of D1, it is difficult
to see how the damper there, of which about two thirds to
three quarters lies within the planes of glass panel, can be said to be
fixed, placed, situated etc. without or beyond the planes which describe the
faces of the glass panel. To use an agricultural
analogy, one would not say
that a cow which has stuck its head through a fence to avail itself of the grass
growing on the other
side is beyond the fence as such, even if part of it is.
Hunter and TCT are correct in that the claim does not explicitly state that the
of the damper be located outside the planes concerned. However,
that does not mean that any damper which has
part of itself located
beyond the planes concerned can be considered to be located
“outside” those planes as such –
the claim language clearly
adverts to a situation whereby the damper itself is actually located beyond the
planes concerned. There
may well be situations where part of a damper lies
within the planes but one would still consider the damper itself to be beyond
the planes – to use an agricultural analogy again, a cow that has escaped
its fencing would be considered to be beyond that
fencing even if it is standing
adjacent to the fence with its tail within the fence boundary. However one
wishes to put it, it is
simply an unnatural distortion of the claim language to
consider that the damper of D1 is located “outside” the planes
describing the faces of the glass panel.
argument, based on Mr Hunter’s views that one does not need to have the
damper within the planes concerned to allow
for a longer damper, is merely
extraneous in constructional terms. The words of the claim are clear on their
own terms and cannot
be varied in view of whether one considers they achieve a
certain purpose or are necessary for that purpose – such considerations
are more relevant to matters of support, sufficiency, or utility.
Novelty – conclusion
balance I am not satisfied that any of the claims lack novelty in view of D1 or
D3. TCT has been unsuccessful in making out this
opposition.
Inventive step
statutory basis for inventive step is set out at s7(2) and s7(3) of the
, and is reproduced below:
“(2) For the purposes of
this Act, an invention is to be taken to involve an inventive step when compared
with the prior art
base unless the invention would have been obvious to a person
skilled in the relevant art in the light of the common general knowledge
existed (whether in or out of the patent area) before the priority date of the
relevant claim, whether that knowledge is considered
separately or together with
the information mentioned in subsection (3).
(3) The information for the purposes of subsection (2) is:
(a) any single piece of prior art information; or
(b) a combination of any 2 or more pieces of prior art information that
the skilled person mentioned in subsection (2) could, before
the priority date
of the relevant claim, be reasonably expected to have combined.”
not expressly referred to in the
, it has been accepted by the
authorities that lack of inventive step in the
is commensurate with
the previous concept of obviousness under the
Patents Act 1952
relying on a different prior art base); see
Re James Earl
Donna C Winner v Ammar Holdings Pty. Limited
[1992] FCA 377
[1992] FCA 561
The approach to obviousness
terms of inventive step, the TS did not explicitly put forward an approach to be
taken. Rather, it seems TCT has identified the
closest items of prior art to
the invention as claimed and refers to the differences between these and the
claims as being conventional,
known in the art or obvious in view of Mr
Hunter’s evidence.
hearing, Mr Gehrig framed the question of obviousness per
of the ways
that Justice Nicholas outlined in
Hood v Bush Pharmacy Pty Ltd
158 IPR 229
”) at [116] and references
therein, as follows:
“Something may be ‘obvious’ in light of the common general
knowledge, or the common general knowledge coupled with
relevant s 7(3) information, if it is ‘plain or open to the
eye or mind, something which is perfectly evident to the person
thinking on the
Olin Mathieson Chemical Corp v Biorex Laboratories
[1970] RPC 157
at 188) or something which ‘would at once
occur to anyone acquainted with the subject and desirous of accomplishing the
Vickers, Sons & Co Ltd v Siddell
[1890] UKLawRpAC 39
(1890) 15 App Cas
also identified other
common ways of assessing obviousness, namely:
“An invention may also be obvious in light of the common general knowledge
if the person skilled in the art faced with the
same problem as the inventor
would have taken as a matter of routine whatever steps might have led from the
prior art to the invention,
whether they be the steps of the inventor or not
at 286 per Aickin J) or (using the language of
the ‘modified Cripps question’) if the person skilled in the art
be directly led as a matter of course to take such steps in the
expectation that doing so might well produce a useful or better alternative
the prior art (
Aktiebolaget Hassle v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2002] HCA 59
). However, a claimed invention is not obvious merely
because the person skilled in the art would consider that it was
‘worthwhile
Applicant, in discussing inventive step in the
, refers to
and later identifies
the problem to be solved as improving damping
performance
. At the hearing, Mr
Wood-Roe referred, at various points, to the skilled addressee not being led as
a matter of course or being
led to solve a different problem instead of the
problem referred to in the ATS.
terms of the problem-solution approach, I tend to agree with the Applicant, in
that I consider the problem to be solved, if one
were to frame the matter in
those terms, is improving the damping performance of hinges used with glass
panels having an edge recess.
As I understand it from the TS and from Mr Gehrig
at the hearing, TCT did not necessarily dispute the Applicant’s
formulation
of the problem. Rather, TCT took issue with the
that Mr Hunter had
solved a problem that was not posed; Mr Gehrig argued that rather, Mr Hunter was
considering what is plain or
open to the mind of the skilled person.
As apparent from
and references therein, there are a variety of ways
of assessing inventive step, and one need not resort to a problem-solution
as such. However, it will be the case, where an approach is properly
and appropriately applied, one would expect that the outcome
from each approach
will yield the same result. It is not apparent to me that any of the approaches
in the present matter would be
inappropriate in some way. I will utilise the
reformulated Cripps question as per
Aktiebolaget Hassle v Alphapharm Pty
[2002] HCA 59
212 CLR 411
77 ALJR 398
194 ALR 485
Aktiebolaget
”) at [53] as follows in assessing
inventive step:
[skilled addressee] at the relevant date in all the circumstances ... directly
be led as a matter of course to try [the
invention claimed] in the expectation
that it might well produce [a useful desired result].
“useful desired result” in this case is improving the damping
performance of hinges used with glass panels having
an edge recess.
TCT’s inventive step case
US 2019/040667 A1 (“
”) and US 2018/010376 A1
”) were particularised for the purposes of s7(3) in the
SGP, TCT’s case has understandably shifted in view of amendments
claimed invention. Ultimately lack of inventive step was pursued in the TS
based on s7(3) with regard to D3 and D7. The
shift in TCT’s case has led
to a number of procedural issues that I will briefly consider before moving onto
whether either
of D3 or D7 deprive any of the claims of inventive step under
that regard, the position of D7 is somewhat unusual. While cited in the TCT
SGP, the document was not filed with the SGP on 27
July 2022. This means that
D7 was not covered by the Commissioner’s usual direction, made on 28 July
2022, making documents
accompanying the TCT SGP part of the EIS. Whilst D7 was
filed on 28 July 2022, this was after the aforementioned direction was made.
was not otherwise filed into evidence during the evidentiary stages of the
opposition. The upshot is that D7, as best understood,
is not actually in
evidence and as per
Coal Corporation of Victoria v David William Hinkley
& Brian Alan Nugent
[1993] APO 56
, is not available to TCT in its
opposition.
filed as part of the Reg 5.23 request. Consequently D7, if I were
to accede to the Reg 5.23 request, would become available to me
in deciding the
TCT opposition, even if not still formally part of TCT’s opposition as
such. As previously noted, the Reg
5.23 request also comprises Hunter3, which
discusses the inventiveness, amongst other things, of the claims as amended in
D3, D7 and D1”
Conversely,
D3 was filed as EIS
and pressed
for inventive step purposes in the TCT SGP. TCT does not need the Reg 5.23
request to introduce D3 into the opposition.
However, as may be apparent, the
attempted introduction of Hunter3 is (in part) sought by TCT to help establish
that the claims
as amended lack inventive step in view of D3.
arguments presented in the TS
proceeded on the basis that feature 1(k) would be found absent in D1/D3. Moving
outside the planes which describe the faces of the glass
panel was said to be “natural and obvious” to allow the hinge
used in a wider range of applications, for example solid
. Mr Gehrig made similar
arguments at the hearing. These arguments are based on Hunter3 at [57], which
is reproduced below:
“Considering the hinges shown in D3 for glass panels having an edge
recess, and faced with the task of adapting those hinges
to use with panels
(glass or otherwise)
having an edge recess, it seems to me that it
would be a natural and obvious consideration to displace the damping mechanism
hinges laterally into the hinge member of the leaf assembly. This is
because the damping mechanism of those hinges is designed to
operate generally
parallel to the plane of the panel. By displacing the damping mechanism
laterally, not just the damper 33 but also
the movable pressure block 32 and the
fixed pressure block 34 can be moved entirely out of the plane of the panel,
thereby enabling
the panel to be solid. This could be expected to lead to some
extra bulk or volume in the hinge member and could be expected to involve
tests or trials of a narrower profile damping mechanism, but the hinges would
then be adapted to use in a much broader range
of applications with basically
the same damping mechanism as in D3.” (emphasis in original)
least two problems for TCT’s case emerge from [57] of Hunter3. The first
is that the modification posited by Mr Hunter changes
the hinge in D3 from a
hinge which “...is arranged to attach to a glass panel which is provided
with an edge recess...”
as recited in claim 1 to one which is attached to
something that does not have such a recess. Mr Hunter does not indicate that a
hinge so modified in the way he indicates would
be capable of being
attached to a glass panel with an edge recess. It is a simple matter of logic
that it would seem unlikely that
that is the case with Mr Hunter’s
“modified” hinge absent any evidence to the contrary. While
essentially fatal
to TCT’s arguments with respect to D3, this also
undermines Mr Hunter’s evidence vis-à-vis D3 and inventive step,
since it suggests that Mr Hunter simply concentrated on achieving an end result
that provided the missing feature (i.e. 1(k)) thereby
indicating that his
evidence is confounded by ex post facto analysis.
second issue is that Mr Hunter concedes that the changes he has outlined
“...could be expected to involve some tests or trials
of a narrower
profile damping
, but he does
not elaborate on the nature or degree of such experimentation. It could be
simple or routine testing and experimentation
or a major research project. The
absence of elaboration on this undermines any ability to infer that claim 1
lacks an inventive
step in view of D3.
am not satisfied that any of the claims lack inventive step in view of D3.
Unsurprisingly
D7 discloses a door hinge
is best understood by reference to the figures, of which 1 to 3 and 7 are
reproduced below. As may be seen from these figures,
comprises left and right leaves
extending from respective parts of
that, when the hinge
is assembled, forms the barrel
. As may be understood from figures 1 and 7, a number of
components reside within cylinder
. These include top cap
shaft casing
, bearing ring
, shaft sleeve
placement groove
, ball bearing ring
that together define an upper rotatable assembly that allows
the upper part of the hinge
to rotate between an open and closed
position. Adjustment pin
threadedly engages rotation control
at its lower end, with its upper end being accessed via a
hole in top cap
. Rotation control mechanism
comprises a
slot for housing pin
that engages spring
which biases the
hinge to the closed position. Rotation of adjustment pin
adjusts tension in the spring
control mechanism
comprises a ribbed portion
at its lower
end which is complementarily received in the upper portion of control cylinder
, such that the rotational control mechanism
and control
are fixed with respect to each other. A flat “D”
shaped edge on the upper part of rotational control mechanism
a complementary flat section in the shaft casing
such that rotational
control mechanism
is fixed with respect to, and rotates with, right
. Consequently, control cylinder
is also fixed with
respect to right leaf
separates the leaves
and the upper and lower
portions of the cylinder
. The lower portion of the barrel/cylinder
comprises a hydraulic damper
housed within hydraulic cover
. Hydraulic damper
includes control cylinder
control pin
, outer casing
, hydraulic pin
. Control cylinder
is positioned within outer
and has a pair of spiral slots
. Control pin
is fixedly mounted with respect to outer casing
received within a hole therein. Control pin
is also received in
spiral slots
and may also have a pair of sleeves
as ball bearings in the spiral slots
. Outer casing
thereby control pin
, is fixed with respect to, and rotate with, left
extends from base cap
with its upper end being operably
connected to the control cylinder
via a plunger (not illustrated).
The plunger and base cap
define a fluid chamber, thereby providing a
means to apply a force against control cylinder
, with the result that
hydraulic damper
is operable to provide a force against spring
. Hydraulic pin
is threaded, such that it can be axially
translated via being rotated by a user through a hole in end cap
This allows a user to vary the hydraulic pressure of hydraulic damper
via raising/lowering the plunger and control cylinder
increasing/decreasing the volume of the fluid chamber and so
decreasing/increasing resistance to the hinge closing.
is, for example, 90 degrees open (as seen on figure 2), control
is closer towards the lower part of slots
with the result that
control cylinder
is in a higher position in the hinge barrel such that
it compresses spring
. This compression of spring
biasing force to close the hinge, and in doing so movement of the right leaf
causes the control cylinder
to rotate in a downward
direction, with control pin
moving upward in the spiral slots
until they reach the terminus of the spiral slots
. At this point,
which is associated with hinge being open by about 20
, the hydraulic damper
applies a force against the spring
so as to slow the closing
of the hinge
towards the closed position (as seen on figure 3). As
may be seen from figure 7, the hinge
is capable, at least in some
embodiments, of opening to around 180 degrees, and indeed this is apparent in D7
obvious difference between D7 and the claimed invention is that D7 discloses a
door hinge. In that regard, TCT considers that
D7 does not disclose features
1.9 and 1.10,
As I understand it,
both parties do not disagree that these are the only differences between claim 1
and D7; that is, I took it
that both parties otherwise accepted the presence of
the remaining integers of claim 1 in D7. I agree with that position.
Unsurprisingly,
TCT’s case that claim 1 lacks an inventive step in view of D7 is based on
“136. The difference between the hinge of D7 and the hinge defined in
claim 1 of the Opposed Application relates to the hinge
portions being designed
for use with glass panels having an edge recess. That is, the hinge portions are
designed for a glass panel
to be clamped or sandwiched between the two parts of
the hinge portion – namely, between a ‘hinge member’ and a
‘clamping member’ as they are denoted in the Opposed Application
with an insert provided to sit snugly within the edge
recess between those two
parts of the hinge portion. This is a conventional hinge leaf configuration for
glass panels having an edge
recess and corresponds to integers 1(h) to 1(j) of
claim 1: Hunter 3, [19].
137. As observed by Mr Hunter, glass panels are preferred for certain
applications. Further, Mr Hunter noted that there were well-known
engineering
advantages associated with using glass panels with edge recesses, including ease
of installation and alignment of the
hinge assemblies, and less stress on the
glass panel during the assembly and operation of the hinge by virtue of the
recess: Hunter
138. Indeed, it is also apparent from the Opposed Application itself that hinges
are designed for use with a range of different doors,
gates, and panels. The
Opposed Application at p9, lines 7-11 states:
Although the embodiment described above described the hinge in use with a glass
pool fence, in other embodiments the hinge can be
used with other types of glass
panels, such as a glass shower screen door. For example, hinge 100 is designed
to be surface mounted
and used with fence or gate structures formed from
extruded metal square sections or glass panels.
139. In addition to identifying a motivation for the ordinary skilled person to
adapt the hinge portions or leaves 34, 35 of the
hinge 10 of D7 for use with
glass panels, Mr Hunter also observed that the design of such ‘hinge
portions’ for glass
panels with an edge recess was commonly known and
understood by skilled persons in the field before May 2020: see Hunter 3, [12],
[13], [22]. Further, Mr Hunter observed that it would not have required any
inventive effort for a skilled person to adapt the leaves
34, 35 of the hinge in
D7 to the alternative well-known design for glass panels having an edge recess
in order to make that hinge
suitable for use with those glass panels. See Hunter
140. For the above reasons, claim 1 of the Opposed Application lacks an
inventive step in light of D7.”
Applicant refuted the Opponent’s case with respect to claim in the ATS at
[61] to [70]:
“61. The immediate difficulty which is apparent with the device of
document D7 is that it is a door hinge, and not a gate hinge.
At para 15 of
Hunter 3, Mr Hunter states that
‘D7 describes a self-closing hinge for
But Mr Hunter is mistaken in this belief. We
have word-searched D7 and at no point does it teach the use of its hinge on a
Hunter appears to have inadvertently imported this purpose into D7.
Closed and Open positions are incompatible with pool gate usage
62. The relevance of D7 being a door hinge becomes apparent when one comes to
consider how D7 operates between its open and closed
conditions. Figures 2 and 3
of D7 are reproduced below. In the section
‘Description of the
in D7 it is explained that Figure 2 shows the hinge in its
open position, and Figure 3 shows the hinge in its closed condition.
63. In the closed position of figure 3, the two leaves 34, 35 of the hinge are
in a close facing parallel relationship. In use, the
leaves are affixed
respectively to the edge of a door and the inside surface of a door frame using
countersunk screws in the countersunk
holes which are best seen in Figure 2 of
64. The barrel of the hinge which joins the leaves will sit outside the joint
between the door and the doorframe on the inwardly
opening side of the door.
This type of hinge mounting is commonly seen used with doorways inside
65. The closed and open positions of the hinge of D7 are completely different to
those required for use in a pool gate hinge. Figure
3 of the present application
is reproduced below. This image shows the hinge in its closed condition. As can
be readily appreciated,
in this position the two leaves of the hinge are
pointing outwardly 180 degrees away from each other.
66. If the hinge of D7 were repurposed for use as a hinge in a pool gate then it
would actually serve to bias the pool gate to a
completely open position and
would never return the pool gate to the closed position. This would not be a
workable solution and would
not even be contemplated by the skilled person.
67. There are additional countervailing issues which the skilled person would
face if they tried to repurpose the hinge of D7.
Not intended for outdoor use
68. The hinge of D7 is for use on doors in internal applications. Even if
mounted on the entrance door to a building, the damping
and spring components of
D7 are not exposed to the elements. The hinge of D7 does not need to withstand
direct sunlight, rain, wind,
frost and wide ranging temperature fluctuations.
The skilled person would not adapt a hinge designed for internal use for
use. And if they did, this would introduce a significant burden of
redesigning the assembly to withstand outdoor use.
Not intended for use with glass panels
69. At para 18 of Huner 3
, Mr Hunter acknowledges that the hinge of
D7 is not designed for use with glass panels having edge recesses. Mr Hunter
asserts that
the skilled person would find it obvious to modify the leaves 34,
35 of D7 for use with clamping members and using an insert portion.
There is no
reason provided by Mr Hunter for the motivation of the skilled person to do
this. Mr Hunter only refers to this being
‘conventional hinge leaf
configuration’.
70. The relevant enquiry here then is would the skilled person be
“directly lead as a matter of course” to redesign a
hinge that does
not bias or close to the correct positions, is not used with glass, and is not
for use on gates, to do all of these things. We believe the
preferred finding is that they would not.” (emphasis in original)
Gehrig made similar submissions at the hearing as in the TS, as well as
addressing the ATS as it concerns D7. Similarly, Mr Wood-Roe
largely reiterated
the Applicant’s position in the ATS, as well as addressing Mr
Gehrig’s further arguments.
noted, TCT’s case concerning inventive step and D7 essentially rests on
Hunter3. It is worthwhile considering some aspects
of Hunter3 in rather more
detail than has been considered by either party in their submissions. In that
regard Hunter3 observes
“12. The prior art is replete with examples of generic hinges designed for
use with glass panels having features 1(a) to 1(j).
Examples are illustrated in
documents D1 to D5 referenced in my first declaration and in Australian Patent
Application No. 2017201858
referenced in the Annexure MM1 of the declaration of
Mr Murauer dated 30 January 2023.
13. Where this type of generic hinge has a central barrel formed by the two
‘hinge portions’ for housing a spring as
‘biasing means’
for the self-closing action, the typical position of the barrel is illustrated
in Fig. 1 of D3 and in
Fig 1A of Annexure MM1, reproduced below:
builds into the crux of Mr Hunter’s argument that it would be obvious to
modify D7 to include features 1(h) to 1(j) in
“20. As is clear from the hinges in paragraphs 12 and 13 of this
declaration, the hinge barrel of this arrangement is located
offset from, or
outside of, the planes of the glass panels. It is apparent, therefore, that
simply adapting the leaves 34, 35 of
the hinge described in D7 for use with
glass panels having an edge recess (i.e., as described in paragraphs 12 and 13
of this declaration)
would necessarily result in a hinge that has all the
features 1(a) to 1(l) of claim 1 of the Amended
21. This is the case because the Opposed Application specifies the barrel as
part of the ‘hinge member’ (see p.4, 1.21-22).
By arranging the
linear damper within the barrel or cylinder 36, the damper will clearly be
outside of the planes describing the
faces of the glass panel and inside the
first hinge member when the hinge is attached to a glass panel, as in feature 1
(k) of claim
1 of the Amended Claims. This is also the case because the
hydraulic damper 39 is arranged in the barrel or cylinder 36 for movement
direction which is substantially parallel to the hinge axis, as set out in
feature 1(l) of claim 1 of the Amended Claims.
22. It is clear from the prior art, and also from the declaration of Mr Murauer
referring to the fact that the Polaris 120 hinge
was already
‘popular’ by 2019, that the design of hinge leaves or ‘hinge
portions’ for glass panels with
an edge recess (as described above in
paragraphs 12 and 13 of this declaration) was commonly known and understood by
skilled persons
in the field before May 2020.
23. It is therefore my view that it would not have required any inventive effort
for a skilled person to adapt the leaves 34, 35
of the hinge in D7 to the
alternative well-known design for glass panels having an edge recess in order to
make that hinge suitable
for use with those glass panels. On the contrary, this
would involve a straight-forward substitution of one well-known hinge leaf
design for another. In this context, I note that glass panels are preferred for
certain applications and that long before May 2020
there were well-known
engineering advantages associated with using glass panels with edge recesses,
including firstly ease of installation
and alignment of hinge assemblies,
secondly less stress on the glass panel during assembly and operation of the
hinge by virtue of
the recess.”
aside the CGK status of hinge leaves for glass panels with an edge recess, as
asserted by Mr Hunter, I have several reservations
adopted by Mr Hunter to arrive at claim 1 in view of D7. The first proceeds
from the nature of the “conventional”
hinge leaves for glass panels
with an edge recess as identified by Mr Hunter at [12] and [13] of Hunter3. As
apparent from the reproduction
of figure 1 of D3 and 1A of MM-1, the hinge
leaves of these documents cooperate to form the hinge barrel in a different way
of the hinge of D7. As can be seen from figures 1 to 3 of D7, each
comprises half of the barrel, with the left leaf
comprising the lower part of the barrel and the right leaf
comprising the upper half of the barrel. The upper and lower halves of the
barrel appear as offset appendages to the comparatively
thin, plate-like
material that defines the remainder of each leaf
. The leaves
are brought together to form the barrel with leaf ring
separating the upper and lower halves of the barrel.
contrast, the hinge leaves of D3 and MM-1 comprise one leaf (for example item 22
of figure 1A of MM-1) having a comparatively long
contiguous barrel portion,
while the other leaf (for example item 32 of figure 1A of MM-1) has smaller
upper- and lower-barrel portions
such that this other leaf has a somewhat
“u” shaped profile. In use the leaf with the contiguous barrel
portion is slotted
between the upper- and lower-barrel portions defining the
arms of the “u” so that all the barrel portions cooperate to
complete barrel. Consideration of D4 (see for example figure 2) and D5 (see for
example figure 1) demonstrates the same type
of barrel arrangement as per D3 and
If, as asserted by Mr
these represent the
conventional hinge leaf configuration for glass panels having an edge recess,
then it follows that design of
these leaves is also “conventional”
including the way in which they cooperate to form the barrel of the hinge. For
convenience
I will call these conventional hinge leaves for a glass panel with
an edge recess the “conventional hinge leaves” and
a hinge using
these as the “conventional hinge”.
the skilled addressee sought to simply keep the conventional hinge leaves as
they stand, i.e. forming the barrel as they stand,
then this would seem to be
taking the conventional hinge leaves and modifying the internal barrel
components of D7 so that they work
with the barrel of the conventional hinge,
noting the differences in the barrel between D7 and that formed by the
conventional hinge
leaves. Whether, or if, this would be straightforward is not
immediately clear, particularly given, for example, the weight difference
expected between a door comprising a glass panel and the doors that D7 appears
to be made for. For example, would the arrangement
of hydraulic damper
allow for sufficient forces for self-closing of a
glass door without it slamming or taking too long to close? Are further
modifications
to the damping and/or self-closing mechanisms of D7 needed to
achieve this for a glass door, particularly in view of the various
considerations that go into the damping effect of a hydraulic damper as noted by
Are routine or
complex changes and experimentation needed? Nothing in Mr Hunter’s
evidence addresses these issues.
Alternatively,
if the skilled addressee intended that the barrel style of D7 should be kept,
but the leaves
simply adapted to accommodate a glass panel with an
edge recess, then further questions arise. In addition to the above issues
the hydraulic damper
fundamental question exists as to whether a skilled addressee would in fact
abandon the “u” shaped barrel-forming
arrangement of the
conventional hinge for the upper and lower offset arrangement of D7. As noted,
the fact that the conventional
hinge has this “u” shaped arrangement
for forming the barrel is highly suggestive that this is a desirable arrangement
when applying hinges to glass panels with an edge recess. Again, the
differences in weight between glass panels and doors seems
highly relevant in
this regard. Mr Hunter has not addressed whether this is the case, leaving one
to wonder whether the skilled
addressee simply would not adopt the barrel
arrangement of D7 for glass panels with an edge recess due to some detriment in
Altogether,
Mr Hunter’s conclusions of the obviousness of claim 1 in view of D7 appear
rather peremptory and lack any material
details concerning design issues that
would be expected to arise in modifying D7 to work with glass panels with an
edge recess.
The lack of detail concerning these issues, whilst quickly
arriving at the “missing” features of claim 1, where Mr Hunter
already knew what those missing features were, smacks of ex post facto
All of this leaves
significant doubt as to what the skilled addressee
do in modifying
D7 when trying to improve the damping of a hinge for use with a glass panel
comprising an edge recess, even assuming
they set out to do so to begin with.
On balance, I do not consider Hunter3 to provide a basis to conclude that claim
inventive step in view of D7 when combined with the CGK.
to TCT’s arguments in support of obviousness in view of D7, even assuming
that it is well known and desirable to use
glass panels with an edge recess as
part of a gate or door,
simply no answer to the matters discussed above. Similarly, the fact that the
application indicates that its hinges may
be used with other types of glass
panels or other materials
not mean that, somehow, the hinges of D7, which are for a door, would be
necessarily understood as suitable in some way for
glass panels with an edge
recess as defined in claim 1. At the hearing, Mr Gehrig went to some lengths to
note that claim 1 is simply
a hinge with the claim being silent on the
application of that hinge. These arguments were made by Mr Gehrig in the
context of submissions
made by the Applicant concerning alleged distinctions
between gates and doors. On one level Mr Gehrig is correct – what the
context of the end use of the hinge is not inherently important, but, again,
this in no way addresses whether D7 would be modified
by a skilled addressee in
some way to be suitable for a glass panel with an edge recess.
am not satisfied that any of the claims lack inventive step in view D7 when read
with the CGK.
Conclusion on inventive step
am not satisfied that any of the claims lack inventive step in view of either of
D3 or D7 when read with the CGK. TCT has been
unsuccessful in this ground of
opposition.
Section 40(2)(a) – clear enough and complete enough
requirement for clear enough and complete enough disclosure was introduced into
as part of the
Intellectual Property Laws Amendment (Raising
the Bar) Act 2012
”) reforms. Specifically,
s40(2)(a) reads as follows:
“(2) A complete specification
(a) disclose the invention in a manner which is clear enough and complete
enough for the invention to be performed by a person skilled
in the relevant
indicated in
Encompass Corporation Pty Ltd v InfoTrack Pty Ltd
”) at [167] the requirements of
s40(2)(a) equate to enablement of the invention; I note that this was
undisturbed in the appeal
Encompass Corporation Pty
Ltd v InfoTrack Pty Ltd
[2019] FCAFC 161.
As explained in the
Explanatory Memorandum
legislation at item 8, enablement amounts to a requirement that
“...sufficient information must be provided to enable the whole
the claimed invention to be performed by the skilled person without undue
burden, or the need for further invention”.
nature of s40(2)(a) was considered in some detail by a Delegate of the
Commissioner in
CSR Building Products Limited v United States Gypsum Company
[2015] APO 72
”), including an extensive
consideration of a number of UK and EPO decisions relevant to an understanding
of this part of the
. After this consideration the Delegate provided
a process for assessing s40(2)(a) at [95]:
“In order to decide
whether a specification provides a disclosure as required by section
, it is necessary
the claims to determine the scope of invention as claimed,
the description to determine what it discloses to the person skilled in the art,
whether the specification provides an enabling disclosure of all the things that
fall within the scope of the claims.”
[2017] APO 57
133 IPR 147
at [45], a Deputy Commissioner provided some further analysis and consideration
of UK and EPO decisions relevant to the question
of s40(2)(a). After having
done so, the Deputy Commissioner expanded on the third point from the test in
as follows (at [45]):
“Does the specification
provide an enabling disclosure of all the things that fall within the scope of
the claims, and in particular:
(a) Is it plausible that the invention can be worked across the full scope of
(b) Can the invention be performed across the full scope of the claim without
undue burden?”
note that the above approach was approved by Justice Burley in
Industries Inc. v Nalco Company
[2021] FCA 970
162 IPR 202
[146]. It was also adopted by his Honour in
in the context of determining priority dates, albeit without reference to the
sub-test from
. See also:
Merck Sharp & Dohme Corporation v
Wyeth LLC (No 3)
[2020] FCA 1477
to [526] and
Limited v Grenof Pty Ltd
[2023] FCA 378
171 IPR 582
a final observation, it can be seen that the expanded consideration from
nominally comprises two extra sub-tests. However, item (b),
relating to undue burden, can be understood as being inherently encompassed
due to the fact that “enabling disclosure”
includes a requirement for the absence of undue burden as understood from the
can be seen as adding a plausibility requirement
as a kind of threshold test in assessing s40(2)(a); that is, it can hardly be
that there is an enabling disclosure where it is implausible that the
invention can be worked across the full scope of the claim.
TCT’s 40(2)(a) arguments
provided four arguments (couched as “complaints”) as to why the
claimed invention failed under s40(2)(a). In broad
terms these are:
complaint 1:
that the claims encompass multiple dampers, when the application only discloses
embodiments with a single damper;
complaint 2:
that the claims do not properly define the actuating mechanism for the hydraulic
damper, when there is only disclosure
in the application of the actuating
mechanism being a rotary cam, fixed to an outside of the barrel portion for
rotation with the
hinge member through the edge recess of the glass panel to
engage the sloped surface on the end of the sleeve covering the hydraulic
complaint 3:
that claims 1 to 3 do not properly define the location of the biasing spring
relative to other components of the hinge,
when the application only discloses
the biasing spring being mounted in a hollow barrel portion of the hinge;
complaint 4:
that claims 1 to 6 do not explicitly define the existence or use of insert
portions in the edge recess of the glass panel
when the application only
discloses embodiments using such insert portions.
I will consider these arguments below.
Complaint 1: multiple dampers
is discussed in the TS at [26] to [44]. This complaint essentially boils down
to the fact that the claims extend to having two
or more dampers via the recital
in claim 1 of “at least one hydraulic damper”, whereas all of the
embodiments as disclosed
only comprise a single damper. As stated in the TS:
“39. There is no disclosure in the Opposed Application as to how any hinge
should be constructed with more than one hydraulic
damper. According to Mr
It is not apparent to me from the Opposed Application, however, how this concept
[namely, the invention of claim 1] should be implemented
for more than one
damper. All of the examples or embodiments concern a single damper. The Opposed
Application provides no guidance
as to how the concept should be implemented for
more than one damper. Using only the common general knowledge, I do not consider
it would be a simple task for a person skilled in the art to redesign the hinges
disclosed in the Opposed Application for multiple
dampers. On the contrary, I
consider that it would be difficult and probably not possible without that
person exercising some inventive
40. It is not difficult to see why Mr Hunter considers that introducing a second
(or more) damper in any of the embodiments disclosed
in the Opposed Application
would require inventive ingenuity. At the very least, there is no disclosure or
guidance given in the
Opposed Application of:
(a) where any such further dampers should be located;
(b) how such further dampers should be orientated;
(c) what kind of actuating mechanism should be employed;
(d) how any such actuating mechanism should be constructed to ensure that it
41. Taking the first embodiment as an illustrative example, looking at Figure 4
(reproduced at paragraph 31
, if one were to venture
the possibility of introducing a second damper, at least the following questions
would arise:
(a) where should the second damper be located?
(b) if a second damper is to be located in the first hinge portion 21:
(i) where will the actuating mechanism be located, noting that the actuating cam
27 for the first damper is already fixed to (or
relative to) the barrel of the
first hinge portion 21?
(ii) what kind of actuating mechanism should be used, noting that the actuating
cam 27 for the first damper has been specifically
designed and shaped to engage
the first damper at the 35 degree open position (p 8, line 10) and any actuating
mechanism to be located
on the second hinge portion 31 will necessarily need to
be of a different shape and/or size compared to the actuating cam 27 for
first damper;
(c) how should the second damper be orientated?
(d) in any event, how is the skilled addressee to ensure that the introduction
of a second damper will ‘provide an overall
damping effect such that the
door closes slowly, but does not take a very long time to close’? (p 1,
lines 31-32).
42. These, and likely many other, important questions are just some of the
issues that would necessarily arise if the skilled addressee
were tasked with
implementing a second (or more) damper in any of the hinges disclosed in the
embodiments of the Opposed Application.
43. The Opposed Application provides no guidance at all in relation to any of
these issues. It would cast an undue burden on the
skilled addressee to resolve
them. The Opposed Application therefore fails to provide an enabling disclosure
of ‘all the things
that fall within the claims’.”
ATS responded to this issue:
“14. This complaint is based on an inclusive construction of claim 1, that
the claim might cover embodiments that include more
than one hydraulic damper.
This is not disputed by the applicant. This was intended.
15. The use of the phrase
‘at least one hydraulic damper’
defined in claim 1 to account for a situation where a hypothetical infringing
article has more than one damper, perhaps only one
of which is mounted in the
way specified in claim 1. The use of the phrase
‘at least one’
conveys that the presence of more than one damper in an alleged infringing
article would not mean that that article falls outside
the scope of claim 1.
16. The opponent has construed that the additional dampers that are permitted by
the definition in claim 1 are also mounted outside
the glass, and vertically.
However, they could similarly be mounted horizontally inside the hinge, and
inside the recess in the glass
panel in an insert component, in much the same
style as in the Polaris 120.
17. The more limited definitions of the invention in claims 2 and 3 refer only
‘the hydraulic damper’
which is consistent with the
construction of claim 1 outlined at para 16.
18. Should the hearings officer find that the phrase
leads to invalidity on this ground then applicant would be
amenable to amend this phrase to define
‘a hydraulic damper’
which is consistent with the language of claims 2 and 3.” (emphasis in
Tsang made similar submissions on this issue at the hearing as in the TS, with
additional responses to the points raised in the
ATS. In particular, Mr Tsang
argued that the claim language did not allow second or subsequent dampers to be
placed in any location
in any orientation as suggested by the Applicant.
Rather, Mr Tsang argued that the claim language requires
be located outside the planes of the glass panel and to move in a direction
parallel to the hinge axis, although Mr Tsang
noted that even if this were not
the case, it made no difference to the outcome under s40(2)(a).
Wood-Roe made similar submissions at the hearing as in the ATS. Mr Wood-Roe
disputed the need to limit the claims to one damper,
but reiterated openness to
an amendment to rectify any issues in this regard.
Does the claimed invention fail under s40(2)(a) due to
complaint 1?
my view the invention defined in claim 1 fails under s40(2)(a) due to the
recital of “at least one hydraulic damper”.
The disclosure of the
application only deals with the use of a single damper. It is difficult to see
how accommodating more than
one damper would merely be a matter of routine
experimentation. Mr Hunter’s
quite clearly indicates
this is the case. Tellingly, nothing in the EIA addresses Mr Hunter’s
evidence on this point or the
issue more generally. The suggestion in the
application
that additional
dampers could be used is little more than desiderata to be figured out by the
skilled addressee.
completeness, I note that it is unnecessary to go into whether additional
dampers must also be located outside the planes of the
glass panel. It is
simply the case that the application only provides an enabling disclosure with
respect to a single damper located
outside the planes of the glass
Complaint 2: claims do not properly define the actuating
mechanism for the hydraulic damper
is covered in the TS at [45] to [50], with passages particularly relevant to
claim 1 at [45] and [46]:
“45. Independent claim 1 does not contain any integer describing the
existence or operation of the actuating mechanism responsible
for engaging the
(single) hydraulic damper: Hunter 1, [66]. That is despite the fact that integer
1(k) specifies that the damper
must be ‘located outside of the planes
which describe the faces of the glass panel and inside the first hinge
This is a significant omission.
46. According to Mr Hunter, given the stipulations of integer 1(k), details
concerning the specific actuating mechanism to be used
to permit the damper to
be operated when located ‘outside of the plane of the glass panel and
inside the first hinge member’
represent a significant feature that is
relevant to an effective operation of the hinge: Hunter 1, [68(d)]. Despite
this, claim 1
is entirely silent about the presence and design of any such
actuating mechanism.”
also note that the TS at [48] made further arguments, based on Hunter3,
concerning features of the actuating mechanism specified
in the dependent
“48. Claim 2 introduces the feature of the hydraulic damper being
‘actuated by way of a cam’. But as Mr Hunter
explains, the only
embodiment in the Opposed Application that corresponds to independent claim 1,
being the first embodiment depicted
in Figures 1 to 5 (emphasis
... does not merely involve a ‘cam’, but rather a rotary cam fixed
to an outside of a barrel portion of the hinge member
for rotation with the
hinge member to extend through the edge recess of the glass panel and to engage
a sloped or inclined surface
provided on an end of a sleeve covering the
hydraulic damper to thereby compress the damper to its retracted condition.
In my view, the Opposed Application only describes how the hinge of Amended
Claim 1 can work by using a rotary cam fixed to an outside
of the barrel portion
for rotation with the hinge member through the edge recess of the glass panel to
engage the sloped surface
on the end of the sleeve covering the hydraulic
There is no disclosure in the Opposed Application that explains how
a skilled person should, or even could, construct the hinge with
actuating mechanism – i.e., there is no disclosure in the Opposed
Application of how the hinge would work with some
generic, otherwise undescribed
‘cam’.” (emphasis in original)
ATS responded to this:
“19. This complaint is based on an assertion that the skilled person could
not work the invention to actuate the damper of
claim 1 in any other way than by
rotary cam fixed to an outside of the barrel portion for
rotation with the hinge member through the edge of the glass panel to engage
sloped surface on the end of the sleeve covering the hydraulic
20. The opponent has put forward a very limited proposed definition for
inclusion in claim 1. The skilled person could easily devise
alternatives to the
formulation promoted by the opponent based on their own common general
knowledge. The prior art is replete with
dampener actuating mechanisms that do
not include the features proposed by the opponent.
21. Should the hearings officer find claim 1 bad for failure to adequately
define the mechanism for compressing the damper then applicant
would be amenable
to amend claim 1 to define the cam currently defined in claim 2.”
(emphasis in original)
Tsang made similar submissions at the hearing. He also suggested that the
Applicant’s arguments at [20] of the ATS were
pure assertion. Mr Wood-Roe
provided rather limited submissions on complaint 2, which would be best
characterised as a summary of
what was said on the matter in the ATS.
Does the claimed invention fail under s40(2)(a) due to
complaint 2?
Hunter’s evidence is key to this issue, particularly given nothing in the
EIA addresses this matter at all. It is worthwhile
to reproduce the relevant
passages of Hunter1:
“65. Interestingly, although features 1 (h) to 1 (k) of claim 1 of the
Accepted Application as set out above focus on features
of the specific
embodiment shown and described with reference to Figs. 1 to 5 of the Opposed
Application, claim 1 seems to be incomplete
in respect of the features of that
specific embodiment that allow the invention to work.
66. In this regard, for example, some details of the first hinge portion are set
out in claim 1 but no details of the second hinge
portion. Further, although the
first hinge portion is stated as being arranged to attach to a glass panel that
is provided with an
edge recess, there is no reference to the hinge including an
insert portion for the recess and the relevance of the edge recess is
apparent from the claim. As the components of the actuating mechanism, namely
the arm 25 with the cam 27, and the sloped surface
54 of the sleeve 53 need to
be located or arranged within the edge recess, however, this appears to be a
very significant omission.
In fact, there is no reference at all in claim 1 of
the Accepted Application to the components of the actuating mechanism in Figs.
to 5 which allow the damper to be located outside of the plane of the glass
panel and inside the first hinge member.
68. In light of the above considerations, I conclude the following in relation
to the hinge set out in claim 1 of the Accepted Application:
(d) it concerns the hinge embodiment shown in Figs. 1 to 5 of the Opposed
Application but omits significant features relevant to
an effective operation of
that hinge, including details of the second hinge portion, an insert portion for
the recess, and details
of the actuating mechanism which permit the damper to be
operated when located outside of the plane of the glass panel and inside
first hinge member.
69. For the reasons set out above, the disclosure in the Opposed Application is
not clear enough and complete enough to enable a
hinge to be implemented over
the scope of claim 1 of the Accepted Application. The Opposed Application
discloses just a single embodiment
of the hinge in claim 1 of the Accepted
Application and relevant features of that embodiment are omitted from the claim.
of the Accepted Application is therefore also not clear.”
Mr Hunter indicates that the failure to specify certain features, including the
actuating mechanism leads to a lack of clear
and complete disclosure, he uses
different language when discussing these features as opposed to the
“multiple damper issue”.
For multiple dampers, Mr Hunter clearly
states that it would require inventive
to implement the
invention with multiple dampers and that it is not apparent how this would be
implemented.
However, with
respect to the absence of details for the actuating mechanism and details of the
second hinge portion, these are called
“a very significant
the details of
which are “relevant to an effective operation of that
The difference in
language is important – one clearly indicates something beyond the routine
skill of the skilled addressee,
whilst the other simply denotes the fact that
features needed for the hinge to properly operate are not specified. The former
denotes something that is not enabled for the purposes of s40(2)(a),
while the latter
denote that something is not enabled but does not
indicate that this is necessarily the case – one may conceive of a claim
to a car that does not specify wheels or a steering wheel, which are
clearly quite significant to the operation of the car, yet the
specifically list these in the claim would not leave the claim wanting in terms
of enablement.
Similarly, Hunter3
merely states
that there is no disclosure of an actuating mechanism beyond the cam arrangement
described in the application. However,
a lack of disclosure of something does
not necessarily mean a lack of enablement. Hunter3 does not say or imply that
the skilled
addressee would not be able to implement the hinge as claimed with
other damping actuating mechanisms or that there would be some
undue burden in
fact that Mr Hunter has not referred to the details of the second hinge portion
or the actuating mechanism as leading to implementation
difficulties or further
invention by the skilled addressee means, on balance, that I am not satisfied
that the absence of these details
in the claims necessarily leads to a lack of
enablement.
Hunter’s comments in Hunter1 on the lack of details for the first and
second hinge portions with respect to working with
a glass panel with an edge
recess, is at odds with his statements in Hunter3 concerning the ubiquity of the
work with glass panels having an edge recess. This much is
apparent from [12] as cited above, but also [19] of Hunter3:
“19. In contrast to the hinge of D7, the hinge examples described in
paragraphs 12 and 13 above of this declaration have their
hinge leaves designed
for use with glass panels that have an edge recess. That is, the hinge portions
are designed for each glass
panel to be clamped or sandwiched between two parts
of the hinge portion (i.e., between a ‘hinge member’ and a
member’ in the Opposed Application) with an insert
provided to sit snugly within the edge recess between those two parts of
hinge portion. This conventional hinge leaf configuration for glass panels
having an edge recess corresponds to features 1(h)
to 1(j) of claim 1 of the
Amended Claims.”
Similar may be said for Mr Hunter’s arguments, canvassed
above, with respect to it being obvious to modify D7 so as to arrive
that is used with a glass panel having an edge recess.
Complaint 3: biasing spring mounted in a hollow barrel
portion of the hinge
is discussed in the TS as follows:
“51. Independent claim 1 does not contain any integer describing the
location of the biasing spring relative to other components
of the hinge. What
this means is that claim 1 includes within its scope hinges where the biasing
spring could be: (i) any kind of
spring (e.g. a compression spring, a leaf
spring, a torsion spring); and therefore (ii) located anywhere relative to the
other components
of the hinge, provided it is ‘arranged to bias the hinge
towards the closed condition’ as required by integer 1(f).
52. However, as Mr Hunter observes, the hinge disclosed in the Opposed
Application as the only embodiment corresponding to independent
claim 1, being
the first embodiment depicted in Figures 1 to
‘...has the biasing spring mounted in a hollow barrel portion of the
hinge. In my view, the Opposed Application only describes
how the hinge of
Amended Claim 1 can be produced with the biasing spring mounted in a hollow
barrel portion of the hinge. In other
words, there is no disclosure in the
Opposed Application of how a skilled person should, or even could, construct
such a hinge without
the biasing spring being mounted in a hollow barrel portion
of the hinge’.
53. The need to specify in claim 1 that the biasing spring is ‘mounted in
a hollow barrel portion of the hinge’ can be
demonstrated by considering
the difficulties that would be encountered by the skilled addressee in trying to
implement a hinge that
is broadly similar in construction to the first
embodiment, but in which the spring is to be located outside of the barrel
of the hinge. In its simplest form, the biasing mechanism could be
limited to the use of a spring alone i.e. without any other components
more complicated biasing mechanism. That might suggest the use of a compression
spring that is directly connected to both
hinge portions. But if such a spring
were to be used, what size spring should be used? Where would it be located? How
could it be
made to fit with the other components of the hinge in a way that
does not interfere with them? Resolving issues such as these would
involve the skilled person engaging in an undue amount of experimentation.
54. Accordingly for the above reasons at least claims 1 to 3 of the Opposed
Application are invalid because the specification of
the Opposed Application
does not disclose the invention the subject of those claims in a manner that is
‘clear enough and complete
enough’ as required by s 40(2)(a) of the
ATS responded to this issue:
“22. In this complaint, the opponent considers the difficulties that a
skilled person would have in providing spring arrangements
alternative to
mounting the spring in a hollow barrel portion of the hinge.
23. The feature of a ‘biasing spring’ is a common feature of hinges
of the type with which this invention is concerned.
The specification provides
adequate disclosure of suitable implementations of a biasing spring and the
prior art is replete with
biasing spring options. If they wished, the skilled
person could adopt the arrangement of the preferred embodiments described in
specification, or not. It is not necessary for the patent specification to
provide details of suboptimal biasing spring alternatives.”
Tsang made similar submissions at the hearing. He again suggested that the
Applicant’s arguments in response in the ATS
were pure assertion. Mr
Tsang also referred to [223] of the
“223. The concession obtained is of limited value. On its face, it asks
product. This does not
equate to the task presently under consideration, which is not a question of new
product design, but the enablement
of an invention said to have been disclosed
in a patent specification. Furthermore, conclusionary statements by experts do
any event go very far. The process of considering sufficiency of
disclosure involves an evaluation of the disclosure, in the context
and consideration of whether implementing the invention across its scope falls
on the wrong side of the line. In my view
in the present case it does.”
Wood-Roe provided rather limited submissions on complaint 3, which would be best
characterised as a rather generalised summary
of what was said on the matter in
Does the claimed invention fail under s40(2)(a) due to
complaint 3?
as for complaint 2, the problem for TCT here is that Mr Hunter’s evidence
simply refers to a lack of disclosure –
it does not actually go into or
necessarily imply that there are difficulties in implementing a biasing spring
in locations other
than the barrel of the hinge commensurate with a lack of
enablement. I respectfully agree with Justice Burley’s remarks at
, however these merely highlight the deficiencies in
TCT’s s40(2)(a) case on complaint 3, albeit from the other side of the
fence. TCT bears the onus of proof, and evidence merely stating that there is a
lack of disclosure of something does not provide
a proper basis for determining
that that lack of disclosure leads to a lack of enablement.
claim 1 and all the claims considered by Mr Hunter in drafting Hunter1 comprised
“a biasing means” rather than
“a biasing spring” but are
otherwise the same in terms of the self-closing mechanism. It is thus odd that
did not comment on the even more generic “biasing means”
in Hunter1 yet made remarks on the “biasing spring”
in the claims
after amendment in Hunter3. Although it is not determinative, [19](i) of
Hunter1 is also indicative that the use of
springs to provide a self-closing
mechanism for hinges is CGK, including the possibility of having springs
external to the hinge.
These aspects of the evidentiary material provided by Mr
Hunter further undermines TCT’s case on complaint 3.
am not satisfied that the claimed invention fails under s40(2)(a) due to
complaint 3.
Complaint 4: insert portion which locates in the edge recess
of the glass
is discussed in the TS as follows:
“55. Claims 1 to 6 do not specify the existence or use of insert portions
located in the edge recess of the glass panels. This
means that claims 1 to 6
extend to hinges where there are no such insert portions, despite integer 1(i)
specifying that the hinge
is to be ‘arranged to attach to a glass panel
which is provided with an edge recess’. The failure to specify the use
insert portions is a material omission in circumstances where the hinge is to be
used (only) for glass panels that have an edge
56. Specifically, the specification of the Opposed Application describes the
insert portions in the following passage (p 3, line
32 to page 4, line 6):
The hinge 10 is arranged to be attached to glass panels using a technique in
which the glass panels are pre-machined to provide edge
recesses in the glass
panel of known profile and locations. Insert portions 28, 38 (see figure 4)
locate in the edge recesses apertures
provided in the glass panels. The hinge
portions 20, 30 mount to the glass panels 100, 101 by sandwiching the glass
panels and insert
portions 28, 38 between the respective pairs of hinge members
21, 31 and clamping members 22, 32...
57. As Mr Hunter has noted, with respect to the hinge the subject of the amended
claims, being the first embodiment depicted in Figures
‘...the first hinge portion must necessarily include an insert portion
which locates in the edge recess of the glass. In other
words, the Opposed
Application only describes how the hinge of the Amended Claims can work by using
an insert portion which locates
in the edge recesses of the glass. There is no
disclosure in the Opposed Application that explains how a skilled person should
even could, construct the hinge without such an insert portion that locates
in the edge recess of the glass.’
58. Mr Hunter’s comments in the above passage indicate that the skilled
addressee, tasked with making of a hinge according
to any of claims 1 to 6
the use of insert portions located in the edge recess of the
glass, would be required to engage in an undue burden or an undue amount
experimentation.
59. Accordingly for the above reasons at least claims 1 to 6 of the Opposed
Application are invalid because the specification of
the Opposed Application
does not disclose the invention the subject of those claims in a manner that is
‘clear enough and complete
enough’ as required by s 40(2)(a) of the
Act.” (emphasis in original)
ATS responds to this as follows:
“24. The feature of an ‘insert portion’ is a common technique
in field of the pool hinge technology. However, other
possibilities are within
the common general knowledge of the skilled person.
25. The hinge members themselves can include formations to locate in the edge
recess of a glass panel without the need for a separate
insert portion
26. Hinges can be attached to glass panels by sandwiching the glass panel
between a hinge member and a clamping member regardless
of whether the glass has
as edge recess or not.
27. The use of insert portions is only a feature of a preferred
embodiment.”
Tsang made similar submissions at the hearing as in the TS. He again suggested
that the Applicant’s arguments in response
in the ATS were pure assertion.
Mr Wood-Roe provided rather limited submissions on complaint 4, which would be
best characterised
as a rather generalised summary of what was said on the
matter in the ATS.
Does the claimed invention fail under s40(2)(a) due to
complaint 4?
as for complaints 2 and 3, the problem for TCT here is that Mr
evidence again
simply refers to a lack of disclosure, without providing anything material on
whether that lack of disclosure leads
to a lack of enablement.
the statement by Mr Hunter that “According to my understanding, the first
hinge portion must necessarily include an
insert portion which locates in the
edge recess of the glass”
is not as helpful as TCT would perhaps like it to be. It
be taken to mean that the skilled addressee would implicitly understand that
there is an insert portion where a hinge is to operate
with an edge recess in a
glass panel. In other words this evidence in Hunter3 could be taken to mean
that the existence of an edge
recess in claim 1
the existence of
an insert portion. This wording in Hunter3 is something of a juxtaposition to
these statements from [66] of Hunter1:
“Further, although the first hinge portion is stated as being arranged to
attach to a glass panel that is provided with an
edge recess, there is no
reference to the hinge including an insert portion for the recess and the
relevance of the edge recess is
not apparent from the claim.”
Although the positions of Mr Hunter in Hunter1 and Hunter3 are not
necessarily
contradictory, Mr Hunter provides no further explanation that
assists in building a clear picture of what he means and how this leads
lack of enablement further undermines TCT’s case on complaint 4.
am not satisfied that the application is wanting under s40(2)(a) due to
complaint 4.
Clear enough and complete enough disclosure –
am satisfied that the application does not disclose the invention as claimed in
claims 1 to 7 in a manner which is clear enough
and complete enough to be
performed by a skilled addressee as these extend to embodiments comprising more
than one damper.
Support – s40(3)
requirement that the claims be supported was introduced into the
part of the
reforms. Specifically, s40(3) reads as
“(3) The claim or claims must be clear and succinct
and supported by matter disclosed in the specification.”
Perram J noted (at [170]) that with the insertion of the
support requirement by the
legislation, the previous requirement for
fair basis was no longer relevant. Justice Perram, on considering the nature of
then quoted the following passage from the
“‘[T]he terms ‘support’ and
‘full support’ pick up two concepts:
there must be a
basis in the description for each claim; and
the scope of the
claims must not be broader than is justified by the extent of the description,
drawings or contributions to the art.’”
than this Justice Perram did not elaborate further on the nature of support.
I apprehend it, the first detailed judicial consideration of support
was undertaken by Justice Burley in
Merck Sharp & Dohme
Corporation v Wyeth LLC
[2020] FCA 1477
”). After extensive analysis of the secondary
materials and the law in Europe and the United Kingdom, from [511] to [543],
Honour summarised the law on support in Australia as follows at [545] to [547]:
“545. The theme common to each ground, however, reflects what the Minister
described in his Second Reading Speech as the cornerstone
of the patent system,
namely that in exchange for a monopoly on commercialisation, the patentee must
tell the public how their idea
works. As said in the Explanatory Memorandum, in
exchange for the exclusive rights given to the patentee, the patentee must share
with the public the information necessary to make and use the invention. This is
the essential exchange between inventors and the
public which has long been a
feature of patent law in Australia: see
Lockwood No
CSR Building Products
Ltd v United States Gypsum Company
[2015] APO 72
, Dr S D Barker adopted the summary provided by Aldous J
in Schering Biotech at 252 – 253, which has been often followed
the United Kingdom (emphasis added):
‘...to decide whether the claims are supported by the description it
is necessary to ascertain what is the invention which
is specified in the claims
and then compare that with the invention which has been described in the
specification. Thereafter the
court’s task is to decide whether the
invention in the claims is supported by the description. I do not believe
that the mere
mention in the specification of features appearing in the claim
will necessarily be a sufficient support. The word “support”
means more than that and requires the description to be the base which can
fairly entitle the patentee to a monopoly of the width
547. That approach encapsulates broadly the claim support obligation
under s 40(3). To it may be added the requirement that the technical
contribution to the art must be ascertained. Where it is a product, it is that
which must be supported in the sense that the technical
contribution to the
art disclosed by the specification must justify the breath of the monopoly
approach was reiterated by his Honour at [241] of
Honour also observed in connection with his formulation of the law on support in
Australia, at [242] of
“This statement of the position has been adopted without criticism by
other judges of this Court:
Rakman International Pty Ltd v Trafalgar Group
[2022] FCA 464
166 IPR 264
Nominees Pty Ltd v Rattlejack Innovations Pty Ltd
[2022] FCA 540
, [481] (Rofe J)
It may also be added that Justice Burley’s formulation of the
law on support was undisturbed, as I understood it, in the recent
decision of
the Full Court in
Jusand Nominees Pty Ltd v Rattlejack Innovations Pty
[2023] FCAFC 178
”), being the
decision on appeal to
may be understood from the preceding discussion, the nature of support was
considered prior to any judicial reckoning in
CSR Building Products Limited v
United States Gypsum Company
[2015] APO 72
to [116], where the
delegate considered caselaw from Europe and the UK relevant to the nature of
support. After doing so the Delegate
outlined a three-step process for
assessing whether the claims are supported at [115]:
task is to:
the claims to determine the scope of the invention as claimed,
the description to determine the technical contribution to the art,
whether the claims are supported by the technical contribution to the
take the considerations of technical contribution from
congruent with the
as cited by Justice Perram in
of the approach cited above by Justice Burley from
delegate’s three step process from
provides a convenient means
of analysing support, and I shall adopt his process in this matter, although as
shall be seen, there is
little need for extensive analysis on support.
Burley provided further guidance on what “support” means at [243] to
Fuel Oils/Exxon
, (T409/91) [1994] OJ EPO 653 the EPO Boards
of Appeal said, in a passage at 3.3 that has been often cited, including by Lord
Generics UK
[Generics (UK) Ltd v H Lundbeck A/S
; [2009] All ER 955;
[2009] RPC 13]
, that: (emphasis added):
‘...[there is a] general legal principle that the extent of the patent
monopoly, as defined by the claims, should correspond
to the technical
contribution to the art in order for it to be supported, or justified... This
means that the definitions in the
claims should essentially correspond to the
scope of the invention as disclosed in the description. In other words,... the
should not extend to subject-matter which, after reading the description,
would still not be at the disposal of the person skilled in the
244 The language of ‘at the disposal of the person skilled in the
art’ should be understood to mean that the patent must
invention to be performed by such a person.
, Rofe J observed that one way for the claim impermissibly
to exceed the technical contribution to the art is for the claim to cover
of achieving the desired result which owe nothing to the patent or any principle
that it discloses: at [483].”
on what is meant by “the technical contribution to the art” is
apparent from
at [111] to [112]:
technical contribution to the art is a subtle concept that is not to be confused
with the inventive concept that is
often discussed in relation to inventive
step. The distinction was explained by Lord Walker in
‘The expressions are certainly connected, but I do not think it is
generally) to treat
them as having precisely the same meaning. “Inventive concept” is
concerned with the identification
of the core (or kernel, or essence) of the
invention – the idea or principle, of more or less general application
Kirin-Amgen
[2004] UKHL 46
[2005] RPC 9
paras 112-113) which entitles the inventor's achievement to be called inventive.
The invention's technical contribution to the art
is concerned with the
evaluation of its inventive concept – how far forward has it carried the
state of the art? The inventive
concept and the technical contribution may
command equal respect but that will not always be the case.’
112. In the same case Lord Neuberger of Abbotsbury described the technical
contribution at [95] as:
‘in the context of a simple product claim such as the present
(especially where the claim is to a single chemical product),
the technical
contribution is (at least in the absence of special factors) the product itself.
As I have suggested, the technical
contribution can often be equated with
non‑obvious novelty – what is new to the art and not obvious is
really another
way of identifying the technical contribution.’”
can be seen that the requirement for the claims to be supported by the technical
contribution to the art includes within its ambit
a requirement that the claims
be enabled, in the sense understood under s40(2)(a), by subject matter in the
description and drawings.
This is due to the fact that a failure to do so
would, in the parlance of
, result in the claim extending
“...to subject-matter which, after reading the description, would still
not be at the disposal
of the person skilled in the art.” Hence a claim
which is not enabled by the description is not supported by the technical
contribution to the art and therefore lacks support under s40(3).
as also apparent from the above, the support requirement is not a mere
reiteration of s40(2)(a). The enabling disclosure
requires consideration of the
claims in isolation from the remainder of the specification – that is, the
enablement must come
from the description and drawings. This contrasts with
s40(2)(a) where the enabling disclosure comes from the entire specification.
observed in
“The requirement in s 40(2)(a) is often referred to as the
sufficiency obligation whilst the requirement in s 40(3) is
to as the support requirement. The sufficiency requirement requires
that the patentee should sufficiently disclose in the specification
perform the invention. The support requirement requires that the claims defining
the patent should themselves be supported
by what appears in the specification.
In many cases these obligations may tend to be the same since they are
describing the same
relationship although viewed from the differing perspectives
of the claims and the specification. As Burley J has observed in
Sharp & Dohme Corporation v Wyeth LLC (No 3)
[2020] FCA 1477
Merck Sharp
’) at [543], they may often be viewed
as two sides of the same coin. But they may nevertheless sometimes differ as
Birss J (as
his Lordship then was) explained in
Illumina Cambridge Ltd v
Latvia MGI Tech SIA
[2021] EWHC 57 (Pat)
’) at [255].”
may also be gleaned from the above, it is also the case that the requirement to
not exceed the technical contribution to the art
requires consistency between
the invention described and the invention claimed, which can result in a lack of
support even if the
claim is otherwise enabled. This was expressed by Justice
Nicholas as follows in
Calix Limited v Grenof Pty Ltd
171 IPR 582
”) at [128]:
“Although discussion of s 40(3) is often focused on the breath
of the claim, there may be some claims which lack support not
because they are too broad, but because they define an invention that
materially different to what is described in the body of the specification.
Hence, a claim that includes a feature not disclosed
in the specification, or
omits a feature that is disclosed, may lack support because the invention
claimed is materially different
from the invention disclosed. Whether or not the
claim will lack support in such circumstances will depend on the proper
characterisation
of the invention disclosed in the body of the specification and
the invention claimed. See, for example, the invention described
in the relevant
priority document and the invention claimed in AstraZeneca at
[254]-[255]
[AstraZeneca AB v Apotex Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC
226 FCR 324
107 IPR 177]
characterised by the Full Court of the Federal Court as ‘fundamentally
different’ inventions. It is difficult
to see how a claim to an invention
that is fundamentally different from that which is disclosed in the
specification could be ‘supported
by matter disclosed’ in accordance
with s 40(3) of the Act.” (emphasis added)
TCT’s support arguments
as for s40(2)(a), TCT’s support arguments are couched in terms of four
“complaints” as follows:
complaint 1:
that the claims encompass multiple dampers, when the application only discloses
embodiments with a single damper;
complaint 2:
that claims cover every means of compressing the hydraulic damper, when there is
only disclosure in the application of
the actuating mechanism being a rotary cam
fixed to an outside of the barrel portion for rotation with the hinge member
through the
edge recess of the glass panel to engage the sloped surface on the
end of the sleeve covering the hydraulic damper;
complaint 3:
that claims 1 to 3 do not properly define the location of the biasing spring
relative to other components of the hinge
when the application only discloses
the biasing spring being mounted in a hollow barrel portion of the hinge;
complaint 4:
that claims 1 to 6 do not properly define the existence or use of insert
portions in the edge recess of the glass panel
when the application only
discloses embodiments with such insert portions.
shall consider each of these complaints below.
Do any of the claims fail for lack of support?
can be seen from the mere listing of the complaints, the discussion of these
“complaints” in the
shows that TCT’s
support “complaints” essentially mirror those made under s40(2)(a).
While complaint 2 is framed
in somewhat different terms from complaint 2 under
s40(2)(a), the TS
indicates that
complaint 2 under support is made for essentially the same reasons as complaint
2 under s40(2)(a). Similarly, complaints
1, 3 and 4 essentially rely upon the
reasoning made with regard to their respective complaints under s40(2)(a).
Similarly, the ATS
essentially
relies upon arguments made with respect to s40(2)(a), although [31] to [34]
comprised a discussion concerning the technical
contribution in view of
that did not appear to be in reply to anything in the TS.
the hearing, Mr Tsang noted that a finding under s40(2)(a) would lead to a
corresponding finding under support. He also spent
some time on the principles
to be applied (perhaps in view of some of the ATS discussion involving
), as well as responding to some other matters in the ATS
concerning the means to compress the damper. Other than this, Mr Tsang
less relied upon the corresponding arguments made under s40(2)(a). For support,
Mr Wood-Roe essentially reiterated the arguments
concerning means of compressing
the damper from the ATS.
the congruence with the arguments presented under s40(2)(a), there is no need
for me to go into detailed analysis for support.
I agree with Mr Tsang that in
the present circumstances the conclusions reached under s40(2)(a) will lead to
the same findings under
support. It follows that I am satisfied that complaint
1 leads to claims 1 to 7 lacking support as they extend to hinges with more
one damper, whilst none of the other complaints lead to support
Support – conclusion
am satisfied that all of the claims lack support. The Opponent has been
successful in making out this ground of opposition.
18(1)(c) requires a claimed invention to be “useful”. Section 7A
was introduced with the
, and defines the meaning of
“useful” as follows:
“(1) For the purposes of this Act, an invention is taken not to be
useful unless a specific, substantial and credible use
for the invention (so far
as claimed) is disclosed in the complete specification.
(2) The disclosure in the complete specification must be sufficient for
that specific, substantial and credible use to be appreciated
by a person
skilled in the relevant art.
(3) Subsection (1) does not otherwise affect the meaning of the
in this Act.”
effect of subsection 3 is such that the insertion of section 7A adds the
specific, substantial and credible use criteria to the
existing case law on
utility, rather than displacing the same. This is apparent from the
Explanatory Memorandum
“The specific, substantial and credible use test is not intended to
displace the existing Australian case law on usefulness.
An invention must have
both a specific, substantial and credible use that is disclosed in the patent
specification
meet the requirements of the existing case law (broadly
that the invention must achieve the promised benefit).
The item bolsters the existing requirement that the claimed invention be useful
with the requirement that the invention has a specific,
substantial and credible
use. The intent is that specific, substantial and credible be given the same
meaning as is currently given
by the US courts and the United States Patent and
Trade Mark Office (USPTO).
Currently, the US courts interpret the terms as follows:
means a use specific to the subject matter claimed and can ‘provide a
well-defined and particular benefit
to the public.’
‘substantial’
means the claimed invention does not require further research to identify or
reasonably confirm a ‘real
world use’. ‘An application must
show that an invention is useful to the public as disclosed in its current form,
that it prove useful at some future date after further research’
an asserted use
will be ‘credible’ ‘unless there is evidence that the
invention is inoperative (i.e. does not operate
to produce the results claimed
by the patent application) or there is reason to doubt the objective truth of
the statements in the
specification.’”
(emphasis in original, footnotes removed)
terms of the existing case law on utility, the Full Court of the Federal Court
provided a useful summary at [119] to [121] of
Artcraft Urban Group Pty Ltd v
Streetworx Pty Ltd
[2016] FCAFC 29
245 FCR 485
117 IPR 210:
“119. It is ‘no objection’ to the validity of an innovation
patent granted under the Act that it is ‘commercially
impracticable’. The utility of the patent depends upon whether,
by following the teaching of the specification, the
is produced:
Advanced Building Systems Pty Ltd v Ramset
Fasteners (Aust) Pty Ltd
[1998] HCA 19
(1998) 194 CLR 171
Brennan CJ, Gaudron, McHugh and Gummow JJ adopting and citing
Kensington & Knightsbridge Electric Lighting Co
[1892] UKLawRpCh 139
[1892] 3 Ch 424
at 430‑431.
120. The ‘basic principle’ of inutility is that if an invention
‘does what it is intended by the patentee to do,
and the end attained is
itself useful, the invention is a useful invention’:
(1896) 13 RPC 398
, Lindley LJ at 405, adopted by Gummow
J as a correct statement of principle in
Rehm Pty Ltd v Websters
Security Systems (International) Pty Ltd
(1988) 81 ALR 79
at 96 (“Rehm”). What the invention is
‘intended’ to do is a matter to be gathered from ‘title
the whole of the specification’:
Gummow J at 96.
121. Put another way, the two questions are: first, what is the promise of the
invention derived from the whole of the specification?;
second, by following the
teaching of the specification, does the invention, as claimed in the patent,
attain the result promised
for it by the patentee?:
Corporation Pty Ltd v Dart Industries Inc
[1988] FCA 399
(1988) 13 IPR 385
Décor v Dart
’), Lockhart J (in
the Full Court);
Welcome Real‑Time SA v Catuity
[2001] FCA 445
(2001) 113 FCR 110
, Heerey J;
Lundbeck A/S v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2009] FCAFC 70
(2009) 177 FCR 151
Ranbaxy Australia Pty Ltd v Warner‑Lanbert Co
[2008] FCAFC 82
(2008) 77 IPR 449
, Emmett, Weinberg and
Bennett JJ. Further, ‘everything’ that is within the scope of a
claim must be useful, that is,
attain the result promised for the invention by
the patentee:
at 172 [81], Emmett J.”
The parties’ utility submissions
I understood it, TCT’s arguments were based wholly on the claimed
invention not meeting three alleged promises of the invention
as described.
These promises are said to be:
damper resulting in more significant
damper travel by locating the damper outside the plane of the
damper travel by altering the damper
orientation.
occupying some length in the TS, TCT’s arguments that the claims fail to
meet the first promise essentially rests on:
“94. ...the assumption that using a longer damper
deliver a greater damping effect. That assumption is incorrect. As Mr Hunter
explains at Hunter 1, [47]:
...I would observe that the ‘damping effect’ or the damping force
exerted by the hydraulic damper is not expected to
be influenced by the length
of the damper, but rather by a range of other factors,
the diameter of the
damper, the resistance to flow of hydraulic fluid within the damping cylinder,
due to the viscosity of
the hydraulic fluid and/or the relative constriction of the fluid flow by the
aperture size vis-à-vis
piston size inside the damper cylinder, the
frictional properties of the damper piston inside the damper cylinder, and the
of the piston within the cylinder of the
arguments for the second and third promises also rely on more or less the same
matters as discussed in Mr Hunter’s
promise is not met by all hinges within the
scope of the claims, for essentially the same reasons as discussed above in
to the first promise. In short, as Mr Hunter states (at Hunter 1,
‘... damper travel is determined by the stroke length that the actuating
mechanism is able to impart on the hydraulic
cylinder.’”
“110. This third promise is also not met for essentially the same reasons
given in relation to the second promise above. In
(a) damper travel is determined by the stroke length that an actuating mechanism
is able to impart on the hydraulic cylinder (see
paragraph 102 above), not by
simply having a longer damper (see paragraph 105 above);
(b) though there may be a way of increasing the damper’s stroke length by
implementing an actuating mechanism that specifically
does this for a damper
orientated parallel to the hinge axis, no such way (i.e. no such mechanism) is
described in the Opposed Application
and it would require a different hinge
design (see paragraph 104 above);
(c) accordingly, claim 1’s requirement that the damper be ‘moves in
a direction which is substantially parallel to the
hinge axis’ does not,
of itself, deliver the professed advantage of a longer damper stroke;
(d) accordingly claims 1 to 7 of the Opposed Application lack
Applicant responded to these arguments at [43] to [51] of the ATS. The
following I consider to be sufficiently representative
of these passages:
“44. At para 94 it is explained that Mr Hunter is of the view that
‘the damping effect exerted by the hydraulic damper is not expected to
be influenced by the length of the damper’.
Applicant does not agree
with this statement. It is well known that the energy absorbed by a damper is
the ‘work’ that
needs to be done in moving the damper. This is
schoolboy physics and is calculated by the resistive force of the damper
by the distance travelled. A damper of longer length can absorb more
energy over its range of travel than a damper of shorter length,
properties being equal.”
(emphasis in original)
“46. At para 97
has also stated that
‘the stroke length L .... is not increased by
increasing a length of the damper.’
This statement is also true in the
absence of making any other modifications, itself, but it overlooks the fact
that the increase
in stroke length has been achieved by mounting the damper
outside of the recess in the glass. This modification has enabled use of
longer damper with a longer stroke. As explained in the evidence of the
inventor, a 40% increase in stroke length has been
(emphasis in
Tsang reiterated TCT’s position in the TS at the hearing but also referred
to the requirement for everything that fell within
the scope of the claim to
meet the promised benefit. Mr Wood-Roe made brief comments that more or less
reflected the position put
in the ATS.
Do any of the claims lack utility?
it may be trite, a key issue here is, firstly, what is the promised benefit? In
that regard, it is helpful to reproduce
the passages from the application cited
by TCT in support of its utility arguments:
“The damper 51 is not mounted inside the insert component. As best seen in
figure 3, it is mounted outside of the glass panel,
to one side of the glass
panel in a well in one of the hinge members. This means that the length of the
damper is not constrained
to fit inside the inert
, which in turn
must fit inside the edge aperture formed in the glass panel. This
of a damper of longer length
, which can provide a more
significant damping effect when compared with damper of shorter
“It can be seen that embodiments of the invention have at least one of the
following advantages:
The hydraulic
damper is mounted in a cavity in one of the hinge members and lies outside of
the plane of the panel.
This further allows for longer damper travel when
compared with hinges in which the dampers are mounted inside one of the hinge
and further improves the predictability of the speed and
smoothness of the closing action.
The hydraulic
damper is mounted so that it moves in a direction which is parallel to the hinge
This allows for longer damper travel in a smaller assembly
turn spreads the resistance force over a longer distance for a more predictable
and smoother closing
may be apparent from the passages emphasised above, the promised benefit is not
simply to provide a better damping action
as expressed in
TCT’s three “promises”, but to
for the use of a
longer damper, with the consequent advantages associated with that, compared to
hinges which have the damper located
within the planes of the glass panel and
orientated perpendicular to the hinge axis – to be clear, the promised
with respect to known hinges that are used in conjunction with a
glass panel with an edge recess. Although coming from a small proportion
description, my reading of the application as a whole indicates that these
passages serve to accurately highlight the promised
benefit of the application
as I have formulated it. I have no reason to believe, based on the evidence in
the TCT opposition, that
everything falling with the claims as they stand would
not achieve this promise.
am not satisfied that any of the claims lack utility. TCT has been unsuccessful
on this ground of opposition.
Best method – s40(2)(aa)
requirement that an application disclose the best method of performing the
invention is given at s40(2)(aa) of the
, which reads as
“(2) A complete specification must:
...(aa) disclose the best method known to the applicant of performing the
invention;...”.
requirement to provide the best method was present in the
legislation, although it was incorporated with considerations of
sufficiency under s40(2)(a). The
legislation carved off best
method from s40(2)(a) into new subsection 40(2)(aa). The consideration of
best method is otherwise the
same pre- and post-
, as is clear from
item 8 of the
. As noted in
Pfizer Overseas
Pharmaceuticals v Eli Lilly and Company
[2005] FCAFC 224
225 ALR 416
, the best method requirement means an applicant needs to include
the best method known to them of performing the invention at the
time of filing
the application.
Importantly,
the “invention” for best method purposes “...is the embodiment
which is described and around which
the claims are drawn...”:
Intellectual Property AB v Quarry Mining & Construction Equipment Pty
[2017] FCAFC 138
348 ALR 156
126 IPR 427
”) at [94];
Kimberly-Clark Australia Pty
Ltd v Arico Trading International Pty Ltd
[2001] HCA 8
177 ALR 460
Kimberly-Clark
Zoetis Services LLC v Boehringer Ingelheim Animal Health USA Inc
[2024] FCAFC 145
[14]. Unsurprisingly, it is important to understand the particular
circumstances of each case when assessing best method:
Les Laboratoires Servier v Apotex Pty Ltd
[2016] FCAFC 27
”) at [103]:
“The authorities that have dealt
with s 40(2)(a)
precedents and equivalents, must be understood in context. The first, and most
important, factor is the nature of the invention
being described and claimed.
Servier divides this simply into products and processes but that is not
sufficient. It is necessary
to understand the invention itself in order to
appreciate what is required of an inventor by way of disclosure in the
specification
in order to secure a monopoly from the public. In some cases, the
claim to a product will require no description of the method of
obtaining it and
it can be left to the skilled worker (as in
). In other cases, the
product claim, properly understood, will require sufficient directions in order
to obtain the monopoly.”
line with comments made by the delegate in
British American Tobacco
(Investments) Limited v Phillip Morris Products S.A.
[2019] APO 40
the “best method” requirement is rarely let out of its box to
trouble patent applicants and patentees, though it clearly
had some bite in
Kineta, Inc.
[2017] APO 45
Deputy Commissioner canvassed some of the relevant case law on best method,
Expo-Net Danmark A/S v Buono-Net Australia Pty
[2011] FCA 710.
After doing so the Deputy Commissioner
posed a process for determining the best method requirement at [29] as
“It is clear that I need to consider three matters:
is the invention for which a best method must be provided;
method is described in the specification; and
the applicant aware of a better method?”
The parties’ best method submissions
arguments concerning the claimed invention and best method are provided in the
TS as follows:
“84. As noted at paragraph 26 above, the claims of the Opposed Application
include hinges having two or more hydraulic dampers.
85. A hinge featuring more than one hydraulic damper would undoubtedly be a more
‘perfect or complex embodiment’ of the
Opposed Application’s
invention. This is because, all other things being equal, a hinge that relies on
the compression of two
hydraulic dampers rather than one would be expected to
deliver a greater damping effect. Accordingly, the Applicant was under an
obligation at the filing date to disclose such an embodiment.
86. Yet there is simply no disclosure in the specification of the Opposed
Application as to how such an embodiment is to be performed.
87. Accordingly, the Applicant has failed to disclose the best method of
performing the invention the subject of claims 1 to 7 of
the Opposed
Application.
88. Claims 1 to 7 are therefore invalid pursuant to s 40(2)(aa) of the
response in the ATS occupies a single paragraph at [42]:
“Opponent hypothesises that a hinge with two dampers would be a more
perfect embodiment than using a single damper. It is purely
speculation on the
part of the opponent. There is no evidence to suggest that applicant has
concealed a best method. The embodiments
described and illustrated in the
specification all represented the best methods of performing the invention.
Applicant rejects this
complaint.”
the hearing, Mr Tsang reiterated the arguments from the TS, adding that the
disclosure of only a single damper in the provisional
application was further
alleged proof that the Applicant knew of a better way of performing the
invention at the time of filing.
Mr Wood-Roe provided rather limited
submissions that were essentially a reiteration of what was said in the
Has there been a failure to disclose the best method
agree with the Applicant. There is simply nothing, let alone any evidence, that
points to the Applicant knowing of a better method
of performing the invention
at the time of filing the application. The fact the claims extend to more than
one damper is not evidence
that the Applicant
better way of performing the invention but has withheld it.
am not satisfied that the Applicant has failed to disclose the best method of
performing the invention. This ground of opposition
by TCT has been
unsuccessful.
Conclusion on the Reg 5.23 request
the material sought to be introduced via Reg 5.23 does not assist in making out
any ground of opposition, I refuse TCT’s
request under Reg 5.23.
Conclusion on the TCT opposition
under s40(2)(a) and support under s40(3) have been made out with respect to all
the claims. No other grounds of opposition
are made out. The TCT opposition is
successful.
allow the Applicant two (2) months from the date of this decision to propose
amendments overcoming the deficiencies identified in
this decision.
Costs for the TCT opposition
usually follow the event. I see no reason to do otherwise in the TCT
opposition. I award costs against the Applicant according
to Schedule 8 of the
Regulations.
THE POLARIS OPPOSITION
the Polaris SGP, Polaris pursued grounds under:
s18(1)(b)(i) – the invention as claimed is not novel in view of the prior
art base as it existed before the priority
date of the claims;
s18(1)(b)(ii) – the invention as claimed is not inventive in view of the
prior art base as it existed before the
priority date of the claims;
the specification does not comply with s40(3), in that the claims are not clear
and succinct;
the specification does not comply with s40(3), in that the claims are not
supported by matter in the specification;
s18(1)(c) – the claimed invention lacks utility;
the specification does not comply with s40(2)(a); and
the specification does not comply with s40(2)(aa).
the above grounds s40(2)(a), best method, support, inventive step (based on a
deferred priority date) and utility were pursued
in the PS and at the hearing.
My consideration of Polaris’s opposition is accordingly confined to these
Who is the skilled addressee?
have considered the nature of the skilled addressee above in connection with my
discussion of TCT’s
opposition,
which I will not
repeat here.
was little discussion by the parties on the nature of the skilled addressee,
either in the written submissions or at the hearing.
The nature of the skilled
addressee, and the suitability of the expert declarants to represent the same,
was simply absent in written
and oral submissions by the Applicant. Polaris has
only commented briefly on the skilled addressee at [14] and [15] of the PS,
it is argued that Mr Schroder falls within the description of the same.
No comment has been provided by Polaris concerning the suitability
Applicant’s experts to represent the skilled addressee.
see no reason not to adopt the formulation of the skilled addressee as for the
TCT opposition, namely that from
which I repeat here for
convenience: “...a person engaged in, or who has experience in, the design
of mechanical devices and,
in particular, in respect of hinges used in domestic
and commercial applications”. I note this is identical to the skilled
addressee as formulated at [14] of the PS.
the lack of disagreement, I have reviewed the declarations, and, where given,
the CVs provided by each of the expert declarants
and I am satisfied that each
is able, at least in some way, to adequately represent the views of the skilled
addressee as I have
defined it. In this regard I note that:
Mr Schroder has
a Bachelor of Technology in Industrial Design, commenced working in that field
in 2002 and was still actively working
in this field at the time Schroder1 was
Mr Schroder’s
industrial design experience includes running his own business since 2017, where
he as provided services to
Polaris regarding soft close hinges for glass pool
Mr Schroder’s
business is “...inclusive of concept generation, detailed CAD design,
technical documentation for manufacturing,
procurement, assembly and testing
followed by final
installation”.
Schroder’s experience also extends to hingers and latches more
Mr Murauer is a
director of the Applicant and has worked for/in the Applicant for about 25 years
designing and manufacturing tools
and mechanical
components.
Mr Murauer has not
provided a CV/resume and does not claim any formal qualifications but states
that he is a mechanical engineer,
as well as being the inventor for the opposed
application.
Mr Graham is an
owner and operator of Lox Locking Pty Ltd, a company that “designs and
distributes various items of door hardware
including door and gate locks,
cabinet locks and latches, door closers and door
retainers”.
Mr Graham has
a Bachelor of Education (Industrial Arts) and has gained extensive knowledge and
understanding of doors, gates and
their associated hardware through his line of
Particularly
given the lack of dispute, I do not propose to make any general statements or
conclusions here about the relative suitability
of any of the experts to
represent the skilled addressee. Suffice to state that where the declarants
disagree on a factual point
that I intend to rely upon, or where I seek to make
findings of fact based on the expert evidence, it will be up to me to weigh each
declarant’s evidence accordingly in view of the particular context
concerned and their skills, knowledge and experience.
The invention as described and claimed
have considered the invention as described
I refer to those
passages and do not see any need to repeat those here.
terms of the claims, I similarly repeat what I have said on those
However, I will
reproduce claim 1 below, annotated with integer numbers according to the
numbering used by Polaris in its submissions.
I do this merely as a matter of
convenience for myself writing the Polaris opposition and to hopefully make it
easier to read for
1.0 A hinge including:
1.1 a first hinge portion;
1.2 a second hinge portion;
1.3 a biasing spring; and
1.4 at least one hydraulic damper;
1.5 the first and second hinge portions are connected together and are arranged
to pivot with respect to one another about a hinge
axis between an open
condition and a closed condition;
1.6 the biasing spring is arranged to bias the hinge towards the closed
1.7 in use the at least one hydraulic damper is compressed from an extended
condition to a retracted condition as the hinge moves
from the open condition to
the closed condition;
1.8 the first hinge portion includes a first hinge member, and a first clamping
1.9 the hinge is arranged to attach to a glass panel which is provided with an
edge recess, the first hinge portion is arranged to
attach to the glass panel by
sandwiching the glass panel between the first hinge member and the first
clamping member;
1.10 and when attached to the panel in use the at least one damper is located
outside of the planes which describe the faces of the
glass panel and inside the
first hinge member; and
1.11 wherein the damper moves in a direction which is substantially parallel to
the hinge axis.
Best method – s40(2)(aa)
have outlined the relevant principles concerning the best method requirement
above at in connection with the TCT
opposition.
I refer to those
passages and do not see any need to repeat these here.
The parties’ best method submissions
best method attack is premised on several alleged “missing” features
not being disclosed in the application,
which are said to be known to the
Applicant and provide for a better method of performing the invention. These
features are:
a) damper adjusters;
b) lugs of an insert portion; and
c) a method of slidably installing the hinge by loosening and tightening bolts.
supported its best method contentions with respect to features a) to c) by
reference to AU 2021900297 (“
application
”), being a provisional application filed by the Applicant
on 9 February 2021, which Polaris maintained established the Applicant
better damper adjusters before the filing date of the present Application. At
the hearing I noted that D12 did not actually
appear to be filed in evidence,
being a document that accompanied the amended Polaris SGP.. Polaris’s
representatives indicated
to me that they were relying on the direction made, on
28 July 2022, in connection with the initial Polaris SGP as originally filed
bring D12 into evidence. The direction concerned is a standard one made by the
Commissioner which specifies that all documents
that accompany the
SGP are treated as EIS. Such a direction is made to obviate
irritating technicalities that occur when a document discussed in expert
evidence in the EIS and filed with the initial SGP is not itself filed in the
EIS. It is appropriate to make such a direction,
Commissioner’s standard practice, since the direction always occurs during
the period to file EIS. Conversely, these
directions cannot be taken to
provide, nor were they ever intended to result in, an endless backdoor to file
“new” evidence
when an amended SGP is filed. Such a situation is
clearly contrary to notions of procedural fairness and to Regulations 5.8 and
5.9, which respectively provide for strict evidentiary time periods and
extensions to the same. To be fair to Polaris’s representatives,
the issue to be one of simple confusion over the effect of amending the SGP on
the documents accompanying it, particularly
as I was advised at the hearing that
Polaris’s representatives were aware D12 would not be appropriate as
the hearing I indicated to the parties that I would give the matter more thought
and write to them if necessary. Procedurally,
D12 can be introduced via Reg
5.23, and while I did not explicitly discuss Reg 5.23 in connection with D12 at
the hearing, the hearing
otherwise proceeded as though D12 was in evidence.
Consequently, I will approach D12 in a similar way as for D7 in the TCT
opposition,
albeit without an actual Reg 5.23 request being made by one of the
also relied upon CS-9 in connection with its best method attack, as this
document more explicitly illustrated the damper adjusters
, which appear
unlabelled in figure 4 of D12 and without any discussion in the description of
D12. Schroder1 at [43] to [46] indicates
that CS-9 relates to a commercially
available version of the invention that was publicly available before the
application was filed
and had not substantially changed since its launch into
the Australian market. None of this was disputed in the EIA, the APS or
Wood-Roe at the hearing. I accept, based on Mr Schroder’s evidence, and
the lack of disagreement by the Applicant, that
CS-9 is in fact related to a
commercialised version of the invention that has not substantially changed since
to Polaris’s best method arguments themselves, these extend from [32] to
[51] of the PS. Primarily, these are directed
towards the “Damper
adjusters” feature. Polaris’s argument with respect to this feature
is that it provides “...predictable
degrees of damping to the hinge when
biased from the open position to the closed
Polaris goes
on to state in the PS:
“40. The damper adjuster is central to the invention of the Opposed
Application. The Opposed Application outlines in the Background
section that:
However, it has been found that the damping action of these hydraulic dampers is
somewhat variable and it can be difficult to achieve
the desired damping
characteristics.
41. As the damper adjuster provides predictability in relation to the damping
characteristic of the damper, as indicated by the integer
printed or embossed on
the damper adjuster
, the damper
adjuster provides a solution to the problem defined in the background section of
the Opposed Application and thus goes
toward the objective of the alleged
invention. The Opponent submits that given the nature of the problem to be
addressed by the alleged
, the damper adjuster
ought to have been in the Opposed Application to satisfy the best method
requirements.”
Opponent submits that the failure to disclose the damper adjuster, which:
a. was known to
the Applicant at the filing date of the Opposed Application as forming, or part
of, the best method of performing
the invention;
b. was present
in Figure 4 of the 297 Application filed 3 months before the Opposed
Application; and
c. is present in the Applicant’s commercialised embodiment of the Opposed
Application,
is sufficient to establish the Opponent’s best method ground of
opposition.”
McDonald made similar submissions at the hearing, and in particular pointed to
Mr Schroder’s evidence at [45] of Schroder1
as to the centrality of the
damper adjusters to the invention:
“I was then asked whether the Atlantic Soft Close Hinge that was marketed
in the first half of 2021 and prior to 10 May 2021
was different to the hinge as
described and depicted in the Opposed Application. It is my understanding that
the Atlantic Soft Close
Hinge was always sold with multiple dampener
adjustments. The dampener adjustments could be interchanged with the hinge to
the dampening action of the hinge. The dampener adjustment allows for
customised dampening which, in my view, appears quite important
to addressing
the problem of customising the dampening action of the hinge. I note that the
Opposed Application does not disclose
a dampener adjustment or multiple
interchangeable dampener adjustments.”
respect to features b) and c), these were not discussed by Ms McDonald at all at
the hearing, Polaris being content to rely upon
its written submissions
concerning these features. These extend from [44] to [49] of the PS, where
Polaris asserts that both these
features are disclosed in D12. The PS goes on
to state at [49]:
“As the 297 Application was filed approximately 3 months prior to the
filing date of the Opposed Application, and the fact
that the current
installation instructions of the Atlantic Soft Close Hinge continue to depict
the lugs and the slidable installation
method, indicates that the Applicant has
withheld the disclosure of the best method of performing the alleged invention,
the best method of installation. The fact that the Applicant was very
aware of the importance of these features which improve the
performance of the alleged invention is highlighted by the Applicant proceeding
to file a provisional application, the
297 Application, approximately 3 months
prior to the filing date of the Opposed Application. Furthermore, the nature and
of these features is highlighted by the Applicant continuing to file
Australian Patent Application No. 2022200698 on 3 February 2022
priority to the 297 Application. As the underlying premise of the patent system
is the disclosure of a novel and non-obvious
invention, it cannot be argued that
these features were minor or routine developments. Rather, the features relating
to the lugs
and the slidable installation method were extremely important
features of the Applicant’s alleged invention at the filing date
Opposed Application.”
Applicant’s response in the
is essentially that feature
a) does not relate to the “invention” for best method purposes.
This is perhaps best exemplified
by the following:
“16. The present invention relates to a new configuration of a damper in a
hinge which allows a greater range of damper travel
to make the performance of
the hinge more predictable. So, for example, if an installer were installing a
number of pool gates of
the same type, they could be confident that the degree
of damping would be consistent. So, if using the adjusters, then once an
of a particular rating (12, 15 etc) is determined as suitable for one
weight of door, then it will be likely that this adjustment
will suit all gates
of the same weight, due to the inherent consistency of operation that has
already been provided by the longer
damper stroke.
17. The advantages of the invention are not provided by the adjusters, they are
provided by mounting the dampers in a manner that
they are not constrained in
size by the recess in the glass to enable a longer stroke.
18. Mr Schroder at para 45 explains that he believes the adjusters address the
problem of ‘customising the dampening action
of the hinge’. However
the present invention is not aimed at a problem of customisation, it is aimed at
a problem of inconsistent
operation, which is addressed by providing a damper of
longer stroke. These are not the same problem.
19. The beneficial effect of the present invention does not rely on the
provision of damper adjusters. It relies on providing a damper
with a longer
stroke and the best method known to the inventor of achieving this has been
disclosed in the complete specification.”
Applicant’s response concerning features b) and c) is encapsulated at [20]
of the APS:
“At para 44 opponent draws attention to some other features in the
‘297 application that are not seen in the present
application as follows:
‘Lugs of in
– these lugs are a standard feature of the ‘mouse
ear cutout’ system for attaching hinges to glass pool hinges and
well known to the skilled person. In fact, they are seen in figure 4 of the
present application, pointed to by reference
numeral 28.
‘A method of slidably installing the hinge’
particular method of installing a hinge by loosening and tightening bolts. This
method of installing the hinge is unrelated
to the present invention. These
method steps have no bearing on the damping operation of the hinge. This is a
separate invention
which was the subject of the ’297 application.”
(emphasis in original)
Wood-Roe made similar submissions at the hearing, whilst also making further
submissions concerning the lack of EIS on the best
method issue.
Has there been a failure to disclose the best method
I may not necessarily agree with how it has been articulated, I substantially
agree with the Applicant’s position. In
my opinion, the invention which
is described and around which the claims are drawn, clearly concerns a hinge for
a glass panel with
a recess wherein the damper is located outside the planes of
the glass panel and moves in a direction substantially parallel to the
axis. The point of this, as indicated in the application, is to provide for
longer damper travel compared to a hinge without
the damper orientated/located
in this way, which in turn leads to a smoother and more predictable closing
The benefits and
solution of the invention extend specifically from the orientation and placement
of the damper in the hinge in
the manner described in the application. Nothing
any way informs or affects the manner or way in which the damper is located
outside the planes of the glass panel and moves in a
direction substantially
parallel to the hinge axis.
language used by both Polaris and Mr Schroder betray a departure from a proper
understanding of the invention for the purposes
of best method. This can be
seen at [45] of Schroder1, where Mr Schroder refers to “...addressing the
problem of customising
the dampening action of the hinge” and [41] of the
PS, which refers to the damper adjuster providing a solution to the problem
defined in the background section of the application. While the problem to be
solved may inform the nature of the invention disclosed,
it is not to the point
to simply equate
that solves the same problem, or leads to a
similar outcome, as something that must be disclosed for the purposes of best
The starting point is, of course, what is the “invention”,
not what problem it has solved or what effect is provided
by the invention. The
fact that Polaris’s position is little more than its own apagoge is
demonstrated by the fact that it
would require an inventor, who has
simultaneously developed different inventions to solve the same problem, to file
every such invention
in the one application.
am not satisfied that the Applicant has failed to disclose the best method of
performing the invention. This ground of opposition
by Polaris has been
unsuccessful.
have outlined the relevant principles concerning utility above in connection
with the TCT opposition.
refer to those passages and do not see any need to repeat these here.
The parties’ utility submissions
thrust of Polaris’s utility attack is provided at [56] of the PS:
“The Opponent relies on two arguments in support of its lack of utility
ground of opposition:
a. All of the claims of the Opposed Application lack utility because they fail
to meet the promise of the invention, being to improve
the predictability of the
speed and smoothness of the hinge when it moves from the open position to the
closed position; and
b. Claims 1 to 3 of the Opposed Application lack utility as they cover means
that will not work.”
in support of these are then developed in the PS at [57] to [64]. At [59] of
the PS, Polaris points to page 9 of the application
to support its contention
“...the objective of the alleged invention is to improve the
predictability of the speed and smoothness of the hinge when it
moves from the
open position to the closed
then leads to the crux of the argument in the PS concerning failure to meet the
“61. The Opposed Application allegedly achieves this
through the
requirement that the hydraulic damper be mounted so that it moves in a direction
which is parallel to the hinge axis
and lies outside of the plane of the panel.
The Opponent submits that this requirement does not address the objective of the
invention. Evidence of Mr Schroder at [38]-[39] of Schroder-1 states
that the hinge disclosed by the Opposed Application does not
improve the
predictability of the speed and smoothness the hinge
when it moves
from the open position to the closed position. Mr Schroder highlighted that the
stroke of the dampener of the Opposed
Application is still relatively small
(e.g., a few millimetres) in the vertical orientation based on the angle of the
sloped surface
along the hinge axis. Thus, reorientating the dampener does not
increase the stroke length. Mr Schroder stated in evidence that the
way in which
the stroke can be increased is by increasing the angle of the sloped surface of
the housing containing the damper (see
Schroder-1 at [40]).
62. Mr Murauer submitted evidence regarding the background to the development of
the hinge of the Opposed Application. Mr Murauer
asserted at [9] and [10] of the
Murauer declaration that the hinge was developed in light of the Polaris 120
hinge – namely
a hinge commercialised by the Opponent. The Murauer
declaration states at [9] that due
the dampers
Polaris 120 hinge being located in the cut-out in the glass panel, locating the
damper outside the cut-out in the glass panel
would not constrain the size of
the damper so a longer damper could be used with a longer travel. Furthermore,
the Murauer declaration
at [11] has submitted that as the two halves of the
Polaris 120 hinge are taller than they are wide, a vertical orientation, would
also allow a longer dampener to be used. However, the Opponent submits that the
statements provided by Mr Murauer do not apply to
the wording of claim 1 of the
Opposed Application as claim 1 encompasses many different types of hinges other
than the Polaris 120
hinge and that the alleged advantages achieved by the
alleged invention simply do not apply to hinges of differing dimensions. Other
hinge designs would fall within the claims where the hinge may not have the same
dimensions (it may have a wider dimension compared
to vertical orientation)
compared to the Polaris 120 hinge (see Schroder-2 at [4.4]). Furthermore, as
there is no defined length
or dimensions of the stroke length of the damper or
the damper itself, the claim encompasses embodiments having a very short length,
thereby failing to provide the promised result of the Opposed Application (see
Schroder-2 at [4.4]).”
arguments that claims 1 to 3 cover means that will not work are given as follows
“63. The Opponent also submits that at least claims 1 to 3 encompass
embodiments of the hinge that do not do what it is intended
by the Applicant. Mr
Schroder submitted in evidence in Schroder-1 at [42] that the alleged invention
of claim 1 cannot work. At [42]
of Schroder-1, Mr Schroder states:
In my view, the hinge of claim 1 will not work only with a hydraulic dampener.
By this I mean that the dampener has no linkage coupled
directly or indirectly
to the panels. I believe there needs to be a linkage between the panels and the
dampener so that there is
a transfer of the closing force to the dampener. In
the specification, this linkage is provided in the form of a cam. But I note
that features like the cam are only introduced in dependent claims.
64. As noted in the authorities mentioned above, all that is within the scope of
a claim must be useful if the claim is not to fail
for inutility, or, to express
the matter differently, a claim is bad if it covers means that will not produce
the desired result
even if a skilful person would know which means to avoid. In
the Opposed Application, claims 1-3 clearly fail to define any form
to transfer the closing force to the hydraulic damper and thus the claims are
bad as they cover means that simply will
not work, let alone produce an
improvement in the predictability of the speed and smoothness the hinge when it
moves from the open
position to the closed position.”
the hearing. Ms McDonald made similar submissions, although at some points she
referred to the promise as being “...a hinge
which is more consistent in
its function” as well as two related concepts, being predictability in the
speed and the closing
action and the length of the damper travel, as well as
observing that Mr Schroder did not see any benefit or difference in the
predictability
by the adding a couple of millimetres of damping effect. Ms
McDonald also argued that the commercial embodiment of invention may
not in fact
have a longer damper stroke due to the use of damper adjusters. Ms McDonald
also argued, in response to submissions
made by the Applicant, that the intended
result of the invention is more than just a longer damper stroke, reiterating
that predictability
still formed part of the result.
Applicant’s response in the APS is as follows:
“22. Opponent draws attention to statements by Mr Schroder at paras 38 to
. In para 40 Mr Schroder explained that he believed the
stroke of the damper in the Atlantic Hinge ‘is still relatively
when compared to the Polaris 120. These statements were made prior
to Mr Schroder considering the evidence in
, Mr Murauer explained that the extent of damper travel had
in fact been increased by 40% and further explained that
‘This would
absorb energy during the closing phase of the hinge over a longer distance. The
peak force on a longer dampener
would be lower, and the energy would be absorbed
more gradually’.
, in reply to the explanation of Mr Murauer, Mr Shroder
only stated that he did not see an explanation of this advantage in
the opposed application. Mr Schroder does not dispute that the
advantage has
been determined to exist in a hinge constructed according to the directions
given in the opposed application.
25. At paras
63, opponent asserts that at least claim 1 covers
embodiments which do not work and draws attention to comments of Mr Schroder
there is no linkage defined in claim 1 and that
specification, this linkage is provided in the form of a cam’.
26. Various damper actuation arrangements are within the common general
knowledge of the skilled person and we believe the skilled
person would be able
to make working embodiments across the scope of claim 1.
27. Nevertheless, should the hearings officer find claim 1 to lack utility for
the lack of defining a cam then applicant would be
amenable to amend claim 1 to
incorporate the features of claim 2 to define that the damper is actuated by a
cam to address this.”
(emphasis in original)
the hearing, Mr Wood-Roe pointed out that the promise related to the ability to
use a damper with longer travel, leading to the
advantages that the invention
promises, by having the damper located outside the planes of the glass. Mr
Wood-Roe argued that specific
dimensions are not given in the application
because the result related to orientating the damper in a certain way enables a
damper with longer travel. Mr Wood-Roe observed that the ability to use a
longer damper was in the context of the type of hinges
concerned, namely hinges
having an insert component and used with glass panels having an edge recess.
This was said to be due to
the fact that moving the damper outside the planes of
the glass meant that the damper did not have to fit within the edge recess,
further noting that the insert component was also located within the edge
recess. At the hearing, Mr Wood-Roe observed that:
“...in the prior art, the dampers were all either located inside, not only
inside that edge recess, but they were located inside
another component which
would was called an insert component which took up further space in that edge
recess. So then within the
insert component yourself, you have a further
restricted space to insert these dampers.”
Wood-Roe also stated at the hearing that:
“...all of the measures which Mr Murauer brought to the problem were aimed
at enabling a longer stroke of the damper and the
reason for this is that then
the energy absorbed by the damper is absorbed over a longer distance...the
reason that provides a smoother
and more consistent or predictable operation is
that the energy that’s taken out is sort of averaged over a longer
of travel of the damper, rather than just a sudden absorption of energy
in a smaller stroke of the damper which he hypothesised was
leading to a
smoothness or predictability of closing that could be improved.”
Do any of the claims lack utility?
noted above in the TCT
, the starting
point of the analysis is to identify the promised benefit. As noted above with
respect to the TCT opposition, I am
of the that view the promise of the
invention is to allow for the use of a longer damper, with the consequent
advantages associated
with that, compared to hinges which have the damper
located within the planes of the glass panel and orientated perpendicular to
hinge axis. I do not see any reason to come to a different conclusion in the
present matter.
of the questions raised by Polaris is whether having the damper outside the
planes of the glass panel and moving in a direction
parallel to the hinge axis
will achieve the promise of predictability and smoothness of the hinge on moving
from the open to the
closed position. Polaris points to [38] and [39] of
Schroder1 in support of this contention. This evidence is repeated below,
[37] of Schroder1 for context:
“37. I was then asked to provide my opinion as to whether the hinge
disclosed in the Opposed Application addressed the problem
stated in the
Background of the specification. I was reminded that the problem in the
Background in the specification was that the
‘damping action of these
hydraulic dampeners is somewhat variable and it can be difficult to achieve the
desired dampening
characteristics’.
38. In my view, I do not see how the dampener of the hinge in the Opposed
Application has improved characteristics compared to well-known
hinge designs to
address this problem.
39. Whilst the specification on pages 6 and 7 discusses customising the
dampening effect by varying the dampener assembly face surface
geometry, the
specification does not discuss providing a user with differently shaped dampener
assembly faces for selection for the
particular application. Furthermore, the
specification provides no instructions as to how to customise the profile of the
assembly face to achieve these desired dampening characteristics. There
appears to be no adjustability provided by the hinge or its
components to be
able to achieve the desired dampener characteristic. Therefore, as an industrial
designer, I would need to use a
significant amount of trial and error to design
and interchange parts to achieve a desired variable dampening characteristic
the hinge of the Opposed Application.”
can be quickly seen that Mr Schroder’s evidence here is related to his
opinion as to whether the hinge of the application
addressed an alleged problem
put to him from the application. Mr Schroder here focuses on issues and
features concerning customisation/adjustability/variability
of the dampening
effect. While these may impact on predictability and smoothness of the closing
action, Mr Schroder does not comment
on predictability or smoothness as such,
and does not contemplate what effect the orientation and location of damper
would have on
the same. This evidence of Mr Schroder does not support
Polaris’s contentions concerning utility.
[40] and [41] of Schroder1 are rather more on point:
“40. I also believe that the movement of the hydraulic dampener in
direction parallel to the hinge axis does not address the
problem mentioned in
the Background. From my reading of the specification, it appears that the stroke
of the dampener is still relatively
small (e.g., a few millimetres) in the
vertical orientation based on the angle of the sloped surface along the hinge
axis, so I cannot
see how reorientating the dampener has solved this problem, as
the stroke length has not been materially changed compared to hinges
dampener is not oriented parallel to the hinge axis. In this hinge design of the
Opposed Application, the way in which
the stroke can be increased is by
increasing the angle of the sloped surface to increase vertical displacement of
the dampener, but
this modification leads to ineffective or seizure-prone force
transfer as it is preferable that the contact surfaces between the
sloped surface is close to 45 degrees.
41. I also believe that locating the dampener outside the faces of the glass
panel is unrelated to the predictability of the speed
and smoothness of the
closing action.”
Murauer responded directly to this in the EIA:
“4. I had noticed a drawback with the Polaris 120 hinge which was that
when installed for use it tended to have an inconsistent
closing action. In some
installations the glass pool gate would close too slowly and take a very long
time to close. In other installations,
the glass pool gate would close too
quickly and would collide heavily on its latch.
5. I thought about how to make an improved hinge with a more consistent closing
6. The Polaris 120 is designed to attach to glass panels using an industry
standard ‘mouse-ear’ profile cut out –
seen in figure 2A. The
hinge includes an insert 40 – seen in figure 6B. The insert 40 locates in
the mouse ear profile cut-out
when the hinge is attached to a glass panel. A
pair of hydraulic dampeners 100 are mounted in the insert 40. When the door is
to close, a biasing spring in the hinge urges the hinge (and attached
door) to the closed position. When the hinge is almost closed,
the extended
parts of the dampeners strike a region on the other half of the hinge, and the
remaining arc of closure is made against
the combined damping force of the
dampeners 100.
7. It seemed to me that the operation of the Polaris 120 hinge would be improved
if the dampener had a longer stroke. This would
absorb energy during the closing
phase of the hinge over a longer distance. The peak force on a longer dampener
would be lower, and
the energy would be absorbed more gradually. I thought this
would provide more consistent operation.
8. After some time thinking about this, I devised two ways which would enable a
longer dampener to be used.
Dampener mounted outside glass
- I realised that the dampeners in the
Polaris 120 are constrained in size because they need to fit inside the insert,
and in turn
are located inside the mouse ear cut-out in the glass panel. I
realised that if the dampener could be mounted outside of the mouse
ear cut-out
in the glass, then the size of the dampener would not be constrained by the
dimensions of the mouse ear cut-out and so
a longer dampener could be used with
a longer travel.
10. In the opposed application, this feature is defined in the claims as
‘the at least one damper is located outside of the planes which
describe the faces of the glass panel and inside the first hinge
Dampener mounted vertically -
I also realised that the dampeners in
the Polaris 120 are constrained in size because they are mounted horizontally in
The two halves of the hinge are taller than they are wide. This would
mean that if the dampener was mounted in the hinge in a vertical
orientation,
then this would also allow a longer dampener to be used.
12. In the provisional priority application 2020901504 this feature of vertical
orientation had been defined as
‘the at least one hydraulic damper is
compressible from an extended condition to a retracted condition and moves along
which is substantially parallel to the hinge axis’
13. However, after filing the provisional application I later realised that a
damper does not really move ‘along’ an
axis. Rather, an axis is more
usually a reference to a line about which something rotates. In order to improve
the clarity of the
claims, the definition of
‘moving along an
was changed to
‘moving in a direction’.
14. In the opposed application, the feature is defined in the claims as
‘the damper moves in a direction which is substantially parallel to the
hinge axis’
. This was a clearer way of defining the feature of
vertical/upright orientation of the dampener.
15. I combined both of the above ideas into a new design of hinge which is the
subject of the Opposed Application. The dampener is
mounted vertically in the
hinge, and it is located outside of the glass panel, to one side of the glass
16. According to my calculations, with my new design I achieved an increase in
damper travel from 12mm to 16mm when compared with
the Polaris 120. In addition,
as a rule of thumb, about 2mm of travel of these types of dampeners is lost in a
short period of initial
wear during the early stages of use. So, the effective
increase in travel can be thought of as going from 10mm to 14mm. An increase
(emphasis in
can be seen from the PS as cited above, Polaris’s response to this was to
note that there were other hinge designs that would
fall within the claims that
may not have the same dimensions as the Polaris 120 hinge, and that the claim
allegedly encompasses embodiments
with very short dampers or damper stroke
length that would not meet the promised benefit. Polaris made some reference to
and it is worthwhile repeating some salient passages from Schroder2
“4. The Murauer Declaration states at [5] that the goal of the hinge
disclosed in the Opposed Application was to provide ‘a
more consistent
closing action’. However, as I stated at [37]-[41] of the EIS, I fail to
understand how the claimed feature
of the hydraulic dampener moving parallel to
the hinge axis addresses the consistent closing action problem. The Murauer
Declaration
seems to address my concerns at [9]-[16]. I have the following
response to the Murauer Declaration:
4.1. The Murauer Declaration states that the two features of ‘the dampener
being mounted outside the glass’ and ‘the
dampener is mounted
vertically’ together provide increased stroke length of the dampener,
leading to more consistent closing
4.2. The Murauer Declaration errs by conflating the issue of ensuring that a
hinge reliably closes with the required force, and the
issue of ensuring that
the forces experiences
by the dampener within the hinge are
controlled to ensure adequate design life for the dampeners. The term
‘consistent closing
action’, in my view, refers to ensuring that the
spring and dampening forces are adequately sized, and adjustable for
environmental
factors such as an imperfect mounting angle and potential wind or
other forces acting on the parts being moved by the hinge. A consistent
action means that, in the context of a particular spring return force, the hinge
is not over-dampened, such that the closing
speed is slow or the hinge does not
close at all due to friction or wind forces, and that the hinge is not
under-dampened, such that
the hinge slams shut with excess force. Adjusting the
stroke length has nothing to do with either of these issues.
4.3. That said, even if the variables mentioned in the Murauer Declaration were
to have the stated effect on consistent closing action,
I note that claim 1 as
examined in table CS-T1 of the EIS does not include the feature of ‘the
dampener being mounted outside
the glass’ or the feature of ‘the
dampener is mounted vertically’. Instead, claim 1 includes the feature of
damper is located outside of the planes which describe the faces of
the glass panel and inside the first hinge member’. There
is no feature in
claim 1 that relates to the orientation of the dampener.
4.4. I am instructed that the
has sought an
amendment to the claims of the Opposed Application and was provided a copy of
these claims, attached as Exhibit CS-12.
Examining these claims, I see that
claim 1 now includes the feature ‘wherein the damper moves in a direction
which is substantially
parallel to the hinge axis’. However, the statement
in the Murauer Declaration refers to a ‘vertical mounting’,
referring to the general aspect ratio of hinges used in situations where the
hinge axis is parallel to the vertical axis. This, however,
is only the case
because of the substantial weight that must be counteracted by the hinge. If a
hinge were to be designed for a horizontal
use case, the additional space in the
vertical dimension would not exist and the claimed configuration would not
provide the alleged
benefit, the existence of which I continue to fundamentally
dispute as mentioned at [4.2] above. There is, in my view, no causal
relationship between the orientation of the hinge axis and the space available
in the hinge body for receiving a dampener.
4.5. The Murauer Declaration states at [16] that the stroke length was increased
from 12 mm to 16 mm when compared to the Polaris
120. I do not see any
disclosure of this feature in the Opposed Application. It is stated that the
effective travel of the dampener
has been increased by 40%. I do not see any
disclosure of this advantage in the Opposed Application.”
on Mr Murauer’s statements at [4] and [5] of Murauer2, it is not clear to
me that he has in fact “conflated”
issues as suggested by Mr
Schroder. It seems to me he understands that consistent opening relates to the
speed and force with which
the gate will close; his discussion of the Polaris
120 hinge at [4] clearly conveys an understanding of issues concerning how a
reliably closes as put by Mr Schroder at [4.2] of Schroder2. In my view,
it is the case that Mr Schroder simply rejects the possibility
that the stroke
length of the damper has any effect on the consistency of the closing action,
while, as best understood, Mr Murauer
takes a contrary view.
this regard, Mr Murauer’s statements about the peak force and more gradual
energy absorption
inherently plausible and have not been addressed by Mr Schroder in the EIR. In
my view Mr Schroder seems to be taking an
unduly narrow view of those factors
that go into the “consistency” of the hinge closing action. All
things being equal,
it is hard to see how reducing the peak force and more
gradual energy absorption would not allow for better consistency of closing
action, even if this is only achieved via improving the design life of the
dampeners. The same can be said for “predictability
and smoothness”
which is what is actually used in the application, to the extent there may be
any difference between these
and “consistency”.
nature of the “comparison” hinges for the purposes of the promised
benefit is important in terms of understanding
whether the claims meet the same.
Polaris has been at pains to point out that the invention was developed with
respect to the Polaris
120 hinge whilst neither claim 1 or the application
mention or are in any way restricted by reference to the same. Notionally,
hinges could have any dimensions as pointed out by Polaris
and thereby lead to issues with claim 1 failing to meet the promised benefit.
However, on balance, I do not think that is the case in view of the
in this matter, for reasons that I will explain further below.
as noted at [4.4] of Schroder2, Mr Murauer’s evidence (and clearly the
disclosure of the application) are with respect
to hinges with a hinge axis
parallel to the vertical, these being, as I understand it from [4.4.] of
Schroder2, longer in the vertical
direction for each leaf of the hinge than the
horizontal direction to deal with the weight borne by the hinge. That being the
then there would seem to be no issue with claim 1 achieving the promised
benefit with respect to vertically orientated hinges, particularly
claim 1 defines attachment to a glass panel (which is rather heavy and therefore
one would expect the “general aspect
ratio” to be abided by). This
also indicates that “comparison” hinges for glass panels with a
recess, when used
for a vertical hinge, would also be understood to comprise the
same general aspect ratio. There is simply no other evidence going
typical dimensions or aspect ratios that would be used by a skilled addressee in
implementing such hinges.
[4.4] of Schroder2 also seems to suggest that the aspect ratios would be
“flipped” for a hinge designed for
use with the hinge axis placed
horizontally. On this basis Mr Schroder argues that claim 1 would not meet the
promised benefit with
respect to such horizontal axis hinges, as there would not
be additional space in the vertical direction. Mr Schroder has focussed
Murauer’s evidence concerning his inventive journey in connection with the
Polaris 120 hinge, where he suggests that
there was more room to be had in the
vertical direction. However, neither claim 1 nor the application refers to a
vertical direction
of the hinge axis at all, nor is the orientation of the
hinge, whether vertical or horizontal, specified in the claim or the
application.
Rather, the damper is located outside the glass panel and moves
substantially parallel to the hinge axis. Consequently, the alleged
space in the vertical direction is not directly relevant to whether claim 1
meets the promised benefit or not.
is still something of a question as to whether hinges with horizontal hinge axes
lead to any utility issues for claim 1. In
that regard, working again with Mr
Schroder’s evidence on aspect ratios, it would
that a hinge
with a horizontal hinge axis would have leaves longer in the horizontal
direction than the vertical direction. If that
is the case, then it would seem
there is room in the horizontal direction to provide for the damper to be
located outside the glass
panel and to move substantially parallel to the hinge
axis, and therefore there are no issues with meeting the promised benefit.
have emphasised “seems” here, as Mr Schroder’s evidence on
horizontal hinges is slender to say the least, and
the only firm inference I can
draw is that a horizontal hinge would have less room in the vertical direction
than a vertical hinge.
[4.4] of Schroder2 is suggestive that there are certain aspect ratios that would
be used by the skilled addressee depending
on the orientation of the hinge,
however Mr Schroder seems to have simply been content with refuting Mr
Murauer’s vertically
focused inventive journey, instead of explaining in
more detail how aspect ratio issues would lead to embodiments of claim 1 not
meeting the promise of the invention. For example, Mr Schroder has not
explained whether, or if, certain aspect ratios would be
rejected by a skilled
addressee for the types of hinges the subject of the invention, depending on the
orientation of the hinge.
While I can accept that claim 1 notionally
encompasses any sized hinge in any orientation, Schroder2 at [4.4] suggests that
are limits on what the skilled addressee would understand those to be,
without actually making those clear. Because of this I cannot
be satisfied on
balance that claim 1 extends to embodiments that will not meet the promised
benefit due to dimensional issues.
is also worthwhile noting that, in some respects, the ability to provide for a
longer damper travel would seem to be independent
of the aspect ratio of the
hinge or its orientation. This is due to the fact that the damper is located
outside the glass panel
and thereby would not tend to come in conflict with that
panel or any insert used to clamp the glass panel. Nothing in Mr
evidence addresses this issue.
final issue raised by Polaris, in terms of the promised benefit, concerns
whether the claim encompasses very short dampers or dampers
with a very short
travel length. It is true that claim 1 does not specify the length of the
damper to be used. However, I do not
consider that this leads to any utility
issues. The promise relates to
the use of a longer damper, by
virtue of the damper being located outside the glass panel and moving
substantially parallel to the
hinge axis. That is, the promised benefit does
not relate to a particular length of the damper as such, as opposed to the
or capacity to use a longer damper in comparison to hinges without the
features concerned.
balance, and in view of the evidence before me, I am not satisfied that claim 1
or any of the claims are wanting in terms of failing
to meet the promised
to arguments concerning claims that will not work due to lack of
“linkage” between the cam and the hinge leaves,
these can be
disposed of fairly quickly. Claim 1 specifies that:
“in use the at least one hydraulic damper is compressed from an extended
condition to a retracted condition as the hinge moves
from the open condition to
the closed condition...”
The fact that the damper is compressed as the hinge closes is
indicative that there must be some means, even if unspecified, to facilitate
compression. The damper is clearly operable in claim 1 as defined. There is no
lack of utility on the basis that claim 1 or
any of the claims simply will not
am not satisfied that any of the claims lack utility. Polaris has been
unsuccessful on this ground of opposition.
Section40(2)(a) – clear enough and complete enough
have outlined the relevant principles concerning s40(2)(a) above in connection
with the TCT opposition.
refer to those passages and do not see any need to repeat these here.
Polaris’s 40(2)(a) arguments
Polaris’s arguments for this ground run from [74] to [89] of the PS but
essentially boil down to arguments that there is a
lack of enablement for any
linkage means and multiple dampers, as well as enablement issues to do with the
geometry of the hinge
itself. The PS at [84] to [88] provide a good overview of
the crux of Polaris’s arguments:
“84. The third step from
is to determine whether the
specification provides an enabling disclosure of all the things that fall within
the scope of the claims.
In other words, does the specification of the Opposed
Application permit the skilled addressee to make, without undue burden or
ingenuity, hinges featuring multiple hydraulic dampers which are
actuated by all manners of force transmission means as implied by
claim 1. The
Opponent submits that the answer to this question is clearly no.
85. The specification of the Opposed Application at Page 9, lines 22 to
, lines 9 to 10, and Page 1, lines 25 to 2 discusses rearranging the damper
from the horizontal axis, as used in the Polaris 120 hinge
as noted by Mr
Murauer at [4] and [11] of the Murauer declaration, to the vertical axis
parallel to the hinge axis. Mr Schroder noted
that various
cammed arrangement
can be used for damping hinges of pool gates and
fences. However, Mr Schroder highlighted in Schroder-1 at [9.3] that friction
the damper and the cam must be taken into consideration. Mr Schroder
highlighted that there can be a build-up of dirt and debris
on the end of the
damper and the cam, wherein this build-up introduces variability to the movement
of the hinge toward the closed
position. Thus, careful design of the cam
arrangement is required, otherwise the cammed arrangement could prevent the
providing predictable damping characteristics in terms of speed and
smoothness of the closing movement.
86. The specification of the Opposed Application at Page 6, line 31 to Page 7,
line 7 also discusses customising the dampening effect
by varying the dampener
assembly face surface geometry. However, as stated by Mr Schroder in Schroder-1
at [39], the specification
does not discuss providing a user with differently
shaped dampener assembly faces for selection for the particular application.
Furthermore,
the specification provides no instructions as to how to customise
the profile of the dampener assembly face to achieve these desired
characteristics. Mr Schroder importantly states at [39] of Schroder-1:
Therefore, as an industrial designer, I would need to use a significant amount
of trial and error to design and interchange parts
to achieve a desired variable
dampening characteristic using the hinge of the Opposed Application.
87. In addition, the specification does not provide an enabling disclosure of
the use of multiple dampers in the hinge.
88. The Opponent submits that specification of the Opposed Application does
permit the skilled addressee to make, without undue burden or
inventive ingenuity, hinges featuring multiple hydraulic dampers that
actuated by a ‘force transmission means’ across the full range of
options encompassed by the words ‘when attached
to the panel in use the at
least one damper is located outside of the planes which describe the faces of
the glass panel and inside
the first hinge member; and wherein the damper moves
in a direction which is substantially parallel to the hinge axis’ as
by claim 1. (emphasis in original)
McDonald made similar submissions at the hearing, though relied upon the PS with
regard to the “geometry” issue.
Applicant responds to the s40(2)(a) matters raised by Polaris in the APS at [29]
1 – Claim 1 encompasses multiple dampers
29. This complaint is based on an inclusive construction of claim 1, that the
claim might cover embodiments that include more than
one hydraulic damper. This
is not disputed by the applicant. This was intended.
30. The use of the phrase
‘at least one hydraulic damper’
defined in claim 1 to account for a situation where a hypothetical infringing
article has more than one damper, perhaps only one
of which is mounted in the
way specified in claim 1. The use of the phrase
‘at least one’
conveys that the presence of more than one damper in an alleged infringing
article would not mean that that article falls outside
the scope of claim 1.
31. The opponent has construed that the additional dampers that are permitted by
the definition in claim 1 are also mounted outside
the glass, and vertically.
However, they could similarly be mounted horizontally inside the hinge, and
inside the recess in the glass
panel in an insert component, in much the same
style as in the Polaris 120.
32. The more limited definitions of the invention in claims 2 and 3 refer only
‘the hydraulic damper’
which is consistent with the
construction of claim 1 outlined at para 16.
33. Should the hearings officer find that the phrase
leads to invalidity on this ground then applicant would be
amenable to amend this phrase to define
‘a hydraulic damper’
which is consistent with the language of claims 2 and 3.
2 - No cam defined in claim 1
34. As for para 27 above, should the hearing officer be of the view that claim 1
is bad for lack of defining a cam then applicant
would be amenable to amend
claim 1 to incorporate the features of claim 2 to define that the damper is
actuated by a cam.
3 – Varying dampener face surface geometry
35. At para 39 of Schroder 1, Mr Schroder points to a teaching at p.6, l.31 to
p.7 l.3 of the specification which reads as follows:
‘In some embodiments the damping effect can be customized by varying
the damper assembly face 54 surface geometry which varies
the speed of the
dampers depression and alters the resistance force. (can provide varied damper
resistance dependent on the gate
angle). For instance, the face 54 can be formed
from a sandwich type arrangement of materials of varying hardness and
Coefficient
of friction.’
36. This passage is really teaching two things: (a) that the shape of the face
of the damper assembly need not be as illustrated
in the drawings, and (b) that
the face of the damper assembly could me made of materials with varying
coefficients of friction.
37. The passage referred to at para 39 is outlining possible variations to the
preferred embodiment to the skilled address. It would
be well understood by the
skilled person that a cam face need not be flat, and that different materials
would exhibit different frictional
characteristics.
38. It would appear, according to the logic advanced by the opponent, that
deleting the above passage from the specification would
restore utility. This
does not make sense. This passage is providing the skilled person with teaching
of the preferred embodiments.
39. We do not believe that the passage referred to by Mr Schroder creates
utility problems for claim 1.” (emphasis in original)
Wood-Roe made similar submissions at the hearing.
Do any of the claims fail under s40(2)(a)?
problem for Polaris in connection with their assertions on multiple dampers is
that there is no evidence
in this opposition,
to support their case
– as I reiterated several times in the TCT opposition above, a lack of
disclosure does not necessarily
mean a lack of enablement. I do not consider
that the nature of the invention is one, in the circumstances, where I can make
concerning s40(2)(a) in the absence of appropriate evidence to do
it is possible for me to incorporate evidence from the TCT opposition concerning
multiple dampers into this one, using Reg 5.23,
there is little point in doing
so. The fact that I have made adverse findings in the TCT opposition on this
issue means that there
is no danger to the public interest, which would simply
suffer by any further delay in this decision issuing if I was minded to take
Reg 5.23 path. Similarly, the parties would be further inconvenienced by the
delay and by the need to file further evidence
and submissions in response to
the material sought to be introduced. I note that there may be
point in exercising Reg 5.23 in view of Polaris’s contentions on the
priority date of the claims, however, as will be seen
later in this decision,
these also do not militate in favour of me exercising Reg 5.23.
regard to the linkage means/actuating mechanism, Polaris essentially makes the
same arguments, based on [42] of Schroder1, concerning
this issue as it did for
utility. As I noted above, claim 1 clearly defines the damper as being
operable. There is no other evidence
that goes to questions of whether the
skilled addressee would face an undue burden or require further invention in
implementing the
invention with all possible actuating mechanisms that fall
within the scope of claim 1, whether for a single damper or where there
multiple dampers.
now to the “geometry” issue, I am having some difficulty in
understanding this matter in terms of s40(2)(a).
Polaris’s argument here
is based on [39] of Schroder1, however this discusses optional features that are
not even claimed.
This evidence does not establish that any of the claims are
wanting under s40(2)(a).
summary, I am not satisfied, in view of the evidence in this opposition, that
any of the claims are wanting under s40(2)(a).
Support – s40(3)
have outlined the relevant principles concerning support above in connection
with the TCT opposition.
refer to those passages and do not see any need to repeat these here.
The parties’ support arguments
support arguments are provided at [105] of the PS and are simply a reiteration
of Polaris’s position on s40(2)(a).
This was reiterated by Ms McDonald at
the hearing.
the Applicant’s support arguments, at [40] and [41] of the APS, simply
referred to its position on s40(2)(a). Mr
Wood-Roe addressed support and
s40(2)(a) together at the hearing.
Do any of the claims lack support?
my conclusions on s40(2)(a), it follows that I am not satisfied that any of the
claims lack support in view of the evidence
before me in this
opposition.
note that the relevant sections of the
Regulations
relating to the determination of priority dates were changed as a result of the
and consequent changes to the Regulations contingent on the
with respect to priority dates, section 43 of the
reads as follows:
“(1) Each claim of a specification must have a priority date.
(2) The priority date of a claim is:
(a) if subsection (2A) applies to the claim—the date determined under the
regulations; or
(b) otherwise—the date of the filing of the specification.
(2A) This subsection applies to a claim if:
(a) prescribed circumstances apply in relation to the invention defined in the
(b) a prescribed document discloses, or a prescribed set of prescribed documents
considered together disclose, the invention in the
claim in a manner that is
clear enough and complete enough for the invention to be performed by a person
skilled in the relevant
(2B) A prescribed document, or a prescribed set of prescribed documents
considered together, is taken to disclose the invention in
a claim as mentioned
in paragraph (2A)(b) so far as such disclosure requires a description of a
micro‑organism, if:
(a) the micro‑organism is deposited with a prescribed depository
institution in accordance with such provisions of the
Budapest Treaty
applicable; and
(b) the prescribed circumstances apply.
(3) Where a claim defines more than one form of an invention, then, for the
purposes of determining the priority date of the claim,
it must be treated as if
it were a separate claim for each form of the invention that is defined.
(4) The priority date of a claim of a specification may be different from the
priority date of any other claim of the specification.
(5) If, at the time when a Convention application or a PCT application is made
in respect of an invention:
(a) an application (the earlier application) has been made for protection
in respect of the invention in a Convention country; and
(b) the earlier application was made in the prescribed period; and
(c) the earlier application has been withdrawn, abandoned or refused without
becoming open to public inspection; and
(d) the earlier application has not been used as the basis of claiming a right
of priority in a Convention country under a law of
that country; and
(e) a later application has been made by the same applicant for protection in
respect of the invention in a Convention country;
the earlier application is taken, for the purposes of this Act, to have never
been made.”
3 Part 1 Division 2 of the
Regulations
deal with the priority date of
claims. Specifically, for present purposes, Regulation 3.12 reads as
“(1) This Division determines the priority date of a
(a) for subsection 36(4) of the Act (see regulation 3.13); and
(b) for paragraph 43(2)(a) of the Act (see regulation 3.13A to 3.13E); and
(c) (c) for section 114 of the Act (see regulation 3.14).
(2) However, if more than one of regulations 3.13A to 3.13E applies to a
single claim, the priority date of the claim, for paragraph
43(2)(a) of the Act,
is the earliest of the dates that is determined by those regulations.
(3) Despite regulations 3.13A to 3.13E, the priority date of a claim, for
paragraph 43(2)(a) of the Act, is no later than the date
of the filing of the
specification.
(4) In this Division, a document, or a set of documents considered together,
clearly discloses
an invention if the document, or set of
documents, discloses the invention in a manner that is clear enough, and
complete enough,
for the invention to be performed by a person skilled in the
relevant art.
(5) For the purposes of subregulation (4), a document, or a set of documents
considered together, is taken to clearly disclose an
invention as mentioned in
that subregulation so far as such disclosure requires a description of a
micro‑organism, if:
(a) the micro‑organism is deposited with a prescribed depository
institution in accordance with such provisions of the
Budapest Treaty
applicable; and
(b) the prescribed circumstances for paragraph 43(2B)(b) of
the Act apply.
3.13A is relevant for present
This reads as
(1) This regulation applies to a claim if:
(a) the circumstance mentioned in subregulation (2) (a prescribed circumstance
for paragraph 43(2A)(a) of the Act) applies to the
invention defined in the
(b) either:
(i) a document mentioned in subregulation (4) (a prescribed document for
paragraph 43(2A)(b) of the Act) clearly discloses the invention
in the claim;
(ii) 2 or more of those documents (a prescribed set of prescribed documents for
paragraph 43(2A)(b) of the Act), considered together,
clearly disclose the
invention in the claim.
Circumstance
(2) For paragraph (1)(a), the circumstance is that the specification containing
the claim that defines the invention was filed for
a PCT application, and:
(a) either:
(i) the PCT application claims the priority of an earlier application under
Article 8 of the PCT; or
(ii) the PCT application has been amended to include a claim to priority from an
earlier application that, at the time of filing
the PCT application, was a claim
to priority that could have been made under Article 8 of the PCT; and
(b) either:
(i) the earlier application was made in Australia no more than 12 months before
the filing date of the PCT application; or
(ii) the earlier application was made in Australia more than 12 months before
the filing date of the PCT application, and:
(A) a receiving
Office has restored the priority under Rule 26bis.3, and the restored priority
has not been found to be ineffective
by the Commissioner or a prescribed court
under Rule 49ter.1; or
Commissioner has restored the priority under Rule 49ter.2; or
Commissioner has granted an extension of time
under section 223 of the Act that has the effect of
restoring a right of priority;
(iii) the earlier application is a basic application that was the first
application made in a Convention country in relation to the
invention, and:
(A) the earlier
application was made no more than 12 months before the filing date of the PCT
application; or
(B) the earlier
application was made more than 12 months before the filing date of the PCT
application, and a receiving Office has
restored the priority under Rule
26bis.3, and the restored priority has not been found to be ineffective by the
Commissioner or a
prescribed court under Rule 49ter.1; or
(C) the earlier
application was made more than 12 months before the filing date of the PCT
application, and the Commissioner has restored
the priority under Rule 49ter.2;
(D) the earlier
application was made more than 12 months before the filing date of the PCT
application, and the Commissioner has granted
an extension of time
under section 223 of the Act that has the effect of
restoring a right of priority; or
(iv) the earlier application is a basic application that was made after a basic
application mentioned in subparagraph (iii).
(3) For the purposes of this regulation, if a provisional specification was
filed for a basic application when the application was
made, a complete
specification later filed for the basic application is taken to be another basic
application from which the PCT
application claims priority, made on the day when
the complete specification was filed.
(4) For paragraph (1)(b), the documents are the documents filed for the earlier
application at the time the application was made.
Priority date
(5) Subject to regulation 3.12, the priority date is:
(a) the date when the earlier application was made; or
(b) if there is more than one earlier application—the date the earliest of
those applications was made for which paragraph
(1)(b) is satisfied.
Prescribed circumstances for micro‑organisms
(6) For paragraph 43(2B)(b) of the Act, the prescribed
circumstances for a disclosure that requires a description of a
micro‑organism
are as follows:
(a) the deposit of the micro‑organism with a prescribed depository
institution, in accordance with such provisions of the
Budapest Treaty
applicable, occurs on or before the date when the documents mentioned in
subregulation (4) are filed;
(b) either:
(i) a document mentioned in subregulation (4) includes the relevant information
on the characteristics of the micro‑organism
that is known to the
applicant at the time the documents are filed; or
(ii) 2 or more of those documents, considered together, include the relevant
information on the characteristics of the micro‑organism
that is known to
the applicant at the time the documents are filed;
(c) the requirements of paragraph 6(c) of the Act are
satisfied by the complete specification that contains the claim.”
states that “Item 10 aligns the
requirement for securing a priority date from an earlier filed application with
the requirement
for disclosure in a complete application (see item 8
above)”. Notably item 8 refers to the new requirements introduced to
s40(2)(a) by
, namely “...that a patent specification must
disclose the invention in a manner which is clear enough and complete enough for
the invention to be performed by a person skilled in the relevant art”
at item 8 and s40(2)(a)). Reference to item 10 from the
also made at item 3 of the
Explanatory Statement
Legislative Instrument 2013 No 31
, being the Legislative Instrument that
implemented changes in the
Patents Regulations
corresponding
to those made in the
operation of s43 and Reg 3.13A means, in the present case, that a claim in the
application may take the nominally earliest priority
date available from the
priority document if this meets the relevant test in terms of providing a
suitable basis for priority. As
apparent from subregulation 3.12(4) as brought
into existence by
, to clearly disclose an invention the document or
set of documents concerned must disclose the invention in a manner that is clear
enough and complete enough for the invention to be performed by a person skilled
in the art. Thus, in wording and in effect, as
noted in the
post-RTB priority requirements are substantially identical to the post-RTB
requirements for s40(2)(a).
the question of priority dates post-RTB was considered in
Glass Hardware
Australia Pty Ltd v TCT Group Pty Ltd
[2024] FCAFC 95
ToolGen Incorporated v Fisher (No 2)
[2023] FCA 794
Group Pty Ltd v Polaris IP Pty Ltd
[2022] FCA 1493
170 IPR 313
seq. These decisions make it clear that the disclosure test for the purposes of
determining priority under s43(2A)(b) is the
same as for s40(2)(a).
The parties’ priority date submissions
Polaris, their submissions extend from [118] to [125] of the PS, and, in
summary, argue that there is no clear and complete disclosure
of the invention
as claimed in the priority document. Because of this, Polaris alleges that the
priority date of the claims is the
date of filing of the application, by virtue
of s43(2)(b) of the Act.
reasons for the alleged lack of disclosure in the priority document are
essentially the same as those made by Polaris in connection
with s40(2)(a), as
far as those go to the linkage/actuating mechanism and multiple dampers. Ms
McDonald’s comments on priority
at the hearing were more or less that if
there is a failure under s40(2)(a), then the claims must also fail in relation
to priority.
Applicant provided rather abbreviated comments on priority in the APS, noting
that they did not see an issue with priority as
the disclosure of the priority
document in relation to the claims was the same in the application. Otherwise,
the Applicant considered
the issue as best addressed under s40(2)(a). Mr
Wood-Roe made similar submissions at the hearing.
Is the earlier priority valid?
have considered the priority
and I am of the
view that this comprises materially the same disclosure concerning the
linkage/actuating mechanism and dampers as
the application with respect to these
features as claimed. While it follows that any defects concerning these two
features held
under s40(2)(a) would also undermine the priority date under s43,
Polaris has been unsuccessful in its attack under s40(2)(a). Notionally,
is the end of the matter as far as priority dates are concerned.
as observed earlier in this decision, TCT has been successful in establishing
non-compliance under s40(2)(a) due to the claims
extending to more than one
damper. As Polaris has made an inventive step attack based on a deferred
priority date in view of the
presence of multiple dampers, this could be taken
to provide a separate impetus to introduce evidence from the TCT opposition into
this matter using Reg 5.23.
the criteria for invoking Reg 5.23, as outlined earlier in the TCT opposition,
it is necessary for me to understand whether
introducing material from the TCT
opposition will lead to grounds being made out in the opposition that would not
otherwise be made
out. Essentially, this boils down to two questions 1) will
this in fact change the priority date of the claims such that Polaris’s
document for inventive step (WO 2020/237303 A1 “
prior art for the purposes of s7(3) and 2) does D6 deprive any of the claims of
inventive step?
respect to the first question, it is reasonable to believe that the priority for
each of the claims would not be valid in view
of my findings on the multiple
damper issue in the TCT opposition. However, that does not automatically mean
D6 becomes relevant
prior the entire scope of claim 1. As one can appreciate
from s43(3), where a claim comprises more than one form of an invention,
those forms must be treated as though they are separate claims for the purposes
of determining a priority date. The fact
that claim 1 recites “at least
one hydraulic damper” in several places at least notionally raises the
prospect of there
being different alternatives or forms of the invention within
claim 1, and therefore the possibility of different priority dates.
issue of alternative forms was considered in
AstraZeneca AB v Apotex Pty
[2014] FCAFC 99
226 FCR 324
107 IPR 177
AstraZeneca
”) at [250] and [251], and at some length
Nichia Corporation v Arrow Electronics Australia Pty Ltd
”) at [58] to [87]. Crucially, both these
cases highlight the importance of understanding whether the claim concerned
encompasses
genuine alternatives or forms of an invention, or merely variants of
an invention. It is helpful to reproduce [58] to [70] of
also provides a useful overview of the position in
AstraZeneca
“58. The plurality in
AstraZeneca AB v Apotex Pty
[2014] FCAFC 99
(2014) 226 FCR 324
briefly discussed the history
of s 43(3) of the Act and its predecessor provision in
Patents Act 1952
(Cth), noting that these provisions were
included to overcome the ruling in
Thornhill’s
Application
[1962] RPC 199.
Thornhill’s Application
, consideration was given to the
drafting of the following claim. It should be noted that the indices (a),
(b)(i), (b)(ii), (c) and
(d) were added to the claim at the hearing before the
Hearing Officer in that case to illustrate the argument made. The indices did
not appear in the printed specification:
1. A method of
producing a black tea concentrate (a) which consists in cutting, grinding, or
otherwise finely dividing
fresh green leaves of the tea tree, and (b) oxidising
the comminuted particles either (i) by exposing the raw mass to the action
the oxygen of the air until the mass becomes dark brown in colour and
subsequently extracting by boiling water or steam the water-soluble
constituents
of the leaves, or (ii) initially after comminuting the leaves extracting in the
same way by percolation the soluble
constituents of the leaves and introducing
into the obtained solution a minute quantity of an oxidising inorganic
substance, (c)
subjecting the solution obtained in either way to heating in the
open air at a temperature approaching the boiling point of water
for a duration
up to six hours until the required degree of oxidation is attained and until as
a result of heating there occurs the
polymerisation of the tannin compounds
polyphenol and catechol with constituents of the solution and the solution has
lost its bitter
taste inherent in the solution of the constituents of the green
tea leaf, and (d) evaporating excess water.
60. The Hearing Officer described the claim as follows:
It will be noted that claim 1 embodies two alternatives, i.e. it may be regarded
as two claims 1A and 1B, wherein:—
1A = a + b(i) + c + d
and the method which may be represented as
1B = a + b(ii) + c + d
61. The Hearing Officer concluded that, as the claim could be regarded as two
notional claims, each notional claim could be afforded
its own priority
date. However, on appeal, Lloyd-Jacob J concluded (at 207) that there was
no provision in the
Patents Act 1949
(UK) that would warrant the attribution of
two different priority dates to different parts of the one claim.
AstraZeneca
, one of the claims in question (claim 1 of what
was called the 842 or cation patent) was as follows:
pharmaceutical composition comprising [rosuvastatin] or a pharmaceutically
acceptable salt thereof as the active ingredient
and an inorganic salt in which
the cation is multivalent, provided that:
(i) the inorganic salt is not
hydrotalcite or synthetic hydrotalcite; and
(ii) the counter anion to the inorganic
salt is not a phosphate.
63. At [251], the plurality concluded (Jessup J agreeing at [447]):
251 In our view, claim 1 of
the 842 or cation patent does not define more than one form of the invention.
Unlike the claim
in issue in
Thornhill’s Application
of the 842 or cation patent does not by its terms allow for any alternatives or,
adopting the language of s 43(3), different
forms of the same
invention. Claim 1
only one form of the invention even
though there will be any number of potential variants that are within its scope.
We do not think
s 43(3) is intended to treat every potential
variant of the defined invention as if it was a form of the invention that must
as a separate claim which is to be given its own priority date.
Rather, it is intended to deal with very different situations such
as that which
Thornhill’s Application
or where, to take a
slightly different example, a claim is dependent on one or more independent
claims (claim 3 of the 842 or cation
patent takes this form) each of which has a
different priority date. We therefore reject AstraZeneca’s submission
s 43(3) of the Act.
(Emphasis in original.)
64. The corresponding provision in the United Kingdom is s 125 of the
(UK). Section 125 relevantly provides:
Extent of invention
(1) For the purposes of this Act an invention for a patent for which an
application has been made or for which a patent has been
granted shall, unless
the context otherwise requires, be taken to be that specified in a claim of the
specification of the application
or patent, as the case may be, as interpreted
by the description and any drawings contained in that specification, and the
of the protection conferred by a patent or application for a patent shall
be determined accordingly.
(2) It is hereby declared for the avoidance of doubt that where more than one
invention is specified in any such claim, each invention
may have a different
priority date under section 5 above.
65. In Miller R, Burkill G, Birss C and Campbell D,
Terrell on the Law
(17th ed, Sweet and Maxwell, 2011), the authors state (at
When can a claim have multiple priorities?
7-12 If a claim is drafted in
such a way that it encompasses clear alternatives—for example, a claim
which defines a
chemical compound by reference to a structure which may take
identified alternative forms—then attributing multiple priorities
unlikely to cause difficulty. In effect, the claim can be regarded as being made
up of several discrete claims or—in the
words of section 125(2) —as
specifying more than one invention, each with a different priority date.
However, it is difficult
to see how a broad claim which does not set out
alternatives as such could be regarded as specifying more than one invention,
it is hard to see how such a claim could allow for multiple priorities to be
claimed. This is in line with the approach taken by
the European Patent
(Citations omitted.)
66. Section 125(2) of the
Patents Act 1977
(UK) was considered in
Company v Brabantia (UK) Ltd
[1990] FSR 134.
In that case, a particular
claim (claim 9) claimed ‘an apparatus according to any preceding
claim’. Aldous J construed
the claim as being a number of discrete claims,
and not a composite claim. At 140, Aldous J said:
The use of the words ‘apparatus according to any preceding claim’ is
a shorthand way of writing out a large number of
claims. For instance, if those
words are used in claim 3 of a patent having three claims, what is being
claimed, and claimed separately,
is the combination of claims 1 and 3 and claims
1, 2 and 3. To hold to the contrary ... would mean that the patentees in the
would have to write out each combination as a separate claim which would
lead to even more claims in patents than there are now.
Merck & Company (Macek’s) Patent
, Lloyd-Jacob J considered an allegation of prior claiming in relation to a
number of claims in a granted patent, including the following:
composition having enhanced bactericidal activity comprising novobiocin in
combination with at least one other antibiotic
selected from the following,
namely, penicillin, tetracycline, oxytetracycline, chlortetracycline,
streptomycin, chloramphenicol,
bacitracin, neomycin, spiramycin, streptothricin
and grisein.
68. As to the construction of this claim, Lloyd-Jacob J said:
The claim, it will be seen, is of the comprehensive type permitting of
alternative additions to novobiocin, which alternative additions
consist of one
or more of the named antibiotics. It is a convenient summation of what is in
effect a number of separate claims to
different compositions of which some will
relate to compositions having two ingredients and some to three or more
ingredients.
The first notional rewriting of this claim to make plain this differentiation
would be: (A) ‘A composition having enhanced
bactericidal activity
comprising novobiocin in combination with one other antibiotic selected from the
following, namely, penicillin,
tetracycline, oxytetracycline, chlortetracycline,
streptomycin, chloramphenicol, bacitracin, neomycin, spiramycin, streptothricin
and grisein.’ (B) ‘a composition...comprising novobiocin in
combination with two or more antibiotics selected from the
following, namely,
penicillin, tetracycline, oxytetracycline, chlortetracycline, streptomycin,
chloramphenicol, bacitracin, neomycin,
spiramycin, streptothricin and
Of these two notional divisions of claim 1 only ‘A’is relevant and
this may be notionally further rewritten in the form
of eleven independent
claims in the form, (C) ‘A composition...comprising novobiocin in
combination with penicillin’;
(D) ‘A composition...comprising
novobiocin in combination with tetracycline’; (E) ‘A
composition...comprising novobiocin
in combination with oxytetracycline’;
(F) ‘A composition...comprising novobiocin in combination with
chlortetracycline’;
and so on through the list.
69. Although dealing with prior claiming,
guidance on how claims of the kind there under consideration are to be
construed. The applicant placed reliance on
because the
relevant claim had drafting similarities to claims 1 and 3 of the 355
specification in that each of these claims provides
an explicit selection step
leading to various combinations and hence various phosphors within the scope of
the claim. The applicant
submitted that if the claim
was written out as described by Lloyd-Jacob J, it
would comprise 2,047 claims.
70. The applicant also referred to ‘claim splitting’ cases where, in
order to avoid the problem posed by
Thornhill’s Application
amendments were sought to split a composite claim into various forms of the
invention so as to render each as a separate claim with
its own priority
Farbenfabriken Bayer AG’s Patent
Anderson’s Application
are two such examples. It is not necessary for me to refer to these
cases in greater detail.”
is also helpful to reproduce Justice Yates’s consideration in
, as this helps illustrate the principles cited above and the
differences between variations of an invention and different forms thereof:
AstraZeneca
, the Full Court emphasised the terms in
which the claim is drafted and directed attention to whether the claim,
according to its
terms, allows for alternatives.
85. Claim 1 and claim 3 of the 355 specification are cast in terms that are
different to the claim considered in
AstraZeneca
. Claim 1 includes
two discrete and express selection steps—one referable to the selection of
the ‘large’ metal
ions and the other referable to the selection of
the ‘small’ metal ions in the fluorescent material—providing
differently constituted phosphors, depending on the selections made and the
combinations arrived at.
86. Claim 3, although differently drafted, also contains discrete and express
selection steps. Similarly to claim 1, there is a stated,
but different,
selection with respect to the ‘large’ metal ions in the fluorescent
material. The constituents of this
material are also determined by the selection
of a value for
from the given range. The general formula in
claim 3 also provides for a selection in relation to the ‘small’
of the fluorescent material by providing a range of values
. These various selection steps combine to provide differently
constituted phosphors.
87. I am satisfied that, by their terms, each of claims 1 and 3 of the 355
specification envisage and provide for different forms
of the invention, as
understood by s 43(3) of the Act. In each case, these forms
are represented by the individual phosphors obtained
after the selection steps
have been undertaken.”
the principles that emerge from
AstraZeneca
the view that claim 1 of the application comprises different alternatives or
forms of the invention. Specifically, the
use of “at least one hydraulic
damper” leads to forms of the invention with only one damper and other
forms with two
or more dampers. It is also possible to further split two or
more into only two dampers, only three dampers, only four dampers etc.,
defining a distinct form of the invention. Although perhaps not necessarily
relevant to the present issue, I observe that while
the claim nominally includes
the possibility of an infinite number of dampers, it is quite apparent that the
skilled addressee would
consider a number of dampers much less than the amount
needed for a hinge to imitate a blackhole to be so silly as to be beyond the
terms of the claim. In short, the alternatives or forms are countably
non-infinite and probably much less than the 2047 claims referred
there may be several forms of the invention within claim 1, for present purposes
it is sufficient to consider these as two forms:
hinges with only one damper and
hinges with two or more dampers. As noted, I am satisfied that the disclosure
of the PD with respect
to dampers is materially the same as for the application.
In view of my discussion of the multiple damper issue in the TCT opposition,
follows that there is no enabling disclosure in the PD with respect to hinges
having more than one damper. This means a notional
claim formed from claim 1
comprising only two or more dampers cannot claim priority from the PD, such that
its priority date is the
filing date of the application i.e. 10 May 2021.
Conversely, there is an enabling disclosure in the PD for a notional claim that
is restricted to only one damper, and thus this claim can take its priority from
the PD i.e. 11 May 2020.
Consequently,
even if I were to incorporate material from the TCT opposition to deal with the
priority date issue, D6 cannot deprive
a notional claim restricted to only one
damper of inventive step, since D6 was published on 3 December 2020. Whether,
may deprive a notional claim based on two or more dampers of inventive
step is something I will consider below in connection with
inventive step arguments. As will be seen, for completeness, my inventive step
analysis will also extend to the
case where there is only a single
Inventive step
have outlined the relevant principles concerning inventive step above in
connection with the TCT
opposition.
Other than some
specific comments I will make below, I refer to those passages and do not see
any need to repeat those here.
terms of the approach, I note that Polaris adopted the test for
obviousness
Aktiebolaget
that I also adopted in the TCT opposition. The APS did not
provide any submissions on the approach to be taken with respect to inventive
step, nor was one provided by Mr Wood-Roe at the hearing. As noted above, I see
no issue with also adopting the modified Cripps
test for assessing inventive
step in the Polaris opposition, particularly in view of the submissions provided
by the parties.
terms of the “useful desired result”, I note that the APS did not
provide any submissions on the problem to be solved
or the useful desired
result, nor did Mr Wood-Roe provide anything on these at the hearing. The PS
does not specifically single
out a problem or useful desired result, but refers
to Mr Schroder identifying that:
“...D6 addressed the problem of the variability of the dampening
characteristics of the damper by transferring the force to
the damper quite
early during the movement to the closed position and increasing the stroke
PS then refers to a “range of
Schroder considers he would need to solve with respect to the hinge of D6,
“In my view, dust, dirt and the like which could be located between the
cammed surfaces could introduce additional friction
which could introduce
variability in the movement of the hinge from the open position to the closed
I understand it, the problem, or the useful desired result, adopted by Polaris
is to remove variability or inconsistencies in the
damping characteristics of
hinges. While not the “useful desired result” I have adopted in the
TCT opposition, it clearly
falls within the remit of improving the damping
performance of hinges used with glass panels having an edge recess. That is the
approach taken by Polaris is somewhat narrower than I took in the TCT
opposition, which, if taken in this opposition, seems rather
more detrimental to
the Applicant than Polaris. In any case, while the application does refer to
variability in damping characteristics,
it also refers to achieving the desired
damping characteristics, which is rather broader than simply the variability in
. I am satisfied that it is appropriate to also adopt the
“useful desired result” from the TCT opposition in the Polaris
opposition as well, namely improving the damping performance of hinges used with
glass panels having an edge recess. As will be
seen, nothing turns on the
precise formulation of the “useful desired result” in any
Polaris’s inventive step case
noted, Polaris’s inventive step case is based on the application having a
deferred priority date, thereby allowing D6 to
become prior art for the purposes
of inventive step. Polaris’s contentions on inventive step extend from
[132] to [150] of
the PS. Here Polaris asserts that claims 1 and 2 as they
stand lack inventive step in view of D6 when read with the CGK, based on
Schroder’s evidence. At the hearing Ms McDonald was content to simply
rely upon the PS.
relates to a frameless glass hinge for a self-closing gate or door, including a
swimming pool gate.
discloses a total of five hinge embodiments, for present purposes it is
convenient to restrict discussion to the fourth
embodiment. This embodiment is
represented by figures 10 to 16, of which figure 10 is reproduced below.
can be seen from figure 10, the frameless glass hinge
comprises first
and second leaf assemblies
. Leaf assemblies
have respective first and second knuckle bodies
each with first
and second cam surfaces
. Cam surfaces
cam formation
. In use, when the hinge moves about the hinge axis,
the cam formation
causes the second leaf assembly
axially upward along the hinge axis from a rest position, as shown in figure 12
to a biassed position as shown in figure 13.
Both these figures are reproduced
may also be seen on figures 12 and 13, the hinge
also includes a
damping assembly
comprising a piston
fixed to first
knuckle body
. Although the means of operation are described in some
detail in connection with the first embodiment
, the hinge
comprises a seal (not shown) that acts as a high pressure seal to the damping
when its volume is reduced but allows air to easily pass as
the volume of the damping chamber
increases. In effect this results
in the piston
compressing air inside damping chamber
the hinge moves from the biased position to the rest position so as to provide a
soft close action for the hinge
. As should be apparent, the damper
works on air compression, rather than hydraulics.
also includes a pair of biassing springs
in damper slots
. These exert an upward force on
the contact position between the cam surfaces
, thereby creating
friction between these surfaces as the first and second leaf assembles
undergo relative pivotal movement. When the hinge
closing or moving slowly, the biasing springs
are arranged so as to
not to induce friction between cam surfaces
so as to allow the
gate to close.
16, reproduced below, shows an exploded view of hinge
. As can be
seen from this figure, the piston
and biassing springs
located along the axis of the hinge. With respect to the second lead assembly
, the glass panel (not shown) is sandwiched between clamping cover
, clamping plate
and clamping plate gasket
on one side and side gasket
on the other, with side gasket
adjoining the body of the second leaf assembly
. Bolts of the
clamping plate
(not labelled) pass through clamping plate gasket
, glass panel, holes in the second leaf assembly
and clamping washer
so as to ultimately fix the glass
panel in place by tightening clamp fasteners
on the bolts of the
clamping plate
. It can be seen by this arrangement that the damping
is located outside of the planes which describe the faces of
the glass panel and inside the second knuckle body
of the second leaf
. It is apparent that an identical arrangement secures a
glass panel to the first leaf assembly
, with the same relative
disposition of the damping assembly with respect the glass panel and the first
knuckle body
inventive step case relies upon combining D6 with the
with the CGK in question
said to be the Polaris 120 hinge, as outlined in AU 201701858
While this document does
not appear anywhere in Polaris’s evidence, it does appear as annexure MM-1
to Mr Murauer’s
declaration but is not particularised in any way in the
SGP. It is well understood that an opponent’s case is constrained
is in the SGP, and any evidence not encompassed by the SGP cannot form part of
an opponent’s case. It follows that
Polaris’s inventive step case
has suffered a fatality on procedural grounds.
it is possible for me to determine whether the claims lack inventive step in
view of D6 via using the Commissioner’s
powers under 60(3) – I note
that Reg 5.23 is not available for D6, since it has been filed as evidence and
therefore fails
the criteria to enliven Reg 5.23 as specified at Reg 5.23(1)(b).
Be that as it may, whether I should exercise any power under s60(3)
connection with D6 is, in my view, rather similar in these circumstances as if
one were to actually utilise Reg 5.23. This essentially
boils down to whether
MM-1 is likely to make out a ground of opposition that would not otherwise be
made out. Consequently, I will
consider Polaris’s inventive step case in
view of D6 and MM-1 for the purposes of determining whether I should exercise
Commissioner’s powers under s60(3).
to the inventive step case in more detail, as I understand it, the parties agree
that D6 discloses all the integers of claim
1, except 1.4, 1.6 and
After considering the
disclosure of D6, I agree with that assessment.
only evidence that Polaris relies upon for MM-1 being CGK is this from [3] of Mr
Murauer’s declaration, cited at [136] of
“In around the year 2019, a
soft close hinge on the market
was the Polaris 120 hinge. I refer to the document attached as annexure MM-1.
This document is published
Australian Patent Application No. 2017201858A1 and I
recognise the hinge described in the application to be the Polaris 120. I
the invention specifically to improve upon this hinge.” (emphasis
is not clear to me that a hinge being merely “popular” means that
its technical features, as appreciated by a skilled
addressee, have been
assimilated into the CGK. At best, popularity is suggestive that something
have become CGK. The Applicant also disputed that MM-1 was CGK at
[50] of the APS. It is true that Mr Schroder does in fact state,
Schroder2, that the Polaris 120 hinge was “well-known”, but,
again’ this seems to be a statement of popularity
as opposed to
On balance, I do not
consider that MM-1 was CGK in view of the evidence before me. This is yet
another point that is fatal to Polaris’s
inventive step case (and whether
I should exercise any power under s60(3) or Reg 5.23, as the case may be).
any event, even if I assume that MM-1 was CGK, it, ultimately, does not assist
Polaris’s position.. Polaris looks to MM-1
to provide the missing
integers 1.4, 1.6 and 1.7, as apparent from this table presented at [140] of the
agree that MM-1 discloses the features concerned as per Polaris’s table.
Polaris’s arguments,
are essentially premised on Schroder2 at [6], though in my view, one should
consider [6] to [9] of Schroder2, reproduced below:
“6. I was asked what changes, if any, I would make to the proposed
embodiments of D6 to address the problem of ‘consistent
action’. In my view, a hydraulic dampening system is far superior to an
air dampened system at the magnitude of forces
being experienced in heavy glass
gates. The lower dampening force provided by an air dampener would have to be
coupled with a very
strong resistive spring which would make it much more
difficult to adjust the tension of the closing spring such that the hinge
and quickly closes in the installed environment. Additionally, the
strong resistive spring would cause oscillations about the end
point which would
further negatively impact the hinge’s ability to consistently close. It is
preferable to have stronger damping
forces such that a stronger closing action
can be provided, and adjusted. It would be relatively straightforward to simply
the air restriction of D6 with a hydraulic restriction and use the
damping assembly of D6 as a hydraulic damping assembly.
7. Lastly, in my view the invention claimed in the Opposed Application is
generally related to the position and orientation of the
dampener. The type of
dampener, in the context of the Opposed Application, seems to me to be a minor
design choice rather than an
essential integer to achieve the effects claimed by
the Opposed Application.
The Graham Declaration
8. The Graham Declaration seems to be mostly in support of the statement that
D6 does not disclose a hydraulic dampener. I refer to
[5]-[7] of this
declaration in response to those statements.
9. The Graham declaration states that a gasket would be required at the top of
chamber 70. One embodiment of D6, disclosed at [0075]
of D6, specifically
contemplates the addition of such a gasket in the form of O-ring 202. The O-ring
202 is mounted to form part
of the damping assembly so that compressed air will
provide friction to facilitate additional gate slowing properties. I note in
this regard, that the manufacture or properties of the hydraulic dampener of the
Opposed Application are not discussed and assume
therefore that they are
off-the-shelf components. Thus, as stated at [6] in this declaration, I would
consider it a simple change
of shelf-ready components to replace the air
dampeners of D6 with hydraulic dampeners as used in the well-known Polaris 120
or the hinge described in the Opposed Application.”
are number of issues with Mr Schroder’s evidence concerning inventive step
and Polaris’s case based on the same.
Firstly, I find parts of Mr
Schroder’s evidence here to be inherently contradictory. Mr Schroder
suggests that a hydraulic
damper is superior to air dampeners for heavy glass
but in the next
suggests that the
is worth noting that claim 1 explicitly
defines attaching the hinge to a glass
panel, and this would seem to be context that Mr Schroder overlooked in
providing his evidence,
perhaps similar to how Mr Schroder assumed in his first
declaration
that the second
embodiment of D6 comprised a hydraulic damper when that is not the case. Either
way, this apparent contradiction
means I cannot be satisfied that the skilled
addressee would in fact replace the air dampener of D6 with a hydraulic damper
as asserted
by Polaris. If anything, it tends to suggest that Mr Schroder was
seeking to discredit the inventiveness of claim 1, rather than
providing careful
and objective evidence relevant to the matter at hand.
impression is further enhanced by the fact that D6, as best understood, has
deliberately opted for an air dampener over a hydraulic
“It is desirable that self-closing hinges include a soft-close assembly to
ensure the long-term reliability of such hinges.
This is particularly desirable
in frameless glass fencing installations as such hinges will lower impact forces
when the gate is
closed to avoid damage to glass panels. Existing hinges with an
inbuilt soft-close assembly, however, suffer from various drawbacks
which often
result in premature failure. For example, self-close hinge assemblies which
employ a spring mechanism often fail due
to corrosion or fatigue.
Hydraulically actuated self-close hinges, in turn, are prone to failure
resulting from hydraulic fluid leakage.
Other self-close assemblies are
prone to failure as a result of continued exposure to environmental factors such
as sunshine and
(emphasis added)
outlines, in some detail, how an air bleed assembly is used to provide a soft
close function.
refers to the air damper as “enabling operative soft closure of the
frameless glass fencing hinge
, that “[t]his
feature provides a preferred soft-closing
“[o]nce a person has opened such gate and released their hold on the gate,
the gate will close under the influence of gravity
to provide self-closure. The
damping assembly 28, in turn, will then operate to arrest movement of the gate
during closing to enable
this, Mr Schroder does not explain in any detail why D6 would fail to achieve
soft closing. In this light, Mr Schroder
appears to make a glib assumption
that, as, in his view, hydraulic dampers provide superior damping performance in
the context of
glass panels compared to air dampeners, the skilled addressee
would simply swap out the air dampener in D6 for a hydraulic dampener.
may be said regarding Mr Schroder’s comments at [6] of Schroder2
concerning the air dampener needing to be coupled with
a very strong resistive
spring, which, Mr Schroder stated, would cause oscillations about the closing
point. This part of Mr Schroder’s
evidence seems to overlook that the
biassing springs in D6 operate in a completely different and, if anything,
opposite manner to
typical biassing springs that bias the hinge towards the
closed position. The biassing springs in D6 operate to provide friction
cam that in fact resists closing until near to the closing point when they are
arranged to reduce that friction. In giving
his evidence, Mr Schroder appears
to have overlooked what the biassing springs of D6 actually do, and instead
assumed that these
are biasing springs that bias the hinge towards the closed
position. Indeed, in view of how the hinge of D6 operates, it is hard
how one would either actually change the biasing springs to bias the hinge of D6
to a closed position, or add such springs
to the existing biasing springs of D6.
All of this further undermines Mr Schroder’s contention that a skilled
addressee would
replace the air dampener of D6 with a hydraulic damper.
the preceding passages together, it is apparent that Mr Schroder’s
proposed changes to D6 are not so much modifications
as a radical change of the
hinge of D6 into something substantially different from what is described. As
explained above, Mr Schroder’s
reasons for affecting this radical change
appears to reside on assumptions that overlook the disclosure of D6
, putting aside any inconsistencies in Mr Schroder’s evidence. I
fail to see how the changes suggested by Mr Schroder would
be relatively
straightforward. It follows that, putting aside any procedural difficulties,
Polaris would not have been successful
in establishing that any of the claims
lack inventive step in light of D6. In particular, this applies to all forms of
the invention
encompassed within claim 1.
Conclusion on priority, inventive step and Reg 5.23 or
am satisfied that Polaris would be unsuccessful in establishing the obviousness
of any of the claims if I were to arrive at a “deferred”
date by incorporating material from the TCT opposition under Reg 5.23. It
follows that I do not see any need to exercise
Reg 5.23 with respect to any
material from the TCT opposition, nor do I see any need to exercise s60(3) in
connection with MM-1.
Conclusion for the Polaris opposition
opposition is unsuccessful. None of the grounds pursued by Polaris have been
made out. Subject to final determination
concerning the TCT opposition, I
direct the application proceed to grant.
Costs for the Polaris opposition
usually follow the event. I see no reason to do otherwise in the Polaris
opposition. I award costs against Polaris IP Pty
Ltd according to Schedule 8 of
the Regulations.
Dr W.E. Guinea
Delegate of the Commissioner of Patents
Annex A – Claims of the 2021271942
Application.
WSH-16 is a copy of US
2019/0040667 A1, referred to below as “D7”.
Specification page 1, line 25
to page 2, line 2
Specification
page 2, lines 14 to 21.
Specification page 3, line 7 to page 9, line
Specification page 6, lines
Specification page 7,
lines 10 to 12.
Specification
page 9, lines 13 to 25.
not take it that there were any issues concerning convenience or why the
material was not filed earlier that would outweigh
the relevance of the material
in making a decision under Reg
Hunter 1 at [5] and
Hunter1 at [7] to [11]
Murauer1 at [1]
Murauer1 at
Graham1 at [4] and
ATS at [52].
Undisturbed on appeal in
Novozymes A/S v Danisco A/S
[2013] FCAFC 6
For example, the
inclined surfaces 34, 35 may always be in contact or may lose contact when the
hinge is fully open and come into
D1 at [0050] and [0051].
at [120] to [123].
ATS at [55] to [58].
For example, the TS
at [136], [139] and [146].
[116] and [117].
As D1 has not been
pressed by the Opponent in the TS or at the hearing for inventive step, I have
given it no further consideration,
though I could not anyway, since D1 does not
form part of the prior art base for inventive step purposes.
WSH-8 and WSH-9 (English
translation).
TS at [143] to
TS at [146].
Hunter3 at [57].
See for example D7 at
[0011] to [0013] and
That is, for
example, the part of the slots 40 closer to the bottom of the page on figure
The degree of angular
opening at which the damper 39 begins to operate is user adjustable, however the
degree of user adjustability
of these ranges is not clear in
Called features 1(h) to
1(j) by the Opponent
TS [136] to
That is, all the features of
claim 1 as it currently
considered D1 or D2, as these are published too late for inventive step
purposes, although D1 is redundant with respect
Hunter1 at [47] and
Mr Hunter was
provided with a copy of the amended claims and D7 before making Hunter3 –
see Hunter3 at [4] and [5].
See TS at [137] and [139]. Mr Gehrig made similar arguments at the
See TS at [138]. Mr
Gehrig made similar arguments at the
Hunter1 at [59].
See paragraph [18]
Hunter1 at [59],
At page 9, lines 3
Hunter1 at [68](b).
Hunter1 at [66]. Similar
statements are made with respect to some previous dependent claims at [72] to
[75] of Hunter1.
Although not referred
to by TCT, Hunter1 also made observations about the lack of disclosure of the
insert portions at [66] and [68](d),
for example.
At [68] to [79].
At [31] to [40].
Explanatory Memorandum at
pages 44 to 45
TS at [100] to
TS at [108] to [110].
Hunter1 at [47] includes
this semicolon, but this is omitted as quoted in the
Hunter1 at [47] includes
this comma, but this is omitted as quoted in the
TS at [102].
TS at [110].
Paragraph [97] of the
TS is meant, which quotes the text concerned from Hunter1 at [51].
Application page 6,
lines 24 to 29.
Application
page 9, lines 13 to 25. I note TCT did not cite lines 13 and 14, however I have
included these to assist with
dealt with a pre-RTB application, where best method still formed part of
45 ALJR 123
[1971] ALR 495
See [33] to [36] above.
Schroder1 at [1] to
Schroder1 at
Schroder1 at
Murauer2 at [1] and
Murauer2 at
Graham2 at [3] to
At [160] to
I note that the
Commissioner is able to invoke Reg 5.23 irrespective of whether a request has
been made by one of the
Based on Schroder1
at [43], these prior sales/marketing of the invention appear to fall within the
grace period defined by Reg 2.2C
and probably explains why CS-9 or other
material concerning such marketing/sales has not featured in a novelty attack by
The damper adjuster
illustrated in CS-9 is provided with numbers that indicate the degree of damping
adjustment provided to the
See also Shroder1 at
APS [13] to
The PS at [44] refers
to “Lugs of an insert
example, the application at page 9, lines 13 to
At [149] to
As asserted at [60]
Murauer2 at [4] to
“Opponent” reflects the wording of Schroder2, I assume Mr Schroder
“Applicant”.
Murauer2 at [7].
At [131] to
I note that
Polaris refers to Regs 3.13C and 3.13D (perhaps erroneously) in the PS at [109]
and [110]. In any case, to the extent
any one or more of Regs 3.13B to 3.13E may
also be applicable, this will not make any difference in the present matter
these Regs require disclosure commensurate with
Filed as CS-10
in the EIS.
PS at [129]. I note
that Polaris also cited
at [130] of the
PS at [143],
referring to Schroder1 at
Schroder1 at [17],
cited at [144] of the PS.
D6 at [0001].
[0060] to [0066].
[143] to [150].
[136] to [142].
[140]. The APS, at [51] to [59] does not dispute that these are the absent
features but rather concentrates on how the
skilled addressee would not modify
D6 to arrive at the invention of claim 1. Similar submissions were made by Mr
Wood-Roe at the
To the extent Mr Schroder’s evidence here could be taken to help establish
MM-1 as being CGK, this aspect of his evidence is,
in my view, not properly in
At [145] to [150] of the
Schroder2 at
Schroder2 at
See Schroder1 at
[15], Murauer2 at [18] and [19] and Schroder2 at [5].
D6 at [0060] to
D6 at [66].
RTF format (121 MB)
Signed PDF/A format