Bakers Delight Holdings Ltd v Fair Work Ombudsman [2025] FCAFC 144 (16 October 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Bakers Delight Holdings Ltd v Fair Work
[2025] FCAFC 144
Appeal from:
Fair Work Ombudsman v Make Dough Enterprises (in liquidation
File number(s):
TAD 1 of 2025
Judgment of:
MORTIMER CJ
, HATCHER AND DOWLING
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
INDUSTRIAL LAW
franchisor liability –interaction of ss 557C and
Work Act 2009
(Cth) – whether primary judge erred in finding applicant
can rely on the reverse onus provision in
as against an
employer/franchisee to establish the liability of a franchisor under
– appeal dismissed
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION
– appeal – whether primary judge erred in construction of
impugned provisions of the
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) – use of
Parliamentary debates – appeal dismissed
Legislation:
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
, Sch 2 (Australian
Consumer Law)
Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904
Corporations Act 2001
Fair Work Act 2009
Fair Work Amendment (Protecting Vulnerable Workers) Act 2017
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) r 9.06
Trade Practices Act 1974
Workplace Relations Act 1996
Workplace Relations Amendment (Work Choices) Act 2005
Cases cited:
Pty Ltd v H
Lundbeck A/S
[2014] HCA 42
254 CLR 247
Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union v
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2022] FCA 1225
Australian Red Cross Society v Queensland Nurses' Union of Employees
[2019] FCAFC 215
273 FCR 332
Bass v Permanent Trustee Co Ltd
[1999] HCA 9
198 CLR 334
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR
Commissioner of Police v Tanos
[1958] HCA 6
(1958) 98 CLR 383
Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal,
Plumbing and Allied Services Union of Australia v Qantas Airways
[2020] FCAFC 205
282 FCR 130
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
v BHP Coal Pty
[2017] FCAFC 50
Fair Work Ombudsman v Foot & Thai Massage Pty Ltd (in liquidation)
[2021] FCA 1242
Fair Work Ombudsman v Grouped Property Services Pty Ltd
152 ALD 209
Fair Work Ombudsman v Woolworths Group Ltd
[2025] FCA 1092
Ghimire v Karriview Management Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2019] FCA 1627
Ilumba Pty Ltd v Malouf
[2019] FCA 2095
Oceanic Life Ltd v Chief Commissioner of Stamp
[1999] NSWCA 416
154 FLR 129
Port Kembla Coal Terminal Ltd v Construction, Forestry, Mining and
Energy Union
[2016] FCAFC 99
Productivity Partners
Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission
[2024] HCA 27
[2024] HCA 3
280 CLR 288
Ravbar v Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 25
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
262 CLR 362
Tepko Pty Ltd v Water Board
[2001] HCA 19
Yorke v Lucas
(1985) 158 CLR 661
Fair Work Division
National Practice Area:
Employment and Industrial Relations
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr C B O’Grady KC with Mr A Aleksov
Solicitor for the Applicant:
MST Lawyers
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Mr M Felman KC with Mr J Zeeman
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Fair Work Ombudsman
Counsel for the Second Respondent:
The Second Respondent did not appear.
Counsel for the Third Respondent:
The Third Respondent did not appear.
Counsel for the Fourth Respondent:
The Fourth Respondent did not appear.
TAD 1 of 2025
BAKERS DELIGHT HOLDINGS LTD (ACN 052 528
FAIR WORK OMBUDSMAN
MAKE DOUGH ENTERPRISES PTY LTD (ACN 122 520
Second Respondent
JOHN VINCE PUGLISI
(and another
named in the Schedule)
Third Respondent
MORTIMER CJ, HATCHER AND DOWLING JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
to appeal from the Court’s orders made on 12 December 2024 be
applicant’s draft notice of appeal dated 20 January 2025 stand as the
notice of appeal against the Court’s orders
made on 12 December 2024.
appeal be dismissed.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
oldings Ltd, the fourth respondent to this proceeding,
seeks leave to appeal from orders made on 12 December 2024 giving answers to
separate question.
underlying proceeding is an application by the
mbudsman for civil penalties and other relief against
Enterprises Pty Ltd (in liq), BDH and two individuals. At the relevant times,
Make Dough operated a retail bakery business under
the brand “Bakers
Delight” from three locations in Tasmania: Eastlands, Kingston and
Lindisfarne. Make Dough is now in
liquidation and the primary judge observed at
[10] that the liquidators have not engaged with the proceeding. The Directors of
Dough, John Vince Puglisi and Lisa Kay Puglisi, are respondents to the
proceeding and relief is also sought against them personally
under s 550 of the
(Cth). However, they were
said by the primary judge to have not actively participated in the separate
easons at [10].
the civil remedy provisions in issue in the proceeding concern either the wages
and entitlements of workers employed by Make
Dough, or the obligations of Make
Dough under the FWA, such as keeping proper records about payments made to
workers. The FWO also
proceeds against BDH as the franchisor, alleging a
contravention of s 558B of the FWA.
is not in dispute that Make Dough operated its bakery business pursuant to a
franchise agreement with BDH, although BDH does dispute
“responsible franchisor entity” for the purpose of Div 4A of the
primary judge gave a helpful description of the civil remedy provisions in issue
in his Honour’s reasons at [11], which
we set out below at paragraph [
separate question came about because of a disagreement between the parties about
how s 558B operated against BDH; in particular
what the FWO needed to prove
disagreement centres on
the operation and effect of s 557C(1), which imposes a
reverse onus of proof on an employer in certain circumstances. In circumstances
where a franchisor (BDH) is alleged to have contravened s 558B of the FWA, can
the FWO as applicant in the proceeding rely on the
operation of s 557C in
establishing the employer/franchisee contravention, such contravention being the
first element of franchisor
liability under s 558B?
RELEVANT PROVISIONS AND SUMMARY OF DECISION
basis for BDH’s liability is alleged to be s 558B of the FWA, which
provides [emphasis added]:
Responsibility of responsible franchisor entities
and holding companies for certain contraventions
Responsible franchisor entities
A person contravenes this subsection if:
an employer who is a franchisee entity of a franchise contravenes a
civil remedy provision referred to in subsection (7);
(b) the person is a responsible franchisor entity for the franchisee entity;
(c) the contravention by the franchisee entity occurs in the franchisee
entity’s capacity as a franchisee entity; and
(d) either:
(i) the responsible franchisor entity or an officer (within the meaning of the
Corporations Act 2001
) of the responsible franchisor entity knew or could
reasonably be expected to have known that the contravention by the franchisee
entity would occur; or
(ii) at the time of the contravention by the franchisee entity, the responsible
franchisor entity or an officer (within the meaning
Corporations Act
) of the responsible franchisor entity knew or could reasonably be
expected to have known that a contravention by the franchisee entity
of the same
or a similar character was likely to occur.
Note: This subsection is a civil remedy provision (see this Part).
Holding companies
(2) A person contravenes this subsection if:
(a) the person is a body corporate; and
(b) a subsidiary (within the meaning of the
Corporations Act 2001
body corporate who is an employer contravenes a civil remedy provision referred
to in subsection (7); and
(c) either:
(i) the body corporate or an officer (within the meaning of the
Corporations
) of the body corporate knew or could reasonably be expected to have
known that the contravention by the subsidiary would occur; or
(ii) at the time of the contravention by the subsidiary, the body corporate or
an officer (within the meaning of the
Corporations Act 2001
) of the body
corporate knew or could reasonably be expected to have known that a
contravention by the subsidiary of the same or a
similar character was likely to
Note: This subsection is a civil remedy provision (see this Part).
Reasonable steps to prevent a contravention of the same or a similar
(3) A person does not contravene subsection (1) or (2) if, as at the time
of the contravention referred to in paragraph (1)(a) or
(2)(b), the person
had taken reasonable steps to prevent a contravention by the franchisee entity
or subsidiary of the same or a
similar character.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3), in determining whether a person
took reasonable steps to prevent a contravention by a franchisee
subsidiary (the
contravening employer
) of the same or a similar
character, a court may have regard to all relevant matters, including the
(a) the size and resources of the franchise or body corporate (as the case may
(b) the extent to which the person had the ability to influence or control the
contravening employer’s conduct in relation
to the contravention referred
to in paragraph (1)(a) or (2)(b) or a contravention of the same or a
similar character;
(c) any action the person took directed towards ensuring that the contravening
employer had a reasonable knowledge and understanding
of the requirements under
the applicable provisions referred to in subsection (7);
(d) the person’s arrangements (if any) for assessing the contravening
employer’s compliance with the applicable provisions
referred to in
subsection (7);
(e) the person’s arrangements (if any) for receiving and addressing
possible complaints about alleged underpayments or other
alleged contraventions
of this Act within:
(i) the franchise; or
(ii) the body corporate or any subsidiary (within the meaning of the
Corporations Act 2001
) of the body corporate;
as the case may be;
(f) the extent to which the person’s arrangements (whether legal or
otherwise) with the contravening employer encourage or
require the contravening
employer to comply with this Act or any other workplace law.
(5) Subsection (4) does not limit subsection (3).
Civil proceedings in relation to contravention by franchisee entity or
subsidiary not required
(6) To avoid doubt, a reference in paragraph (1)(a) or (2)(b) to a
contravention by a franchisee entity or subsidiary includes any
contravention
whether or not an order has been sought or made against the franchisee entity or
subsidiary under Division 2 for the
contravention.
Relevant civil remedy provisions
(7) The civil remedy provisions are the following:
(a) section 44 (which deals with contraventions of the National Employment
Standards);
(b) section 45 (which deals with contraventions of modern awards);
(c) section 50 (which deals with contraventions of enterprise agreements);
(d) section 280 (which deals with contraventions of workplace
determinations);
(e) section 293 (which deals with contraventions of national minimum wage
(f) section 305 (which deals with contraventions of equal remuneration
(g) subsection 323(1) (which deals with methods and frequency of
(h) subsection 323(3) (which deals with methods of payment specified in
modern awards or enterprise agreements);
(i) subsection 325(1) (which deals with unreasonable requirements on
employees to spend or pay amounts);
(ia) subsection 325(1A) (which deals with unreasonable requirements on
prospective employees to spend or pay amounts);
(j) subsection 328(1), (2) or (3) (which deal with employer obligations in
relation to guarantees of annual earnings);
(k) subsection 357(1) (which deals with misrepresenting employment as an
independent contracting arrangement);
(l) section 358 (which deals with dismissing an employee to engage as an
independent contractor);
(m) section 359 (which deals with misrepresentations to engage an
individual as an independent contractor);
(n) subsection 535(1), (2) or (4) (which deal with employer obligations in
relation to employee records);
(o) subsection 536(1), (2) or (3) (which deal with employer obligations in
relation to pay slips).
s 558B, s 557C was introduced in 2017, as part of a suite of amendments to the
FWA made by the
(Protecting Vulnerable Workers)
which dealt with the circumstances facing workers who had been
employed by franchise operators and who claimed they had not received
wages and entitlements.
557C is a “reverse onus provision”. It provides:
Presumption where records not provided
(a) in proceedings relating to a contravention by an employer of a civil remedy
provision referred to in subsection (3), an applicant
makes an allegation
in relation to a matter; and
(b) the employer was required:
(i) by subsection 535(1) or (2) to make and keep a record; or
(ii) by regulations made for the purposes of subsection 535(3) to make
available for inspection a record; or
(iii) by subsection 536(1) or (2) to give a pay slip;
in relation to the matter;
(c) the employer failed to comply with the requirement;
the employer has the burden of disproving the allegation.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if the employer provides a reasonable
excuse as to why there has not been compliance with
557C(1)(b).
(3) The civil remedy provisions are the following:
(a) section 44 (which deals with contraventions of the National Employment
Standards);
(b) section 45 (which deals with contraventions of modern awards);
(c) section 50 (which deals with contraventions of enterprise
agreements);
(d) section 280 (which deals with contraventions of workplace
determinations);
(e) section 293 (which deals with contraventions of national minimum wage
(f) section 305 (which deals with contraventions of equal remuneration
(g) subsection 323(1) (which deals with methods and frequency of
(h) subsection 323(3) (which deals with methods of payment specified in
modern awards or enterprise agreements);
(i) subsection 325(1) (which deals with unreasonable requirements to spend
or pay amounts);
(j) any other civil remedy provisions prescribed by the regulations.
we explain, the real issue in the separate question, and on this appeal, is the
operation of s 558B(1)(a): in a proceeding against
a franchisor,
an applicant (here, the FWO) establish that an employer/franchisee has
contravened a civil remedy provision in s 558B(7)? If
it has relied on s 557C
against the employer/franchisee and a contravention of a civil remedy provision
has been established, is
that sufficient as against the franchisor?
the reasons set out below, s 558B should be approached no differently to the
accessorial liability provision at s 550 of the FWA,
and so the answer is that
an applicant such as the FWO can rely on s 557C against an employer, and if the
contravention has been
established by this process, it is capable of satisfying
subsection (1)(a). The primary judge was to that extent correct in the answer
his Honour gave.
to appeal should be granted but the appeal should be dismissed.
LEAVE TO APPEAL
FWO opposes the grant of leave to appeal. We consider leave should be granted.
The operation of s 558B, and the role of s 557C,
are issues with ramifications
beyond this proceeding. As the primary judge’s decision, and the
submissions of the parties,
demonstrated, the issue is not an easy one. The
issue is also of significance in the conduct of this proceeding and certainty
be given to the correct approach about the allegations made against
THE ALLEGED CONTRAVENTIONS
PJR [11], his Honour summarised the civil remedy provision contravention
allegations made against Make Dough by the FWO:
The FWO alleges that Make Dough:
(a) breached the record keeping obligations in the FW Act and Regulations;
(b) provided false information to a Fair Work Inspector and hindered or
obstructed a Fair Work Inspector in the exercise of his
(c) contravened a substantial number of clauses in the Bakers Delight (TAS)
Enterprise Agreement 2012, thereby breaching s 50;
(d) failed to comply with various annual leave obligations and carers’
leave obligations in contravention of the National
Employment Standards (thereby
contravening s 44(1));
(e) breached s 323(1), by failing to pay employees in full in relation to the
performance of work and by deducting amounts payable
for annual leave on
termination of employment;
(f) breached s 325(1), by requiring employees to pay a bond for a uniform on
commencement of employment; and
(g) breached s 712(3), by failing to comply with two notices to produce records
or documents.
its allegations against BDH in respect of a contravention of s 558B(1) of the
FWA, the FWO relies on the civil remedy provisions
in s 50 of the FWA; namely
breaches by Make Dough of the
Bakers Delight (TAS)
BDH knew or could reasonably be expected to have known that each of the
Franchisee Contraventions would occur; and further, or alternatively,
could reasonably be expected to have known that contraventions by Make Dough of
the same or a similar character to each of
the Franchisee Contraventions were
likely to occur
“Franchisee Contraventions” are set out in paragraphs [82] to [84],
[85] to [87], [88] to [90], [91] to [93], [94]
to [96], [97] to [99], [100] to
[102], [103] to [105], [110] to [115] and [116] to [121] of the SOC. Broadly, as
the Particulars
to [216] in the SOC state, these alleged contraventions relate
to payments made to workers employed by Make Dough to perform work
“Bakers Delight” stores operated by Make Dough.
example, from [82] of the SOC, is underpayments to workers who were 21 years and
over or who were apprentices of any age. The
SOC sets out what the Enterprise
Agreement stipulated as the ordinary wage rate per hour. The FWO alleges that
these workers were
entitled to be paid a total of $901,521.62 by Make Dough, but
were not paid the applicable rates and were only paid a total of $817,564.93
Make Dough, resulting in a collective underpayment of $83,956.74 by Make Dough
(SOC [83]).
total, the FWO alleged (SOC [226]) that BDH is liable as responsible franchisor
for the sum of $642,162.66, being the total employee
underpayments during the
nominated period (after the introduction of s 558B). In its application for
leave to appeal, BDH contends
that the proceeding relates to 88 separate
employees of Make Dough.
taking this underpayment example in [82]-[84] of the SOC, if the applicant/FWO
can establish this collective underpayment and
contravention of s 50 of the FWA
as against Make Dough, including by relying on s 557C, is that sufficient to
establish the first
element in s 558B(1)(a), or does the FWO have to prove all
those contraventions separately against BDH, without relying on the reverse
for the purposes of the separate question there are no admissions made by BDH
themselves, limited
admissions were made by BDH about contraventions of the record keeping
provisions in ss 535(1) and 535(2) of
the FWA. Those admissions were made in
relation to two employees of Make Dough. The purpose of those admissions in
BDH’s Defence
was to establish, for the purposes of the separate question,
that the preconditions to the reverse onus in s 557C were engaged, because
could be agreed Make Dough had failed to adhere to its record keeping
obligations. See PJR at [13].
THE SEPARATE QUESTION AND ANSWER
separate question (as amended by orders made on 1 July 2024) was:
“In the circumstances set out in paragraphs [49] to [57], [80] to [81],
[83] and [216] of the Statement of Claim and paragraphs
1 to 4 of the Reply, and
paragraphs [49], [80] to [81], [83], [118] to [119], [216] and [225] of the
Further Amended Defence of the
fourth respondent, does
Work Act 2009
(Cth) apply as against the fourth respondent, and if so,
answer given by the primary judge, in orders made on 12 December 2024
Section 557C
Fair Work Act 2009
applies to establish the
contravention referred to at s 588B(1)(a) and it is open to a responsible
franchisor to discharge the burden
of disproving the relevant allegations.
in framing the question, the parties may have invited the primary judge to focus
, as his Honour’s answer reveals, the more appropriate focus
and how the element in subsection (1)(a) can be established. That
is the focus we adopt in these reasons.
PRIMARY JUDGE’S REASONS
primary judge held (at PJR [39]) that
It is not correct to compartmentalise and confine
in its operation only
to allegations made in a proceeding against the employer. To do so is to ignore
that the first element of liability
of the responsible franchisor is derivative
on establishing a contravention by a franchisee.
primary judge pointed out that
involved, as its first step, a derivative
liability imposed on the responsible franchisor from the contravention by an
the legislative history, on which both parties at first instance and on appeal
placed some reliance, the primary judge said (at
The legislative history does not reveal an intent to confine the reverse onus
only to proceedings against an employer. Parliament
simply did not address the
interplay between the reverse onus and first requirement to establish the
derivative liability of the
responsible franchisor. It may be inferred that by
requiring a contravention by the employer as the first element of the derivative
liability of a responsible franchisor, it was assumed that the proof mechanism
would apply.
[52] his Honour added:
The construction of the Ombudsman is supported by other considerations. It
avoids the possibility of inconsistent findings on the
same factual question. It
harmoniously connects the provisions which have as their core purpose the
protection of vulnerable workers
from exploitation where the employer fails in
the obligation to keep employment records, which makes proof of underpayment and
at [11]-[14].
reference to Colvin J’s decision in
v Karriview
Management Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2019] FCA 1627
; 290 IR 331
is a refence to
the following passages:
[11] Record keeping obligations are an important part of the protections
afforded by the
Fair Work Act
. As stated by Reithmuller FM in
Fair Work Ombudsman v Taj Palace Tandoori Indian Restaurant Pty Ltd
[2012] FMCA 258
‑[67] in dealing, prior to the enactment
, with the importance of compliance with the obligation under the
Regulations to issue pay slips to employees:
The need to ensure compliance, particularly with respect to vulnerable workers,
such as those on work visas, those who come to Australia
without strong language
skills, and those with little education is crucial to a just society, and the
avoidance of exploitation.
Whilst the record keeping obligation with respect to pay slips only appears in
the Regulations, its central importance in industrial
matters cannot be
underestimated. Proper pay slips allow employees to understand how their pay is
calculated and therefore easily
obtain advice. Pay slips provide the most
practical check on false record keeping and underpayments, and allow for genuine
or misunderstandings to quickly be identified. Without proper pay slips
employees are significantly disempowered, creating a structure
within which
breaches of the industrial laws can easily be perpetrated.
[12] These statements have been cited with approval in this Court:
Ombudsman v Grouped Property Services Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2017] FCA 557
(Katzmann J) and
Fair Work Ombudsman v South Jin Pty Ltd
[2016] FCA 832
Section 557C
Fair Work Act
states in terms that where in
proceedings relating to a contravention by an employer of a civil remedy
provision an applicant makes
an allegation in relation to a matter and the
employer was required (by specified provisions) to keep a record in relation to
matter and the employer failed to comply with the requirement (and there is
no reasonable excuse as to why there has not been compliance)
then 'the employer
has the burden of disproving the allegation'. The civil remedy provisions
which provides that a person must not contravene a term of a
modern award.
Section 557C
provides for more than an evidentiary burden on the
defaulting employer when it comes to an absence of records. It is not a mere
reversal of the evidentiary onus. Further, it is not a provision, for example,
that operates to deem a matter to be proved in the
absence of evidence to the
contrary. In such cases, an issue may arise as to whether the obligation is to
adduce some evidence which
raises a genuine issue as to whether the matter
occurred or whether the burden of disproving the matter falls on the party who
the matter. Rather,
states expressly that the defaulting
employer bears the burden of disproving the allegation. It is a provision
concerned with the
overall burden of proof.
Colvin J went on to observe at [16], to displace the effect of
employer must “affirmatively prove” that a worker did not work the
hours that they claimed. In
Fair Work Ombudsman v
Woolworths Group
[2025] FCA 1092
, Perram J expressed his agreement with
Colvin J. We also respectfully agree.
BDH’S ARGUMENT
contends the primary judge erred because
can only be engaged in a
proceeding against an employer/franchisee, whether or not the proceeding
includes – as a separate
allegation – contraventions against a
franchisor under
BDH contends an applicant (here, the FWO) bears the
ordinary legal burden of proof of the contravention of the civil remedy
by the franchisor, without reliance on
, and irrespective of
whether a contravention might be separately established against an
employer/franchisee, invoking
and the reverse onus.
submits that, for example, even if an employer/franchisee has made admissions
and in that sense agreed to findings of contravention
(for example of
that admission cannot be used to establish
s 558B(1)(a)
has been met, nor can
any declaratory or other relief granted against an employer/franchisee be relied
upon against a franchisor
s 558(1)(a).
BDH submits the applicant
(here the FWO), must prove the employer/franchisee contraventions afresh, for
the purposes of establishing
franchisor liability under
interpretation, BDH contends, is consistent with the legislative history of
being limited to employers, it affords procedural fairness to franchisors
(who may not have been a party to earlier proceedings against
employers and may
not have had an opportunity to be heard), and recognises that a “blameless
franchisor” cannot take
advantage of the “reasonable excuse”
exception in
As to the legislative history, BDH says neither the
Explanatory Memorandum or Second Reading Speech for the Amendment Act
suggest the Parliament intended the reverse onus in s 557C to apply to the
franchisor.
response to a submission made by the FWO, that on the construction advanced by
BDH the Court might need to consider twice whether
a contravention of a civil
remedy provision is established (once in relation to the employer, and again in
relation to the franchisor),
BDH submitted:
If the BDH construction is accepted, the FWO will not be required to prove
anything twice. There will be only one hearing where the
evidence of all parties
is adduced, once only. What the Court would then do is to work through the
allegations made by the FWO and
the orders that are sought as against each
party, having regard to the evidence before the Court and the submissions of
each party.
In the case made as against the employer, the Court would apply s
557C where applicable, whereas in the case made against BDH, the
Court would
not. The Court would be determining the case only once but applying different
evidentiary rules in relation to different
other words, while BDH accepted that under s 550, the contravention by the
employer does not separately have to be proved against
the accessory, its case
on appeal rested on a distinction being drawn, and intended by Parliament to be
drawn, between ss 550 and
THE CONTEXT OF THE PROVISIONS IN ISSUE
558B is located in Div 4A of Part 4-1, entitled “Responsibility of
responsible franchisor entities and holding companies
for certain
contraventions”. Section 557C is located in Ch 4, Part 4-1, Div 4 –
entitled “General provisions relating
to civil remedies”.
whole of Ch 4 is concerned with “Compliance and Enforcement”, and s
537 describes Part 4-1 as being about civil remedies.
general accessorial liability provision is s 550, located in Div 4. It
Involvement in contravention treated in same way as actual contravention
(1) A person who is involved in a contravention of a civil remedy provision is
taken to have contravened that provision.
Note: If a person (the
involved person
) is taken under this
subsection to have contravened a civil remedy provision, the involved
person’s contravention may be a
serious contravention (see
subsection 557A(5A)). Serious contraventions attract higher maximum
penalties (see subsection 539(2)).
(2) A person is
involved in
a contravention of a civil remedy
provision if, and only if, the person:
(a) has aided, abetted, counselled or procured the contravention; or
(b) has induced the contravention, whether by threats or promises or otherwise;
(c) has been in any way, by act or omission, directly or indirectly, knowingly
concerned in or party to the contravention; or
(d) has conspired with others to effect the contravention.
is s 550 which is alleged to be the basis of liability for Mr and Mrs Puglisi in
this proceeding.
550 has been in effect since the introduction of the FWA in 2009. A
substantially similar provision was introduced into the
Relations Act 1996
(Cth) in March 2006 by the
Workplace Relations
Amendment (Work Choices) Act 2005
(Cth). The section mirrors in substance
and form other accessorial liability provisions: s 75B
Competition and
Consumer Act 2010
Australian Consumer Law
in Sch 2 of the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth). Thus,
was not intended by Parliament
to introduce any new approach to accessorial liability. The words of the section
are drawn from the
long history of accessorial liability in the criminal law and
their application in other legislation: see Brennan J in
(1985) 158 CLR 661
at 673-4 considering
Practices Act 1974
Court has held that s 550 should be construed in the same way as those similar
regulatory provisions:
Fair Work Ombudsman v Grouped Property Services Pty
[2016] FCA 1034
152 ALD 209
(Katzmann J).
unlike the provision considered in
Yorke v Lucas
, s 550 operates as a
deeming provision, imposing liability on accessories for a contravention by
another of a primary civil remedy
provision where the requisite level of
“involvement” is established. The accessorial nature is confirmed by
of s 557A (which deals with a person’s involvement in a
“serious contravention” by reference to “involved
defined by s 550), where the primary contravener is described as “the
principal”.
contrast, s 558B creates a stand-alone civil remedy provision. BDH contended
this meant its operation should not be approached
in the same way as s 550. We
550 applies to a wide range of civil remedy provisions: see s 539(2). This
includes the civil remedy provisions contained
in the general protections
provisions of the FWA, in
of Ch 3 of the FWA, including for example s
340, the adverse action provision. This part of the legislative scheme also
a reverse onus provision: s 361. Section 361 provides:
Reason for action to be presumed unless proved
(a) in an application in relation to a contravention of this Part, it is alleged
that a person took, or is taking, action for a particular
reason or with a
particular intent; and
(b) taking that action for that reason or with that intent would constitute a
contravention of this Part;
it is presumed that the action was, or is being, taken for that reason or with
that intent, unless the person proves otherwise.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply in relation to orders for an interim
injunction.
reverse onus provision has existed, in various forms and contexts, in the FWA
and its predecessors since the original
Conciliation and Arbitration Act
has been held that the reverse onus in s 361 does not apply to claims against
accessories under s 550. In
Port Kembla Coal Terminal Ltd v Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2016] FCAFC 99
, Rangiah J
stated at [448]:
The primary judge correctly held that
Fair Work Act
did not apply
to the allegations against Mr Green [the accessory], and that the applicants
(the present respondents) were required
to prove that he was knowingly concerned
in PKCT’s contraventions. The respondents were required to establish that
had knowledge of each essential element of the contravention:
(1985) 158 CLR 661
at 670 (Mason ACJ, Wilson, Deane and Dawson JJ).
They were required to prove that Mr Giddings’ Union roles or industrial
were among the substantial and operative reasons for Mr Green’s
decision to terminate Mr Giddings’ employment. They were
required to prove
that matter in accordance with the
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
v BHP Coal Pty Ltd
[2017] FCAFC 50
Greenwood, Flick and Rangiah JJ stated at [59]:
The effect of
of the FWA is that in an adverse action case where it is
alleged that a respondent took action for a particular reason or with a
particular intent, it is presumed that the action was taken for that reason or
with that intent, unless the respondent proves otherwise.
Section 361(1)
not usually apply to an allegation of contravention of
through the
operation of
Port Kembla Coal Terminal Ltd v Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2016] FCAFC 99
Automotive,
Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union v Visy
Packaging Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2013] FCA 525
(2013) 216 FCR 70
. The applicant alleges
“knowing involvement” within the meaning of
of the FWA against
the Downer entities. To be knowingly involved, those respondents must have
intentionally participated in the contravening
conduct, with actual knowledge of
the essential facts which constituted the contravention: see
Yorke v Lucas
(1985) 158 CLR 661
at 667. It may be that
of the FWA has
application to the question of whether the respondents intentionally
participated in the contravening conduct, but
the point was not argued before
the primary judge or in the appeal and it is unnecessary to decide it. The
immediate point in respect
of paragraph 28B of the ASOC is that the applicant
carries the onus of proving that the Downer entities had the requisite
case presents more analysis. Those cases pre-date the introduction of
. Those decisions have been applied a number of times, including;
Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union v
Commissioner of Taxation
[2022] FCA 1225
and [485] (Jagot J);
Fair Work Ombudsman v Foot & Thai Massage Pty Ltd (in liquidation) (No
[2021] FCA 1242
(Katzmann J); and
Australian Red Cross
Society v Queensland Nurses' Union of Employees
[2019] FCAFC 215
(Greenwood, Besanko and Rangiah JJ).
authorities are consistent with the proposition that the reverse onus in
is directed at
the primary contravener’s reason for acting
is directed at the accessory’s conduct and knowledge of the
essential elements of the primary contravention, by the principal
whose conduct the reverse onus applies).
our view, the same approach should be taken to the relationship between
The latter is directed towards the proof of a contravention by an
employer/franchisee, not a franchisor. That said, as we will explain,
remains in its character an accessorial liability provision. Therefore, for a
moving party to satisfy the requirements of
s 558B(1)(a)
, it is not necessary
for that moving party separately to prove a contravention by the
employer/franchisee without the assistance
As against the
employer/franchisee,
is in play, just as
is in play against a
primary respondent in an adverse action proceeding.
both circumstances, there must be a principal, or primary actor, who contravenes
a civil remedy provision.
the primary contravention or liability is established (including by reliance on
any reverse onus), the focus of the accessorial
liability provisions is on the
nature and character of the involvement of the party said to be liable under the
accessorial provisions.
THE ENACTMENT OF
SECTION 558B
SECTION 557C
were part of a suite of amendments to the FWA introduced by the
Amendment Act.
the Second Reading speech for the Amendment Act, the Minister stated:
We know that the majority of employers do the right thing, but it is also
apparent that there are some cases of widespread underpayment
or coercion of
workers, such as the well-publicised exploitation of workers by some 7-Eleven
franchisees. These are the instances
this bill seeks to address.
noted the increased penalties introduced, and the prohibition on employers
asking for cash payments back from their employees,
the Minister said:
The bill will also clarify the accessorial liability provisions to make them
more effective. These changes will ensure that franchisors
and holding companies
that exercise significant control over their franchisees or subsidiaries will be
responsible for underpayments
where they turned a blind eye or were complicit in
such a breach.
Where the franchisor or holding company should have known of the breach, or a
similar breach, but did not take reasonable steps to
try to prevent it then they
may be liable for the underpayments.
Minister then noted the qualifications in the Amendment Act around the need to
establish franchisors had a sufficient level of
control over the employment
practices of employers/franchisees before liability for employer/franchisee
contraventions would be imposed.
He then stated:
The bill will not absolve franchisees or subsidiaries of their responsibility
under workplace laws. These employers will remain liable
for any breach of the
Fair Work Act
under existing laws.
in a passage emphasised by BDH, the Minister noted the strengthening of the
evidence gathering powers of the Fair Work Ombudsman
to assist in investigating
contraventions “even if there is no paper trail”. Relatedly, BDH
submitted the focus, at least
at that time, was on the Ombudsman having
additional powers, without any suggestion that a reverse onus would be imposed
franchisor.
Previous reports and inquiries
Minister’s reference to the 7-Eleven franchise situation is reflected in a
report issued in April 2016 by the Fair Work
Ombudsman about the outcomes of an
inquiry into the 7-Eleven franchise network:
Identifying and addressing the
drivers of non-compliance in the 7-Eleven network
inquiry had been initiated in 2014, and related to allegations that significant
underpayment of wages and falsification of employment
records were occurring
across much of the 7-Eleven franchisee network. The Executive Summary
The Inquiry found 7-Eleven’s approach to workplace matters, while
ostensibly promoting compliance, did not adequately detect
or address deliberate
non-compliance and as a consequence compounded it. In particular, instances
where franchisees created false
and misleading records to satisfy
7-Eleven’s auditing and payroll regime while continuing to underpay
section 4.7
of the report, the Fair Work Ombudsman discussed the importance of
employment record keeping, and its fundamental role in the enforcement
workplace rights and obligations:
The failure to keep proper records and to issue payslips: disempowers employees,
undermines the effectiveness of workplace inspectors,
and creates a structure
where breaches of workplace laws may be easily perpetrated.
Making false records, particularly if intended to mislead a Fair Work Inspector
that a business is compliant with its obligations,
is of serious concern to us
for several reasons:
it frustrates an employee’s capacity to
know, and hold an employer accountable, for their minimum entitlements
impedes our ability as a regulator to properly and promptly investigate
whether an employer is compliant with the law
deprives us of crucial evidence, leading to the use of significant public
funds to undertake extensive investigation and analysis
of multiple sources of
evidence that wouldn’t otherwise be required
can prevent us from assessing underpaid entitlements and taking enforcement
action when necessary.
Court has also recognised the importance of record-keeping: see
at [11]-[12].
the recommendations in the report were recommendations that the Fair Work
to maximise use of accessorial liability to ensure those involved in serious
breaches of workplace laws are held accountable,
noting the evidentiary
requirements and our lack of capacity to require any person to answer questions
on the record in relation
to alleged contraventions of workplace laws.
in 2016, the Senate Education and Employment References Committee published a
report entitled “
A National Disgrace: The Exploitation of Temporary
Work Visa Holders
”. As the FWO submitted to the primary judge, this
report considered the effects of the absence or fabrication of wages records
franchisees, including 7-Eleven. While the report had a focus on a number of
immigration related issues, the Senate Education
and Employment References
Committee also recommended that there be an independent review of the
“penalty, accessory liability,
and sham contracting provisions under the
Fair Work Act 2009
” and the review should, amongst other matters, make
“recommendations on the utility of the accessory liability provisions
Fair Work Act 2009
Course of the Fair Work Amendment (Protecting Vulnerable
Workers) Bill
on from these inquiries and reports, the Fair Work Amendment (Protecting
Vulnerable Workers)
2017 was introduced into the House of
Representatives on 1 March 2017.
23 March 2017, the Senate referred an inquiry into the provisions of the Bill to
Senate Education and Employment Legislation
Committee for inquiry and report by 9 May 2017.
Senate Education and Employment Legislation Committee’s report
acknowledged (at [3.5]) that:
Under the Fair Work Act's current accessorial liability provisions, franchisors
and holding companies with no knowledge of contraventions
within their networks
cannot be found to have been 'involved in' the contraventions.
noting that the new provisions did not displace or reduce the obligations of
employers/franchisees, the Committee emphasised
that the criterion in the Bill
for franchisor liability rested on the concept of a “significant degree of
influence or control”
over the relevant employer/franchisee's affairs,
while also providing a “reasonable steps” defence. The Committee
the view it was “appropriate that the bill seek to supplement
the existing accessorial liability provisions in the
Fair Work Act
relation to the proposed increase in penalties for failures in record keeping,
the Senate Education and Employment Legislation
Committee expressed the view
that (at [5.33]):
The committee believes that stronger penalties for breaches relating to
record-keeping requirements are necessary to deter a small
minority of employers
who deliberately fail to keep appropriate records as part of a systematic plan
to underpay workers and disguise
their wrongdoing.
Senate Education and Employment Legislation Committee’s overall view was
expressed at [2.12] of its report:
The committee is of the opinion that the bill addresses a growing body of
evidence that indicates that the
Fair Work Act
needs to be strengthened in order
to better protect vulnerable workers, and appropriately punish those who
deliberately and systematically
break the law.
Recommendation
6 of the Labor Senator’s Additional Comments on the report related to a
reverse onus of the kind enacted in
1.23 Labor senators recommend that the government amend the bill to include a
failure to address complaints about alleged underpayments
to the list of conduct
in proposed
subsection 557A(2)
to be considered when assessing whether conduct
constitutes a serious contravention.
Increased penalties for record-keeping failures
1.24 Labor senators support the increased penalties for record-keeping failures
proposed in the bill.
1.25 However, in addition to increased penalties, Labor senators consider that a
reverse onus of proof in wage disputes where an
employer fails to keep or
provide employee records is also necessary to encourage compliance with
record-keeping obligations.
1.26 As the WEstjustice submission detailed:
In order to eliminate the incentive for employers to avoid keeping employee
records, and create a culture of compliance, we propose
that a reverse onus of
proof be imposed on employers who are respondents to claims for unpaid wages and
have failed to keep or produce
employee records where required by law. Employers
who had not kept records could still discharge the onus in another way, for
via us of CCTA footage or rosters.
To achieve this we suggest including a new provision in Division 4 of
to reverse the onus of proof in respect of civil remedy provisions concerning
payment of wages where the employer had not kept and/or
provided employee
records as required by
sections 535
Fair Work Act
or regulation 3.42
of the Fair Work Regulations.
[Footnotes removed]
Greens members of the Senate Education and Employment Legislation Committee made
a similar point at 1.7 of their Additional Comments:
The failure of an employer to keep records can result in the burden of proof
falling to vulnerable workers when attempting to prove
wage theft. In these
instances, as WEstjustice points out, the current legislative framework rewards
employers who fail to keep employee
records. It is also apparent that penalties
do not always act as an adequate deterrent to exploiting workers, particularly
penalties can be easily absorbed by the franchisor. The Greens support
the increase of penalties, however the bill should be amended
to reverse the
onus of proof when employees make claims and the employer has failed to keep
records in accordance with the law. This
will incentivise employers to maintain
adequate records.
The introduction of s 557C
the Bill was introduced into the House of Representatives, s 558B was present
but s 557C was not.
Consistently
with the position of the Greens members of the Senate Education and Employment
Legislation Committee’s Report,
a reverse onus provision was introduced by
Adam Bandt MP, for the Greens Party. The proposal was voted down in the House of
Representatives.
Bill proceeded to the Senate, was read a first time, and debate resumed about
appropriate amendments to the Bill, including the
first version of what would
become s 557C. Through several days in mid-August 2017 and early September, the
Bill (including a newly
proposed s 557C, introduced by Senator Cameron on
behalf of the then-opposition Labor Party) was debated in the Senate. The debate
included references to government reservations about the potential for
unscrupulous workers to exploit the provision, and the government
prepared to endorse the reverse onus. Other speakers recounted accounts of
employers/franchisees not keeping or producing
accurate pay records, and the
terms of the “reasonable steps” exception in sub-section (2). There
was no real debate
following reference by Senator Cameron on 14 August 2017 (emphasis
This bill purports to make franchisors and holding companies responsible for
underpayments by franchisees or subsidiaries. This is
aimed at responding to the
7-Eleven scandal, but there are flaws with the new civil liability offence in
this bill, which shows that
the government's response is weak.
government's offence will not reverse the onus of proof, which means that it
will remain very hard for workers and the Fair Work
Ombudsman to successfully
prosecute franchisors
. Many large businesses do not use a franchise model
and will therefore not be liable, and businesses that use a franchise model are
likely to move out of that model or design their business relationships in order
to escape prospective liability under the offence.
Labor's amendments address
all of these flaws. They are essential to giving this bill real teeth. The
government must support them
if it truly wants to stamp out underpayments across
our economy.
4 September 2017 Senator Marshall, for the Opposition, stated:
I support the position that we support these amendments and what's been
discussed and negotiated with Senator Xenophon, even though
the government's not
pursuing it, because I think it is important to move forward. If an employee or
alleged employee can establish
that they did work for a business or an employer,
and the employer either has deliberately not kept the records or doesn't want to
show the records because they will prove that they were underpaying, it ought to
be a reverse onus of proof because the employee
is in such a vulnerable
position. How do they establish those facts? They can't establish those facts.
They're being ripped off in
the first place. As if the employer is going to make
it easy for them to come and prove that they were going to be ripped off! I
some people say cases where this business model's in place are rare. Well, I'm
telling you: they're not rare. They're across
industry, and in hospitality in
particular.
government maintained its position that it would not support the provisions.
support of the version of s 557C (including changes to sub-section (2)) that he
had introduced, Senator Cameron stated:
We don't believe that where an employer has failed to deliver on what is an
obligation under the existing act to provide a pay slip
there should be any
impediments put before an employee to actually prove that they haven't been
paid. It really is a problem created
by the employer in not providing a pay
slip, which is their legal obligation to provide, and then hiding behind that
and indicating
to a worker that the worker needs to provide the proof. We
understand that you don't reverse the onus of proof easily, but when an
is breaching the act as it stands then there is, in my view, an obligation on
parliament to make sure that that employee
doesn't have unnecessary hurdles to
jump before they can undertake a case to get what is their legitimate right. If
an employer is
not complying by providing a pay slip then there should be a
reverse onus of proof.
So, we are very clear that this is another protection for vulnerable workers, by
having a reverse onus of proof. In actually bringing
a case against a powerful
employer—an employer who has all the facts, an employer who may have been
exploiting the worker—the
worker may have some difficulties if they don't
have a pay slip. So, the employer has an obligation under law to provide the pay
slip, and you can't have noncompliance with legal obligations making it harder
for a vulnerable worker, a worker in an exposed position,
to actually make a
claim for their rights under the law and their rights to get paid for what
they've worked. A 'reasonable excuse'
has to be reasonable, and the employee
cannot be put in a position with the employer because of an omission, either
deliberate or
non-deliberate, by the employer, where they cannot get a fair
day's pay for a fair day's work.
4 September 2017, the Senate transmitted all of its proposed amendments back to
the House of Representatives, and the Bill was
passed with those amendments on 5
September 2017.
Explanatory Memorandum to the Amendment Act stated (at [35]-[39]):
Part 2 of Schedule 1 amends the
Fair Work Act
to insert new provisions to
hold ‘responsible franchisor entities’ (referred to as franchisors)
and ‘holding companies’
responsible for certain contraventions of
the Act by businesses in their networks. The new provisions supplement and do
not override
the existing accessorial liability provisions (section 550).
Some franchisors and holding companies have established franchise agreements and
subsidiaries in their corporate structure that operate
on a business model based
on underpaying workers. Some have either been blind to the problem or not taken
sufficient action to deal
with it once it was brought to their attention.
Recent highly publicised cases of exploitation of vulnerable workers, including
7-Eleven franchisees, demonstrate more needs to be done by franchisors
and holding companies to protect vulnerable workers employed
in their business
networks. A number of case studies are provided in the Senate Education and
Employment References Committee’s
report entitled
A National Disgrace:
The Exploitation of Temporary Work Visa Holders
, March 2016 and reports of
the Fair Work Ombudsman.
Under the existing laws a person may be held responsible for being
‘involved in’ a contravention, even if they are not
employer (section 550). This is known as accessorial liability. There is no
accessorial liability if a person genuinely
‘did not know’.
The provisions only apply to responsible franchisor entities which have a
significant degree of influence or control over the relevant
franchisee’s
affairs. By definition, holding companies have control over the affairs of their
subsidiaries. Control relates
to the affairs of the franchisee or subsidiary
broadly, not only as to minor matters that would not have any impact on the
and operational decisions of the business.
terms of the intended relationship to the existing accessorial liability
provisions in the FWA, the Explanatory Memorandum stated
at [35] that:
the new provisions supplement and do not override the existing accessorial
liability provisions (section 550).
Conclusion on the legislative history
the Explanatory Memorandum predates the introduction of s 557C after the debate
in the Senate, it nevertheless provides important
context for the
Parliament’s objectives in introducing liability for franchisors.
legislative history clearly demonstrates that the Parliament recognised,
consistently with the inquiries and reports which led
to the Amendment Act, that
the terms of the accessorial liability in s 550 were not adequate to capture the
circumstances where workers
were employed by franchisees. Parliament recognised
that there was a sufficient factual basis to suggest that some franchisors were
not undertaking appropriate supervision of the way franchisees were treating
workers, and were not adequately supervising franchisees’
compliance with
employment and industrial laws. Parliament recognised that, with legislative
safeguards, it was appropriate to impose
a new form of accessorial liability on
franchisors, where contraventions by employers/franchisees had been established,
the franchisors
likely being the entities more likely with capacity to
compensate workers and pay appropriate penalties.
context is critical to the correct interpretation of s 558B, and the role of s
557C. Nevertheless, it is true that the legislative
history does not squarely
explain what Parliament intended to be the operational relationship between the
two provisions.
APPLICABLE INTERPRETATION PRINCIPLES AND THE USE OF EXTRINSIC
parties agreed the current general approach to statutory interpretation was set
out by Kiefel CJ, Nettle and Gordon JJ in
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
262 CLR 362
(cited recently by
Gageler CJ, Gordon and Edelman JJ in
[2024] HCA 3
280 CLR 288
The starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning of a statutory provision
is the text of the statute whilst, at the same time,
regard is had to its
context and purpose. Context should be regarded at this first stage and not at
some later stage and it should
be regarded in its widest sense.
[Citations removed]
having regard to the context of s 558B, it is appropriate to take into account
the pre-existing law. This relevantly includes s
550 and how that provision
applies to principals and accessories. In
H Lundbeck A/S
[2014] HCA 42
254 CLR 247
Crennan, Bell and Gageler
JJ explained:
The pre-existing law and the legislative history should not deflect the Court
from its duty to resolve an issue of statutory construction,
text-based activity.
However, both parties recognised that the task of
statutory construction in this case required some appreciation of the
pre-existing
law and the legislative history of relevant provisions
Undoubtedly, questions of policy can inform the Court’s task of statutory
construction.
[Citations removed, emphasis added]
Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing
and Allied Services Union of Australia v
Airways Limited
[2020] FCAFC 205
282 FCR 130
, Rares and Colvin JJ applied this passage in
in the context of industrial law at [35]:
Particularly in a field like industrial law where there is a history of
legislative provisions that deploy concepts that have their
origins in earlier
statutes the terms of which have been interpreted by the Courts to form a body
of associated law, the pre-existing
law may provide part of the
context in which to consider the statutory provisions:
Electrolux Home
Products Pty Ltd v Australian Workers' Union
[2004] HCA 40
(Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ); and
Pty Ltd v H Lundbeck A/S
[2014] HCA 42
(2014) 254 CLR 247
. Terms may be carried into legislation on the basis that they have
acquired a particular meaning through past usage within the particular
being addressed by the legislation or may be adopted to change or alter the
effect of past approaches. In either case, the
context may be important in
determining the intended meaning.
, and the extrinsic material excerpted
above, we consider that Parliament, in creating s 558B, did so expressly in the
the pre-existing law in s 550 and intended to add to it to provide a
consistent, but more tailored, mechanism to address the situation
of franchisors
and franchisees.
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) provides that recourse
may be had to “material not forming part of the Act [which] is capable of
assisting in the ascertainment
of the meaning of the provision”, in
circumstances including where “the provision is ambiguous or
obscure”. This
material includes “any relevant material ... in any
official record of debates in the Parliament or either House of the
Parliament”:
s 15AB(2)(h). Section 15AB “supplements, but [does] not
displace, the common law” (
v Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 25
(Gordon J).
as Gordon J explained in
(at [137]-[138]), reliance on statements
in Parliamentary debates may only be of assistance in ascertaining
Parliament’s intention
where there is a link between what is in the
debates and the text of the legislation as enacted. That is what supplies an
of objective Parliamentary intention. That link is present here, as
we have outlined above.
at [377], Jagot J made these observations about the use of
statements from individual members of Parliament:
It may be accepted that legislative purposes are not to be divined from private
communications. Parliamentary debates, however, occur
in the public domain.
Further, once it is accepted that the objective circumstances which called forth
the legislation are relevant
to the ascertainment of legislative purpose, it
must also be accepted that ensuring that, for the period of the administration,
C&G Division would not engage in political activities, including
political communications, formed part of those objective circumstances.
characterise this objective as a mere subjective reason that some individual
legislators or the legislature as a collective wanted
to enact Pt 2A may be
convenient but is not convincing. There is no justification to accept one
publicly stated legislative purpose
– to restore functionality to the
C&G Division – and yet to ignore another publicly stated legislative
to ensure that the C&G Division would be prevented from
political activity including political communications during the period
administration. No doubt individual legislators may have had different reasons
or motives for wanting to achieve this objective.
It is those reasons and
motives which are to be disregarded, not the objective itself.
the present circumstances, the Senate debates inform why, and explain how, s
557C came to be introduced. They also inform its perceived
role in remedying
what Parliament saw, based on the many instances given in the reports and
inquiries which preceded the Amendment
Act, as an imbalance and unfairness
imposed on workers seeking to recover what they alleged they were due, where
employers/franchisees
failed to keep, or supply, accurate pay and entitlement
debates and the extrinsic material all demonstrate that Parliament viewed s 558B
as a form of accessorial liability, supplementing
the existing forms already in
the FWA such as s 550, and providing a more tailored mechanism to address the
situation of franchisors
and franchisees. Parliament did not see s 558B as any
different in character and purpose to s 550, but did recognise the need for
specific approach.
of the extrinsic material provides any support for BDH’s contended
approach that s 558B creates some new and different
form of liability, and
should be approached differently from s 550 in terms of what has to be
established about the contravening
conduct of a primary actor. BDH accepted
that, under s 550, the primary contravention by the employer does not separately
be proved against the accessory. We consider s 558B should be approached
in the same way.
common law principle that apart from any reliance upon s 15AB, a court may have
regard to extrinsic materials to “ascertain
the mischief which a statute
is intended to cure” (
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club
(1997) 187 CLR 384
at 408 (Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey and Gummow JJ)) is
also applicable. One of the mischiefs to which s 558B was directed was the
perceived role of franchisors in the exploitation of workers employed by
franchisees, and the unsuitability of s 550 to address this.
The Amendment Act
provisions were intended to cure this by imposing a more appropriate form of
direct legal responsibility on franchisors.
Parliament’s legislative
judgment about when such imposition was appropriate centred on a
franchisor’s level of influence
or control over a franchisee’s
affairs, while also recognising in the amendments that a defaulting franchisee
was often unlikely
to supply the documentary evidence needed to establish
underpayments and other contraventions of workers’ entitlements.
CONCLUSION ON THE LEGISLATIVE SCHEME
558B was intended by Parliament to be a further form of accessorial liability,
to strengthen the enforcement of the civil
remedy provisions in the FWA in
circumstances where an employer was also in a franchisee arrangement, and it was
objectively appropriate
to sheet home to a franchisor legal responsibility for
the failure of the employer/franchisee to meet its obligations under the FWA,
especially as to record keeping, and payment of wages and provision of
entitlements. The clear history of default demonstrated by
the inquiries and
reports which preceded the Amendment Act was the mischief Parliament sought to
remedy by the introduction of a
series of provisions in 2017, including but not
limited to s 558B.
550 was regarded as inadequate to cover the circumstances of the
franchisee/franchisor relationship, and a more tailored form
of accessorial
liability was seen by Parliament to be necessary.
is no basis in the text, context or purpose of s 558B and the other provisions
of the Amendment Act which accompanied it to
see s 558B as somehow distinct or
different in purpose from s 550. It was intended to supplement the liability
imposed by s 550 and,
as we have explained, tailor it more specifically to what
Parliament considered appropriate where there was a franchisee/franchisor
arrangement.
reject the heavy focus BDH sought to impose on the other provisions in the
Amendment Act which strengthened the role of the FWO
and gave the FWO more
investigative powers. While that is undoubtedly a policy component of the
Amendment Act, an applicant in respect
of a contravention of s 558B might well
than the FWO. Under the terms of ss 539 and 540 of the
FWA, a range of persons can apply for orders in relation to contraventions
civil remedy provisions: including inspectors, employees, and employee and
employer organisations (as defined in s 12 of the FWA).
Section 558B must
accordingly be construed in a manner which gives the provision a consistent
operation, as an accessorial liability
provision, no matter who the authorised
applicant is in respect of alleged contraventions by employers/franchisees and
franchisors.
OPERATION OF SECTION 558B, READ WITH SECTION 557C
Accessorial
liability as a concept has been drawn from the criminal law, as
makes clear: at 666-7 (Mason ACJ, Wilson, Deane and Dawson JJ) and 673
(Brennan J). Liability is derived from the conduct of a principal
more is needed. Accessorial liability always turns upon proof of some kind of
independent conduct or state of mind of
the accessory as well; the attribution
of liability to an accessory is generally not automatic. In the way the civil
law, and especially
statutory and regulatory law, has sought to use accessorial
liability, different legislative judgments are made about what level
knowledge or involvement is required in a given circumstance.
Productivity Partners
Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2024] HCA 27
Edelman J said:
An accessory is a person to whom the liability of a principal for a crime or
civil wrong is attributed. The accessory did not commit
the crime or other wrong
but will have attributed to them the liability of the person who did. Since the
focus is upon attribution
of liability for a wrong found to have been committed
by another, it has rightly been said that "[t]he very basis of secondary
is different from that of a principal".
subsection (1)(a) expresses the wrong of
another – the employer/franchisee – as a precondition to any
liability for a
franchisor arising. There is no doubt the liability is
accessorial: it would not arise without the underlying contravention by an
employer/franchisee. Of course, more must be established against the franchisor
– in particular, control or supervision of
the franchisee’s affairs
(including its compliance with FWA requirements), and at least constructive
knowledge of the employer/franchisee
contraventions.
the extrinsic material demonstrates, the standard in s 550, interpreted in the
Yorke v Lucas
, was seen by the Parliament as inappropriate for
the franchisor/franchisee situation. Instead Parliament focussed on what kind of
conduct by a franchisor should lead to legal responsibility for FWA
contraventions by a franchisee. In doing so, Parliament settled
precondition which is expressed as a fact that must be established: a
contravention by an employer/franchisee.
Satisfaction
of the subsection (1)(a) precondition might occur in a number of ways. In terms
of determining the correct operation
of s 558B, the operation of the provision
needs to be considered in a range of scenarios.
might have been an admission provided by an employer/franchisee for the purposes
of avoiding contested civil proceedings against
it, and the employer/franchisee
may have consented to certain relief being granted against it. In that situation
s 558B(1)(a) may
be satisfied upon proof of the admission and any relief
an employer/franchisee might also be a respondent party to the civil proceeding
brought against the franchisor. In that situation,
unless there is a finding of
contravention against the employer/franchisee in the proceeding, the
precondition in s 558B(1)(a) will
not be met and no liability could attach to
the franchisor. If an employer/franchisee successfully defends the contravention
allegations
against it, by (amongst other matters) discharging the reverse onus
in s 557C, s 558B cannot operate.
third possible scenario is where an employer/franchisee is also a respondent
party but is placed in liquidation, as Make Dough was
here, and (again as here)
the liquidators elect not to participate in a proceeding against the
employer/franchisee company, leaving
the allegations against the company
essentially undefended.
our view, s 557C may be engaged in this third scenario and is available to a
moving party such as the FWO. That proposition is
no more than an application of
the terms of s 557C, which are engaged in “proceedings
a contravention by an employer”.
phrase “relating to” is of wide import, but does require a
connection to or between subject matter, and the nature
of the relationship or
connection may vary depending on the context and purpose in which the phrase is
used , see generally:
Oceanic Life Ltd v Chief Commissioner of Stamp
[1999] NSWCA 416
154 FLR 129
(Fitzgerald JA) and the cases
cited therein. Considering the context and purpose of s 558B in the legislative
scheme, and the interdependence
between franchisee and franchisor liabilities, a
sufficient connection exists because the employer/franchisee contravention is
first element of s 558B. In our view, neither party’s submissions
adequately recognised that as a matter of construction, a
proceeding under s
558B against a franchisor could be a proceeding “relating to” a
contravention by an employer.
purpose and effect of s 557C is to impose a burden of proof
. It does so by moving the burden in relation to the underlying
facts alleged to constitute a contravention from an employee to an
employer: see
Woolworths Group
at [129]-[130] (Perram J). The exclusion in s 557C(2)
again operates in its terms on the provision
by an employer
“reasonable excuse”. There is no reason to apply its terms any
differently when the employer is also a franchisee,
and the franchisor liability
provisions of the FWA are also in issue in a proceeding. Nor is there any
objective basis in the legislative
scheme to distinguish between solvent and
insolvent employers/franchisees, or participating or non-participating
employers/franchisees,
bearing in mind active participation as a respondent
party will be a forensic choice.
that extent, BDH is correct in its submissions that in a s 558B proceeding, s
557C does not contemplate that a franchisor can assume
the burden imposed on the
employer/franchisee, nor that a franchisor can provide a “reasonable
excuse” on behalf of the
employer/franchisee for the purposes of s 557C(2)
and the restoration of the ordinary legal burden of proof on the moving party
contraventions of civil remedy provisions listed in s 557C(3).
fourth scenario is that the employer/franchisee is not a party at all. BDH
contends this is addressed by s 558B(6). BDH submitted
that this provision
makes it plain that a contravention of s 558B(1) does not require the
“employer” to be a party to any litigation as against
a responsible
franchisor under s 558B, nor is it necessary for any orders be sought against
the employer to seek orders as against
a responsible franchisor.
558B(6) provides:
To avoid doubt, a reference in paragraph (1)(a) or (2)(b) to a contravention by
a franchisee entity or subsidiary includes any contravention
whether or not an
order has been sought or made against the franchisee entity or subsidiary under
Division 2 for the contravention.
effect of that provision is not quite as BDH contends. The provision clarifies
need not be relief sought or granted
employer/franchisee. For example, if leave to proceed against the
employer/franchisee here (Make Dough) had
been granted, then the fact
Make Dough was in liquidation would have prevented any relief being granted
against it, but the effect
of s 558B(6) is that this would
prevented the proceeding against BDH. The same reasoning applies to the
circumstances of Mr and Mrs Puglisi. There might be
any number of other forensic
reasons why a moving party (whether the FWO or another person) might choose not
to seek relief against
an employer/franchisee, but seek relief against a
franchisor. Including, but not limited to, a forensic judgment about which
is more likely to be able to satisfy orders made by the Court.
the other hand, an employer/franchisee might seek to be joined to a proceeding,
even if no relief is sought against them, in order
to be heard about the
contraventions of civil remedy provisions alleged against it for the purposes of
s 558B, but that again is
a forensic decision in a given case, which does not
affect the construction and operation of s 558B. In contrast, an
employer/franchisee
may elect not to participate in a proceeding, even if relief
is sought against them. The operation and engagement of the provision
depend on the various forensic choices that might be made in any given piece of
litigation.
do not accept BDH’s contention that the policy and purpose behind s 557C
cannot be intended to extend to franchisors in an
alleged contravention of s
558B, because franchisors are not the persons with the record keeping
obligations. First, as we have explained
above, the whole point of s 558B was to
impose liability on those franchisors which had the capacity to supervise and
performance of their franchisees in terms of their FWA obligations.
The list of civil remedy provisions in s 558B(7) includes the
record keeping
obligations: see ss 558B(7)(n) and (o). There is nothing incompatible with the
purpose of these provisions for s 557C
to be given its express effect for the
purpose of proving an employer/franchisee contravention as the first (but only
element of franchisor liability under s 558B. While BDH’s
contentions described the policy and purpose of the provisions as
“a defaulting employer should not profit from their default”, when s
558B is properly characterised as an
accessorial liability provision, it is
evidence that a
purpose of the provisions is to impose legal
responsibility to franchisors for the defaults of employers/franchisees, where
the franchisor
(paraphrasing the key element) knew or could reasonably be
expected to have known that the contravention by the franchisee entity
its submissions BDH invites the Court to gloss over the potentially inconsistent
outcomes in a trial where an applicant such as
the FWO seeks to prove primary
contraventions against an employer/franchisee and accessorial contraventions
against a franchisor.
However as soon as the context and purpose of s 558B is
understood, it is apparent that this purpose would be undermined by giving
557C no operation in a proceeding against a franchisor. In the franchisor
proceeding, the focus is not on the primary contravention
but on whether the
preconditions set by Parliament for accessorial liability have been met: a
significant degree of influence or
control over the franchisee’s affairs,
and an objective basis to know the franchisee contravention might occur.
Contrary to
BDH’s submissions, to set up a different burden of proof for
an applicant (who may or may not be the FWO) in respect of the
contravention from that which applies against an employer/franchisee itself
(possibly in the same proceeding) would not give
effect to the role of s 558B as
an accessorial liability provision.
this sense, it is also incorrect to describe a franchisor as
“blameless”: see BDH reply submissions at [4]. Parliament
impose legal responsibility on a franchisor for a franchisee’s
contraventions if all the statutory conditions are
met. If “blame”
be a relevant concept (which we doubt) and if all statutory conditions in s 558B
are met, then a franchisor
is liable because the franchisor has failed to
exercise appropriate supervision and control over the franchisee’s
leading to the civil remedy contraventions. To BDH’s contention
that it would be open to a franchisor to seek a separate trial
under r 9.06(b)
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) and thus avoid the operation of the
reverse onus, it can be accepted that an application for separate trials is a
option available to a respondent party where an applicant is proceeding
against more than one party. Here, we infer BDH means against
employer/franchisee and the franchisor. It will be a matter for the Court
whether any such application should be granted.
Whether or not such a forensic
decision would avoid the operation of s 557C in a separate proceeding would
depend on the construction
given to the phrase “in proceedings
to a contravention by an employer
of a civil remedy provision referred to in
subsection (3)”. We have explained above that the phrase “relating
requires a connection, but the authorities suggest the connection may
arise in various ways. It is not appropriate to say more in
these reasons about
what is, for the moment, a hypothetical issue. Suffice to say that even if
separate trials were ordered, there
would remain a question whether the separate
trial (against the franchisor) was nevertheless a “proceeding[s] relating
contravention by an employer of a civil remedy provision referred to in
subsection (3)”, because of the terms of s 558B(1)(a).
THE PRIMARY JUDGE’S REASONING ABOUT THE FRANCHISOR
ASSUMING THE BURDEN OF DISPROVING THE ALLEGATIONS AGAINST THE EMPLOYER
primary judge found that, if s 557C is engaged in respect of the first element
in s 558B(1)(a), its effect can be
by the franchisor
discharging the reverse onus imposed on the employer: see [42]-[47].
primary judge relied upon the authorities and processes dealing with the rights
of third parties to contest findings in a proceeding
where their liability is
affected by or may depend upon those findings.
primary judge observed that basic principles of procedural fairness suggest that
a franchisor would need to be able to contest
the allegations about
employer/franchisee contraventions (here, of an enterprise agreement, relying on
s 50 of the FWA). His Honour
referred to the reasons of Dixon CJ and Webb J in
Commissioner of Police v
[1958] HCA 6
(1958) 98 CLR 383
at 395-396. His
Honour also drew on the third party procedures available in this
[45] In multi-party proceedings it is elementary that respondents with the same
or similar interests may each contest the applicant’s
claim. A close
analogy for present purposes is the third-party procedure, in this Court by a
cross-claim commenced by a respondent
against a cross-respondent by invoking the
procedure at r 15.01 of the Rules. The liability of a third-party
(cross-respondent) is
derivative. A party to a cross-claim may apply for an
order permitting a cross-respondent to defend the claim of the applicant, or
other cross-claim, either alone or with another party: r 15.13. It is common for
orders to be made in cross-claims to the effect
that a cross-respondent has the
right to cross-examine the applicant’s witnesses, to call evidence and to
make submissions
for the purpose of defending the primary claim. The whole point
of the procedure is to bind the third-party to the outcome of the
claim and to ensure that the third-party has full participation rights:
Barclays Bank v Tom
[1923] 1 KB 221
at 223-224, Scrutton LJ.
[46] The third-party is entitled to “full procedural fairness” in
defence of the primary claim:
Insurance Exchange v Dooley
(2000) 50 NSWLR
[2000] NSWCA 159
, Handley JA.
we understand it, the primary judge’s reasoning is that s 557C should not
be construed as depriving the franchisor of a forensic
choice to attempt to
disprove the employer/franchisee contravention, irrespective of the position
adopted by the employer/franchisee,
and irrespective of whether the
employer/franchisee is a party, or an active party, to the proceeding. His
Honour then explains further,
by reference to the Court’s powers in s 23
(Cth), being a “broad power to make orders which are just and
efficient in the administration of justice”, and citing
Ilumba Pty Ltd
[2019] FCA 2095
(Derrington J).
take the alleged contraventions which we have set out at [17] above as an
example. To recall, the FWO alleges underpayments to
workers who were 21 years
and over or who were apprentices of any age, contending these workers were
entitled to be paid a total
of $901,521.62 by Make Dough, but were not paid the
applicable rates under the enterprise agreement and were only paid a total of
$817,564.93, resulting in a collective underpayment of $83,956.74 by Make Dough
(SOC [83]). On the primary judge’s reasoning,
one forensic choice open to
BDH as franchisor in defending the case against it under s 558B would be, in
substance or effect, to
assume the burden cast by s 557C on Make Dough and seek
to prove that this group of workers were not underpaid by the amount alleged
(or, on one forensic choice) by any amount.
parties did not address this aspect of his Honour’s reasoning on the
appeal, focussing instead on the anterior question
engaged at all in allegations made against a franchisor. However, in other
submissions BDH certainly
did emphasise what it described as the potential
denial of procedural fairness to franchisors if s 557C were engaged. His
analysis seeks to address that very issue. However care must be
taken in invoking the observations in
in relation to s 558B,
because on the central aspect of this contravention – the conduct and
position of the franchisor –
a franchisor of course would be heard fully.
Indeed, BDH’s defence in this proceeding illustrates the kinds of
contentions
that might be made.
the parties did not engage with this aspect of the primary judge’s
reasoning, we do not consider it is appropriate to
express a final opinion on
whether and if so how a franchisor might seek to disprove allegations made
against an employee/franchisee,
adopting the burden imposed by s 557C(1).
Suffice to say that we respectfully agree with the primary judge that s 557C
be construed as
this course, and that s 23 of the
FCA Act may well be a source of power by which the Court can make orders
permitting a franchisor
to assume this burden, if in its forensic decision
making it chooses to apply to do so.
the realities of alleged underpayments and FWA contraventions of the kind under
consideration in this proceeding, one might wonder
how often that forensic
choice would be made, rather than concentrating on the aspects of s 558B which
are about franchisor liability.
Especially given there may be inaccurate,
incomplete or perhaps even fraudulent records that have been kept by an
employer, being
the premise for s 557C to operate. Nevertheless, circumstances
in individual proceedings vary enormously and it is not for the Court
speculate about when such a forensic decision might be made. To go further
would, in our respectful opinion, be to enter into
a realm of speculation that
is unnecessary to determine the appeal.
THE SEPARATE QUESTION AND ITS ANSWER
questions often pose challenges not always apparent in the initial enthusiasm of
the parties and the court to try to save
time and resources by separating out an
issue. There is no doubt that the separate question process can be of great
utility and maintain
a cost-effective approach to litigation: see
Permanent Trustee Co Ltd
[1999] HCA 9
198 CLR 334
there are also risks in fragmentation. In
Tepko Pty Ltd v Water Board
[2001] HCA 19
, Kirby and Callinan JJ (Gaudron J
agreeing at [52], at least in relation to tort claims) said:
[168] The appeal should be allowed. However, we should not leave this case
without making four comments. Both Mason P and Fitzgerald
JA were critical of
the course of limiting the issues to be tried that the primary judge adopted. In
Perre v Apand Pty Ltd
[1999] HCA 36
198 CLR 180]
attention was drawn to
difficulties that can be caused when that course is adopted. In light of the
experience in this case, what
was there said should be restated with emphasis.
The attractions of trials of issues rather than of cases in their totality, are
often more chimerical than real. Common experience demonstrates that savings in
time and expense are often illusory, particularly
when the parties have, as
here, had the necessity of making full preparation and the factual matters
relevant to one issue are relevant
to others, and they all overlap.
[170] Thirdly, there is an additional potential for further appeals to which the
course of the trial on separate issues may give
rise. Indeed, that could occur
here were this appeal to be allowed and a retrial had in which the remaining
issues of causation and
damages were decided. Single-issue trials should, in our
opinion, only be embarked upon when their utility, economy, and fairness
parties are beyond question.
[Citations removed]
the FWO submitted, the separate question was framed by reference to particular
allegations in the statement of claim, which focused
on what was alleged against
BDH, but also what was alleged against Make Dough in relation to contraventions
by it of various civil
remedy provisions, including record keeping. However the
question then asked:
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) apply as against
the fourth respondent, and if so, how?”
we have explained, since
is an accessorial liability provision, of the
same character as
, the contravention of the principal actor (or
contravener) must be proven by the moving party. With the benefit of hindsight,
question might have been better framed as:
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) apply in a
proceeding against the fourth respondent for contravention of
, and if so,
Nevertheless,
as the question was framed, and read in the context of his Honour’s
reasons, the answer given by the primary judge
in the orders is correct. His
Honour was correct in finding that
“applies to establish the
contravention referred to at s 588B(1)(a)”.
to the second part of the answer given by the primary judge, as we have stated
above, since the parties did not address the Court
on this issue specifically,
we do not consider it is necessary for the Court on appeal to express any
concluded views. These matters
should await trial, and a full forensic context.
rejection of the contentions advanced by BDH about the operation of
proceeding where allegations under
are made against a franchisor means
that the appeal must be dismissed.
orders as to costs were sought, or would be appropriate, given the terms of
of the FWA.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
thirty-two (132) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment
Honourable Chief Justice Mortimer and Justices Hatcher and Dowling.
Dated: 16 October 2025
TAD 1 of 2025
Respondents
Fourth Respondent:
LISA KAY PUGLISI
RTF format (693 KB)
Signed PDF/A format