"Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union" known as the Australian Manufacturing Workers' Union (AMWU) v Nyrstar Port Pirie Pty Ltd [2025] FWC 3400 (13 November 2025)
[2025] FWC 3400
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Application for a protected action ballot
“Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred
Industries Union” known as the Australian Manufacturing Workers’
Union (AMWU)
Nyrstar Port Pirie Pty Ltd
(B2025/1712)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT HAMPTON
ADELAIDE, 13 NOVEMBER 2025
Proposed protected action ballot of employees of Nyrstar Port Pirie Pty
Ltd – non-AEC ballot agent electronic voting
is an application by the “Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing
and Kindred Industries Union” known as
the Australian Manufacturing
Workers’ Union (
) made under
Fair Work Act 2009
) for a protected action ballot order in relation
to certain employees of Nyrstar Port Pirie Pty Ltd (
note that the Australian Workers’ Union
Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing
and Allied Services Union of Australia
have each made a
separate application for a protected action ballot order in relation to the same
proposed enterprise agreement.
November 2025, the Commission was advised that the Employer did not object to
the Application.
the circumstances, I have decided to determine the matter on the papers without
holding a hearing.
the basis of the material before me, including the declaration of Steven
McMillan, Northern Regional Organiser, setting out the
steps taken by the AMWU
in bargaining with the Employer and that it has been, and is, genuinely trying
to reach agreement with Nyrstar,
I am satisfied that there is a notification
time in relation to the proposed agreement and that all of the requirements in
of the Act have been met.
ballot is to be conducted by Fair Vote Services Pty Ltd (
Vote has been approved as an eligible protected action ballot agent under
of the Act and consequently is authorised to conduct the ballot.
the purposes of
s.443(3)(c)
of the Act, the Commission has determined that the
date by which voting is to close is 28 November
This also establishes the
ballot period for the purpose of
of the Act.
Order has been separately issued in
matter will be assigned to another Member of the Commission to conduct the
s.448A compulsory conciliation conference along with
the other related matters.
That Member will issue an Order requiring the attendance of all bargaining
representatives in the proposed
enterprise agreement at the conference. It is
likely that Directions will also be issued to ensure that the parties attend the
ready to conduct meaningful negotiations.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
B2025/1679.
B2025/1702.
The AMWU sought an earlier
date. The period determined by the Commission is, in effect, 11 working days
from the making of the Order
and coincides with the listing of the compulsory
s.448A conciliation conference in the related AWU and CEPU matters. That
will involve all bargaining representatives including the Applicant
and this has impacted the timing practicality of the ballot
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government
RTF format (261 KB)
Signed PDF/A format