D20-21\102 [2020] SCTA 209 (4 December 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\102
FILE NUMBER : 18-330
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
JOINED PARTY
The Sister of the Deceased Member
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
The Deceased Member
The Complainant’s Solicitors
The Deceased Member’s Friend
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(Cth) (the Complaints Act) and held on 18 September 2020 before:
Duffield, Presiding Member
MacDonald, Member.
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
decision under review is that of the Trustee to pay the entire benefit arising
on the death of the Deceased Member to the Sister
of the Deceased Member.
Trustee notified the LPR of its decision by letter dated 30 November 2017 and,
following review, by letter dated 18 January 2018.
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal determines the LPR lacks standing to bring a complaint, concerning the
Trustee’s death benefit distribution decision,
to the Tribunal.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
to s32 of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal requested submissions from the
Submissions
were received from the LPR and the Sister. The Trustee relied on material
previously provided to the Tribunal.
submissions were exchanged and responses were invited. The Trustee
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
electronic files provided to it.
lawyer acting on behalf of the Trustee (Lawyer 1) contends the LPR lacks
standing, per s15 of the Complaints Act, to bring a complaint
Trustee’s death benefit distribution decision to the Tribunal.
lawyer acting on behalf of the LPR (Lawyer 2) argues s15(2)(b) of the Complaints
Act is enlivened, and accordingly the LPR has
the necessary standing to bring a
complaint to the Tribunal about the Trustee’s death benefit distribution
Tribunal has firstly considered the following timeline of events:
September 1998 the Will of the Deceased Member is signed and witnessed. The Will
is prepared by solicitors (XXX).
2010. First Draft of a new Will sent by XXX to the Deceased Member. Contains
drafting error and returned to XXX.
March 2010 corrected draft Will (draft Will) sent by XXX to Deceased Member.
Will never executed by Deceased Member.
Deceased Member dies on 1 August 2015.
August 2015 the Friend contacted the Trustee and informed the Trustee of the
Deceased Member's death. She asked for
a death benefit application form to be
sent to her.
August 2015 the Trustee telephoned the Friend who said that the Deceased Member
had no partner or children, and that
his parents were both deceased. She said
that he only had one sister (the Sister). The Trustee asked the Friend to
provide the Sister’s
September 2015 solicitor (YYY) for the Friend writes to XXX seeking certified
copy of draft Will.
October 2015 YYY send reminder to XXX.
October 2015 XXX send draft Will to YYY.
November 2015 the Friend provides the Sister’s contact details to the
Trustee. The Trustee sends the Sister an intentions
letter to ask if she wished
to claim the death benefit.
November 2015 the Trustee received a letter from the Friend’s YYY.
with this letter were:
a copy of the
Deceased Member’s Death Certificate. According to the Death Certificate,
the Deceased Member died unmarried and
without children. The Death Certificate
named the Friend as executor;
the unsigned
draft Will of the Deceased Member. This named the Friend and the Sister as
executors; and
an Application
for Payment of Death Benefit form signed by the Friend and claiming the Deceased
Member's death benefit as a legal
personal representative.
December 2015 the Trustee received a Request for Consideration in the
Distribution of a Death Benefit form signed by
the Sister.
December 2015 the Trustee determined to pay 100% of the death benefit to the
Sister as a Non-Financial Dependent. That
same day the Trustee sent ‘claim
staking’ letters to the Sister and the Friend.
December 2015 the Trustee received an email from the Sister saying that she had
‘no objection’ to the proposed
distribution. The Trustee did not
receive a response from the Friend.
February 2016 the Trustee paid 100% of the death benefit to the Sister.
April 2016 the Sister made application to the relevant State Supreme Court for
Letters of Administration (LOA).
May 2016 the Sister obtains LOA.
2016 Lawyer 2
informed the Trustee by letter:
that he acts for
the Deceased Member’s former de facto spouse who is the executor of the
Deceased Member's Will (dated 30 September
that Lawyer 2
was applying for the LOA to be called in, and Probate to be granted to the
executor of the Deceased Member’s
January 2017 the relevant State Supreme Court revoked the LOA that had been
granted to the Sister.
March 2017 the relevant State Supreme Court granted Probate of the 1998 Will to
the Tribunal, for the better understanding of the Parties, provides the
following deconstruction of the operation of s15
of the Complaints Act; it
relevantly states:
(1) A person may make a complaint under s14 only if:
(a) in the case of a decision that relates to the payment of a death
(i) the person has an interest in the benefit; or
(ii) the person claims to be, or to be entitled to benefits through, a person
referred to in subparagraph (i); or
(iii) the person is acting for a person referred to in subparagraph (i) or
critical words in sub-s.15(1) are the words ‘only if’. ‘Only
if’ the LPR can show that she personally
has, or claims to have such an
‘interest’; or, is claiming her entitlement to the benefit through a
person with such
an ‘interest’; or, is acting for either a person
with, or claiming, such an ‘interest’, does the LPR have
requisite standing to make a death benefit complaint to the Tribunal.
what is meant by an ‘interest’ and how does a person acquire such an
‘interest’? Sub-section 15(2) sets
out a list of four different ways
in which a person may acquire an ‘interest’; and, as the opening
words of the provision
clearly show, this is not an inclusive list, it is an
exclusive and exhaustive list. So, if the LPR does not fall into one or other
these four categories, she does not have the requisite legislative
‘interest’ to make a death benefit complaint to
the Tribunal.
are no exceptions and no other ways in which the LPR may come to the Tribunal to
lodge a death benefit complaint. In a nutshell,
sub-sections 15(1)(a) and (2)
jointly operate to provide the only way in which a person can achieve the
requisite standing or ‘interest’,
to bring a death benefit complaint
to the Tribunal under s14 of the Complaints Act; and this conclusion is further
supported by sub-s.14(2)
which provides that the LPR’s ability to make a
s14 complaint is, inter alia ‘subject’ to s15.
now to s15(2) this relevantly states:
(2) A person does not have an interest in a death benefit for the
purposes of paragraph (1)(a) unless:
(a) the person:
(i) has been given written notice by the trustee of the proposed payment of
the benefit; and
(ii) has been given written notice by the trustee of the prescribed period
within which the person may object; and
(iii) has objected to the trustee within the prescribed period;
(b) the person has not been notified by the trustee of the proposed payment
of the benefit and the failure to notify was unreasonable;
(c) the person has been notified by the trustee of the proposed payment of
the benefit but was not notified of the prescribed period
to object to the
payment; or
(d) the person has been notified by the trustee of the proposed payment of
the benefit but was notified of a period less than the
prescribed period for the
purposes of subparagraph (a)(ii).
in the factual circumstances of this complaint, the LPR can only have standing
with the Tribunal if it can be satisfied as
to the operation of s15(2)(b),
....the [LPR] [was] not...notified by the trustee of the proposed
payment of the benefit and the failure to notify was unreasonable...
this regard, Lawyer 2 has relevantly asserted:
...The failure [of the Trustee] to make any further enquiry [as to
whether the Sister or Friend intended to apply for granting of
LOA, or of XXX,
as to whether there was an earlier Will and executor; Tribunal note] occurred in
circumstances where Ms [Sister],
whom the Trustee was aware was named as an
executor under the unsigned will and was the sister of the Deceased with
standing to apply
for Letter (sic) of Administration if there was in fact an
intestacy, subsequently filed an application for Letters of Administration
April 2016 which was granted on 13 May 2016.
...That application was filed within 8 months and 3 days of the
Deceased’s death and within 4 months and 3 days of the determination
by the Trustee.
...The Trustee’s failure to make reasonable enquiries in circumstances
where an application for a grant of representation was
filed in the timeframe
set out above has the consequence that the failure to notify was
unreasonable:
the Trustee had made reasonable enquiries as required by reg 6.22, it can be
readily inferred that those enquiries would undoubtedly
have revealed that a
grant of representation was going to be obtained (noting the short time frame of
events set out above); and
more probably than not, revealed the existence of an existing valid Will.
...Given the unusual circumstances of the death certificate naming
Ms [Friend] as executor, the provision of a certified copy of the
unsigned will
naming Ms [Friend] and Ms [Sister] as executors and the absence of any enquiry
as to the existence or otherwise of
an earlier will, the decision by the Trustee
to make a determination in the timeframe in which it did and without any further
as to the status of the estate representation was unfair and
unreasonable for the purposes of s. 14 of the [Complaints Act].
...The Trustee ought not be permitted to take the benefit of its own failure
to undertake reasonable enquiries as to the potential
existence of a legal
personal representative to justify a conclusion that its failure to notify that
person of the decision was not
unreasonable.
Tribunal is not persuaded by Lawyer 2’s logic, which essentially relies on
the judicial process involved with the granting
of letters of administration.
The fact is, the Sister was granted the LOA on 13 May 2016 and it was not until
11 October 2016 that
Lawyer 2 wrote to the Trustee advising of the existence of
the Deceased Member’s Will and that the Deceased Member’s
facto spouse was the executor. To use the vernacular, the process of the Sister
applying for the LOA, with the attendant
court imposed advertisements, did not
‘flush out’ either the Will or the executor.
the Tribunal by reference to the timeline is unable to discern, where at any
point the Trustee could reasonably have established
the existence of either the
Will or the LPR. At risk of sounding trite, the Trustee could not know what it
did not know.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal determines s15(b)(2) does not assist the LPR and therefore she
lacks standing to bring a complaint to the
Tribunal, in relation to the
Trustee’s death benefit distribution decision.
Stephen Duffield, Presiding
Date of Tribunal signature: 4 December
RTF format (251 KB)
Signed PDF/A format