Bremmer v Bremmer [2011] SSATACSA 26 (8 November 2011)
REVIEW NUMBER
OTHER PARTIES
Steven BREMMER
Support Registrar
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
A Child Support
Agency objection decision dated 21 April 2011. The Objections Officer disallowed
Ms Bremmer’s objection to a
Senior Case Officer’s decision dated 6
December 2010. The Senior Case Officer had refused Ms Bremmer’s
application for
a change of
assessment.
The members of the Tribunal
were: XXXXXX Presiding
The hearing was conducted
on 8 November 2011. Ms Bremmer spoke to the Tribunal by phone. Mr Bremmer
attended in person. The Child
Support Registrar did not participate in the
TRIBUNAL DECISION
On 8 November 2011 the
Tribunal decided to affirm the decision under review. This means the application
for review is not successful.
DATE OF DESPATCH
November, 2011.
STATEMENT OF
Bremmer and Mr Bremmer have been separated since January 2006. They are the
parents of Carol and Kim. For child support purposes
each parent is assessed as
having 50% of the care of the children, based on week-about shared care.
However, the parents told the
Tribunal that in recent weeks they have agreed
that for the time being the children should spend nine nights per fortnight with
Bremmer, and five with Mr Bremmer. Neither parent has yet asked the Child
Support Agency to revise the 50/50 care determination.
Court proceedings are
under way in respect of the care arrangements. The matter will come before the
Court on 16 November 2011. It
seems likely from the parents’ evidence to
the Tribunal that at that time an order will be made continuing the nine/five
arrangement on an interim basis. In the longer term, Ms Bremmer believes
the children should be in her care for more than 50% of
the time, while Mr
Bremmer favours the 50/50 arrangement.
Bremmer has repartnered, to Mr Peter Collier. Mr Bremmer has also repartnered.
He and his wife have a daughter aged three.
child support rates payable by Mr Bremmer, in the absence of a change of
assessment in the current proceedings, are:
Commencement date
Annual rate
Income used for Ms Bremmer
Income used for Mr Bremmer
(2008/2009 adjusted taxable income)
(2008/2009 adjusted taxable income)
(set by SCO on 10 May 2010)
(2009/2010 adjusted taxable income)
(2010/2011 adjusted taxable income)
(2010/2011 adjusted taxable income)
10 May 2010 the Senior Case Officer had set Ms Bremmer’s adjusted taxable
income at $46,800 for the period 10 March 2010
to 30 October 2011. This income
was set on the basis that Ms Bremmer was earning $1,800 per fortnight working
for Mr Collier’s
18 October 2010 Ms Bremmer applied for a change of assessment. She said her
income had reduced, and so the figure of $46,800 should
no longer be used. The
Senior Case Officer however was not satisfied that a ground for departure was
established, and so declined
on 6 December 2010 to make a change of assessment.
Ms Bremmer’s objection was disallowed by an Objections Officer on 21 April
Bremmer applied to the Tribunal for a review on 28 April 2011. A pre-hearing
conference was held on 16 June 2011. The application
was listed for hearing on 9
August 2011. On 9 August 2011, prior to the hearing commencing, Ms Bremmer
withdrew her application for
review. Mr Bremmer subsequently requested
reinstatement of the application for review, and this request was granted on 1
2011. The matter then proceeded to a hearing on 8 November
INFORMATION CONSIDERED
Tribunal has taken into account the sworn oral evidence given and the
submissions made at the hearing by Ms Bremmer and Mr Bremmer,
as well as the
1: section 95(3)
and 95(5) statements and documents prepared by the Child Support Agency;
2: directions
issued at the pre-hearing conference;
3: two child
support assessment notices issued on 2 August 2011 (front pages only);
A: documents
supplied by Ms Bremmer;
B: documents
supplied by Mr Bremmer; and
documents supplied by the Child Support Agency on 28 June 2011 (in response to a
notice requiring information).
in Exhibit 1 were some documents relating to the child support case between Mr
Collier and his ex-wife Ms Tania Collier.
These had been supplied by Mr Bremmer,
who is a representative for Ms Collier in child support
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
rate of child support is usually based on an administrative assessment under
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
(‘the Act’). A
formula is used. It takes into account variables including the parents’
recent adjusted taxable
incomes and the care arrangements.
parent can apply for a change of assessment. Such an application is made under
of the Act. Under
section 98C
, a decision-maker can make a change of
assessment only if satisfied that:
a ground for a
change of assessment (such as Reason 8) has been established;
a change of
assessment would be just and equitable as regards the children and each parent;
a change of
assessment would be otherwise proper.
grounds for a change of assessment are set out in
section 117
of the Act. Reason
8 will be established if, in the special circumstances of the case, application
of the administrative assessment
provisions would result in an unjust and
inequitable determination of the level of child support:
because of the
income, property and financial resources of either parent
(section 17(2)(c)(ia)
of the Act); or
because of the
earning capacity of either parent
(section 117(2)(c)(ib)
relation to earning capacity,
section 117(7B)
(7B) In having regard to the earning capacity of a parent
of the child, the court may determine that the parent’s earning capacity
is greater than is reflected in his or her income for the purposes of this Act
only if the court is satisfied that:
(a) one or more of the following applies:
(i) the parent does not work despite ample opportunity to do so;
(ii) the parent has reduced the number of hours per week of his or her
employment or other work below the normal number of hours per
constitutes full-time work for the occupation or industry in which the parent is
employed or otherwise engaged;
(iii) the parent has changed his or her occupation, industry or working
pattern; and
(b) the parent’s decision not to work, to reduce the number of
hours, or to change his or her occupation, industry or working
pattern, is not
justified on the basis of:
(i) the parent’s caring responsibilities; or
(ii) the parent’s state of health; and
(c) the parent has not demonstrated that it was not a major purpose of
that decision to affect the administrative assessment of child
relation to the child.
MS BREMMER’S FINANCIAL
CIRCUMSTANCES
key points of Ms Bremmer’s evidence may be summarised as follows:
While employed
other than in Mr Collier’s business, she has worked only within the
children’s school hours. This enables
the children to participate in
after-school activities. For two or three years up to April 2009, she worked in
the public service.
In July 2009 she
started working in Mr Collier’s business. At this time the business was
conducted from the home that Mr Collier
rented. The business was established
there before Ms Bremmer moved in. In February 2010 her income increased when the
family, together
with the business, moved. Around this time Mr Collier
introduced a computer-based system for allocating work to staff. The various
changes meant there was extra work to do with advertising in the new location
and so on. She rang the Child Support Agency to advise
the increase in her
income, but they told her it was not necessary to report such changes. They
explained that incomes would be updated
annually, when tax returns were
The hours were
extensive but as she was working from home Ms Bremmer was able to schedule her
work to fit around the children’s
needs. Asked by the Tribunal about the
different hourly rates of pay shown on the payslips at different times, Ms
Bremmer said the
fortnightly amount of her wages from time to time depended on
what the business could afford. She did not monitor her hours. She
did not think
it mattered how many hours were shown on the payslips or what the hourly rate
was, so these variables were simply adjusted
as required.
The business did
not thrive after the move. By October 2010 she had to reduce her wage. That is
when she applied for the change of
assessment. She continued to draw a wage for
a few months, but has not had any paid work in the business in 2011.
In January 2011
the business was adversely affected by weather events. Flash flooding damaged
many tools and materials in the workshop.
A lightning strike to the house
damaged equipment as surge protectors failed. This caused the loss of all
electronic business data.
Insurance covered some losses. Attempts to retrieve
data proved unsuccessful, and the business could not recover. It had no records
of debts owed or owing, and so on.
Meanwhile Mr
Collier was away from home for a few months in early 2011 on a contract. He had
arranged this prior to the adverse weather
events because the business was not
performing well. Income came in from wages, the employer support scheme, and
Centrelink benefits
paid to Ms Bremmer. The Centrelink benefits included
disaster income recovery subsidy payments (at the rate of newstart allowance)
the first few months of 2011, and then newstart allowance from April 2011 for
two or three months until Mr Collier obtained work.
He has continued to work as
an employee away from home, returning only every few weeks. The business has not
resumed trading. Mr
Collier owes a number of business debts and he is making
payments on these.
Into 2011, there
were still many tasks for Ms Bremmer to perform, on an unpaid basis, for the
business, particularly in Mr Collier’s
absence. They were holding out hope
that the business could be revived. They were not accepting new work after
January 2011, but
Mr Collier did arrange for a subcontractor to perform some
warranty work for a customer. Ms Bremmer attended to tasks including ones
relating to insurance and repairs, reconstruction of accounts, negotiating with
creditors, and later the sale of vehicles.
Ms Bremmer did
not start looking for employment outside the business until about April 2011,
after the attempts to retrieve the business
data had failed and there was no
prospect of the business being revived. Even though Ms Bremmer had a Centrelink
exemption from looking
for work, she did seek work. She emailed her resume to
agencies; registered for alerts; checked with former colleagues etc. Through
word of mouth, she commenced casual employment in July 2011. She works 20 hours
per week and earns $725, after tax, per fortnight.
She is also looking for
other, more secure work. Ms Bremmer was not willing to identify her employer in
her oral evidence but said
she would provide payslips if directed to do so.
Ms Bremmer has
no qualifications. She intends to undertake a six month course in early 2012, to
broaden her work prospects. The study
will reduce the number of hours she can
She has not been
looking for full-time work, but she has not confined herself to jobs within the
children’s school hours. She
does, though, consider such hours preferable.
If she were offered a job not within those hours, she would need to carefully
factors such as whether the pay justified the additional costs, what
arrangements could be made for the children, and the impact
children’s quality of life.
The Tribunal
asked Ms Bremmer whether her failure to look for outside employment prior to
April 2011, and her decision not to look
for full-time work, were motivated by a
desire to maximise child support. Ms Bremmer denied any such motive. She said
2011 has been
a very difficult time financially and emotionally for the family.
The business was in a great mess; it was unclear whether it could
be revived;
she was unsure what to do to try to salvage the situation; Mr Collier was away
for extended periods; and time slipped
by. She was not in a fit state to take on
outside work initially. The location of her residence, was an added
complication. If she
was determined to maximise child support, she would have
pursued the backdating of a reduction in her income. She would not have
suggested that her income be set on an average figure, higher than her actual
substantial non-superannuation assets. She does not own a car or a house. She
sold her vehicle for $6,000 in about June
2011, so that Mr Collier could pay
some or all of a business debt to avoid bankruptcy. In September or October
2011, Mr Collier took
out a lease on a vehicle that is registered in her name
and which is available for her use. She can also use Mr Collier’s vehicle.
While Mr Collier said he got a good deal on the leased vehicle, he made the
decision without her input and she considered it unwise.
She suspects Mr Collier
wanted to show his appreciation for her sticking with him in difficult times,
and for selling her car when
she had not wanted to.
The family pays
weekly rent of $650. She has credit card debts (amounting to approximately
$3,600 as at May 2011).
She keeps the
child support in a special account, and spends it on activities for the
children. They have discontinued some of the
activities due to financial
constraints, but should be able to resume these now that Mr Collier has steady
work. The balance of the
account is $105.
Tribunal notes the following matters, which could reflect adversely on the
reliability of Ms Bremmer as a witness:
indicate that Ms Bremmer started working for Mr Collier’s business on 1
July 2009. However, in a 2009 objection letter,
the Child Support Agency said
that Ms Bremmer provided an income estimate of nil on 17 July 2009 and said she
was not working. Ms
Bremmer told the Tribunal that the Child Support Agency must
have misinterpreted what she said.
The payslips
show that Ms Bremmer earned $1,000 between 1 July and 5 August 2009, but a
payroll activity report that Ms Bremmer faxed
to the Objections section of the
Child Support Agency on 6 August 2009 indicated earnings of only $600 in the
period 1 July to 6
August 2009. Ms Bremmer told the Tribunal that this must have
been due to the third pay not having been processed at the time. (Mr
mentioned that Ms Bremmer told the Child Support Agency at around this time that
she had annualised earnings of some $10,000,
which is consistent with the then
actual level of earnings).
There are two
records which suggest that Ms Bremmer told the Child Support Agency in 2010 that
she had commenced work in February
2010, when she had actually started in July
2009. A file note of 18 February 2010 says that Ms Bremmer called to say she was
working and wanted to lodge an estimate of income. Senior Case Officer
commented that in April 2010 Ms Bremmer said she only started
working at the end
of February 2010. Ms Bremmer told the Tribunal that she must have been
misunderstood. She did not start work in
February 2010, but her income increased
then. She had already faxed a pay record in August 2009.
The business
cheque account for the period 10 January to 10 May 2011 shows a number of
business-related transactions. For example,
there were payments in from
customers. There were payments out, such as payments to a supplier as late as
April 2011, and a payment
to a newspaper in which the business advertised as
late as March 2011. An advertisement for the business appeared in the newspaper
on 10 February 2011. Responding to this evidence, Ms Bremmer told the Tribunal
that the business did not continue to trade. Payments
in and out related to
pre-existing debts. The newspaper continued to run the advertisement in each
edition because the pre-existing
arrangement had not been stopped.
By letter dated
24 February 2011 Ms Bremmer told the Child Support Agency that the recent floods
and storms had detrimentally affected
the business, and that
employees have been forced to leave ...”
. In a letter to the Child
Support Agency dated 9 March 2011 she said the business
employs tradesman”
. However, on 7 March 2011 Mr Bremmer photographed a
worker driving a business van. And by letter dated 13 March [2011] (the letter
is incorrectly dated 13 March 2010) Mr Collier informed the Child Support Agency
“... I have now only one part time employee now
. Ms Bremmer told the Tribunal that the only person working
for the business at this time was a subcontractor and that Mr Collier’s
reference to an ‘employee’ was mistaken. She said the business bank
account does not show any payment of wages at this
An email that Ms
Bremmer has provided indicates that it was not until 2 June 2011 that she
received advice (or final advice) that
the computer drive could not be restored.
suggests that Ms Bremmer may not have started looking for work until
Tribunal found Ms Bremmer to be somewhat vague in parts of her evidence, though
by and large it did not gain the impression that
her vagueness was deliberate.
(Her refusal to name her current employer is an exception). It does seem
possible that she was misunderstood
by the Child Support Agency at times. It is
unlikely that she would have said in early 2010 that she had only just started
she had reported earnings in August 2009. On the other hand, a number
of the instances summarised above could well have involved
downplaying her income, or the activities of the business, in discussions with
the Child Support Agency. For example her
letters of February and March 2011
gave the impression of no business activity at all, but there was at least one
person working
for the business around this time (even if his work was not
income-producing). In light of these matters, it is necessary to approach
Bremmer’s evidence critically.
business cheque account statement does show a tapering off of payments from
customers in 2011. It does not show the level of activity
that one would expect
from a thriving business. The Tribunal also accepts that Mr Collier has taken up
paid employment in other capacities
during 2011. There is some documentary
evidence confirming that he worked. It is unlikely he would have taken on
outside employment
if the business was generating a good income. Ms Bremmer has
provided some documents to corroborate that business equipment was damaged
the weather events. The Tribunal questioned Ms Bremmer extensively about the
business and her involvement in it. Her answers were
responsive and internally
consistent. The Tribunal found Ms Bremmer’s evidence about the general
course of events in the business
during 2010 and 2011 to be credible. The
Tribunal is satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the business is no
longer trading.
Bremmer told the Tribunal that she had not received wages from the business
during 2011. The Tribunal accepts this, subject to
the likelihood that there was
payment for some days into January 2011. It finds that the last wage payment was
for the fortnight
ended 11 January 2011. On 24 February 2011 Ms Bremmer wrote to
the Child Support Agency that she had not received an income [from
the business]
since 11 January 2011, and the business cheque account shows an amount of $1,300
paid out on 17 January 2011 which
is labeled ‘R Bremmer wages’
(presumably for the fortnight ended 11 January 2011).
Tribunal finds that the fortnightly amount of wages decreased from October 2010,
as indicated by the payslips. The Tribunal finds
that the reduction and later
cessation of the wage income was the result of a downturn in the business
followed by the cessation
of income-producing activity.
question to be considered is whether, and over what period, the annualised
income figure of $46,800 was accurate. Mr Bremmer points
to references by Ms
Bremmer to “our business”, and her ability to adjust the level of
her wages as she saw fit, as indications
that she was essentially a partner in
the business rather than a mere employee. He contends that Ms Bremmer would have
derived benefits
from the business in addition to her wages, such as use of Mr
Collier’s vehicle and telephones paid for by the business. Ms
denies that she obtained such benefits.
Tribunal agrees with Mr Bremmer that Ms Bremmer’s role in the business was
more than that of an ordinary employee, and it
is likely that she would have
benefited from the personal use of business equipment. The Tribunal would
however stop short of regarding
her as a partner, in any sense that would be
recognised in legal proceedings, given that she came into the business after it
been established by Mr Collier. He supplied the capital and possessed the
necessary trade qualifications and skills. While Ms Bremmer
in practice might
have shared in any profits, it is unlikely that there were any profits in
2010/2011 (although the Tribunal has
not seen financial statements). Overall,
the Tribunal considers it appropriate to treat Ms Bremmer as having received
remuneration
at the annualised rate of $46,800 between 10 March 2010 and 11
January 2011. This is higher than her actual rate of earnings at times,
factors in any indirect benefits. The Tribunal does not see any basis for
attributing a higher income to Ms Bremmer. Remuneration
of some $46,800 per year
appears reasonable for the role Ms Bremmer performed.
Tribunal accepts that Ms Bremmer’s present employment is as she described
in her evidence.
further question to be considered is whether Ms Bremmer should be assessed on
the basis of earning capacity. There is no reason
to suppose that Ms Bremmer was
failing to exercise a higher earning capacity while she was earning an
annualised income of $46,800.
The Tribunal accepts that she has no
qualifications, and she does not have a history of high earnings. Since January
2011, however,
it can be inferred that she could have earned more than she has.
For example, she could have looked for work earlier. Further, had
full-time work, she might well be earning more than she is at present.
question of earning capacity must be approached in the way set out in
of the Act. The first and second criteria are satisfied in Ms
Bremmer’s case. She changed her working pattern. She went from
extensive hours in the business to working fewer hours, initially on a paid, but
then on an unpaid, basis. She has since
commenced employment on a casual basis
for another employer. She does not contend that this change in working pattern
was the result
of caring responsibilities or health issues. She does however
contend, in relation to the third criterion, that her major purpose
these changes was not to increase the rate of child support. She explained the
reasons for the changes in terms of the
decline in the business which was beyond
her control, uncertainty about whether the business could be revived, emotional
and her desire to be available for the children outside school hours.
The Tribunal found her evidence on these issues convincing.
It finds that it was
not a major purpose of Ms Bremmer’s changes in her working pattern to
affect the administrative assessment
of child support (even though they have
that effect). Accordingly, Ms Bremmer cannot be assessed on the basis of a
higher earning
Tribunal also accepts the other evidence Ms Bremmer has given about her present
financial circumstances, including how she comes
to be driving the leased
vehicle. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that Ms Bremmer owns no substantial
property but has financial
resources provided by Mr Collier in the form of
access to vehicles.
MR BREMMER’S FINANCIAL
CIRCUMSTANCES
Mr Bremmer’s financial circumstances are more straightforward. The key
points of his evidence may be summarised as follows:
He is currently
earning $107,000 per year as a manager. His wife earns $230 gross per week.
He owns his home
worth some $500,000, subject to a mortgage debt of $437,366 (as at May 2011). He
has credit card debts (amounting
to almost $22,000 as at May 2011). He has no
substantial savings, and apart from household contents owns no other substantial
non-superannuation
assets. The family has a car and a motorcycle, both
registered in his wife’s name.
His wife intends
to commence postgraduate studies in 2012, so the family income will decrease.
Childcare costs will probably increase.
His wife had a
small business. She closed it at the end of 2009/2010 but retains the domain
name as it could be valuable. The business
was never a lucrative concern. He
He does not
undertake any business-like activity on eBay.
Bremmer has produced a document indicating that Mr Bremmer edited Ms
Collier’s business website in March 2011. Mr Bremmer
told the Tribunal
that this activity would have been undertaken by his wife, but as all computers
in the house are registered in
his name the activity has shown up under his
name. The Tribunal accepts this evidence. It finds that Mr Bremmer’s
circumstances are as he has outlined.
REASON 8 ESTABLISHED?
Tribunal has found that Ms Bremmer cannot be assessed on the basis of any higher
earning capacity. There is no suggestion that
Mr Bremmer has a higher earning
capacity. Mr Bremmer has a modest level of assets, higher than Ms
Bremmer’s, but this is offset
by the fact that Ms Bremmer has financial
resources in the form of vehicles supplied by Mr Collier.
Tribunal does not consider that any unfairness arises in the assessment of child
support from the property, financial resources
or earning capacity of either
real point of difference between the parents is their income. Mr Bremmer is a
high income earner and Ms Bremmer is not. Accordingly,
the administrative
assessment provisions require the payment of child support by Mr Bremmer even
when care is shared 50/50. This
, such as that the level of child support should be determined on the
basis of parents’ capacities to provide.
is a useful exercise to compare the level of child support that results from the
present assessments with the level that might
be considered fair (just and
equitable) in light of the particular circumstances of the parties. Of course,
perceptions of what is
fair differ. Ms Bremmer contends that the assessment of
the income figure of $46,800 until October 2011 is unfair. She suggests it
be fair to adopt as her income an average of a number of years’ worth of
her adjusted taxable incomes, or the level of
her earnings while in government
employment (around $28,000 per year). Even though this would be higher than her
recent and current
income, and her likely income in 2012 while studying, she
says she does not expect Mr Bremmer to fund her choice to study, or her
to help out in Mr Collier’s business on an unpaid basis. The Tribunal
agrees with Ms Bremmer that there is a sense
of fairness in treating her as
having some higher level of income in this way. Ms Bremmer does not go so far as
to suggest she should
be assumed to have income at the level of a full-time
worker, as she contends that her decision to work around the children’s
school hours is in their best interests.
Bremmer has a different view of what is fair. He does not believe that Ms
Bremmer has given an accurate account of her circumstances.
is also relevant to consider whether hardship would result for the children, or
either parent, in the absence of a change of assessment.
There is no reason to
suppose that the children or Ms Bremmer have been facing hardship. While the
Tribunal accepts that Ms Bremmer’s
family has had to economise, Ms Bremmer
has still been able to keep the child support funds separate and use them for
discretionary
activities for the children. Mr Bremmer says he does not know how
he will meet his child support liability, now that it has recently
especially when his wife starts her course of study. He commented that there are
probably areas they could trim, but they
would have to consider selling their
house. He acknowledged, though, that it was his decision to incur the mortgage
debt. Whether
Mr Bremmer would really need to take the drastic step of selling
the house remains to be seen, but even if this was necessary, the
Tribunal does
not consider it would be unreasonably onerous. Mr Bremmer chose to take on a
high mortgage debt even though he must
have been aware that he would face
considerable, and unpredictable, child support costs.
Tribunal will next calculate the amount of child support payable by Mr Bremmer
under the existing assessments in the period September
2009 to August 2012. For
this purpose, it is sufficient to consider whole months rather than break down
the rate within months (such
as where the rate changed on 10 March 2010). The
Tribunal will take a similar approach when calculating an alternative rate. For
example it will treat Ms Bremmer as earning annualised income of $46,800 to the
end of December 2010, even though she continued to
earn at this rate into the
first part of January 2011. The Tribunal will also assume that the care
determination will become 65%
to Ms Bremmer and 35% to Mr Bremmer from December
2011, as that seems to be the way that care is moving. The calculations for the
total amount payable under the existing assessments are as follows:
September 2009
to February 2010, $3,515 was payable.
March 2010 to
September 2010, $2,095 was payable.
October 2010 to
August 2011, $3,604 was payable.
September to
October 2011, $765 was payable.
November 2011,
$652 is payable.
December 2011 to
August 2012 (assuming a care determination of 65%/35%, incomes of $15,724 and
$99,990, and the resulting annual rate
of $11,732), $8,799 would be
the Tribunal will consider what might be a more just and equitable assessment
within particular subperiods. It seems to the
Tribunal that a child support
assessment along the following lines would, in broad terms, be just and
For the period
September 2009 to February 2010, the Tribunal will annualise Ms Bremmer’s
actual earnings of $20,400 (up to 9
March 2010) to $40,800. Together with Mr
Bremmer’s adjusted taxable income of $90,036, this produces an annual rate
So the child support payable for the six month period would be
March 2010 to
September 2010, $2095 would be payable (same as the actual assessment).
October 2010 to
December 2010, $983 would be payable (same as the actual assessment).
From January
2011 the Tribunal will use the income figure of $30,685 for Ms Bremmer.
This was her
adjusted taxable income in 2009/2010. While this was earned at home, the
Tribunal considers it reasonably representative
of what Ms Bremmer would earn in
outside employment within school hours.
For the period
January 2011 to August 2011, the annual rate based on incomes of $30,685 and
$93,309 would be $5,864. The amount payable
in the eight month period would be
For the period
September 2011 to November 2011, the annual rate based on incomes of $30,685 and
$99,990 would be $6,530. The amount
payable in the three month period would be
For the period
December 2011 to August 2012, the annual rate based on the above incomes but
assuming a change of care to 65%/35% would
be $10,946. The amount payable in the
nine month period would be $8,209.
The difference between the two totals is relatively small. The difference is not
sufficient to render the existing assessments unjust
and inequitable.
Consequently, although the Tribunal does not consider the income for Ms Bremmer
of $46,800 to be accurate after
December 2010, and although Ms Bremmer’s
present income is higher than $15,724, the overall effect of the existing
assessments
is to produce a rate of child support that is just and equitable
across the period considered. Reason 8 is not
established.
is not suggested that any other ground for departure is made out, and the
Tribunal does not consider that any other ground arises
on the evidence.
Consequently, the Tribunal will affirm the decision under review. This will
leave in place the existing assessments.
The Tribunal does not have any power to
change the care percentages in the course of this review. One or both of the
parents would
need to approach the Child Support Agency if they seek a change to
the existing 50/50 care
assessment.
On 8 November 2011
the Tribunal decided to affirm the decision under review. This means the
application for review is not successful.
Date: 11 November, 2011.
The publication of Social Security Appeals Tribunal child support
decisions is authorised under
subsections 16(2AB)
(2AC) of the
Support (Registration and Collection) Act
Personal particulars of parties to an appeal and their children are
removed to protect their privacy. Names used in all published
decisions are
pseudonyms. Reasons for decisions are published in full (with any information
which may identify involved individuals
to a member of the public removed) to
ensure that the full context and basis for the decision can be understood. The
Social Security
Appeal's Tribunal's decisions in relation to child support
matters demonstrate the application of the Child Support legislation to
individual circumstances of the case being decided. Different fact situations
or subsequent changes to legislation may result
in different outcomes.
The CSA reviews all SSAT decisions to identify opportunities to improve
its services and ensure its processes and policies are robust
and accurate. The
CSA publishes further information about SSAT decisions on their website
www.csa.gov.au/publications/1313.aspx#ssat
RTF format (1.53 MB)
Signed PDF/A format