URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1972/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Commissioner of Stamp Duties (NSW) v Atwill [1972] UKPCHCA 2; (1972) 126 CLR 665 (7 November 1972)
PRIVY COUNCIL
COMMISSIONER OF STAMP DUTIES (N.S.W.) v. ATWILL
[1972] UKPCHCA 2
(1972) 126 CLR 665
Death Duties - Statutes
PRIVY COUNCIL Lord Reid(1), Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest(1), Viscount
Dilhorne(1), Lord Simon of Glaisdale(1) and Sir Richard Wild(1).
Death Duties (N.S.W.) - Settlement - Property subject to trust - Subject to
trust - Property bought by trustees by investment of
settled moneys - Whether
part of national estate of deceased - Stamp Duties Act, 1920-1964 (N.S.W.), s.
102 (2) (a).
Statutes - Interpretation - Proviso - Whether complementary, explanatory or
qualifying.
1972, July 10-12; November 7. 7:11:1972
APPEAL from the High Court of Australia.
The judgment of their Lordships was delivered by VISCOUNT DILHORNE : -
Milton Spencer Atwill, who died on 24th November 1965, on 27th November 1953
of the survivor of himself, his wife and his sons
the trust fund was to be
divided. It is not disputed that the trust deed contained a trust to take
effect after his death and so
was caught by s. 102 (2) (a) of the
Stamp Duties
(N.S.W.). (at p666)
2. The trust fund in 1953 consisted of 200 Pounds provided by Mr. Atwill.
That sum was invested by the trustees in the purchase
of twenty shares in
Langton Pty. Ltd., a company incorporated in New South Wales, and those shares
continued to be held by the trust
and were held by the trust at Mr. Atwill's
death. Their value then was $276,458. (at p666)
3. The Commissioner of Stamp Duties in assessing the death duty payable in
respect of Mr. Atwill's estate claimed that the twenty
shares were to be
included in his dutiable estate and on that basis assessed the duty payable at
$124,938.06. If the shares are not
to be so included that sum will be reduced
by $77,926.04 so that the duty will be $47,012.02. (at p666)
4. The respondents required the Commissioner to state a case and on 27th
November 1970 the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court
of New South Wales
(Asprey, Mason and Moffitt JJ.A.) dismissed their appeal holding that the duty
payable was $124,938.06. (at p666)
5. The respondents then appealed to the High Court of Australia and by a
majority their appeal was allowed (Barwick C.J., Windeyer
and Owen JJ.,
Menzies and Walsh JJ. dissenting)
[1971] HCA 63
(1971) 125 CLR 203
. (at p666)
6. The Commissioner now appeals with special leave. At the time leave was
granted an appeal from the Court of Appeal of the Supreme
Court of New South
Wales was pending which raised precisely the same question. Counsel for the
appellants in that case (Falkiner
and Perpetual Trustee Co. Ltd. v.
Commissioner of Stamp Duties (N.S.W.) (1)) was heard in the course of the
argument in this case.
7. The question to be determined is the proper interpretation to be placed on
the relevant parts of s. 102 of the Stamp Duties Act
(N.S.W.). They read as
"102. For the purposes of the assessment and payment
of death duty but subject as hereinafter provided, the estate
of a deceased person shall be deemed to include and consist of
the following classes of property -
(2) (a) All property which the deceased has disposed of
. . . by a settlement containing any trust in respect of that
property to take effect after his death. . .
Provided that the property deemed to be included in the
estate of the deceased shall be the property which at the time
of his death is subject to such trust." (at p667)
8. The respondents in this case and the appellants in the Falkiner Case
contend that s. 102 (2) (a) only operates to
bring into account as part
of the dutiable estate so much of the actual property made
subject to a
settlement containing a trust
to take effect after the settlor's death as was
in existence and subject to the settlement
at the date of the death. The
respondents
therefore say that at most only 200 Pounds could have been
included, and that as that sum
was not at the date of death subject to
trust, nothing should be included. (at p667)
9. The appellant on the other hand contends that the value of the twenty
shares at the date of death must be included in the dutiable
estate. (at p667)
10. Barwick C.J. said that he agreed with the conclusions of Owen J. and with
his reasons. He held that it was an inadmissible method
of construction of the
statute to read the words of the proviso as if they were a substantive
provision ; that the proviso ought
not to be read and construed apart from the
terms of the section ; that the governing words of the whole provision were
the opening
words of s. 102 (2) (a) "all property which the deceased has
disposed of . . . by a settlement . . ." and that the reference to property
the proviso was to that property. In his opinion the proviso ensured that only
the property made subject to the settlement which
is at the date of the death
still subject to the settlement is brought into the valuation (1971) 125 CLR,
at pp 207-208. (at p667)
11. Owen J. said that it appeared to him odd that what on its face appears in
the form of a proviso should be regarded as adding
to and not merely
qualifying what went before.
"If it is itself a substantive enactment then the legislature
has, in the form of a proviso, added to s. 102 (2) a new category
of 'notional estate' consisting of property over which the
deceased never had any power of disposition."
(1971) 125 CLR, at p 221
He thought the second part of s. 102 (2) (a) was a true proviso limiting the
operation of the first part and operating only upon so
much of the property
disposed of by the deceased as remains subject to the trusts of the
settlement. (at p668)
12. Windeyer J. agreed with the judgment of Barwick C.J. and Owen J. In his
view the shares not being property the deceased disposed
of were not by virtue
of section 102 (2) (a) to be included in his dutiable estate. In his view the
property subjected to duty was
the property that the deceased had disposed of
by the settlement, or so much of it as was still subject to the trust when he
13. The decision of the majority of the High Court was thus based on the view
that the proviso was a true proviso limiting or qualifying
what preceded it.
14. Their Lordships are not able to agree with this conclusion. While in many
cases that is the function of a proviso, it is the
substance and content of
the enactment, not its form, which has to be considered, and that which is
expressed to be a proviso may
itself add to and not merely limit or qualify
that which precedes it. In Jennings v. Kelly
(1940) AC 206
, at pp 217-219
Maugham said :
"The learned Lord Chief Justice was influenced in coming
to his conclusion by his view that the first part of the section
was the operative portion of it, and that the proviso could
not properly be used to explain the words as to increase of
population in the operative part. He therefore relied on the
principle of construction to be found in the case of West Derby
Union v. Metropolitan Life Assurance Society
(1897) AC 647
principle is thus stated by Lord Watson
(1897) AC, at p 652
, 'I am perfectly
clear' he said, 'that if the language of the enacting part of
the statute does not contain the provisions which are said to
occur in it, you cannot derive these provisions by implication
from a proviso.' I am sure that none of your Lordships
would desire to depart from this principle where it is applicable,
namely, where the enacting part of the section is unambiguous
and complete and is followed by a true proviso, that is, a
qualification or an exception out of it.
In my view that is not the case here, and as Lord Herschell
pointed out in the same case
(1897) AC, at p 655
: 'Of course a proviso may
be used to guide you in the selection of one or other of two
possible constructions of the words to be found in the
and show when there is doubt about its scope, when it
may reasonably admit of doubt as to its having this scope or
that, which is the proper view to take of it.' My Lords, that
is precisely the method of construction which in my view is
applicable in the present case. I will add that the words
beginning 'Provided that' are, in my opinion, additional and
explanatory words necessary for the purpose of giving a more
definite meaning to the preceding words, that is of removing
doubt as to its scope, and they might easily have been
incorporated
in the earlier part of the section at the risk of making
it rather more cumbrous than it is. We are not dealing here
with a true proviso, or at any rate not with such a proviso as
this House was considering in the case cited. It cannot, I
think, be disputed that in construing a section of an Act of
Parliament, it is constantly necessary to explain the meaning
of the words by an examination of the purport and effect of
other sections in the same Act. . . . This principle is equally
applicable in the case of different parts of a single section, and
none the less that the latter part is introduced by the words
'provided that' or like words. There can, I think, be no
doubt that the view expressed in Kent's Commentaries on
American Law (cited with approval in Maxwell, p. 140) is
correct : 'The true principle undoubtedly is, that the sound
interpretation and meaning of the statute, on a view of the
enacting clause, saving clause and proviso, taken and
together, is to prevail'.".
In the same case Lord Wright said (1940) AC, at p 229 :
"It is said that where there is a proviso, the former part,
which is described as the enacting part, must be construed
without reference to the proviso. No doubt there may be
cases in which the first part is so clear and unambiguous as
not to admit in regard to the matters which are there clear
any reference to any other part of the section ; the proviso
may simply be an exception out of what is clearly defined in
the first part, or it may be some qualification not inconsistent
with what is expressed in the first part. But in the present
case, not only is the first part of the section deficient in express
definition, but the second part is complementary and necessary
in order to ascertain the full intention of the legislature.
The proper course is to apply the broad general rule of
construction,
which is that a section or enactment must be
construed as a whole, each portion throwing light, if need be,
on the rest. I do not think that there is any other rule even
in the case of a proviso in the strictest or narrowest sense.
Still less, where, as here, the introduction of the second part
by the word 'provided' is in a strict sense inapt."
In a strict sense the use of the words "provided that" in s. 102 (a) may also
be disregarded as inapt. The meaning of that provision
and the proviso would
be the same if instead of the words "provided that" there had appeared the
word "and" or the words "in which
case" and to ascertain the true effect of
the provision the second part, that is to say, the proviso, is complementary
and necessary
in order to ascertain the full intention of the legislature. In
Rhondda Urban District Council v. Taff Vale Railway Company
House of Lords had to consider the effect of a section which was framed as a
proviso upon preceding sections. In that
Loreburn L.C. said : (1909)
AC, at p 258 :
"But it is also true that the latter half of it, though in form
a proviso, is in substance a fresh enactment, adding to and
not merely qualifying that which goes before."
Other examples of such provisos are to be found in the
itself in the
first proviso to s. 102 (2) (ba) where the Commissioner
is given power to
reduce the value of any property in certain
circumstances ; in the first
proviso to s. 102 (2) (l) and to s. 102
(2B) where the Commissioner is given a
similar power. In each
of these instances the proviso contained what is called
a substantive
enactment (see also the Wheat Marketing Act 1920 (N.S.W.),
(1), and the Workmen's Compensation (Amendment) Act 1920 (N.S.W.),
15. Examples of such a use of a proviso can also be found in conveyancing
precedents (see Hallett's Conveyancing Precedents (1965)
p. 846, 3 (b), the
Encyclopaedia of Forms and Precedents, 4th ed., vol. 20, p.
: H : 41 and p.
: L : 6). The words of the
proviso to s. 102 (2) (a) are in their Lordships' opinion clear and
unambiguous. They must
be construed
with the words which precede them and
their effect would not be different if instead of the words "provided that",
section, as
has been said, had read "and" or "in which case". To come
within s. 102 (2) (a) there must have been property disposed
deceased by a will or settlement containing a trust in respect of that
property to take effect after death. If that is
so, then the
property which at
the time of the death is subject to such trust is to be deemed to be included
in the deceased's estate.
16. The word "property" is used four times in s. 102 (2) (a). In each case
the sub-section makes clear beyond doubt what is the
property referred to. On
the first two occasions on which it is used it is property which the deceased
had disposed of. On the third
occasion it is property "deemed to be included
in the estate" and on the fourth "property which at the time of his death is
to such trust". (at p670)
17. The scope of that description of property is not in their Lordships' view
in any way restricted by the fact that it is contained
in a proviso and there
is no valid ground for implying that it should be read as "property which at
the time of his death is subject
to such trust and which was disposed of by
the deceased". (at p671)
18. In Watt's Case
(1925) 25 SR (NSW) 467
Ferguson J. expressed the opinion
that the intention of the legislature was that if there
was existing some
property which the deceased
had disposed of but which at his death was still
subject to a trust to take effect
after death the effect of the proviso was to
that that was treated as part of his dutiable estate. On appeal Higgins
[1926] HCA 14
(1926) 38 CLR 12
. That was a case where a trust to take
effect on death was extinguished and the Commissioner's
once property
had been disposed of by a will or settlement on a trust to take
effect after death that property
was stamped
irrevocably with liability
death duty. That contention was rejected. The court in that case did not have
to consider
the problem
raised in this case and
while what Ferguson J. said
was clearly right, their Lordships do not consider that the effect
is limited to such
a case. (at p671)
19. If in this case the decision of the High Court is right, then it means
that a very large gate is open for the avoidance of duty.
Directly the
disposition of property is made by a settlement on a trust to take effect on
the settlor's death the trustees of the
settlement, by changing the form of
the property held, e.g., by selling the shares transferred by the settlor and
buying further
shares with the money realised, can free the trust fund from
all liability to estate duty. It cannot have been the intention of the
Legislature so to provide. (at p671)
20. In the Stamp Duties Act 1898, s. 58, it was provided that within six
months of the death of any person who had executed a settlement
containing a
trust to take effect after his death, notice of the settlement had to be
lodged "together with a declaration specifying
the property thereby settled
and the value thereof" and duty was payable on that value. Section 58 (2) gave
the Supreme Court power
to order a sufficient part of "the property included
in such settlement" to be sold to pay the duty. (at p671)
21. When the Stamp Act 1920, an Act to amend and to consolidate, was
prepared, it may have been appreciated that the language of
s. 58 which was
replaced by s. 102 (2) (a) left it open to argument whether the property
thereby settled was to be interpreted as
the property disposed of and whether
duty was or was not payable on the value of the property included in the
settlement at the time
of death. It may well have been in order to clarify the
position that the proviso to s. 102 (2) (a) was inserted. (at p672)
22. For the reasons stated their Lordships are of the opinion that the views
expressed by Menzies and Walsh JJ. were correct and
they will humbly advise
Her Majesty that this appeal should be allowed, the order of the High Court
set aside and the order of the
Court of Appeal restored. The respondents must
pay the costs of the appeal to the High Court and of this appeal. (at p672)
Appeal allowed. Order of High Court of Australia set aside. Order of Court
of Appeal restored. Respondents to pay costs of appeal
to High Court and to
Privy Council.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter