URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1967/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Freightlines and Construction Holding Ltd v New South Wales [1967] UKPCHCA 1; (1967) 116 CLR 1 (10 April 1967)
PRIVY COUNCIL
FREIGHTLINES & CONSTRUCTION HOLDING LTD. v. NEW SOUTH WALES
[1967] UKPCHCA 1
(1967) 116 CLR
Constitutional Law (Cth)
Privy Council
Lord Reid(1), Lord Hodson(1), Lord Pearce(1), Lord Wilberforce(1) and Lord
Constitutional Law (Cth) - Freedom of inter-State trade - Inter-State road
transport - Imposition of charges for use of road by
vehicles - Whether
interference with freedom - The
Constitution
(63 & 64 Vict. c. 12),
Road Maintenance (Contribution) Act, 1958-1965 (N.S.W.).
Constitutional Law (Cth) - Decision on constitutional validity of law of
Commonwealth or State - Effect where based in part on
findings of fact.
1967, January 25, 26, 30, 31; February 1, 2, 6, 7, 8; Apr il
APPEAL from the High Court of Australia.
LORD PEARCE delivered the judgment of their Lordships as follows:-
Since 1900 when the
Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Australia was
roads themselves have very greatly increased in extent, elaboration,
efficiency, and cost of
maintenance. There has been a like increase in the
extent, volume and weight of inter-State commercial traffic. (at p3)
2. The broad problem raised by the present case and by the Transport Cases in
general is this. To what extent, if at all, can inter-State
transport be lawfully required by the States (or by the Commonwealth) to
contribute directly to the maintenance and upkeep
of the road system which is
vital to its existence and which is constantly and inevitably being worn away
by its daily impact? (at
3. According to the appellants, it cannot be required to make any direct
material contribution to the cost of road maintenance.
Or, if it can, the
contribution to the cost must bear so close a relation to the actual wear and
tear caused to the particular roads
by the particular vehicles on their
particular journeys that for practical purposes it would be impossible to
exact it. To hold otherwise,
it is argued, would create an inroad into
which enacts that trade, commerce, and intercourse among the States, whether
by means of internal carriage or ocean navigation, shall
be absolutely free.
And such an inroad would, it is said, lead to the erosion of that charter of
absolute freedom which
has granted to inter-State commerce. This is the
basis of the various arguments, so ably presented by the appellants' counsel ;
which he seeks to show that the legal concept embodied in the Transport
Cases since 1955 is wrong, and that it cannot justify those
decisions. (at p3)
4. The appellants, who carry on business as inter-State carriers and own
commercial goods vehicles seek a declaration that the Road
Maintenance
(Contribution) Act, 1958-1965 of the State of New South Wales is invalid
generally, or invalid in respect of certain
sections and schedules, by virtue
of the provisions of
Constitution
. That Act imposes upon owners
of commercial goods vehicles (with a load capacity of over 4 tons) a road
charge at a rate per ton
per mile of public streets travelled in New South
Wales towards compensation for wear and tear to public streets caused by such
The respondents demurred to the statement of claim. The High Court
following its own previously decided cases, one of which had already
the provisions of the Act in question were valid, allowed the demurrer. On
appeal to your Lordships leave to intervene
was given to another carrier of
commercial goods, who had an interest similar to that of the appellants. On
the other side leave
to intervene was given to the States of South Australia,
Victoria and Tasmania, Queensland, and Western Australia. These States are
closely interested since they have enacted legislation which is in all
material respects similar to the legislation which is here
attacked. (at p4)
5. The Commonwealth of Australia has also intervened. It has not enacted
similar legislation. But it is, equally with the States,
bound by s. 92 (James
v. The Commonwealth
(1936) AC 578
(1936) 55 CLR 1
). It is therefore
concerned to maintain
an interpretation
of s. 92 which will enable it to pass
similar legislation with regard
to road maintenance charges, if it should
to do so. It
is also concerned to maintain an interpretation which will
support the
validity of certain legislation authorizing
the making of
for aerodromes and other facilities and services used by persons
inter-State trade, commerce, and
intercourse.
But it is conceded by the
appellants' counsel that his arguments are not
directed against and do not
touch this latter
class of legislation.
6. In addition to the appellants and respondents all the interveners have by
their counsel made submissions on this interesting
and important matter and
their Lordships are much indebted for the careful arguments. (at p4)
7. It has long been established that the words "absolutely free", strong as
they are, cannot be read without any qualification.
It is clear that s. 92
does not, for instance, give to inter-State goods the privilege of travelling
on railways or ships without
paying for their freight. Fifty years ago Sir
Samuel Griffith C.J. said (Duncan v. State of Queensland
[1916] HCA 67
): "But the word 'free' does not mean extra legem any more than freedom
means anarchy. We boast of being an absolutely
free people,
but that does not
mean that we are not subject to law." Those words were quoted in The
Commonwealth v. Bank of New South
(1949) 79 CLR 497
where there was much discussion of the extent to which the words "absolutely
free" should be qualified.
It was there suggested by
way of general
proposition that regulation of trade, commerce and intercourse
States was compatible
with its absolute freedom,
and that s. 92 is violated
only where an Act operates to restrict commerce
"directly and immediately as
distinct from creating some
indirect or consequential impediment which may
fairly be regarded as remote"
(1950) AC, at p 310 ; (1949)
79 CLR, at p 639 .
it was pointed out with justice that actual decisions on the matter were
to be controversial and that
although the decision
was one for a court
of law the problems were likely to be largely political, social
or economic.
This has certainly
been so in the
Transport Cases where there have been many
differences of opinion. (at p5)
8. In the case of Hughes and Vale Pty. Ltd. v. The State of New South Wales
[1954] UKPCHCA 5
(1955) AC 241
(1954) 93 CLR 1
convenience called
Hughes and Vale (No.
1)) the Privy Council was called on to decide a transport case concerning the
of the State Transport
(Co-ordination) Act of New South Wales
requiring application to be made for a licence (which might be granted
refused at discretion
by an executive official) and various consequential
provisions applying to the operators of public motor
vehicles engaged in
inter-State
trade. It was held that they contravened s. 92 and were therefore
invalid. (at p5)
9. Various Transport Cases which had been decided by the High Court came into
question in Hughes and Vale (No.
[1954] UKPCHCA 5
(1955) AC 241
(1954) 93 CLR 1
none of those could it be properly said that they imposed charges for road
maintenance and
nothing more.
Nor on the view
of the judges who upheld the
validity of various Acts in those cases was it necessary to rely on the
argument that
they dealt with
road maintenance charges. The first of these
Transport Cases was Willard v. Rawson
[1933] HCA 12
(1933) 48 CLR 316
where the Court
majority (Dixon J. dissenting) upheld a Victorian law requiring the
registration of all motor
cars. Their Lordships
no opinion on the
correctness of the case. It is however interesting to note that Dixon J. in
dissenting judgment said:
statute fixes a charge for a convenience
or service provided by the State or an agency of the State,
and imposes it
choose to avail themselves of the service or convenience, the
freedom of commerce may well be considered
unimpaired, although
the charge is incurred in inter-State as well as intra-State transactions. But
in such a case the
imposition assumes
the character
of remuneration or
consideration charged in respect of an advantage sought and received" (1933)
48 CLR, at p 334 .
There one has
a glimpse of the concept which he
subsequently developed and elaborated. (at p5)
10. It is also interesting to see that Mr. Fullagar as counsel in the case
argued (1933) 48 CLR, at p 318 that a reason for the
invalidity of the
registration fee under discussion was that it was not computed according to
the mileage run on the roads and that
the purpose was not to maintain the
highway. (at p6)
11. Next for consideration by the Board in Hughes and Vale (No.
[1954] UKPCHCA 5
; 1) (1955) AC
(1954) 93 CLR 1
came R. v. Vizzard
[1933] HCA 62
(1933) 50 CLR 30
where the High Court had considered the very same statute which was then
the Board. The majority had
held that it was valid,
but Starke J. and
Dixon J. had dissented on the ground that it contravened s.
92. Again in O.
Gilpin Ltd.
v. Commissioner for Road
Transport and Tramways (N.S.W.)
[1935] HCA 8
and in Bessell
[1935] HCA 5
(1935) 52 CLR 215
the majority
had upheld the
Act, but Starke J. and Dixon J. had again dissented for the
same reason. (at
12. The last of the Transport Cases considered by the Board in Hughes and
Vale (No. 1) (2) was McCarter v. Brodie
[1950] HCA 18
(1950) 80 CLR
where a Victorian
Act by which commercial goods vehicles could not operate on public highways
unless licensed
to do so under
Act had been held by the majority to be
good. Dixon J. and Fullagar J. had dissented. The Board in Hughes and
[1954] UKPCHCA 5
; 1) (1955)
(1954) 93 CLR 1
upheld the dissenting judgments and
thus endorsed the earlier dissenting
judgments of Dixon J. It quoted
from the judgment
of Dixon J. in McCarter v. Brodie
[1950] HCA 18
(1950) 80 CLR 432
accepted his view on the following six propositions
as to mistakes which
underlay the previous Transport Cases: The Bank Case
(1950) AC 235
had rejected as erroneous
three of them which had often been put
forward ; (i) that s. 92
does not guarantee the freedom of individuals,
that "if the
same volume of trade flowed from State to State before as after
the interference with the individual trader, then
the freedom of
trade among
the States remained unimpaired", (iii) that "because
a law applies alike to
inter-State commerce and to
the domestic
commerce of a State, it may escape
objection notwithstanding that
it prohibits, restricts or burdens inter-State
(1950) AC 235
(iv) that "the object or purpose of an Act challenged as contrary to s. 92
to be ascertained from what is enacted
consists in the necessary legal
effect of the law itself and not in its ulterior effect
socially or
economically", (v) that "the
question what is the pith and substance of the
impugned law, though possibly of help in
considering whether it is nothing but
a regulation
of a class of transactions forming part of trade and commerce, is
beside the point
when the law amounts to a prohibition or the question
regulation cannot fairly arise", (vi) it is erroneous to make a distinction
between "on the one hand motor vehicles as integers
of traffic and on the
other hand the trade of carrying by motor vehicles as part
of commerce". The
carriage of goods and persons
does not lie "on the circumference of the
conception of commerce" but "at or near
the centre". (at p7)
13. In the dissenting judgments, which were thus accepted and became good
law, Dixon J. had been primarily concerned with what could
not be done without
contravening s. 92 rather than with what could properly be done. And the
majority who were thus overruled had
not, ex hypothesi (since they were
content with the validity of the relevant acts), been concerned to explore
such a question. In
the new light thrown on the Transport Cases by the
decision in Hughes and Vale (No.
[1954] UKPCHCA 5
; 1) (1955) AC 241;
(1954) 93 CLR
Court (with Sir Owen Dixon now the Chief Justice) set itself to give some
obiter guidance on how far it was practicable,
in conformity
with s. 92, for
the States to secure financial contributions towards the large cost of
maintaining their roadways against
the deterioration
caused by the increased
and increasing demands of heavy vehicles. In Hughes and Vale Pty. Ltd. v. The
New South Wales (No.
[1955] HCA 28
(1955) 93 CLR 127
, (for convenience called
Hughes and Vale (No. 2)) the particular statutes
concerned were unanimously
held invalid,
but the judgments
deliberately dealt with the wider aspects of
the situation. The joint
judgment of Dixon C.J., McTiernan and Webb
describes the
problem as being one "which hitherto has not received
consideration
in this Court untrammelled by the conceptions
by the Privy Council in Hughes and Vale (No.
[1954] UKPCHCA 5
(1955) AC 241;
(1954) 93 CLR 1
. It is the problem of saying
how far if at all and on what
grounds a pecuniary levy can be made directly
upon inter-State transportation
by road and yet leave
that form of trade, commerce and intercourse absolutely
free" (1955) 93 CLR,
at p 171 . "In conception" it
says (1955) 93 CLR, at
160 , "the distinction is clear between laws interfering with the freedom
effect the very transaction
or to carry out the very
activity which
constitutes inter-State trade, commerce or intercourse and
laws imposing upon
those engaged
in such transactions or
activities rules of proper conduct or
other restraints so that it is done
in a due and orderly manner without
invading the rights
or prejudicing the interests of others and, where a use is
made of services
or privileges enjoyed as of common
right, without abusing
them or disregarding the just claims of the public as represented by the
to any recompense or reparation
that ought in fairness
to be made." (at p8)
14. The judgment goes on to point out that the question cannot be dealt with
on the basis of the ownership of property, nor on the
basis of a facility or
service, like railways, electricity, gas, or water. The roads of a State being
an established everyday means
of carrying on commerce, were one of the basic
assumptions of s. 92. (at p8)
15. "But whilst it is not possible to justify the imposition of a charge for
the use of the roads on the basis of property, if it
includes inter-State
commerce, there are other grounds which make it possible to reconcile with the
freedom postulated by s. 92 the
exaction from commerce using the roads,
whether the journey be inter-State or not, of some special contribution to
their maintenance
and upkeep in relief of the general revenues of the State
drawn from the public at large. The American phrase is that inter-State
commerce must pay its way. It is but a constitutional aphorism, but it serves
to bring home the point that in a modern community
the exercise of any trade
and the conduct of any business must involve all sorts of fiscal liabilities
from which, in reason, inter-State
trade or business should have no immunity.
Those who pay them are not unfree, they merely pay the price of freedom. Just
as any commercial
pursuit or activity must conform with the laws affecting its
incidents, notwithstanding that it may form part of inter-State commerce,
it must discharge the fiscal liabilities which State law attaches to those
incidents. No one, for example, would say that s. 92
gave a depot or terminal
of an inter-State air service or road transport business immunity from rates
or land tax. The aphorism,
however, does not tell you where the application of
this principle stops, even under the American doctrine which allows more
than our s. 92 can admit. 'The appealing phrase that "interstate
business must pay its way" can be invoked only when we know what
the "way" is
for which interstate business must pay.' - per Frankfurter J. in Braniff
Airways v. Nebraska State Board
[1954] USSC 54
[1954] USSC 54
(98 Law Ed 967
p 981) . Needless to say, the principle has no application if there is a
discrimination against
inter-State commerce, if it is
placed under any
disadvantage in face of the State's internal commerce. The principle has no
application
to impositions the purpose
of which is not to recoup the State or
supply the means of providing the services, or a relevant service,
government, but to give
effect to some social or economic policy, as for
example to deprive road transport of an advantage in
competing with railways.
16. "A distinction of much importance must be maintained between impositions
upon things which are only incidental to or consequential
upon carrying on the
activity, as for instance a tax on the occupation of premises, a 'pay roll'
tax, a profits tax, and impositions
upon the thing itself. To exempt a
business from the former because it has an inter-State character might go
beyond preserving freedom
of inter-State trade and amount to a privilege - '.
. . to require that inter-State trade shall be protected from the ordinary
of competitive business is to give - not an immunity from
interference, but a specially privileged position' - per Mann J., Melbourne
Harbour Trust Commissioners v. Colonial Sugar Refining Co. Ltd.
, at p 149 " (1955) 93 CLR, at pp 172, 173 . (at p9)
17. Their Honours then proceeded to state the solution to the problem and the
principles upon which a charge for use may be based
in the following way: (at
18. "For the purpose of that provision (s.92) it may perhaps be said with
some confidence that if a charge is imposed as a real
attempt to fix a
reasonable recompense or compensation for the use of the highway and for
contribution to the wear and tear which
the vehicle may be expected to make it
will be sustained as consistent with the freedom s.92 confers upon
transportation as a form
of inter-State commerce. But if the charge is imposed
on the inter-State operation itself then it must be made to appear that it
such an attempt. That it is so must be evident from its nature and character.
Prima facie it will present that appearance if it
is based on the nature and
extent of the use made of the roads (as for example if it is a mileage or
ton-mileage charge or the like)
; if the proceeds are devoted to the repair,
upkeep, maintenance and depreciation of relevant highways, if inter-State
transportation
bears no greater burden than the internal transport of the
State and if the collection of the exaction involves no substantial
interference
with the journey. The absence of one or all of these indicia need
not necessarily prove fatal, but in the presence of them the conclusion
naturally be reached that the charge was truly compensatory. (at p9)
19. "The expression 'a reasonable compensation or recompense' is convenient
but vague. The standard of 'reasonableness' can only
lie in the severity with
which it bears on traffic and such evidence of extravagance in its assessment
as come from general considerations.
In speaking of 'relevant highways' it is
intended to mark the importance of recognizing the size of Australian States,
as distinguished
from most American States. It is for the use of certain roads
that it is supposed the recompense is made, and not for the use of
roads of an
entirely different character many hundreds of miles away. It may of course be
immaterial, if the charge is based on average
costs of road care, repair and
maintenance, which may well give a lower rate than if it were based on the
costs in connexion with
the highway used. It does not seem logical to include
the capital cost of new highways or other capital expenditure in the costs
taken as the basis of the computation. It is another matter with recurring
expenditure incident to the provision and maintenance
of roads. The judgment
whether the charge is consistent with the freedom of inter-State trade must be
made upon a consideration of
the statutory instrument or instruments by and
under which it is imposed. The fault with s. 18 (4) - (6) is that these
confer an authority which ex facie gives no assurance that the
charge imposed under it will conform with what amount to constitutional
necessities. It is needless to consider whether this necessarily means that
the sub-sections are wholly void, so that it would be
unnecessary to wait to
see what is done under them. For in any case, they fall with the licensing
provisions. (at p10)
20. "All that is conceded to the State by what has been said is authority to
exact a compensatory payment for the use of the highways
notwithstanding that
it is a use in the course of inter-State trade" (1955) 93 CLR, at pp 175, 176
. And then after pointing out
what, in their Honours' view, would not be a
charge able to be levied consistently with s. 92, they proceeded (1955) 93
177-179 : (at p10)
21. "But very different considerations arise when the State demands payment
in respect of the use of a physical thing which the
State provides although
under no legal obligation to provide it. No one would doubt that, if coal is
discharged from inter-State
colliers through handling equipment and bins
established by the State, the State may impose a proper charge by way of
or remuneration. But a State may build a wharf which inter-State
ships cannot well do otherwise than use. Yet it seems undeniable
State can require the ships to pay wharfage provided the wharfage charge is
genuinely fixed as a fair and reasonable compensation
for the use of the
wharf. Government aerodromes constructed and equipped for traffic by air may
be indispensable to inter-State aerial
navigation; but because charges are
levied for the use of them no one would say that air navigation among the
States is not free.
The fact is that we find nothing inconsistent with our
conception of complete freedom of inter-State trade in the exaction, for the
use of physical things like the foregoing, of a pecuniary charge, if in truth
it is no more than a reward, remuneration or recompense.
But when an exaction
is compulsory, it must possess characteristics which distinguish it from a
mere tax, falling upon inter-State
trade. It is for this reason that the
relation which the amount of the exaction bears to the actual use of the
facility should appear,
and that there should not be evidences of an attempt
to achieve objects that go beyond the recovery of fair compensation for the
actual use made of the facility. We are accustomed to the levy of charges for
the use of such things as have been given as examples,
coal-handling
equipment, wharves and aerodromes, and accordingly we see in it nothing
incongruous with freedom of trade. We are not
accustomed to charges being made
for the use of ordinary bridges; but it would strike few minds that there was
any impairment of
freedom of inter-State trade in placing a toll upon the use
of some great bridge erected as a major engineering work, like that over
Sydney Harbour. Must a highway be treated by the State for the purposes of s.
92 as in a different category from wharves, bridges,
aerodromes and special
constructional works which interState trade uses? A modern highway is in fact
a constructional work of a very
substantial character indeed. It cannot be
distinguished from the facilities that have been mentioned either in cost, the
and engineering skill it demands or the general purpose it serves.
It is an engineering work of a major description designed to carry
heavy motor
vehicles between distant places. There is little exaggeration in saying that
its association with the highways of the
nineteenth century is a matter of
history rather than of practical identity or resemblance. But highways have in
Australia a very
different history from wharves and analogous constructional
works. At the time when s.92 was enacted, with very few, if any, exceptions
the highways of Australia were available without charge for the use of all
persons as of right. It has not always been so in England.
Even before the
period of statutory tolls it was competent for the Crown to grant a franchise
to take tolls over a road in consideration
of the grantee keeping the road in
repair: see Lord Pelham v. Pickersgill (1787) 1 TR 660
(99 ER 1306)
course there came
the long history of turnpike roads governed by turnpike
trusts constituted by statute. Is it an anterior
assumption of s. 92 that
roads of a State whatever form they take must be available without charge to
all kinds of inter-State
traffic? Is such an assumption
part and parcel of the
freedom which the provision guarantees ? To give an affirmative answer to this
question implies that in reference
to inter-State commerce the law, that is to
say the State law, conferring upon the subjects of
the Crown a right of free
over highways is unchangeable. There seems to be no constitutional
reason why this should be so.
What is essential for the purpose
of securing
the freedom of inter-State transportation by road is that no pecuniary burden
be placed upon it which goes beyond
a proper recompense to the State
for the actual use made of the physical facilities provided
in the shape of a
highway. The difficulties
are very great in defining this conception. But the
conception appears to be based on
a real distinction between remuneration for
the provision of a specific physical service of which particular use is made
and a burden
placed upon inter-State transportation
in aid of the general
expenditure of the State. It seems necessary to draw the distinction
ultimately to attempt to work out
the conception so as to allow of a charge
compatible with real freedom because it is no more
than a fair recompense for
facility provided by the State and used for the purpose of his
business by the inter-State
trader." (at p12)
22. Williams J. spoke to a somewhat similar effect. Fullagar J. said (1955)
93 CLR, at pp 208-210 : (at p12)
23. "Nor is it any denial or qualification of this freedom to come and go to
say that nobody is bound affirmatively to facilitate
my coming and going or to
supply me with the means of coming or going. Nobody is bound to provide for me
a ship or an aeroplane or
a motor car. Nor is anybody bound to provide for me
a wharf or an aerodrome or a parking station. If a government or a
governmental
instrumentality does provide any of these things, it is clearly
entitled to make at least a reasonable charge for the use thereof,
making of such a charge cannot be said to interfere with my freedom to come
and go : cf. Melbourne Harbour Trust Commissioners
v. Colonial Sugar Refining
(1926) VLR 140
. This, however, is, of course, subject to the proviso
that the charges made do
not involve any discrimination against me as an
inter-State
trader or traveller. If they do, they assume at once a different
and can no longer be regarded as merely charges for a service
rendered. They impose a special burden on me as an inter-State trader
traveller, and they do therefore interfere with my freedom
to come and go.
* * * * * (at p12)
24. "There is, however, another aspect of the matter. Large, fast moving, and
often very heavy, road vehicles provide today, in
Europe, America and
Australia, a normal and necessary means for the transportation of goods and
passengers. Such vehicles require,
for their safe, efficient and economical
use, roads of considerable width, and of a hardness and durability beyond what
was achieved
by John McAdam. Because such roads serve, directly or indirectly,
the needs of the community as a whole, it is the natural function
Governments to provide and maintain them. That function has been assumed in
Australia by the States, acting directly or through
a statutory
instrumentality, as one of their constitutional functions, though large sums
have been paid to the States by the Commonwealth
for assistance in the
performance of this function under a series of Commonwealth Acts, of which the
latest is the Commonwealth Aid
Roads Act 1950. (at p13)
25. "Such roads, as I have said, serve directly or indirectly the needs of
the community as a whole. But, because the users of vehicles
generally, and of
public motor vehicles in particular, stand in a special and direct relation to
such roads, and may be said to derive
a special and direct benefit from them,
it seems not unreasonable that they should be called upon to make a special
contribution
to their maintenance over and above their general contribution as
taxpayers of State and Commonwealth. Among those who so use those
persons who use those roads exclusively for the inter-State carriage of goods
or passengers. Does s. 92 mean that such
persons must be exempt from making
any contribution towards the maintenance of the roads which they use ? I do
not think it does.
It does not appear to me to be inconsistent with anything I
have said above to say that such persons may be called upon to make a
contribution towards the cost of maintaining something from which they may
fairly be regarded as deriving a benefit over and above
that which is derived
by the community as a whole. In making such a contribution they are not really
paying a price for their coming
and going. They are paying a price for
something which makes their coming and going safer, easier, or more convenient
than it would
be if the highways which they use were allowed to fall into
disrepair or decay. So regarded, the exaction of a contribution towards
maintenance of the highways of a State does not appear to me, necessarily and
of its very nature, to offend against s. 92. Such
a view derives support, I
think, from the view taken in a considerable number of cases in the United
States, although, as has often
been pointed out, there is no s. 92 in the
Constitution
of the United States, and the question of the validity of such
charges arises there in connexion with a constitutional doctrine which
been adopted here." (at p13)
26. Kitto J. expressed, and gave clear and detailed reasons for, the view
that the States could not validly make any charge for
the use made of roads by
vehicles engaged in inter-State trade. Taylor J. also expressed similar
reasoned views but he said that
in cases where by reason of their weights and
construction vehicles are calculated to work destruction of such a nature to
that they ought not to be on them at all, the States may validly
prohibit their use on the road. In such cases it is legitimate for
to stipulate for payment of a charge as a condition of relaxing such
prohibition. (at p14)
27. In Armstrong v. The State of Victoria (No. 2)
[1957] HCA 55
(1957) 99 CLR 28
majority Dixon C.J., McTiernan, Williams
and Fullagar JJ.
(Webb, Kitto and
Taylor JJ. dissenting) repeated their views and amplified
them. In that case
the High Court had
an actual statute
to consider, framed within the principles
adumbrated obiter in Hughes and
Vale (No. 2)
[1955] HCA 28
. The Act there
under consideration
was for practical purposes identical with the Act which is
being considered in the present
Evidence was called whose nature
by inference from the judgments. The Act was held valid by the majority. The
Justice (in his judgment with
which McTiernan J. agreed) pointed
out that the liability to pay accrued from the actual use
road and the
amount was quantified
by the length of the journey. Payment was not exacted as
a condition precedent to carrying
goods or entering upon or continuing
journey (1957) 99 CLR, at p 40 . He observed: "When it is said that a toll
upon a bridge,
to take the example mentioned, does
not burden inter-State
commerce, it does not mean that the payment is not borne by the traffic
that the payment is so small that
its incidence cannot be felt. It means that
the payment is of such a kind that it is no impairment
of the freedom of
commerce or
of movement if you are required to make it . . . " (1957) 99 CLR,
at p 43 . (at p14)
28. After referring to tolls on bridges, charges on aerodromes, and tonnage
rates on ships berthing at wharves, he says: (at p14)
29. "Although the payments are exacted under the authority of the law from
parties engaged in inter-State commerce who must incur
the charges if they are
to pursue the inter-State transactions, yet there is no detraction from the
freedom of inter-State commerce.
The reason, as I venture to suggest, simply
is that, without the bridge, the aerodromes and airways, the wharves and the
respective inter-State operations could not be carried out and that
the charges serve no purpose save to maintain these necessary
things at a
standard by which they may continue. However it may be stated, the ultimate
ground why the exaction of the payments for
using the instruments of commerce
that have been mentioned is no violation of the freedom of inter-State trade
lies in the relation
to inter-State trade which their nature and purpose give
them. The reason why public authority must maintain them is in order that
commerce may use them, and so for the commerce to bear or contribute to the
cost of their upkeep can involve no detraction from
the freedom of commercial
intercourse between States. It is not because the charges are consensual for
plainly they are imposed by
law ; if the conditions are fulfilled that the law
prescribes, a liability arises. It is not because they are based on property.
Indeed the instruments of commerce in question are public works often subject
to and complicated by a combination of authorities.
30. "Once however it appears that, under colour of the law, the charge is
imposed not for the purpose of obtaining a proper contribution
maintenance and upkeep of the work but for the purpose of adversely affecting
the inter-State commerce, then whatever its
guise it is called in question by
s. 92 as an infringement of the freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse
among the States" (1957)
99 CLR, at pp 43, 44 . (at p15)
31. After incorporating the passage quoted above from the judgment in Hughes
and Vale (No. 2)
[1955] HCA 28
(1955) 93 CLR 127
the learned Chief
Justice continued (1957)
99 CLR, at p 47 : (at p15)
32. "The passage which as I have already said must be read into this judgment
from that in Hughes & Vale Pty. Ltd. v. State
South Wales (No. 2)
(1955) 93 CLR, at pp 171-179 concludes with a reference to the difficulties
necessarily arising in working
the distinction between, on the one hand,
recompense or remuneration for the provision of a specific physical service of
use is made and on the other hand, a burden placed on
inter-State transportation in aid of the general expenditure of
careful argument in this case on the part of the plaintiffs was of course not
directed to diminishing or solving the
difficulties
; but it had a particular
value as an exposure of latent questions to which any practical measure must
give rise. Nevertheless
am confirmed in the view that it is 'necessary to
draw the distinction and ultimately to attempt to work out the conception so
to allow of a charge compatible with real freedom because it is no more
than a fair recompense for a specific facility provided
the State and used
for the purpose of his business by the inter-State trader' (1955) 93 CLR, at p
179 ." (at p15)
33. Williams J. agreed and confirmed his views as set out in the joint
judgment in Hughes and Vale (No. 2)
[1955] HCA 28
34. Fullagar J. said (1957) 99 CLR, at pp 82, 83 : (at p16)
35. "What is permissible (whether you call it a 'compensation' or a
'recompense' or what you will) is the exaction of a contribution
towards the
maintenance of something which can be used as of right. The distinction is, to
my mind, both real and important. For,
if what is permissible were of the
former character, the States must obviously be very much at large. If, on the
other hand, what
is permissible is of the latter character, the powers of the
States are defined, and the Courts have a power of investigation and
control, which can be exercised to prevent an infringement of s. 92, the final
question in each case being whether what
is exacted is in truth and in
substance, and is no more than, a contribution towards the maintenance of
public highways." (at p16)
36. And again at p. 83: (at p16)
37. "Every one of the indicia mentioned (i.e., as suggested in Hughes and
Vale (No. 2)) is present here. The charge is based on
ton-mileage, and is thus
related on its face to the nature and extent of the use made of roads. Section
30 of the Act requires all
moneys received by the board to be paid into the
Country Roads Board Fund . . . to the credit of a special 'Roads Maintenance
and money to the credit of that special account is to be applied only
to the maintenance of public highways. Inter-State transport
bears no greater
burden than the internal transport of the State. And the collection of the
charge involves no interference with
any inter-State journey. It is to be
added that the charge is not shown to be quantitatively unreasonable either in
the sense of
being out of proportion to the actual cost of maintenance or in
the sense of imposing a practically prohibitive burden. It is to
be added also
that the State adduced evidence to show the actual basis on which the amount
of the charge had been arrived at. Anything
even approximating to mathematical
accuracy is obviously out of the question, but the evidence does, I think,
establish that there
is what Frankfurter J. (in Capitol Greyhound Lines v.
[1950] USSC 51
(1950) 339 US 542
[1950] USSC 51
(94 Law Ed 1053
, at p 1059) ) has called
'relationship between what is demanded and what is given by the State'. It
shows, I think, that there
has been a 'real attempt
to fix a reasonable
recompense or compensation'." (at p16)
38. The last of this important trilogy was Commonwealth Freighters Pty. Ltd.
[1959] HCA 11
(1959) 102 CLR 280
dealt with the
validity of the New South
Wales Act here in question. The Act was unanimously held to be valid. The
Justice restated
his previous views. He concluded: (at p17)
39. "In Armstrong v. The State of Victoria (No. 2)
[1957] HCA 55
(1957) 99 CLR 28
considered that, notwithstanding the unsatisfactory
of the information
upon which, in the circumstances I have summarized,
the conclusion must rest,
the realities of the case
were that a contributory charge had been
levied for the maintenance of
highways sufficiently uniform in its incidence,
proportionate to the wear and tear involved and otherwise
conforming with
the tests accepted by a majority of the Judges for a charge
consistent with true freedom in carrying on trade, commerce and intercourse"
(1959) 102 CLR, at pp 293, 294 . (at p17)
40. And again: (at p17)
41. "The basal reason in the distinction upon which these cases rest is that
the constant flow of traffic involves equally constant
recurring charges to
uphold the surface on which it continues to travel and that it is no
impairment of its liberty so to travel
if a charge is levied commensurate with
the use and attrition for the purpose of upholding the surface" (1959) 102
CLR, at pp 294,
295 . (at p17)
42. Kitto and Taylor JJ. held that the Court was bound by Armstrong's Case
[1957] HCA 55
(1957) 99 CLR 28
and therefore
no longer dissented.
43. Menzies J. did not question the rationale of Armstrong's Case (No. 2)
[1957] HCA 55
(1957) 99 CLR 28
. But he considered and
refuted the argument
that since the
Victorian case of Armstrong had been decided in the light of factual
as to the reasonableness
of the charges
as they related to the Victorian
roads, this New South Wales Act could not be properly
held valid without
evidence ; and
that since the charges in the two Acts were identical,
the Victorian evidence supporting
the charges gave a prima
facie indication
unreasonableness, since charges which were reasonable in respect of Victoria
were unlikely
to be reasonable in
respect of New
South Wales. He said: (at
44. "Any decision that a statute is constitutional or unconstitutional,
however it may have been reached, is necessarily one of
law and is, in the
absence of special circumstances, of binding authority. Where such a decision
has been reached simply by process
of construction and comparison no
difficulty arises about the binding authority of the decision in subsequent
cases. Where, however,
the decision has depended in part upon findings of fact
there is room for argument. Where the facts which have entered into the
were ascertained by judicial notice there would seem to be no sound
reason for not according the decision the same authority as if
it had depended
upon nothing more than a comparison between the challenged legislation and the
constitution because the only matters
of which judicial notice can be taken
are those considered too notorious to require proof, that is, matters beyond
controversy. Where,
however, the facts which have entered into the decision
have been ascertained from evidence there is more room for doubt whether
decision so reached has binding authority except in cases where precisely the
same facts are established. This problem, like
the more fundamental problem of
the place of evidence in constitutional cases, is not a matter for unnecessary
generalization, because
it is possible to envisage cases where a decision
based upon findings of fact could properly be called into question, but to
with the case in hand I am not in doubt that if after taking evidence in
an action the Court has decided that a State law leaves
trade, commerce and
intercourse among the States absolutely free and so does not contravene s. 92,
its decision on that point of
law so long as it stands puts the matter at
rest. Where a decision concerning validity has been reached upon findings of
would, of course, be open to the Court to consider the matter again
upon the representation that the significant facts are no longer
as they were,
but this is another matter which need not be considered here" (1959) 102 CLR,
at pp 301, 302 . (at p18)
45. Those observations seem to their Lordships, with respect, to contain good
sense. But in this area sharply defined questions
of fact in the foreground
blend imperceptibly in the middle distance with the broader and more distant
matters of which a tribunal
may take judicial notice. And as at present
advised it seems to their Lordships that these are matters peculiarly within
the province
of the High Court and they therefore make no further comment on
them. (at p18)
46. There is an interesting judgment of Windeyer J. (1959) 102 CLR, at p 302
who had not been concerned with previous Transport
Cases, in which he examines
and adopts their rationale, supporting it by its accordance with "some
historic doctrines of English
law and with old practices which can, I think,
be regarded as in harmony with the freedom which s. 92 assures" (1959) 102
p 303 . He then went on to consider from medieval times the situation
with regard to highways, bridges, ferries and tolls. (at p18)
47. Three later cases were cited to their Lordships, Boardman v. Duddington
[1959] HCA 64
(1959) 104 CLR 456
, Breen v. Sneddon
[1961] HCA 67
(1961) 106 CLR
and Allwrights
Transport Ltd. v. Ashley
[1962] HCA 1
(1962) 107 CLR 662
in which the High Court
the same line of reasoning. They
added little or nothing to the argument save
in so far as the appellants'
counsel claimed
Allwrights Case (1962) 107 CLR,
as an indication of the undesirable lengths to which the heresy which
was attacking could
go. There it was held that it was not
relevant that the
total amount of charges collected in respect of a particular
highway exceeds
the amount expended on its upkeep.
"What matters", said the joint judgment,
"is that a rate is adopted by the State
. . . and is
expended only upon the
maintenance
of highways, using the word 'maintenance' in the widest sense"
(1962) 107 CLR, at
p 668 . (at
48. Thus there has been evolved a legal concept, which has become established
by the authority of the High Court in several decisions.
It has been worked
out by careful, thoughtful judgments in which those of the learned and very
distinguished Chief Justice Sir Owen
Dixon have naturally played the leading
part. It is conceded that, broadly speaking, it is fair and reasonable in its
practical effect.
But the appellants rightly contend that if it offends
against the charter of freedom contained in s. 92 it cannot stand. And
Mr. Deane for the appellants largely bases his arguments on the
clear and careful judgments of Kitto J. and Taylor J. who, as long
open to them, maintained that such exactions from inter-State trade were
inconsistent with the absolute freedom conferred
by s. 92. (at p19)
49. Mr. Deane's argument runs thus. Admittedly there is some qualification of
the words "absolutely free"; and freedom of inter-State
traffic under s. 92
has certain implied restrictions. Traffic must be regulated by rules; and if
an exaction is truly regulatory,
e.g., if registration is necessary for
control of traffic and a compulsory payment for licences goes towards paying
the costs of
registration machinery, this does not offend s. 92. But the
charge under consideration cannot be described as regulatory. Nor in
the supporters of its validity rely on its regulatory nature. Again there is
admittedly a right to charge for facilities.
But this is limited to charges
based on a right of property with a consequent power to exclude. Railways (or
aerodromes) which are
owned by the State and from which the public may by
right of property be excluded are thus different from highways where the
(including inter-State traffic) go as of right. This right is one of
which the trader is a beneficiary, and if the inter-State trader
charged for this he may be charged for all the benefits provided to him by the
State. Any charge for a right to go on the
roads is irreconcilable with
freedom. (See Kitto J. Hughes and Vale (No. 2) (1955) 93 CLR, at pp 221-223 ;
Taylor J. (1955) 93 CLR,
at pp 237,238 .) This is a mere tax on the movement
of the trader, movement which he is entitled to make as an integral and all
part of his inter-State trade. "If it is conceded that a person
enjoys a constitutional immunity from all charges upon his going
inter-State
by road, I do not see how it can be asserted, wothout contradicting the
concession, that that person is not immune from
a charge imposed and measured
by reference to an aspect, or a necessary incident or consequence, of his
going inter-State by road"
(per Kitto J. Armstrong's Case (No. 2) (1957) 99
CLR, at p 86 ). To impose such a charge, it is argued, is inconsistent with
and Vale (No.
[1954] UKPCHCA 5
; 1) (1955) AC 241;
(1954) 93 CLR 1
50. The arguments thus shortly summarized are formidable and their Lordships
have given them careful consideration. But in their
opinion they do not
invalidate the legal concept contained in the judgments of Sir Owen Dixon and
other members of the Court in the
three relevant Transport Cases. The
appellants' argument assumes that if the charge is not regulatory in the
strict sense and is
not a charge for facilities in the strict sense, it cannot
be made. It assumes that the qualifications which admittedly have to be
in the words "absolute freedom" cannot include a charge which does not come
strictly within either of those categories. It denies
a right to charge
towards the upkeep of something which the trader can use as of right. Yet
there is admittedly a framework within
which the freedom operates, a framework
which one may describe in the apt words of Kitto J. in Breen v. Sneddon
[1961] HCA 67
106 CLR 406
at p 415 , "as circumscribing an individual's latitude of conduct
in the interests of fitting him into a neighbourhood
- a society,
of which entails, because of its nature, acts and forbearances on the part of
each by which room is allowed
for the reasonable
enjoyment by each other of
his own position in the same society". This framework partly consists of rules
charges therefor)
of strictly regulatory nature, and partly consists of
charges for facilities (e.g., railways and wharves). One
may ask why the
should not also consist of a duty to contribute directly to the cost
of that which the trader, while using
the highway as of right,
consumes by the
wear and tear which he inflicts on it. The framework within which the trader's
freedom operates
is nowhere indicated
with any precision or at all. Its extent
is a matter of inference and commonsense. Mr. Deane argues in terrorem
the judgments
attacked might be extended to cover charges for other matters of
which the trader should properly be a beneficiary
in exercising
his freedom
under s. 92. But the Transport Cases have rightly been treated in the High
Court as cases in isolation
from other aspects
of the freedom of inter-State
trade. (at p21)
51. Their Lordships accept the judgments of Sir Owen Dixon and the other
judgments of the High Court to the like effect in the three
relevant Transport
Cases as being a correct development and exposition of the law. In their view
the Act here in question is valid,
and does not on the general point offend
against s. 92. (at p21)
52. Apart from their general contention the appellants relied on three
subsidiary matters. (at p21)
53. Mr. Deane argued that since the Act expressly puts a burden on commercial
vehicles (or private vehicles acting commercially)
as such, it discriminates
against commerce and thus the burden becomes one which offends against the
freedom under s. 92, even if
a burden on all private citizens' and traders'
vehicles alike would not do so. Their Lordships cannot accept that contention.
it is established that the charge towards the wear and tear of the roads
is allowable as part of the framework within which the freedom
of s. 92 runs,
it does not cease to be so because it is put only on that section of the
transport which causes the heaviest wear
and tear. If it is not a burden on
freedom within the meaning of s. 92, it does not become one merely because it
is (on a common
sense computation and with no discriminatory malice) laid on
those who may be considered the proper persons to bear it. (at p21)
54. It was further argued that, granted the general right to impose such a
charge in certain circumstances, there was no evidence
to support this
particular charge and the onus should be on the State in this connexion. Their
Lordships would refer to their comment
on the passage from the judgment of
Menzies J. quoted above. (at p21)
55. Finally it was argued (by Mr. McLelland) that since a factual situation
was necessary to the validity of these charges and since,
even assuming that
it now existed, yet it might not continue to exist, the Act was invalid. For
when an Act depends for its validity
on transient circumstances it is valid
only if it refers to them; and it is invalid, if it is passed in general
terms, thus claiming
a permanence to which it is not entitled. In support of
this proposition he referred to various decisions in the United States of
America. The hypothesis on which the proposition is based is that the cost of
road maintenance in New South Wales may diminish to
such an extent that the
charge exacted can no longer be regarded as bearing a reasonable relationship
to the cost of road maintenance
and the wear and tear of traffic. Whether this
attractive hypothesis has sufficient relation to reality and instils into the
situation any element of transience, their Lordships do not venture to
estimate. This again seems to be a matter peculiarly within
the province of
the High Court and their Lordships are content to accept their view of the
matter. (at p22)
For these reasons their Lordships will humbly advise Her Majesty that the
appeal should be dismissed. The appellants must pay to
the respondents their
costs of this appeal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter