Luk Fook Holdings Company Limited v Zhou Liu Fu Jewelry Co Ltd [2025] ATMO 219 (29 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Opposition by Luk Fook
Holdings Company Limited to application under
Trade Marks Act
(Cth) by Zhou Liu Fu Jewelry Co., Ltd to remove trade mark number 1559183
(classes 9, 14, 16, 35, 36, 40 and 42) – LUKFOOK
JEWELLERY & Chinese
characters - in the name of Luk Fook Holdings Company Limited
Anne Makrigiorgos
REPRESENTATION:
James & Wells Intellectual Property
A.P.T. Patent and Trade Mark Attorneys
2025 ATMO 219
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) – application under
– limited use shown during relevant period – no circumstances
established that were an obstacle to use – discretion
not exercised
– trade mark to be partially removed
4 September 2024, Zhou Liu Fu Jewelry Co., Ltd (‘
filed an application under
Trade Marks Act 1995
Application
’) for the complete removal of the following registered
trade mark (‘
Registration
’) in the name of Luk Fook Holdings
Company Limited
Goods and services
Filing Date
: Accessories for mobile telephones; accessories for mobile
telephones sold as component parts of mobile telephones, namely, batteries,
battery chargers, electric cables, camera, telephone headsets, headsets with
wireless transmission function, synchronization cables,
cradles, ac adaptors,
cases for mobile phones, cases for PDAs, memory cards, in-car chargers for
mobile phones or PDAs, in-car holders
for mobile phones or PDAs; accessories of
eyewear, spectacles and sunglasses; calculating machines; camera phones; cases
and pouches
adapted for eyewear, spectacles and sunglasses; computer operating
and computer application software for mobile phones; contact lenses;
eyeglasses;
eyewear; frames for eyeglasses; lenses; mobile phones with data transmission
function; mobile telephone installations;
mobile telephone sets; mobile
telephones; optical products; parts and fittings for eyewear, spectacles and
sunglasses; PDAs with
wireless communication function; personal digital
assistants (PDA); protective eyeglasses; scientific apparatus and instruments;
sports eyeglasses; sunglass lenses; sunglasses; voice over internet protocol
(VoIP) phones
Bracelets (jewellery);
brooches (jewellery); chains (jewellery); charms (jewellery); chronometrical
instruments; clocks and watches,
electric; coins; costume jewellery; cuff links;
diamonds; earrings; gold bars; gold thread (jewellery); gold, unwrought or
horological and chronometric instrument; imitation gold; ivory
(jewellery); jewellery; jewellery cases (caskets); jewel cases of
metal; jewellery of yellow amber; key rings (trinkets or fobs); medallions
(jewellery); necklaces (jewellery) ornamental
pins; ornaments of precious metal;
ornaments (jewellery); palladium; pearls (jewellery); pins (jewellery); platinum
(metal); precious
metals and their alloys and goods in precious metals or coated
therewith, not included in other classes; precious stones; rings (jewellery);
semi-precious stones; silver ornaments; silver plate; silver thread; silver,
unwrought or beaten; statues of precious metal; statuettes
of precious metal;
stopwatches; tie clips; tie pins; watch cases; watch straps; watches; works of
art of precious metal; wristwatches
: Bags (envelopes, pouches) of paper or plastics, for
packaging; booklets; calendars; cards; catalogues; envelopes (stationery);
(stationery); graphic prints; greeting cards; handbooks (manuals);
loose-leaf binders; money clips; note books; pads (stationery);
pamphlets; pens
(office requisites); photographs; pictures; posters; printed matter; printed
publications; stationery; tear-off calendars;
wrapping paper; writing
instruments; writing materials; instructional and teaching materials (except
: Advertising; Auctioneering; Business consultancy
(Professional); Direct mail advertising; Dissemination of advertising matter;
Distribution
of samples; Management (Advisory services for business); Marketing
research; Marketing studies; On-line advertising on a computer
Organization of exhibitions for commercial or advertising purposes; Organization
of trade fairs for commercial or advertising
purposes; Outdoor advertising;
Public relations; Publicity; Radio advertising; Rental of advertising space;
Retail and wholesale
services including online sales in respect of precious
metals and their alloys and goods in precious metals, jewellery, precious
stones, horological and chronometric instruments, gold bars, pens, bracelets,
brooches, chains, chronometers, diamonds, earrings,
key rings, medals,
necklaces, pins, tie pins, ring, watches and clocks; sales promotion for others;
television advertising; television
commercials
: Appraisal; banking; brokerage; credit services; evaluation
(financial) (insurance, banking, real estate); guarantees; insurance
information; issuing of travellers' checks (cheques); loans (financing);
lending; banking; merchant banking services and the issuing
and redemption of
travellers' cheques; mutual funds; real estate agencies; safe deposit services;
savings banks; valuations (fiscal);
analysis (financial); capital investment;
clearing (financial); financial services; credit bureaux; credit card services;
services; debt collection agencies; deposits of valuables; exchanging
money; fiduciary; financial consultancy; financial information;
management; financing services; fiscal assessments; fund investments;
hire-purchase financing; home banking; instalment
loans; insurance brokerage;
insurance consultancy; insurance underwriting; investment (capital); issuance of
credit cards; lease-purchase
financing; lending against security; mortgage
banking; pawnbrokerage; real estate brokers; real estate management; rental of
(real estate); renting of apartments; securities brokerage; stock
exchange quotations; stocks and bonds brokerage; surety services;
(electronic funds); trusteeship; valuables (deposits of)
: Electroplating; engraving; gilding; gold-plating; material
: Authenticating works of art and jewellery; calibration
(measuring); certification of quality; chemical analysis; computer system
design; software design; design of interior decor; design services (packaging);
gemmological laboratory services; mechanical research;
quality control; rental
of web servers; studies (technical project); technical research; testing
(material) (‘
Goods and/or Services
Opponent filed a Notice of Intention to Oppose the Removal Application on 7
November 2024 and a Statement of Grounds and Particulars
’) on 4 December 2024. The Applicant filed a Notice of
Intention to Defend the Removal Application on 25 December 2024.
27 March 2025, the Opponent filed Evidence in Support
’). The Applicant filed Evidence in Answer
’) on 21 May 2025. No Evidence in Reply was filed.
parties were given the opportunity to request to be heard by written or oral
submissions. While neither party elected to be heard,
the Applicant requested a
decision without a hearing. I am a delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks and
this matter has been allocated
to me to determine. I do so based on the
particulars set out in the SGP and the evidence of the parties.
parties filed the following evidence in this
Declarant and Position
Annexures or Exhibits
Cao Ai Min, Trade Mark Attorney and Partner of Beijing Wan Hui Da
Intellectual Property Agency, the Opponent’s legal representative
CAM-1 to CAM-19
LI Weizhu, President of the Applicant (‘
ZLF-1 to ZLF-19
Legal Framework
relevantly provides (notes omitted):
Application for removal
of trade mark from Register etc.
(4) An application under subsection (1) or (3) (
application
) may be made on either or both of the following grounds, and
on no other grounds:
(b) that the trade mark has remained registered for a continuous period of 3
years ending one month before the day on which the non‑use
application is
filed, and, at no time during that period, the person who was then the
registered owner:
(i) used the trade mark in Australia; or
(ii) used the trade mark in good faith in Australia;
in relation to the goods and/or services to which the application
note that an application under
may not be made before a period of
five years has passed from the filing date of the
application,
and I confirm that
five years since filing the Registration has in fact passed.
, the relevant period during which the Opponent must establish use of
the trade marks in relation to the Goods and Services is the
three year period
ending on 4 August 2024 (‘
Relevant Period
Opponent bears the onus of rebutting an allegation of
by establishing, on the
balance of probabilities,
has used the trade marks in respect of any or all of the Goods or Services
identified in the Removal Application during the
Relevant Period or that there
were circumstances that were an obstacle to use in the Relevant
Blount Inc v Registrar of Trade Marks
, Branson J
Where the Act requires the Registrar to be
‘satisfied’ of any matter, it is to be understood as requiring that
be persuaded of the matter according to the balance of probabilities
Rejfeck v McElroy
). That is, that the Registrar be persuaded, having
given proper consideration to those factors and circumstances that the Act
him or her to give consideration to, that such matter is more probable
follows that unless the Opponent provides convincing proof of use of the Trade
Mark in the Relevant Period in relation to the Goods
and Services to the
satisfaction of the Registrar, the opposition to removal will not be
established.
Woolly Bull Enterprises Pty Ltd v
Drummond J observed
that the expression ‘use in good faith’ has a well understood
meaning in terms of s 92, namely it
is ‘real, as opposed to token, use in
a commercial sense’. He said:
Where an overseas trader has in
some way committed goods for export to Australia, eg, by actually shipping them
or by earmarking them
for export in some other way, there will be actual trade
in the marked goods in Australia sufficient to show use of the mark here
the foreign goods have been offered for sale in Australia under the mark, though
none have yet arrived here.
the use is in good faith, ‘a single bona fide use of the mark’ may
be enough to rebut an allegation of
but if a single act of
use is relied upon then it should be established by ‘if not conclusive
proof, at any rate overwhelmingly
The fewer acts
relied on the more solidly ought they to be
established.
‘use’ in good faith required to be demonstrated by the Opponent is
‘use as a trade mark’. Section 17 defines
a trade mark as ‘a
sign used, or intended to be used, to distinguish goods or services dealt with
or provided in the course
of trade by a person from goods or services so dealt
with or provided by any other person’. Therefore, use as a trade mark
use of the sign as a badge of
examples of use carry little, if any, weight in support of a claim for use of a
trade mark within the relevant
Similarly, bald
assertions of use during the relevant period which are not supported by clearly
dated documentary evidence should
be afforded little
if an opponent intends to rely on only slight evidence of use of the registered
trade mark, the evidence should be of high provenance
and will carry more weight
if it provides objective, preferably third party, corroboration of the
101 provides the Registrar with the discretion to remove the Trade Mark from the
Register in respect of any, or all, of the
goods and services for which it is
registered. Relevantly, the section also provides:
(3) If satisfied
that it is reasonable to do so, the Registrar or the court may decide that the
trade mark should not be removed
from the Register even if the grounds on which
the application was made have been established.
(4) Without limiting the matters the Registrar may take into account in
deciding under subsection (3) not to remove a trade mark
from the Register,
the Registrar may take into account whether the trade mark has been used by its
registered owner in respect of:
(a) similar goods or closely related services; or
(b) similar services or closely related goods;
to those to which the application relates.
Note 1: If the registered owner of the trade mark has authorised another
person to use it, any authorised use of the trade mark
by that person is taken
to be a use of the trade mark by the registered owner (see
subsection 7(3)).
Note 2: For
registered owner
see section 6.
Summary of Evidence
states that the Opponent is a member of a group of subsidiary companies
’) owned by Luk Fook Holdings (International) Limited,
which was established in 1991 in Hong Kong. The Group operates over 3,200
jewellery stores in 11 countries and regions, including Hong Kong, Macau, China,
Laos, Thailand, Malaysia, Cambodia, the Philippines,
the United States of
America, Canada and Australia. The Group operates through the Opponent in
Australia. The Group sources, designs,
wholesales, licenses and retails a
variety of jewellery products.
claims that the Opponent first used the Trade Mark in Australia in December 2013
when its first jewellery store opened in Sydney
and the Trade Mark has been
continuously used since that date:
Opponent’s six physical retail stores located in Sydney, Melbourne,
Brisbane, Chadstone, Chatswood and Glen Waverley.
The latter three stores opened
after the Relevant Period. Min exhibits undated photographs of the Sydney,
Melbourne and Brisbane
stores together with screenshots from the
Opponent’s Lukfook Jewellery Brisbane Facebook account in respect of the
store dated in March and April 2023 and Lukfook Jewellery Brisbane
Instagram account dated September 2023 and January 2024, the latter
which shows
a gold figure;
On a wide range
of jewellery goods and services including retailing of jewellery,
and maintenance of jewellery
customised manufacture of jewellery;
On invoices. Min
exhibits a bundle of copies of invoices for the sale of jewellery,
ornaments and figures in Australia which display the
Trade Mark dated between November 2021 and 4 August 2024 (within the Relevant
Period) and in October 2024 and January 2025 (after the Relevant Period). The
invoices show use on the following range of jewellery
products: bracelets,
necklaces, pearl bracelets and necklaces, rings, bangles, earrings and pendants,
and on ornaments and figures;
On signage,
price tags, store equipment, printed matter such as brochures, packaging and
instructional manuals, promotional calendars
and business cards. Min exhibits
undated photographs of business cards, packaging, a purse, a cup, a mini fan,
and calendars dated
between 2021 and 2024, all of which display the Trade Mark.
Min also exhibits an undated photograph of packaging ribbon which displays
trade mark LUKFOOK JEWELLERY;
On accessories
for glasses exhibiting undated photographs but I am unable to ascertain the
nature or use of the claimed product shown;
On financial
services through the Group’s website at http://lff.com.hk/zh/
Group’s Website
’) annexing an undated screenshot from
the website claimed to be from 21 March 2025 and a Wayback Machine screenshot
March 2024. I note that the bulk of the writing on both screenshots is
in Chinese characters;
On artwork and
jewellery appraisal services through the Group’s websites at
www.vgiltd.com and www.chinagemslab.com/EN/. Min
exhibits an undated screenshot
of each website claimed to be dated 21 March 2025 and Wayback Machine
screenshots of www.vgiltd.com
dated 19 March 2016 and of
www.chinagemslab.com/EN/ dated 25 February 2024. I note the website
www.vgiltd.com is that of the Victoria
Gemological Institute Limited (LLC) and
there is reference to the Trade Mark and
. I also note the website
www.chinagemslab.com/EN/ is that of China Gems Laboratory Limited, the bulk of
the website is in Chinese
characters and there is also reference to
Group’s website www.lukfook.com/en, exhibiting Wayback Machine screenshots
of the website dated between 14 October 2021
and 17 April 2024. I note there is
no indication from these screenshots that jewellery can be purchased online at
all, let alone
from Australia. Min also provides a confidential table of website
traffic from Australia to the Group’s website between 2021
On social media
platforms Facebook and Instagram and on Chinese social media accounts RedNote,
Weibo, Douyin, exhibiting screenshots
from these accounts. I note the Chinese
social media accounts are all in the Chinese language.
provides a history of the Applicant, a Chinese company established in April 2004
which designs, manufactures and sells jewellery
products globally. The trade
marks used by the Applicant are
and ZHOU LIU FU
Applicant’s Marks
’). The Applicant’s sells
jewellery products in China through physical stores (mainly by franchisees) and
online via a
number of channels such as Tmall, JD, VIPSHOP and TikTok Shop Mall.
The Applicant’s jewellery products are advertised and promoted
social media channels in China such as Wechat, Weibo, TikTok and Little Red
states that the Applicant sells jewellery products in Australia through Amazon
and advertises jewellery products for sale overseas
through Facebook and
Instagram. Weizhu annexes printouts from the Amazon store showing use of the
Applicant’s Marks including
printouts which show the date first available
of two jewellery products being 22 September and 23 November 2023. Details of
sales of jewellery products to Australian consumers between 1 January
2024 and 31 December 2024 and January and February 2025 are
also provided.
discusses coexistence of the Trade Mark and the Applicant’s Marks around
the world including co-existing trade mark registrations.
Weizhu also refers to
oppositions by the Opponent to the Applicant’s Australian trade mark
numbers 2368103
, 2406799 and 2457711 ZHOU LIU FU and provides a
list of world wide trade marks owned by the Applicant.
Discussion and Reasons
SGP claims that the Trade Mark has been used in good faith by the Opponent
during the relevant three year period in relation to
the Goods and Services. The
SGP also claims that if non-use is established, that circumstances exist which
justify the exercise of
the Registrar’s discretion not to remove the
registration such as the similarity of the goods/services for which the trade
mark has been used and the likelihood of consumer confusion should the
registration be removed.
consider that the Opponent has used the Trade Mark in the Relevant Period in
respect of jewellery, ornaments and figures and the
retailing of jewellery,
ornaments and figures. The evidence of jewellery, ornaments and figures in the
Opponent’s retail jewellery
stores in at least Sydney and Brisbane
together with the invoices and the Facebook and Instagram screenshots are
sufficient to support
this conclusion. I am therefore satisfied that the
Opponent has used the Trade Mark in the Relevant Period in respect of the
goods and services claimed in the Registration (‘
and Services
Class 14: Bracelets (jewellery); chains
(jewellery);
costume jewellery;
earrings; jewellery; necklaces
(jewellery) ornaments of precious metal; ornaments (jewellery); pearls
(jewellery); goods in precious
metals or coated therewith, not included in other
classes; rings (jewellery); statues of precious
statuettes of precious
works of art of
precious metal
Class 35: Retail and wholesale services including online sales in respect of
goods in precious metals, jewellery, bracelets, brooches,
chains, earrings,
necklaces, ring
the Opponent has not provided any evidence of use of the Trade Mark on the
specific items ‘brooches (jewellery), charms
(jewellery), cuff links, gold
thread (jewellery), ivory (jewellery), jewellery of yellow amber, medallions
(jewellery), ornamental
pins, pins (jewellery), tie clips or tie pins’, or
the retailing of ‘pins and tie pins’, given the definition of
these goods are clearly items of jewellery. As such, given that jewellery and
retailing of jewellery are to be retained in the Registration,
no purpose would
be served by deleting these specific goods from the Registration. Therefore, I
am satisfied that the following goods
and services are to be retained in the
Registration (‘
Retained Goods and
Class 14: Bracelets (jewellery); brooches
(jewellery); charms (jewellery); chains (jewellery);
earrings; jewellery; necklaces (jewellery) ornaments of
precious metal; ornaments (jewellery); pearls (jewellery); goods in precious
metals or coated therewith, not included in other classes; rings (jewellery);
cuff links; gold thread (jewellery); ivory (jewellery);
jewellery of yellow
amber; medallions (jewellery); ornamental pins; pins (jewellery); tie clips; tie
pins; statues of precious metal;
statuettes of precious metal;
art of precious metal
Class 35: Retail and wholesale services including online sales in respect of
goods in precious metals, jewellery, bracelets, brooches,
chains, earrings,
necklaces, ring, pins, tie pins
am not however satisfied that the Opponent has evidenced use of the Trade Mark
in respect of any of the remaining goods and services
in classes 14 and 35 nor
any of the goods and services claimed in classes 9, 16, 36, 40 and 42
Remaining Goods and Services
’). The Opponent’s
evidence does not show any use of the Trade Mark in respect these goods and
services in the Relevant
Period or for that matter, at any time.
Opponent’s evidence shows use of the Trade Mark on a number of goods which
are supported purely by undated photographs.
These goods include accessories for
glasses, business cards, packaging, a purse, a cup, a mini fan, and calendars
dated between 2021
and 2024. The Opponent’s evidence also shows use of the
trade mark LUKFOOK JEWELLERY on packaging ribbon which is also supported
undated photograph. Other than the calendars, I afford this evidence little
weight in showing use of the Trade Mark on these
goods as this evidence is not
supported by any dated documentary evidence. I am therefore not satisfied that
the Opponent has used
the Trade Mark in respect of these goods in the Relevant
to calendars, while the photographs of calendars are undated, the calendars
themselves display dates within the Relevant Period.
However, while Min
describes these calendars as promotional calendars, there is no evidence to show
the occasion on which the calendars
are supplied, that these calendars were ever
distributed to customers in Australia or that the use of the Trade Mark on
is in the course of trade. Without further evidence, I cannot be
satisfied that there was use of the Trade Mark on calendars in the
respect of financial services claimed to be offered through the Group’s
Website, firstly the bulk of the writing on the website
screenshots is in
Chinese characters and secondly, there is no evidence that this website was
directed or targeted to Australian
Ward Group Pty Ltd v Brodie & Stone plc
[T]he use of a trade mark on the internet, uploaded on a
website outside of Australia, without more, is not a use by the website
of the mark in each jurisdiction where the mark is downloaded.
However, ... if there is evidence that the use was specifically intended
made in, or directed or targeted at, a particular jurisdiction then there is
likely to be a use in that jurisdiction when the
mark is downloaded. Of course,
once the website intends to make and makes a specific use of the mark in
relation to a particular
person or persons in a jurisdiction there will be
little difficulty in concluding that the website proprietor used the mark in
downloaded.
International Hair Cosmetics Group Pty Ltd v International Hair Cosmetics
Logan J held that trade
marks on a British website constituted use in Australia by marketing to
Australians through a drop-down link
to a page containing certain products
marketed and sold in Australia.
the Group’s Website does not show any direct connection to Australia or
indication that the website has been promoted
in the Australian marketplace. As
the Opponent has not provided any evidence that the website is in any way
directed or targeted
to Australian consumers, I am not satisfied that the
Opponent has used the Trade Mark in the Relevant Period in respect of financial
respect of artwork and jewellery appraisal services claimed to be provided
through the Group’s websites at www.vgiltd.com
www.chinagemslab.com/EN/, the Opponent’s evidence suffers from many
deficiencies. First and foremost, the evidence does
not show any direct
connection of these websites to Australia nor any indication that these websites
have been promoted in the Australian
marketplace. Secondly while the websites
both refer to ‘All rights reserved. Luk Fook Holdings Limited’, the
offers no explanation as to the relationship between Victoria
Gemological Institute Limited (LLC), Luk Fook Holdings Limited and
the Opponent
or China Gems Laboratory Limited, Luk Fook Holdings Limited and the Opponent.
Thirdly the screenshots of the www.vgiltd.com
website are not dated within the
Relevant Period.
light of the deficiencies of the evidence and in particular the lack of evidence
that these websites are in any way directed or
targeted to Australian consumers,
I am not satisfied that the Opponent has used the Trade Mark in the Relevant
Period in respect
of artwork and jewellery appraisal services.
the Opponent has not rebutted the allegation of non-use for the Remaining Goods
and Services, I find that the non-use ground has
been partially established for
the Remaining Goods and Services.
Obstacles to Use
the sake of completeness, I note the Opponent has not provided evidence of any
circumstances prevailing during the Relevant Period
which might have been an
obstacle to use of the Trade Marks for any of the Remaining Goods and Services.
I accordingly find no case
under s 100(3)(c) has been established.
I have decided that the Trade Mark is not be removed for the Retained Goods and
Services, I must consider whether it is appropriate
to otherwise exercise
discretion to not remove the Trade Mark for any of the Remaining Goods and
question to be asked is whether it is reasonable not to remove the Trade Mark
for the Remaining Goods and Services, even though
the Opponent has not
established use of the Trade Mark during the Relevant Period in respect of any
of the Remaining Goods and Services.
I must be positively satisfied that it is
reasonable that the Trade Mark should not be removed.
Opponent bears the onus of establishing that the discretion should be exercised
in its favour: it is not for the Applicant to
establish that it should
discretion provided by this section is very broad. In
PDP Capital Pty Ltd
Grasshopper Ventures Pty
the Court made the
following observations regarding the discretion under s 101(3):
following propositions are relevant to the exercise of this discretion:
(1) It is broad and is unfettered in the sense that there are no express
limits on it. It is to be understood as limited only by the
subject-matter,
scope and purpose of the legislation and, in particular, by the subject-matter
scope and purpose of
Trade Marks Act
(2) The scope and purpose of the
Trade Marks Act
strikes a balance between
various disparate interests. On the one hand there is the interest of consumers
in recognising a trade
mark as a badge of origin of goods or services and in
avoiding deception or confusion as to that origin. On the other is the interest
of traders, both in protecting their goodwill through the creation of a
statutory species of property protected by the action against
infringement, and
in turning the property to valuable account by licensing or assignment. ...
(3) The particular purpose of
, within which
falls, is to provide
for the removal of unused trade marks from the Register. It is designed to
protect the integrity of the Register
and in that way the interests of
consumers. At the same time, it seeks to accommodate, where reasonable to do so,
the interests of
registered trade mark owners. Accordingly, the Court must be
positively satisfied that it is reasonable that the trade mark should
removed. The onus in this respect lies on the trade mark owner to persuade the
Court that it is reasonable to exercise the
discretion in favour of the owner.
(4) The discretion in
is expressed in the present tense. It requires
consideration of whether, at the time that the Court is called upon to make its
it is reasonable not to remove the mark.
(5) The range of factors considered in the exercise of the discretion has
included whether or not:
(a) there has been abandonment of the mark;
(b) the registered proprietor of the mark still has a residual reputation in
(c) there have been sales by the registered owner of the mark of the goods
for which removal was sought since the relevant period
(d) the applicant for removal had entered the market in knowledge of the
registered mark;
(e) the registered proprietors were aware of the applicant’s sales
under the mark;
(f) A further factor, explicitly noted in
, but which falls within
the scope of the discretion in
, is whether or not the trade mark under
consideration has been used by its registered owner in respect of similar goods
related services.
discretion factors broadly fall under 3 headings:
the interests of
the owner of the trade mark;
the interests of
the applicant for removal; and
the SGP states that circumstances exist which justify the exercise of the
Registrar’s discretion not to remove the Registration
such as the
similarity of the goods/services for which the trade mark has been used and the
likelihood of consumer confusion should
the Registration be removed, the
Opponent has not provided any evidence or submissions as to the similarity of
any of the Remaining
Goods or Services to any of the Used Goods and Services nor
any likelihood of consumer confusion.
is a public interest in maintaining the integrity (or ‘purity’) of
the Register which generally demands that unused
trade marks be removed. In
Health World Ltd v Shin-Sun Australia Pty Ltd
, on the subject of the
condition of the Register, the Court said:
[T]he legislative scheme
reveals a concern with the condition of the Register of Trade Marks. It is a
concern that it have “integrity”
and that it be “pure”.
It is a “public mischief” if the Register is not pure, for there is
interest in [its] purity”. The concern and the public
interest, viewed from the angle of consumers, is to ensure that the Register
maintained as an accurate record of marks which perform their statutory function
– to indicate the trade origins of the
goods to which it is intended that
they be applied.
balance, in light of the above considerations, I am unpersuaded that the
Opponent has provided justification to allow the retention
of the Trade Marks on
the Register for all or any of the Remaining Goods and Services. Given the
importance of the integrity of the
Register, I do not consider it appropriate to
exercise my discretion in favour of the Opponent not to remove or restrict the
Goods and Services of the Trade Mark.
Opponent has been partially successful in its opposition in relation to the Used
Goods and Services. The ground for removal under
of the Trade Mark
has been established in respect of the Remaining Goods and Services.
direct that registration 1559183 be partially removed from the Register for all
the goods and services except:
Class 14: Bracelets (jewellery);
brooches (jewellery); charms (jewellery); chains (jewellery); costume jewellery;
earrings; jewellery;
necklaces (jewellery) ornaments of precious metal;
ornaments (jewellery); pearls (jewellery); goods in precious metals or coated
therewith, not included in other classes; rings (jewellery); cuff links; gold
thread (jewellery); ivory (jewellery); jewellery of
yellow amber; medallions
(jewellery); ornamental pins; pins (jewellery); tie clips; tie pins; statues of
precious metal; statuettes
of precious metal; works of art of precious metal
Class 35: Retail and wholesale services including online sales in respect of
goods in precious metals, jewellery, bracelets, brooches,
chains, earrings,
necklaces, ring, pins, tie pins
the event of an appeal from this decision, the Registration shall not be
restricted until the appeal has been discontinued or dismissed,
or in the event
of a decision from the court, that the registration be dealt with as the Court
parties have sought their costs. Neither party has been entirely successful in
respect of the Removal Application. As such I
have decided not to award
Anne Makrigiorgos
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and Hearings
Trade Marks and Designs
Unless otherwise stated, each
reference to a section is a reference to a section of the
Trade Marks Act
’) and each reference to a regulation is
a reference to a regulation in the
Trade Marks Regulations 1995
Endorsement recorded
‘The applicant has advised that the CHINESE characters appearing in the
trade mark may be transliterated
as LIU FU ZHUBAO and translated into English as
SIX, BLESSING,
JEWELLERY’.
Per s 93(2)
prior to the
Intellectual Property Laws Amendment (Productivity Commission
Response Part 1 and Other Measures) Act 2018
(Cth) sch 1,
as applies in
the present matter. The updated s 93(2) applies to trade marks filed from 24
February 2019 onwards.
Corporation Limited v Phone Directories Company Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
[133] (Besanko, Jagot and Edelman JJ), albeit in respect of oppositions under s
[1998] FCA 440
(citations omitted).
Nodoz Trade
(1962) RPC 1
, 7 (Wilberforce
Coca-Cola Co v
All-Fect Distributors Ltd
[1999] FCA 1721
, [19] (Black CJ, Sundberg and
Finkelstein JJ).
Information Systems Pty Ltd v Leap Software Developments Pty Ltd
[2018] ATMO
, [16] (Hearing Officer Wilson). See also
Simon Burke v Factor Holdings
[2019] ATMO 69
, [24] (Hearing Officer
Maniatis v Roche Diagnostics GmbH
[2022] ATMO 59
, [26] (Hearing Officer
Great White Shark Enterprises Inc v Joose Apparel Pty Ltd
ATMO 8 (Hearing
The Registration
does not claim ‘Repair and maintenance of
jewellery’.
consider include ornaments and
‘Articles for
personal adornment, made of gold, silver, precious metals, etc., often
ornamented with jewels’
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 2 October
2025) ‘jewellery’; ‘Jewels or other ornamental objects,
especially for personal adornment,
regarded collectively’
Oxford Dictionary
(2 ed.) (online at 2 October 2025)
‘jewellery’.
[2005] FCA 471
Austin Nichols
& Co Inc v Lodestar Anstalt
[2012] FCAFC 8
, [35] (Jacobson, Yates and
Katzmann JJ).
[2021] FCAFC
, Nicholas and Burley
Ibid [153] (emphasis
altered) (citations
Societe Anonyme
des Eaux Minerales d’Evian v The Yogurt Co Pty Ltd
[2012] ATMO 53
[33] (Hearing Officer
[2010] HCA 130
[22] (French CJ, Gummow, Heydon and Bell JJ) (citations omitted).
RTF format (872 KB)
Signed PDF/A format