URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1966/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Goldman v Hargrave [1966] UKPCHCA 2; (1966) 115 CLR 458 (13 June 1966)
PRIVY COUNCIL
GOLDMAN v. HARGRAVE
[1966] UKPCHCA 2
(1966) 115 CLR 458
Negligence - Fire
Privy Council
Lord Reid(1), Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest(1), Lord Pearce(1),
Lord Wilberforce(1) and Lord Pearson(1).
Negligence - Fire caused by lightning striking tree - Fire capable of being
extinguished - Spread of fire to neighbouring lands
- Duty of care - Existence
- Standard of care - Breach.
Fire - Liability for damage - Fire accidentally beginning - Negligent
failure to extinguish or control - Fires Prevention (Metropolis)
Act, 1774 (14
Geo. III. c. 78), s. 86.
1966, April 25-27; June 13. 13:6:1966
APPEAL from the High Court of Australia.
LORD WILBERFORCE delivered the judgment of their Lordships as follows: -
This consolidated appeal from a decision of the High Court of Australia,
fire, which developed in the grazing area of Gidgegannup,
Western Australia,
and did extensive damage to the respondents' properties. The High Court
decided that the appellant, on whose property
the fire started, was liable for
the damage, and this decision the appellant now contests. (at p459)
2. The circumstances in which the fire started are concisely stated in the
judgments of the High Court, which accepted the findings
of the trial judge.
There was an electrical storm on 25th February 1961, and a tall redgum tree,
in the centre of the appellant's property,
was struck by lightning. This tree was about two hundred and fifty yards from
the western
boundary of the appellant's property (in which direction the
respondents' properties lie) and rather less from the eastern boundary.
redgum caught fire in a fork eighty-four feet from the ground and it was
evidently impossible to deal with the blaze while the
tree was standing. Early
in the morning of 26th February, the appellant telephoned the district fire
control officer, appointed as
such under the Bush Fires Act, 1954-1958 (W.A.),
and asked for a tree feller to be sent. Pending his arrival the appellant
a space round the tree of combustible material and sprayed the
surrounding area with water. (at p459)
3. The tree feller arrived at midday on 26th February, at which time the tree
was burning fiercely, and it was cut down. The trial
judge found, and the High
Court accepted the finding, that up to this point the appellant's conduct in
relation to the fire was not
open to criticism. (at p459)
4. But the judge also found that if the appellant had taken reasonable care
he could, on the Sunday evening (26th February), or
at latest early on the
next morning, have put out the fire by using water on it. The appellant indeed
claimed that he spent two hours
on Monday, 27th February, in extinguishing the
fire, but his evidence as to this was rejected. The judge referred to evidence
indicated that the appellant's method of extinguishing a fire of this
kind was to burn it out. "You burn it out" he was reported
as saying "that is
the only way I know to put a fire out." (at p460)
5. On Tuesday 28th February, the appellant was away from the property for a
substantial part of the day, and it was found that he
did not at any time
after 27th February take any steps which could be regarded as reasonable to
prevent the fire from spreading.
On Wednesday 1st March there was a change in
the weather; the wind, which had previously been light to moderate, freshened
20 m.p.h. with stronger gusts. The air temperature rose some 10 to
105 degrees F. The fire revived and spread over the appellant's
towards the west and on to the respondents' properties: it was not observed by
the appellant until about noon on 1st March
and by then it could not be
stopped. The damage to the respondents' properties followed. (at p460)
6. It is important at once to deal with an argument, as to the facts, which
was advanced by the respondents at the trial. It was
sought to contend that
although the fire commenced accidentally, the appellant, whether by heaping
combustible material on to it,
after the tree had been felled, or even by
permitting the tree to burn in the way in which it did on the ground, had
adopted the
fire as his own - as suus ignis - and had made use of it for his
own purpose or advantage. (at p460)
7. Their Lordships (in agreement with the High Court) do not accept this view
of the facts. The result of the evidence, in their
Lordships' opinion, is that
the appellant both up to 26th February and thereafter was endeavouring to
extinguish the fire; that initially
he acted with prudence, but that there
came a point, about the evening of 26th February or the morning of 27th
February, when, the
prudent and reasonable course being to put the fire out by
water, he chose to adopt the method of burning it out. That method was,
according to the findings of the trial judge, unreasonable, or negligent in
the circumstances: it brought a fresh risk into operation,
namely the risk of
a revival of the fire, under the influence of changing wind and weather, if
not carefully watched, and it was
from this negligence that the damage arose.
That a risk of this character was foreseeable by someone in the appellant's
was not really disputed: in fact danger arising from weather
conditions is given official recognition in the
Bush Fires Act, 1954
which provides for their classification according to the degree of danger
arising from them. (at p461)
8. This conclusion has an important bearing upon the nature of the legal
issue which has to be decided. It makes clear that the
case is not one where a
person has brought a source of danger on to his land, nor one where an
occupier has so used his property
as to cause a danger to his neighbour. It is
one where an occupier, faced with a hazard accidentally arising on his land,
act with reasonable prudence so as to remove the hazard. The issue is
therefore whether in such a case the occupier is guilty of
legal negligence,
which involves the issue whether he is under a duty of care, and if so, what
is the scope of that duty. Their Lordships
propose to deal with these issues
as stated, without attempting to answer the disputable question whether if
responsibility is established
it should be brought under the heading of
nuisance or placed in a separate category. As this Board has recently
explained in Overseas
Tankship (U.K.) Limited v. The Miller Steamship Co. Pty.
Limited (Wagon Mound (No. 2))
[1966] UKPC 1
(1967) 1 AC 617
the tort of
nuisance, uncertain
in its boundary, may comprise a wide variety of situations, in some of which
negligence plays no
part, in others
of which it is decisive.
The present case
is one where liability, if it exists, rests upon negligence and nothing
falls within or overlaps
the boundaries of nuisance is a question
of classification which need not here be resolved.
9. What then is the scope of an occupier's duty, with regard to his
neighbours, as to hazards arising on his land? With the possible
exception of
hazard of fire, to which their Lordships will shortly revert, it is only in
comparatively recent times that the law
has recognized an occupier's duty as
one of a more positive character than merely to abstain from creating, or
adding to, a source
of danger or annoyance. It was for long satisfied with the
conception of separate or autonomous proprietors, each of whom was entitled
exploit his territory in a "natural" manner and none of whom was obliged to
restrain or direct the operations of nature in the
interest of avoiding harm
to his neighbours. (at p461)
10. This approach, or philosophy, found expression in decisions both in
England and elsewhere. In Giles v. Walker
(1890) 24 QBD
a claim that an
occupier had a duty to protect his neighbour against the invasion of
thistledown was summarily rejected by the
Bench Division. And, in a
similar field, it was held in 1908 by the High Court of Australia (Sparke v.
(1908) 7 CLR
that an occupier was not under a duty to prevent a
noxious weed, prickly pears, from attacking a neighbour's
fence. The case
decided on a demurrer to a pleading in which negligence was not alleged. In
relation to fires, there were similar
In Australia,
in 1879 the
Supreme Court of Victoria decided on a demurrer to a pleading which alleged
negligence, that
an occupier
of land on which
a fire accidentally occurs is
not under any duty to put it out (Batchelor v. Smith
(1879) 5 VLR (L)
Zealand, in 1888, the Supreme Court in Banco held that there is no legal
duty cast upon the owner of land upon which
to prevent it
from spreading to the land of another, though he was present immediately after
it was lighted and
have put it
out (Hunter v. Walker
(1888) 6 NZLR 690)
It is interesting to see (since the present case is concerned with an
accidental fire) that
Richmond J. in a learned judgment examines
law from the Year Book 2 Hen. 4, 18, and expresses this
opinion upon the state
of the law prior to the statute 6 Anne
c. 31. "(The authorities) leave it
doubtful what would be the responsibility
of the owner
for damage done by a
fire beginning on
his property, the origin of which is not known. It seems to
have been supposed
that at common
law the owner would be answerable for
fires, which may be properly called, so far as the owner is concerned,
'accidental'" (1888)
6 NZLR, at p 694 - and in fact his
decision, against
liability, was based upon an exempting statute - the Fires
(Metropolis)
Act, 1774 (replacing the earlier
6 Anne c. 31) to which reference
will later be made. (at p462)
11. That, at common law an occupier of premises from which fire escapes was
liable if either the origin, or the escape, of the fire
was due to his
negligence seems also to have been the opinion of Sir John Salmond - see
Eastern Asia Navigation Co. Ltd. v. Fremantle
Harbour Trust Commissioners
[1951] HCA 7
(1951) 83 CLR 353
, where Fullagar J. in the High Court of Australia left the
(1951) 83 CLR,
at p 393 (at p462)
12. Lastly in 1905 the Supreme Court of South Australia in Havelberg v. Brown
(1905) SALR 1
held that an occupier who remains passive
is under no
responsibility, and that if he interferes, he is liable only upon proof of
negligence. The argument against responsibility
is powerfully stated by Way
C.J. where, referring to the occupier's duty, he says:
"It is one example
among many of imperfect obligations,
of a moral as opposed to a legal duty,
and one can see how difficult it would
be to frame a law making an occupier
liable for a fire
arising upon his premises, annexing to him legal
responsibilities, when he
was in no way connected with the act. Should such a
duty apply in all cases, irrespective of age or sex? Should it be made
applicable in spite of the absence or illness of the owner,
or in the case of
a fire out of his sight or without his knowledge? Is
it to apply to a man who
is weak or unskilful? The slightest
reflection must show any one how difficult
it would be to frame a law
that would be applicable to all cases, and any one
seen, as most of us have, the frequent bush fires in the hills
to Adelaide, will understand that there really is no necessity
any such law. People not only extinguish dangerous fires from
self-interest,
and for the preservation of themselves and their
families, but in the summer
we see every week the whole countryside
turning out and using the utmost
endeavours to prevent danger
to life and injury to the property of others"
(1905) SALR, at p 11
That a person who takes some action (though mistaken) to
with an accidental fire should not be in a worse position as regards
civil liability than one who does nothing is clearly a consideration
importance not to be overlooked when stating a rule as to
liability. (at p463)
13. These three decisions relating to fires were followed by the learned
trial judge in the present case. (at p463)
14. A decision which, it can now be seen, marked a turning point in the law
was that of Job Edwards Ltd. v. Birmingham Navigations
(1924) 1 KB 341
hazard in that case was a fire which originated in a refuse dump placed on
land by the act of a third party.
When the fire threatened
to invade the
neighbouring land, the owners of the latter, by agreement, entered and
extinguished the fire
at a cost of some 1,000
pounds. The issue in the action
was whether the owners of the land, where the fire was, were liable to bear
part of the cost. The
Court of Appeal by a majority answered this question
negatively, but Scrutton L.J.'s dissenting judgment contained
the following
passage: "There is a great deal to be said for the view that if a man finds a
dangerous and artificial thing on his
land, which he
and those for whom he is
responsible did not put there; if he knows that if left alone it will damage
other persons;
if by reasonable
care he can render it harmless, as if by
stamping on a fire just beginning from a trespasser's match he can extinguish
it; that then
if he does nothing, he has 'permitted it to continue,' and
becomes responsible for it. This would base the liability
on negligence,
not on the duty of insuring damage from a dangerous thing under Rylands v.
[1868] UKHL 1
(1868) LR 3 HL 330
I appreciate
that to get negligence you must have
a duty to be careful, but I think on principle that a landowner has a duty to
care not to allow his land to remain a receptacle for a thing
which may, if not rendered harmless, cause damage to his
neighbours"
KB, at pp 357, 358 One may note that this passage is dealing with a different
set of facts from that involved
in the case
then under consideration: the one
referring to a fire just beginning which can be extinguished by stamping on
other concerned
with a smouldering dump to extinguish which involves
both effort and expense, so that it is quite possible to approve
both of the
majority decision and of the passage quoted from the dissenting judgment. (at
15. This was followed in 1926 by Noble v. Harrison
(1926) 2 KB 332
there was caused by an overhanging tree with a latent
defect and the decision
was against liability. The judgment of Rowlatt
J. in the Divisional Court
contains this passage: "a person
is liable for a nuisance constituted by the
state of his property: (1.)
if he causes it; (2.) if by neglect of some duty
it to arise; and (3.) if, when it has arisen without his own act or
he omits to remedy it within a reasonable time after
he did or ought
to have become aware of it" (1926) 2 KB, at p 338 (at p464)
16. It will be seen that the learned judge in the third category makes no
distinction according to whether the "nuisance" is caused
by trespassers or by
natural causes, and that he does not enter into any question as to the limits
of the effort or expenditure required
of the occupier. As a general statement
of the law it was cited with apparent approval by Dixon J. in Torette House
Pty. Ltd. v.
[1940] HCA 1
(1940) 62 CLR 637
, at p 657 (at p464)
17. In 1940 the dictum of Scrutton L.J. passed into the law of England when
it was approved by the House of Lords in Sedleigh-Denfield
v. O'Callaghan
[1940] UKHL 2
(1940) AC 880
Their Lordships need not cite from this case in any detail since
it is now familiar
law. It establishes
the occupier's liability
with regard to
a hazard created on his land by a trespasser, of which he has knowledge,
he fails to
take reasonable steps to
remove it. It was clear in that case that
the hazard could have been removed by what Viscount
Maugham described
"very simple
step" of placing a grid in the proper place. The members of the
House approved the passage
just cited from Scrutton
L.J.'s judgment
KB, at pp 357, 358 and Viscount Maugham and Lord Wright also adopted the
of the law in Salmond
on Torts 5th ed.
(1920) pp. 258- 265: "When a
nuisance has been created by the act of a trespasser or otherwise
without the
authority, or permission
of the occupier, the occupier is not responsible
for that nuisance unless, with knowledge
or means of knowledge
he suffers it to continue without taking reasonably prompt and
efficient means for its abatement."
18. The appellants, inevitably, accept the development, or statement, of the
law which the Sedleigh-Denfield Case
[1940] UKHL 2
(1940) AC 880
contains - as it was
accepted by the High Court of Australia. But they seek to establish a
distinction between the
which was there involved, namely one
brought about by human agency such as the act of trespasser, and one arising
from natural causes,
or act of God. In relation to hazards of this kind it was
submitted that an occupier is under no duty to remove
or to diminish it,
that his liability only commences if and when by interference with it he
negligently increases the risk or
danger to his neighbour's
property. (at
19. Their Lordships would first observe, with regard to the suggested
distinction, that it is well designed to introduce confusion
into the law. As
regards many hazardous conditions arising on land, it is impossible to
determine how they arose - particularly in
this the case as regards fires. If
they are caused by human agency, the agent, unless detected in flagrante
delicto, is hardly likely
to confess his fault. And is the occupier, when
faced with the initial stages of a fire, to ask himself whether the fire is
or man-made before he can decide upon his duty? Is the neighbour,
whose property is damaged, bound to prove the human origin of the
proposition involves that if he cannot do so, however irresponsibly the
occupier has acted, he must fail. But the distinction
is not only
inconvenient, it lacks, in their Lordships' view any logical foundation. (at
20. Within the class of situations in which the occupier is himself without
responsibility for the origin of the fire, one may ask
in vain what relevant
difference there is between a fire caused by a human agency such as a
trespasser and one caused by act of God
or nature. A difference in degree - as
to the potency of the agency - one can see but none that is in principle
relevant to the occupier's
duty to act. It was suggested as a logical basis
for the distinction that in the case of a hazard originating in an act of man,
occupier who fails to deal with it can be said to be using his land in a
manner detrimental to his neighbour and so to be within
the classical field of
responsibility in nuisance, whereas this cannot be said when the hazard
originates without human action so
long at least as the occupier merely
abstains. The fallacy of this argument is that, as already explained, the
basis of the occupier's
liability lies not in the use of his land: in the
absence of "adoption" there is no such use; but in the neglect of action in
face of something which may damage his neighbour. To this, the suggested
distinction is irrelevant. (at p466)
21. On principle therefore, their Lordships find in the opinions of the House
of Lords in Sedleigh-Denfield v. O'Callaghan
statements of the law by Scrutton L.J. and Salmond, of which they approve,
support for the existence
of a general
upon occupiers in relation to
hazards occurring on their land, whether natural or man-made. But the matter
not rest there.
the principle has been applied to the specific
hazards of fire by the more recent decision of the Supreme
Court of New
Boatswain v. Crawford
(1943) NZLR 109
That was a case of a fire of
unknown origin which could easily have
been controlled in its
initial stages.
The Court held the defendant
liable for breach of duty following expressly
Sedleigh-Denfield
v. O'Callaghan
[1940] UKHL 2
and applying the passage above
quoted from Salmond on Torts. The High Court of Australia,
which may be taken
to be aware of
the present-day
conditions as regards bush fires considered
that this decision is now to be preferred
to the older cases as in accordance
trend of the law, and their Lordships agree with their view. A still
later case in New
Zealand, Landon v. Rutherford
Boatswain v. Crawford
(1943) NZLR 109
- though, as was pointed out by Taylor
J. and Owen J. in their judgment
in the High Court of Australia, it placed too
heavy an onus
of proof on the defendant (1963) 110
CLR, at p 52 Secondly, it
that the movement of American decisions has been towards the
development of a duty of care on the
part of occupiers in relation to
arising on their land both generally and of fire. Their
Lordships were
referred to three
successive series of the American
Law Reports Annotated in
the years 1926, 1937 and 1951 referring
to a number of decided cases in
various jurisdictions, all of which,
save one, point in the same direction.
The cumulative result
of these is to establish the occupier's
duty of care
towards his neighbour
to a similar extent as the English and New Zealand
Their Lordships were also referred to
the Restatement of the Law of
the relevant portion of which (vol. iv, par. 839-840) dates
This makes a distinction
between invasions of a neighbour's
interest arising
from a natural condition of land and other
invasions, which is expressed in
general terms and which is
of less direct application to such a case
as the present than
the American decisions. (at p466)
22. Thirdly their Lordships have considered the modern text books of
authority on the law of torts, Clerk and Lindsell 12th ed.
(1961), Salmond
13th ed. (1961), Winfield 7th ed. (1963), Fleming (1965), as well as a
formative article by Dr. A. L. Goodhart in
4 Cambridge Law Journal (1932) p.
13. All of these endorse the development which their Lordships find in the
decisions, towards a
measured duty of care by occupiers to remove or reduce
hazards to their neighbours. (at p467)
23. So far it has been possible to consider the existence of a duty, in
general terms. But the matter cannot be left there without
some definition of
the scope of his duty. How far does it go? What is the standard of the effort
required? What is the position as
regards expenditure? It is not enough to say
merely that these must be "reasonable" since what is reasonable to one man may
unreasonable, and indeed ruinous to another: the law must take account
of the fact that the occupier on whom the duty is cast, has,
ex hypothesi, had
this hazard thrust upon him through no seeking or fault of his own. His
interest, and his resources whether physical
or material, may be of a very
modest character either in relation to the magnitude of the hazard, or as
compared with those of his
threatened neighbour. A rule which required of him
in such unsought circumstances in his neighbour's interest a physical effort
which he is not capable, or an excessive expenditure of money would be
unenforceable or unjust. One may say in general terms that
the existence of a
duty must be based upon knowledge of the hazard, ability to foresee the
consequences of not checking or removing
it, and the ability to abate it. And
in many cases, as for example in Scrutton L.J.'s hypothetical case of stamping
out a fire, or
the present case, where the hazard could have been removed with
little effort and no expenditure, no problem arises. But other cases
be so simple. In such situations the standard ought to be required of the
occupiers what it is reasonable to expect of him
in his individual
circumstances. Thus, less must be expected of the infirm than of the able
bodied: the owner of a small property
where a hazard arises which threatens a
neighbour with substantial interests should not have to do so much as one with
larger interests
of his own at stake and greater resources to protect them: if
the small owner does what he can and promptly calls on his neighbour
provide additional resources, he may be held to have done his duty: he should
not be liable unless it is clearly proved that he
could, and reasonably in his
individual circumstances should, have done more. This approach to a difficult
matter is in fact that
which the Courts in their more recent decisions have
taken. It is in accordance with the actual decision in the Job Edwards Case
(1924) 1 KB 341
where to remove the hazard would have cost the occupier some
1,000 pounds - on this basis the decision itself seems
obviously right.
in accordance with Pontardawe R.D.C. v. Moore-Gwyn
(1929) 1 Ch 656
maintain the rocks in a state
of safety would have cost the occupier some 300
pounds. And if some of the situations such
as those in Giles v. Walker
(thistledown) and Sparke v Osborne
[1908] HCA 46
(1908) 7 CLR 51
(prickly pears)
were to recur today, it is probable that
they would not
be decided without a
balanced consideration of what could
be expected of the particular occupier as
compared with
the consequences
of inaction. That Giles v. Walker
(1890) 24 QBD
might now be decided differently was indeed suggested by Lord
Goddard C.J.
the judgment of the English Court of Appeal in
Davey v. Harrow
Corporation
(1958) 1 QB 60
In the present case
it has not been argued
action necessary to put the fire out on 26th to 27th February was not well
the capacity and
resources of the appellant.
Their Lordships therefore
reach the conclusion that the respondents' claim for damages,
on the basis
negligence, was fully made
out. (at p468)
24. One final point was raised by the appellant by way of defence to the
claim. This was based upon the provisions of the Fires
Prevention (Metropolis)
Act, (1774) (14 Geo III c 78, s 86) which provides that no action shall lie
against any person on whose estate
"any fire shall accidentally begin". This
statute replaces the earlier Act of Anne (6 Anne c. 31). It is accepted that
this statute
is part of the law in Western Australia, and that it applies to
such an area as that in which the fire in question arose. (at p468)
25. The words "shall accidentally begin" are simple enough, but the
simplicity is deceptive. Read literally they suggest that account
taken of noghing except the origin of the fire and that given an accidental
beginning, no supervening negligence or even
deliberate act can deprive a
defendant of the benefit of the statute. But further reflection suggests a
doubt both because such a
result seems capable of producing absurdity and
injustice, and because of the inherent difficulty of saying what the
expression "any
fire" is intended to mean. A fire is an elusive entity; it is
not a substance, but a changing state. The words "any fire" may refer
whole continuous process of combustion from birth to death, in an Olympic
sense, or reference may be to a particular stage
in that process - when it
passes from controlled combustion to uncontrolled conflagration. Fortunately,
the Act has been considered
judicially and, as one would expect, the process
of interpretation has taken account of these considerations. In Filliter v.
[1847] EngR 999
(1847) 11 QB 347
[1847] EngR 999
(116 ER 506
, at p 509) Lord Denman
explained the purpose of the earlier Act (6 Anne c. 31 s. 6) as being
remove the supposed common law liability
of a person "in whose house a fire
originated which afterwards spread to his neighbour's
property" and held that
it did not apply
to a fire caused deliberately or negligently. This was
carried further in Musgrove v. Pandelis
(1919) 2 KB 43
where a fire started
accidentally in the carburettor of a car, but spread because the chauffeur
negligently failed
to turn off the
petrol tap. The Court of Appeal held that
the Act did not apply. Bankes L.J. put it that the Act relieved an owner
mere escape
of fire from his premises but did not relieve him against a claim
for damages for negligence. The fire which caused
the damage was,
he thought,
not the spark which caused the initial ignition, but the raging fire which
arose from the act of negligence.
Their Lordships
accept this interpretation:
it makes sense of the statute, it accords with its antecedents, and it makes
a reasonable application
of it to the facts of the present case, that
is to say that the fire which damaged the respondents' property
was that which
on 1st March as the result of the negligence of the appellant. The
statutory defence therefore fails. (at p469)
26. Their Lordships will humbly advise Her Majesty that the appeal should be
dismissed. The appellant must pay the costs of the
appeal. (at p469)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter