Warszawski & Warszawski (No 2) [2025] FedCFamC1A 203 (11 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1) APPELLATE
Warszawski & Warszawski (No 2)
[2025] FedCFamC1A 203
Appeal from:
Warszawski & Warszawski
[2025] FedCFamC2F 536
Appeal number
NAA 234 of 2025
File number
SYC 7769 of 2021
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – COSTS
– Where the appellant husband made offers to settle the proceedings
– Where the respondent
wife would have been financially better off had she
accepted these offers – Where the wife's financial circumstances are
than the husband's – Where the wife's cross-appeal was wholly
unsuccessful – Where these factors justify costs orders
against the wife
– Where the husband did not seek to amend the erroneous orders of the
primary judge pursuant to the slip
rule – Where the husband waited until
the appeal hearing to abandon one of his two grounds of appeal – Where
these factors
impact the quantum of the costs orders to be received by the
husband – Costs orders made for both the appeal and the costs
application.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth), r 10.13
Cases cited:
Warszawski & Warszawski
FedCFamC1A 165
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Determined in Chambers on the papers
Solicitor for the
Fox & Staniland Lawyers
The Respondent:
Litigant in person
SYC 7769 of 2021
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
DIVISION 1 APPELLATE JURISDICTION
MR WARSZAWSKI
MS WARSZAWSKI
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
21 days the wife pay the husband’s costs of and incidental to the appeal
in the sum of $11,223.
21 days the wife pay the husband’s costs of and incidental to the costs
application in the sum of $2,500.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Warszawski & Warszawski
has been approved pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
appellant (hereafter “husband”) seeks costs of the appeal,
including, separately costs of his application for costs.
respondent/cross-appellant (hereafter “wife”) resists the making of
an order for costs. Both parties seek alternate
orders in the event their
primary relief is refused.
wife did not file a formal response to the husband’s Application in an
Appeal seeking costs within time but has done so
out of time. I am satisfied
that there is no prejudice to the husband by the late filing and I grant the
wife leave to rely on her
Response to an Application in an Appeal filed 3
November 2025.
Applications
for costs are governed by the provisions of
Family Law Act
(Cth) (“the Act”). The usual rule is that each party meets
his or her own legal costs. There may be a departure from
the usual rule if the
Court finds that there are justifying circumstances.
non-exhaustive list of the matters which may be taken into account in the
exercise of the Court’s discretion is contained
matters which are relevant to determination of this matter are:
(a) The financial circumstances of the parties;
(b) The fact that the wife was wholly unsuccessful in her cross-appeal;
(c) The husband’s offers of settlement prior to filing the appeal;
(d) The conduct of the parties to the proceedings.
Financial circumstances of the parties
wife’s financial circumstances are superior to those of the
Wholly unsuccessful
wife filed a Notice of Cross-Appeal. I dismissed the cross-appeal as lacking
merit. The husband was required to respond to the
cross-appeal.
Offers of Settlement
20 May 2025 the solicitors acting for the husband wrote to the solicitors acting
for the wife to identify “several mathematical
errors”. In fact, the
husband alleged two specific errors. One related to the exclusion of the monies
($803,270) in the wife’s
Company D account in circumstances where it was
not controversial that they existed, their quantum and, that they were in the
name. The husband was mistaken about the second asserted error, a
fact he acknowledged.
correspondence between the parties’ lawyers, the husband proposed that the
orders made by the primary judge be amended under
the slip rule.
solicitors for the wife accepted, by letter dated 21 May 2025, that the Company
D account had been omitted but did not agree to
amendment under the slip rule.
They argued (as they ultimately did for the purpose of the cross-appeal) that
the primary judge’s
failure to include those funds resulted in an
undervaluation of their client’s contributions such that the slip rule
be not available. As I indicated in
Warszawski & Warszawski
[2025] FedCFamC1A 165
, I do not accept that the primary judge’s exclusion
of the monies in the account led to any further error.
husband’s solicitors, by letter dated 22 May 2025, said a “change to
these Orders needs to occur by consent or alternatively
there will be an
Appeal.” This is not accurate.
Rule 10.13(1)(e)
, (g) and (h) of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) are available methods by which an order may be varied. They do not require
the consent of both parties and may be made on application
by one party.
22 May 2025 the husband made another offer of settlement which provided that the
wife pay him $1,002,147 and that otherwise the
final orders remain in
orders which were made on re-exercise provided that the husband received an
amount in excess of that which he offered to accept
by way of the offer of 22
offers of settlement are relevant justifying circumstances.
Conduct of the proceedings
factors arise: The first is the husband pursuing until the day of the hearing of
the appeal two grounds of appeal and only, for
the first time in oral argument,
abandoning his second ground. The second is the husband failing to seek an order
under the slip
rule from the primary judge. It is of no moment that the wife did
not consent since her consent was not determinative of the merits
proposed application.
of the above matters persuade me that there should not be a costs order in the
husband’s favour, but they are relevant
to my assessment of
husband sought $22,446 by way of costs of the appeal itself. I am satisfied that
there should be an order but that having regard
to the matters listed at [15]
– [16], it should be for half of the husband’s costs. Accordingly, I
will make an order
that the wife pay the husband’s costs in the sum of
$11,223 within 21 days. The wife has funds available to her to make the
so I see no need to provide that the funds await settlement of the sale of the
Suburb B property.
Costs of this application
husband sought an order that the wife pay his costs of the costs application in
the fixed sum of $10,000.
husband’s affidavit says “my estimated costs associated with this
application will be approximately $5,000 - $10,000.”
It is not open to
estimate a range and then ask for an order at the top of the range. The husband
quite properly set out his costs
of the appeal providing an evidentiary basis
upon which to determine that application. The same is not true of this
application.
I accept that husband has incurred legal fees on this application.
Absent evidence, doing the best I can, the wife should pay the
costs of the costs application in the fixed sum of $2,500.
I certify that the preceding nineteen (19)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 11 November 2025
RTF format (335 KB)
Signed PDF/A format