Bilik & Bilik [2025] FedCFamC2F 1069 (25 July 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Bilik & Bilik
[2025] FedCFamC2F 1069
File number(s):
MLC 10748 of 2020
Judgment of:
JUDGE O'SHANNESSY
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– Contravention
application – where the father alleges 6 counts of contravention –
where the father alleges contravention
of the final orders of 2022 – where
the father alleges contravention of the 2023 orders – where the mother has
to have previously contravened the orders in 2023 – where the
mother enters into a bond – where there be three conditions
of that bond.
Legislation:
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Family Law) Rules 2021
rr 1.31, 10.13, 11.64 & 11.69
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
BTT Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Thistleton
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Kaj Sharma Legal
MLC 10748 of 2020
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
JUDGE O'SHANNESSY
DATE OF ORDER:
UPON THE COURT FINDING THAT:
Court is satisfied that Counts 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the Contravention Application
(‘the Contravention Application’) filed
2 January 2025 are proven
beyond a reasonable doubt and that the Mother, Ms Bilik (‘the
Mother’) has contravened the
orders of 24 October 2022 and 20 December
2023. Those counts are as follows:
(a) Count 1: The Respondent has failed to attend upon and complete a
post-separation parenting program.
(b) Count 2: The Respondent, without reasonable excuse, refused to allow the
children to spend time with the Applicant for his birthday.
(c) Count 3: The Respondent without reasonable excuse, failed to provide her
telephone number to the Applicant.
(d) Count 4: The Respondent without reasonable cause, fails to facilitate any
telephone or video time after saying she does not have
a telephone.
Court is satisfied that Count 6 of the Contravention Application is proven on
the balance of probabilities and that the Mother
has contravened the orders of
24 October 2022. That count is as follows:
(a) Count 6: The Respondent without reasonable excuse has unreasonably refused
permission for the Applicant to travel overseas with
the children.
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
5 of the Contravention Application be and is dismissed.
Mother, enter into a bond with a surety of $1,000 payable to the Commonwealth of
Australia upon non-compliance of these orders
(and the orders of 24 October
2022) with the following conditions:
(a) The Mother complete the post-separation parenting course that was enrolled
in on Wednesday, 23 July 2025 and once completed,
notify and provide to the
Father by email documentary evidence of the completion of this course within 14
days of completion;
(b) To be of good behaviour for a period of 2 years; and
(c) To comply with the Orders of 24 October 2022 as varied, and the orders of
25 July 2025.
9 of the orders of 29 March 2023 be and is discharged.
14 of the orders of 24 October be and is discharged.
Mother do all acts and things to cause and ensure that the children communicate
with the Father, Mr Bilik (‘the Father’),
via electronic
communication with the Mother to facilitate the call each Tuesday night from
6.30pm – 7.00pm and in the event
the Father would not be available because
of work (transport worker) to take the call, the Father notify the Mother by the
of his availability and that telephone call occur on the next day when
he is available at the same time.
Mother provide, and make available to the children, a mobile phone with a
working sim card with a minimum of $30 per month for
the purpose of the Father
and Ms B (the father’s partner) to speak with the Mother in relation to
the children and/or to call
the Father for the purpose of these orders.
Mother do all acts and things to cause and ensure the children’s current
psychologist (‘the psychologist’) provides
his details to the Father
and all other information or details from the psychologist that the Mother is
entitled to.
Mother do all acts and things to cause and ensure that any psychologist and/or
counsellor the children attend upon involves the
Father and that the Father be
notified of all appointments and any such information as the Mother is entitled
the event either of the parties make a complaint or report to the Department of
Families, Fairness and Housing and/or Victoria
Police, they provide, at the time
of the complaint or report a copy of the following documents:
(a) A copy of these sealed orders;
(b) A copy of the orders of 20 December 2023;
(c) A copy of the orders of 24 October 2022; and
(d) A copy of the reasons for these orders (when available).
AND THE COURT NOTES THAT:
Court is satisfied that on numerous occasions the Mother has not advised the
Father of times the children have been sick as required
by Order 24 of the
orders of 24 October 2022.
agreed between the parents that the next time the children are required to spend
time with the Father is 31 July 2025.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE O’SHANNESSY
are the settled reasons of a judgment delivered
reasons were delivered orally. These settled reasons have been corrected from
the transcript where appropriate to correct
grammatical errors, to add
citations, passages of authorities and evidence, and to attempt to make the
orally delivered reasons easier
to read. The substance is unchanged.
matter of Bilik & Bilik comes before me on the hearing of a contravention
application this day. Both parties were represented
by counsel, and I was
assisted by counsel's robust but skilled representation of their clients. There
were six counts alleged against
Ms Bilik (‘the Mother’) and they are
as follows:
(1) Count 1: The Respondent has failed to attend upon and complete a
post-separation parenting program in contravention of the enforcement
20 December 2023.
(2) Count 2: The Respondent, without reasonable excuse, refused to allow the
children to spend time with the Applicant for his birthday
in Contravention of
the final orders of 24 October 2022.
(3) Count 3: The Respondent without reasonable excuse, failed to provide her
telephone number to the Applicant in Contravention of
the final orders of 24
October 2022.
(4) Count 4: The Respondent without reasonable cause, fails to facilitate any
telephone or video time after saying she does not have
a telephone in
Contravention of the final orders of 24 October 2022.
(5) Count 5: The Respondent without reasonable cause, has failed to notify the
Applicant if the children have been ill or in hospital
and provided the father
liberty to speak and attend the children’s medical practitioners in
Contravention of the final orders
of 24 October 2022.
(6) Count 6: The Respondent without reasonable excuse has unreasonably refused
permission for the Applicant to travel overseas with
the children in
Contravention of the final orders of 24 October 2022.
adopted the procedure under Rule 11.69 of the
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(‘the Rules’).
Rule 11.69 Procedure at hearing
At the hearing of an application referred to in item 2, 3, 4 or 5 in Table 11.1,
the court must:
(a) inform the respondent of the allegation; and
(b) ask the respondent whether the respondent wishes to admit or deny the
allegation; and
(c) hear any evidence supporting the allegation; and
(d) ask the respondent to state the response to the allegation; and
(e) hear any evidence for the respondent; and
(f) determine the proceeding.
Issue with the application
issue was that neither the contravention application or affidavit as filed did
not have annexed to it as required by the Rules,
the Court orders of 24 October
2022 or the orders of 20 December
Rule 11.64 How to apply for an order
(2) A person filing an application referred to in Table 11.1 must file with it
an affidavit that:
(a) states the facts necessary to enable the court to make the orders sought
in the application; and
(b) for an application referred to in item 1 of Table 11.1--has attached to it
a copy of any order, bond, agreement or undertaking
that the court is asked to
enforce or that is alleged to have been contravened.
(3) The affidavit filed with an application referred to in item 3 of Table 11.1
must also state:
(a) whether a court has previously found that the respondent contravened the
primary order without reasonable excuse; and
(b) the details of any finding made under paragraph (a), including:
(i) the date and place of the
finding; and
(ii) the court that made the finding; and
(iii) the terms of the finding in sufficient detail to show that the finding
related to a previous contravention by the respondent
of the primary order.
hearing submissions, I ruled that the requirement to have the applicable orders
attached to the affidavit support the contravention
application be dispensed
with, settled pursuant to rule 1.31.
Rule 1.31 Court may make orders or dispense with these Rules
(1) The court may, in the interests of justice, dispense with compliance, or
full compliance, with any of these Rules at any time.
(2) If, in a proceeding, the court gives a direction or makes an order that is
inconsistent with any of these Rules, the direction
or order of the court
prevails in that proceeding.
the procedure, I permitted counsel to admit or deny each of the counts rather
than having counsel stand silent whilst his client
(the Mother) addressed me.
The Mother initially pleaded:
(1) Count 1: Not guilty on the basis she had a reasonable excuse.
(2) Count 2: Guilty.
(3) Count 3: Not guilty on the basis that she had a reasonable excuse.
(4) Count 4: Not guilty on the basis she had a reasonable excuse.
(5) Count 5: Not guilty.
(6) Count 6: Not guilty.
plea of not guilty was intended to be and clearly understood by all concerned as
being, in terms of rule 11.69, a statement of
denying the allegation which
included that the order was contravened without a reasonable excuse.
Change in position
the father giving evidence and being cross-examined after the luncheon
adjournment, Ms Bilik, through her counsel, changed
her plea and
(1) Count 1: Guilty
(2) Count 2: Guilty
(3) Count 3: Guilty
(4) Count 4: Guilty
Bilik maintained a plea of not guilty (that is a denial of the contravention)
for counts 5 and 6.
Ms Bilik’s evidence
Bilik came to the witness box and gave sworn evidence and relied upon an
affidavit filed 12 February 2025. In addition, Ms Bilik
tendered the section
67ZBE report dated 3 April 2025 as M1 and an email chain, exhibit M2.
related to a birthday issue (and Count 2)and went to the issue of mitigation in
terms of the plea of guilty (or admission of contravention).
But the point of
M2 needs to be taken in the context that the father's birthday is ... of each
year, that is, the day these parties
understand that the orders clearly provide
that the parties are to ensure that the orders are otherwise suspended so that
the children
can spend the time specified in the order with the father. The
Mother put forward that she had offered make up time in regard to
not making the
children available on his birthday.
father gave evidence that he was told and understood that the reason the
children were not made available on his birthday was
because they had a birthday
function of their cousins. Sensibly, the mother ultimately pleaded guilty to
Orders must be complied with
needs to be made clear that the orders are the orders, and it is not up to
either parent to not comply with them. By way of example,
if Mr Bilik was to
decide that an additional day on his weekend was a good idea because he had a
relative who had a birthday, and
he would keep the children for an extra day,
that would be a breach of the order. That would be contravening the order.
for Ms Bilik to determine that there was something else more important
(in her view, more important to the children than complying
with the orders
the point is the birthday was on ..., and it was in May (a Thursday) that the
mother contacted the father by email and proposed
that on that following
weekend, the father's time commencing that Thursday, that he would be able to
keep the children over the period
on the following Saturday (of 9am to 1pm).
That is the time under the orders the children would otherwise be entitled to be
her on X’s birthday. I take that into account.
point is that the proposal (if that is to be regarded as make up time), was not
made at any time prior to .... It was made much
later and was simply determined
by the mother. Nonetheless, that proposal of the additional time is something
that I do take into
account in regard to the penalty.
it turned out, the father was unable to exercise that time that weekend at all
because, he said, of an illness. He advised that
his partner was available to
pick up the children, but he respected the mother's position that that was not
her preferred option,
and I am satisfied that the father's sensitivity to having
the children picked up by his partner, as he would have been entitled
under the orders, was sensitive to the mother's sensitivity to the involvement
of his partner in the children's
terms of counts 1 to 4, taking into account the affidavit of evidence and the
mother's explanations (or lack of them) and her demeanour
in the witness box
causes me to be
satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt
Bilik contravened the orders.
regard to count 5, that was dismissed, as Mr Bilik could not satisfy me that on
28 September 2024, the mother did not contact him
their illness because there is no evidence the children were sick and it appears
likely the children
were with him that day during school holiday time. I do
note that I am so satisfied that the Mother, on numerous occasions, has
advised the Father of the times when the children have been sick in her care.
regard to count 6, the reason I am satisfied on the serious civil standard but
not on the higher criminal standard is that, at
this time, the mother had been
reporting matters to the Child Protection authorities, who had been involved in
an investigatory phase
but had never taken any steps to revoke or override the
applicable final orders.
Nonetheless,
the uncertainty about Child Protection involvement means that I have not placed
out of my mind that the mother may have
thought that she was entitled by the
involvement of Child Protection (to the extent they were involved and they were
involved often)
to not comply with the orders.
That is not the
fact that a Child Protection officer is investigating a claim of abuse does not
suspend the orders that the Court has made. It
is for those reasons I am only
satisfied of that contravention on the balance of probabilities.
also take into account that in 2025 the father proposed, during the first term
school holidays of 2025, that he would take the children
overseas to visit C
Venue as well as his family. I simply do not accept that the children would not
want to attend C Venue with
the father. They are the reasons why I am satisfied
those orders are made out.
Variation of orders
discussed with the parties, I will vary, pursuant to Rule 10.13 of the Rules,
the orders of 2022 by both deleting and remaking
the telephone time orders to
the effect that the telephone time will be each Tuesday between 6.30 and 7.00
pm, but with the mother
to initiate the call and with the father to have advised
the mother by the Thursday of the week prior if, as a result of work issues,
is not going to be available to take the call and, in that case, he is to
nominate the next day that he will be available at those
times to take the call
and the call is to be made at those times.
am, as discussed with the parties, also satisfied that the order of the Chief
Judge relating to the provision of a telephone should
be discharged and
effectively be remade but with a different onus. For the reasons discussed with
counsel, I am also satisfied that
there should be an order on both parties to
ensure that both parties authorise any psychologist, counsellor or therapist
children consult and be directed to include both parents in any therapy
and to authorise any counsellor or therapist to provide to
each of the parents
any information that either parent would be entitled to and to bring to any
therapist involved the provisions
of paragraph 2 of the orders of 24 October.
That is and I read:
(2) the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for the children.
fact, that means the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for
decisions relating to the long-term welfare of the children
including education
and health, and that includes psychological health.
am satisfied that Ms Bilik should enter into a
as penalty for her
contravention with a surety. I take into account that the Mother has previously
been found to have contravened
the 24 October 2022 orders and was placed on a
bond without surety on 20 December 2023. She was ordered to undertake a
post-separation
course and she did not. In the last week she has enrolled in
terms of the surety are:
I acknowledge that I owe the Commonwealth of Australia the sum of $1000 to be
made and levied on my property, real or personal, for
the use of the
Commonwealth if I fail to meet the conditions as set out below.
is not payable unless there is a failure.
conditions of this bond are to complete the post-separation parenting course
that was enrolled in on Wednesday, 23 July 2025
and, once completed, notify and
provide to the father, by email, documentary evidence of the completion of the
course within 14 days
of completion. I am satisfied this is to be done 14 days
from when the Mother completes that course.
second condition is to be of good behaviour for a period of two years. This
means to be of good behaviour about the obligations
under the Court orders and
the parenting of the children. It does not relate to parking tickets, speeding
tickets or whatever else.
It is to be of good behaviour in regard to parenting
and the applicable parenting orders.
third condition is to comply with the orders of 24 October 2022 as varied and
the orders of this day, 25 July 2025.
are my reasons.
I certify that the preceding thirty-two (32)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Judgment of Judge
O'Shannessy
Dated: 6 August 2025
On 20 December 2023, Judge
Glass had found the Mother contravened the final parenting orders on 5 separate
occasions without a reasonable
excuse and ordered the mother to enrol and
complete a post-separation parenting course and to enter into a bond. The orders
specify a time of when the Mother was to enter this bond and as
discussed with counsel, I applied that without a time limit, orders
mean a thing
is to be done “forthwith” or “immediately”.
The affidavit filed with the
application attached the 20 December 2023 orders
the 24 October
2022 orders and that point was taken by counsel for the Mother. The court was
addressed on the basis that the orders
alleged to be contravened should be
attached to the application rather than with the contemporaneously filed
affidavit but nothing
turned on this.
The applicable orders
do not prevent
the Father’s partner being involved in
the children’s lives during the Father’s court ordered time with the
The Father sought
that the Mother enter into a bond.
RTF format (380 KB)
Signed PDF/A format