URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1947/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Commissioner of Succession Duties (SA) v Executor Trustee & Agency Company of South Australia Ltd [1947] HCA 10; (1947) 74 CLR 358 (8 May 1947)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Commissioner of Succession Duties (South
Australia) Respondent, Appellant; and Executor Trustee and Agency
Company of South Australia
Limited and Others Appellants,
Respondents.
On appeal from the Supreme Court of South Australia.
Latham C.J., Rich, Starke, Dixon and Williams JJ.
Hannan K.C. (with him K. J. Healy), for the appellant.
Brebner (with him Bright), for the respondents.
Hannan K.C., in reply.
The following written judgments were delivered:—
Latham C.J.,
Rich and Williams JJ.
These reasons for judgment were prepared by
This is an appeal by the Commissioner of Succession Duties from a
valuation by the Supreme Court of South Australia of 28,150
paid ordinary shares of £1 each in a South Australian
company, D. Clifford Theatres Ltd. The shares are part of the
of Daniel Clifford, who died on 10th December 1942. The
appellant assessed the shares at the value of 37s. each for the
of succession duty under the
Succession Duties Act
S.A.. The executors of the will of the deceased, the
respondents in this court, being dissatisfied with this value,
appealed to the
Supreme Court of South Australia under
Succession Duties Act
J., who heard the
appeal, ordered that the valuation should be reduced to 17s. 6d.
Section 59 of the
Succession Duties Act 1929-1942
provides that:—"In estimating the net present value of any
property for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of duty, no
reduction shall be made in the estimate on account of the estimate
being made on the assumption that the whole property is to be
placed on the market at one and the same time: Provided that where
it is proved to the commissioner that the value of the property
been depreciated by reason of the death of the deceased any such
depreciation shall be taken into account."
Otherwise the Act, like many other Acts imposing death duties,
does not prescribe any criterion by which the value of dutiable
is to be determined.
Where property is being bought and
sold in a market, there is usually no difficulty in determining its
The value is almost
invariably the market value. Therefore
the valuation of shares which are listed on a stock exchange seldom
any difficulty.
The value is the price at which the shares
are being bought and sold on the stock exchange at the date of
But the shares in
D. Clifford Theatres Ltd. have never been
listed on a stock exchange. There is no evidence of any private
of the shares. In
these circumstances it is a problem of
considerable difficulty to estimate their true value. But the
courts have
often been confronted
with a similar problem before,
and have adopted an approach which has been discussed in this court
recent cases:
Perpetual Trustee Co. (Ltd.) v. Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
McCathie v. Federal Commissioner of
Abrahams v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation
This approach is summarized in the first five propositions which
McCathie's Case
]. Broadly speaking, the courts have adopted the
same test as that applied in determining what would be the proper
amount of compensation
to be paid for the compulsory acquisition of
property, where, as in the case of shares not listed on the stock
exchange, there is
no market value for the property. But this test
must be applied with caution in order to determine the value of an
asset in the estate
of a deceased person because there is not as in
the case of compulsory acquisition any actual transfer of ownership
at the date of
death; and the shares still remain part of the
estate and in many instances are not sold at all, but after payment
of the funeral
and testamentary expenses, debts and duties, are
transferred to the beneficiaries to whom the shares are bequeathed
by the will.
In estimating the price at which a reasonably willing
vendor would sell and a reasonably willing purchaser would buy the
they entered into friendly negotiations for that purpose
on the date of death, the price must represent the full value of
to the vendor, so that slightly to adapt the words used
in delivering the judgment of the Privy
Pastoral Finance Association Ltd. v. The
], probably
the most practical form in which the matter can be put is that the
vendor is entitled to that which a prudent purchaser
been willing to give for the shares sooner than fail to obtain
The main items to be taken into account in estimating the value
of shares are the earning power of the company and the value of the
capital assets in which the shareholder's money is invested. But a
prudent purchaser does not buy shares in a company which is a
concern with a view to winding it up, so that the more important
item is the determination of the probable profit which the
may be reasonably expected to make in the future, because dividends
can only be paid out of profits and a prudent purchaser
interested mainly in the future dividends which he could reasonably
expect to receive on his investment. Further, a prudent
would reasonably expect to receive dividends which would be
commensurate with the risk, so that the more speculative the
of business in which the company is engaged the greater the rate of
dividend he would reasonably require. In order to estimate
probable future profits of a company it is necessary to examine its
past history, particularly the accounts of those years which
most likely to afford a guide for this purpose. In order to
estimate the rate of dividend that a prudent purchaser could
require on his investment it is necessary to examine the
nature of the business and the risks involved and to seek the
evidence of
business men, particularly members of the stock
exchange and experienced accountants, who can testify to the
appropriate rate from
the prices paid for shares in companies
carrying on a similar business listed on the stock exchange or from
private sales of shares
in such companies or from their general
business experience.
D. Clifford Theatres Ltd. owns or leases a number of
motion-picture theatres in the suburbs of Adelaide, where it
exhibits hired motion
pictures. It is common ground amongst the
expert witnesses that in the case of companies engaged in the
motion-picture business listed
on the stock exchange a prudent
investor would require a dividend of eleven per cent to thirteen
per cent upon his investment.
D. Clifford Theatres Ltd. is not a company whose shares are
listed on the stock exchange. But it is not a company the articles
association of which contain restrictions upon the transfer of
its fully paid shares. The only disability suffered by shareholders
who wish to sell their shares is that shares in companies not
listed on the stock exchange cannot be so readily disposed of as
shares. We think that a sufficient allowance will be made
for this disability if we estimate that the rate of dividend which
purchaser of shares in D. Clifford Theatres Ltd. could
reasonably expect to receive on his investment would be fourteen
The next task is to select the past years the profits of which
are most appropriate for the purpose of estimating the probable
success of the company. This requires a short examination of
the history of the company. The company was incorporated on 17th
1922 under the name of Star Pictures Ltd. It changed its
name to D. Clifford Theatres Ltd. on 10th October 1923. Its nominal
is £70,000 divided into 70,000 shares of £1
each. On 10th December 1942 its issued capital was 40,000 ordinary
and 22,408 eight per cent cumulative preference shares all
of £1 and fully paid. No dividend had been paid on the
shares since 1927 and the arrears of preference dividends
on 30th June 1942 were £15,171. In addition to the 28,150
shares, the deceased held 535 preference shares in the
company. He was also the holder of one share numbered 1, and called
Governor's Share" in an associated company, Clifford's
Investments Ltd. The memorandum of association of Clifford's
Investments Ltd.
provides that:—"The Life Governor's Share
shall confer on the said Daniel Clifford or his personal
representatives so long
as he or they shall be the registered
holder or holders thereof the right either in person or by attorney
or by proxy at every general
meeting or any poll of the Company to
three-fourths of the votes in the Company that is to say to three
votes as against every one
vote conferred on all the other issued
shares for the time being in the capital of the Company, provided
always that the said special
rights attaching to the Life
Governor's Share if and when the said personal representatives of
the said Daniel Clifford shall be
registered as the holders thereof
shall only be exercisable by such personal representatives for a
period expiring on the 30th day
of June 1963 and after such period
the said Daniel Clifford being then dead the Life Governor's Share
shall become in all respects
an ordinary share in the company
without any special rights."
Clifford's Investments Ltd. held 10,000 ordinary shares and
10,000 preference shares in D. Clifford Theatres Ltd. Under the
of association of D. Clifford Theatres Ltd. the
shareholders, whether holders of preference or ordinary shares, in
general meeting
have on a poll one vote for each share. The
shareholders in Clifford's Investments Ltd. were all close
relatives of the deceased.
Most of them were employed by D.
Clifford Theatres Ltd. It is not suggested that their salaries were
more than adequate remuneration
for the work they were doing, but
it probably explains why they made no complaint that Clifford's
Investments Ltd. was not receiving
dividends from D. Clifford
Theatres Ltd. When it commenced business D. Clifford Theatres Ltd.
operated seven theatres. By 1928 this
number had increased to
fourteen theatres, and by 1937 to nineteen theatres, and the
company still had nineteen theatres on 10th
December 1942.
In its early days the company suffered many vicissitudes. It was
necessary to change from silent to talking films and to carry out
extensive alterations and repairs to its theatres. The
motion-picture business suffered severely during the depression.
Losses were
sustained in the years 1929-1932 inclusive. For these
and other reasons the early existence of the company was
precarious. But the
company survived its early difficulties. From
1933 onwards it made profits and at the end of 1942 was in a strong
financial position.
Its policy had been to husband its resources
and to use its profits in the business. In consequence it never
paid a dividend on its
ordinary shares out of these profits and
there were the arrears of dividends on the preference shares
already mentioned.
The company was a private company within the meaning of Part
III., Div. 7, of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936-1942
and therefore had to pay the special tax on its undistributed
income. Prior to 14th December 1940, when s. 7 (c) of the
Income Tax Assessment Act (No. 2) 1940
came into force and
applied to all assessments for the financial year beginning 1st
July 1940 and subsequent years, this tax was
payable on two thirds
of the distributable income, but after this date it was payable on
the whole of the distributable income. As
a result the net profits
shown in the company's accounts are net profits arrived at after
deducting not only ordinary company tax
but also this special tax.
As a further result the company had a balance to profit and loss
account and reserves amounting to £57,286
which under s. 107
Income Tax Assessment Act
when distributed to
shareholders would be free of Federal income tax in their
There was, as is usual in these cases, a conflict of expert
evidence as to the past years of the company's business which
the best guide to its probable future course. We think
that those years should be selected in which the volume of the
company's business
approximated as nearly as possible to that which
it was likely to be in the future. In other words, we think that
the most appropriate
years are those in which the company had
surmounted its initial difficulties and had acquired the number of
theatres in which it
was likely to continue to operate in the
future. We think that the five years 1938-1942 inclusive should be
chosen. By 1938 the business
had reached the extent which it was
likely to retain in the future. During this period the gross
profits rose from £42,000
in 1938 to £78,000 in 1942,
and in the subsequent years remained at about £78,000. The
net profits of these five years,
after adjusting the accounts by
substituting taxes payable for taxes paid, amount to £45,229.
These were the net profits after
deducting undistributed profits
tax under s. 104. But once the company commenced to distribute its
net profits by way of dividend
this tax would disappear. Further,
preference shareholders
could not expect to be paid a preference
dividend free of tax, and in
estimating the dividend of eleven per
cent to thirteen per
cent as the return which shareholders would
require in comparable companies
listed on the stock exchange the
witnesses have referred
to shares in companies in which the
shareholders would receive a dividend
subject to tax and not a
taxfree dividend. Therefore, in
order to estimate from the net
profits of the five years in question the
sums likely to be
available for dividends in the future,
it is necessary to add to
the net profits the taxation payable by the company
under s. 104 on
the undistributed profits of the five years. This amounts to
£35,616. If this amount is added to £45,229
of net profits available for dividends is, in round figures,
£81,000, or approximately £16,200 per annum. This
is reached after allowing for ordinary company tax, heavy
depreciation and setting aside £1,000 in 1938 and
annum thereafter as part of a general reserve.
This general reserve as at 30th June 1942 was £26,000. After
allowing, in
figures, £1,900 to pay the preference
dividend, there is left a sum of £14,300 per annum for
distribution amongst
ordinary shareholders, or in other words,
a sum sufficient to pay a dividend of thirty-six per cent on the
ordinary shares. If
return that a prudent investor could
reasonably expect to receive on shares in the company is, as we
have said, fixed at fourteen
per cent, this would give the shares,
when capitalized on a basis of fourteen per cent, a value of
£2 11s. 6d. But there was
on 30th June 1942 £15,171
arrears on preference shares to be paid off, and for this and other
reasons we think that it would
be proper to allow some period
before the company would be in a position to pay dividends of
thirty-six per cent on the ordinary
shares. If a period of three
years is allowed a prudent purchaser could only be reasonably
expected to pay a sum which, with compound
interest at ordinary
bank overdraft rates, say five per cent, on the money he might have
to borrow to buy the shares, would at the
end of that period amount
to £2 11s. 6d., or, in other words, £2 4s. 3d. per
The next question is whether the sum of £2 4s. 3d. is
reasonably secured by the value of the tangible assets of the
The balance sheet of the company at 30th June 1942
disclosed these assets to be as follows:—freehold properties
leasehold £20; furniture, plant, vehicles
&c. £35,315; advances, debtors &c. £1,844,
investments and cash
£22,828: Total £213,707. The
liabilities to creditors were £76,846. There was therefore a
balance of assets over
liabilities of £136,861. If the
contingent liability of £15,171 for arrears of preference
dividends is deducted there
still remained a balance of
£121,690. No evidence was given to show the extent to which
the book values corresponded with the
real values of the assets,
but there is no suggestion that the book values were not
conservative, and it is stated in the report
of the directors of
5th September 1945 that substantial depreciation in excess of
normal requirements had been provided in past years.
On the basis
of book values the ordinary shares were represented on 30th June
1942 by tangible assets of £2 9s. 7d. a share,
so that there
was a satisfactory asset backing for a purchase price of £2
4s. 3d. From an examination, therefore, of the affairs
company as a going concern we estimate that £2 4s. per share
would be the sum which, apart from special considerations,
prudent purchaser would have had to pay for the shares on 10th
December 1942 sooner than fail to obtain them.
We have reached this value without taking into consideration a
contention based on the voting rights attached to the
life-governor's
share by the memorandum of association of
Clifford's Investments Ltd. This contention was that the executors
of the will of the deceased
could become the registered holders of
this share and by the exercise of its voting power could convene a
general meeting of this
company and pass a special resolution that
the shares held by this company in D. Clifford Theatres Ltd. should
be sold to a purchaser
at the same time as the shares of the
deceased and that in this way a purchaser would acquire 48,685
shares in D. Clifford Theatres
Ltd. and thereby obtain control of
this company.
J. rejected this contention and we
agree with him. One asset to be valued for the purposes of duty is
the shares held by the deceased
in D. Clifford Theatres Ltd. The
share held by the deceased in Clifford's Investments Ltd. is a
share in a different company and
therefore a separate asset. It is
no more permissible to amalgamate the two lots of shares than it
would be to amalgamate two separate
parcels of land for the purpose
of giving an additional value to each. We need not consider,
therefore, a number of difficulties
which might stand in the way of
the executors using the power conferred by the life-governor's
share to sell the shares in D. Clifford
Theatres Ltd. held by
Clifford's Investments Ltd. possibly against the wishes of the
other shareholders in the latter company.
But we cannot agree with his Honour that the ordinary shares of
the deceased in D. Clifford Theatres Ltd. considered as a separate
parcel of shares were of the value of 17s. 6d. It would not be
proper for this court on an appeal of this nature to substitute its
own opinion for that of the court below unless it were satisfied
that the court below acted on some wrong principle of law, or that
the value was entirely erroneous (
Rook v. Fairrie
Lee Transport Co. Ltd. v.
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v. Sagar
Charan Das v. Amir
], where Lord
, delivering the judgment of the Privy Council
in an Indian appeal said:—"Now this Board will not interfere
with any question
of valuation unless it can be shown that some
item has improperly been made the subject of valuation or excluded
therefrom, or that
there is some fundamental principle affecting
the valuation which renders it unsound." The Privy Council recently
affirmed this principle
Naravanan Chettiar v. Kaliappa
His Honour applied the principles stated in
Spencer v. The
Commonwealth
and based his valuation upon an estimate of the price which would
have been agreed upon in a voluntary bargain between a vendor
purchaser each willing to trade but neither of whom was so anxious
to do so that he would overlook any ordinary business
considerations.
His Honour therefore acted on the right principle
of law, but we are forced to the conclusion that in applying this
principle he
reached a value that was unreasonably low. We cannot
agree with his Honour that a prudent purchaser would have been
"tempted to try
to secure the shares at a price in the region of
7/6 each as a price that would protect himself against
contingencies and have something
in hand" or that the vendor would
have been "glad to receive his original capital to invest or use"
so that an offer by a purchaser
of 17s. 6d., that is 10s. more than
he thought the shares were really worth, would have been accepted
by the vendor. This meant,
as his Honour said, that the vendor
would have agreed to abandon part of his original capital, and it
also meant that the vendor
would have given up the prospect of
receiving anything in respect of the undistributed profits. His
Honour thought that both purchaser
and vendor would consider that
it was useless for a company to make profits unless they matured
into dividends, and assumed it was
unlikely that the company would
commence to pay dividends on the ordinary shares for another ten
years. With all respect to his Honour
we can find nothing in the
condition of the company's finances to justify such an assumption.
Nor can we agree that the fact that
the company had paid no
dividends on its ordinary shares since 1927 would necessarily be a
reason for a purchaser placing a low value
on the shares or for a
vendor desiring to sell them at an undervalue. It all depends on
the reason why a company fails to pay dividends.
depression the company made losses. But after 1933 it made profits
but used them to increase its future profit-making
capacity. As one
expert witness said, "The figures show that from June 1937 to June
1942, the company financed some £90,000
expenditure and wrote off £35,315 depreciation of which only
£9,000 came from the increase in liabilities
increase in other assets." The non-payment of dividends since 1927
would therefore benefit a purchaser once the arrears
of preference
dividends had been paid. It would not be a reason for the vendor
being induced to sell the shares for 17s. 6d. when
he knew that as
a result of this use of the company's profits his purchase money
and his share in a fund of £57,000 of tax-free
profits was
well secured by tangible assets and that the effect of the
non-payment of dividends had been to enhance the company's
prospects. It is true that this sum of £57,000 was buried in
the business and it was therefore unlikely that it could
detached to pay a dividend in cash. But it was a fund out of which
a bonus dividend could be declared to be satisfied by the issue
fully paid shares. If the company were to decide to sell its assets
and wind up it would be a fund which would not be taxable
Income Tax Assessment Act
We think that perhaps his Honour reached a value which is
unreasonably low because he failed to base his valuation
principally upon
the two main items to which we have referred.
Prima facie the value of shares in companies having similar issued
capital carrying
on comparable businesses with comparable assets
and making similar profits should be the same. Estimates of the
value of shares in
such companies made in the manner already
mentioned would lead to this result. It then remains to consider
the extent to which the
initial valuation would be affected by
differences between such companies, such as one being listed and
the other not listed on the
stock exchange; and in the case of
companies not listed on the stock exchange by the presence of
articles of association compelling
shareholders or their executors
who desire to sell the shares to offer them to the other
shareholders at a sum which is below their
real value, or placing
the management and control of their affairs in the hands of certain
shareholders to the exclusion of others.
But too much emphasis
should not be placed on such matters. The essence of the valuation
is the examination of the worth of the company's
business. We refer
in this connection to the passage from the judgment of Lord
in the Court of Appeal in
Inland Revenue
Commissioners v. Crossman
], cited in
Abrahams' Case
The articles of association of D. Clifford Theatres Ltd., as we
have said, do not contain any such provisions. The deceased was,
in his lifetime in complete control of the business of the
company and also of the business of Clifford Amusements (Mount
Ltd., a company with an issued capital of 5,005 ordinary
shares and 8,105 eight and one-half per cent cumulative preference
in which D. Clifford Theatres Ltd. held 5,735 of the
preference shares. It was contended that the deceased had an
uncanny instinct
for sensing the public taste in motion pictures so
that his death was a serious blow to the future prospects of both
companies. No
doubt outstanding business capacity may be shown in
the motion-picture business as in most other businesses, but we
find it difficult
to believe that it is a business in which any
particular individual is irreplaceable. Other considerations
adverted to in the evidence
deserve attention. For instance, the
motion-picture business may have been more prosperous during the
war than it would be in peace-time
in some of the five selected
years and in the post-war years from the prevailing full employment
and high wages and lack of competition
from other amusements. If we
had to place an exact value on the shares these considerations
might lead us finally to value the shares
below £2 4s. But we
need not pursue this question because the appellant only asks that
the assessment should be restored. Our
examination of the evidence
has satisfied us that the shares were at least worth 37s., that his
Honour's valuation cannot stand,
and that the assessment was not
For these reasons we are of opinion that the appeal should be
allowed with costs, that the order of the Supreme Court should be
aside, and in lieu thereof an order made that the appeal to the
Supreme Court be dismissed with costs.
This is an appeal from a judgment of the Supreme Court of South
Australia which ordered the variation of an assessment to
duty under the
Succession Duties Act 1929-1942
and determined that 28,150 ordinary shares in D. Clifford Theatres
Ltd. were of a value of £24,631 5s. or 17s. 6d. per share
not £52,077 10s. or 37s. per share as assessed by the
Commissioner.
The determination of this value was necessary for the purpose of
arriving at the total of the net present value of all property
from Daniel Clifford, deceased, pursuant to the
Succession Duties Act 1929-1942
The Act provides no method or measure of value or what has been
called a statutory value (
Inland Revenue Commissioners v.
is the monetary worth of the shares that must be
ascertained—an imputed price—the price that a buyer
to pay to procure the shares. As
Spencer v. The Commonwealth
], "In order that any article may have an
exchange value, there must be presupposed a person willing to give
the article in exchange
for money and another willing to give money
in exchange for the article."
Ordinarily the price at which shares are selling in the open
market will determine their value. Sometimes, however, the market
will not represent what Lord
Russell of Killowen
calls the actual true or intrinsic value of the shares (See
Inland Revenue Commissioners v. Crossman
]) or there is no market
price. But it is the true actual or intrinsic value of the shares
that must be ascertained and if there be
no market price then the
value or worth of the shares must be ascertained by some other
The general principles applicable to the case of lands
compulsorily acquired under statutory powers afford, I think, no
value in such cases. The value to be ascertained in
those cases is the value of the land to the vendor with all its
potentialities
and with all the use made of it by the vendor and
not the value to the purchaser (See
Compensation
, 8th ed., 174;
South Eastern Railway v.
London County Council
Spencer v. The Commonwealth
]). Nor do I think that
statements in the compensation cases, to the effect that the basis
of valuation is the price that a willing
purchaser would at the
relevant date have to pay to a vendor not unwilling, but not
anxious, to sell, that is, the value to the owner
afford much assistance in any valuation.
If the actual and true value of the shares be ascertained after
consideration of all the matters that affect value the hypothetical
buyer is assumed.
Succession Duties Act 1929-1942
requires that the
net present value of the property of a deceased person shall be
ascertained and assumes that the property has a
value which can by
some means be ascertained. The shares in D. Clifford Theatres Ltd.
were not upon the open market. Consequently
their value must be
ascertained by some other method. The methods and practices of
business men afford real assistance in ascertaining
that value.
They would examine the organization of the company, its accounts,
assets, backing and its earning capacity.
On 10th December 1942, when D. Clifford died, the D. Clifford
Theatres Ltd. had issued 40,000 ordinary shares and 22,408
preference shares all of £1 fully paid. The
holders of the preference shares were entitled to cumulative
preference dividends
at eight and one-half per cent per annum.
These dividends were £15,171 in arrears at the time of the
death of the deceased.
The deceased held, as already appears,
28,150 ordinary shares of £1 fully paid. The memorandum and
articles of association
of the company do not restrict the sale or
transfer of its shares.
It appears from the accounts of the company that its ordinary
shares of £1 were covered by net tangible assets (less
capital and arrears of preference dividend) of the value
of £2 9s. 7d. per ordinary share.
The earning capacity of the company can also be ascertained from
its accounts. The years 1938-1942, both inclusive, give, I think,
fair basis for estimating the earning capacity of the company. The
total shareholders' funds used in the business during this period
averaged £117,545 and less the preference capital
£22,408 the ordinary shareholders' funds averaged
The adjusted net profit of the company for the same period
averaged £12,847, and less provision for the preference
the average profit available for ordinary shareholders
amounted to £10,955 per annum.
On the average of the ordinary shareholders' funds used in the
business £95,137, the average profit £10,955 per annum
is equal to eleven point five one per centum.
One of the objects of D. Clifford Theatres Ltd. is to provide
public entertainment of any nature whatsoever and it has in fact
more than a dozen picture theatres. The business is
somewhat speculative in character and subject to various
fluctuations and risks.
And there is evidence that may be accepted
that anyone investing in the ordinary shares of a company carrying
on such a business
would look for more than eleven point five one
per cent upon his investment and might reasonably require from
twelve and one-half
to fourteen per cent return upon it. I shall
assume the higher rate, fourteen per cent. But the company averages
only eleven point
five one per cent on the average funds of
ordinary shareholders used in the business, £95,137, which is
two point four nine
per cent less than fourteen per cent on those
average funds or £2,369 per annum. The present value of that
at fourteen per cent for ten years is
£12,357. The assumed interest rate is the same as that which
would be required by anyone
investing in ordinary shares in the
company but the period of ten years is a conjectural estimate of
the period that it would take
the company to earn the full interest
rate of fourteen per cent. On this basis the value of the 40,000
ordinary shares in the company
would amount approximately to
£82,780 or slightly more than £2 per share.
But there are some other matters affecting the value of the
shares that must be considered. It appears that the company
accumulated
profits amounting to £57,286 upon which it paid
income tax. During the years 1938-1942 the company paid dividends
on undistributed
profits amounting to a sum of £35,616, and
if these profits are distributed the shareholders will be entitled
to a rebate of
taxation pursuant to the provisions of s. 107 of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936-1942
. And it is suggested
in evidence that this renders the shares of the company especially
attractive because it would save shareholders
taxation from 5s. to
14s. per share. These profits are employed in the business of the
company, which is undercapitalized, and must
in the end be
capitalized or moneys provided or borrowed to release them. But any
dividends declared in the course of capitalization
in respect of
these undistributed profits would seem to be excluded from taxation
imposed by reason of the provisions of ss. 44 and
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936-1942
. The benefit that
would flow from this possible rebate of taxation is conjectural and
incapable, I think, of close estimation. It
is a circumstance,
however, that must be considered in any estimation of value because
it makes the shares more attractive.
Further it was said that the deceased was the governing-director
of a company known as Clifford's Investments Ltd. which held 10,000
ordinary shares or thereabouts in D. Clifford Theatres Ltd. and
that this gave him and his executors complete control of D.
Theatres Ltd. Such a control would enhance the value of
the ordinary shares in D. Clifford Theatres Ltd. All that need be
that the argument is untenable, for the shares in D.
Clifford Theatres Ltd. belonging to Clifford's Investments Ltd.
were not the
property of the deceased and gave him and his
executors no right to use them for his own benefit.
Further still there is a sum of £15,171 arrears of
cumulative preference dividends. But this sum is allowed in account
in ascertaining
the average of the ordinary shareholders' funds
used in the business, £95,137.
And it was said that the value of the assets of the company
appearing in the balance sheets is excessive and the provisions for
obsolescence,
depreciation and so forth, insufficient. But there is
no definite evidence on the subject and the profit and loss
accounts show that
considerable amounts have been written off for
depreciation, some £35,000 during the period 1938-1942.
And it was also said that the deceased, D. Clifford, was the
brains of the company and that his death must adversely affect its
operations and render the business less attractive for
investors. The fact may have some influence on the value of the
the company but how far, if at all, the value of the
shares would be affected is conjectural and incapable of
estimation.
Let the sum of £10,000, however, be allowed for all these
imponderables and the value of the shares would be reduced from
to £72,780. And £70,000 for 40,000
ordinary shares or 35s. per share at fourteen per cent would
require dividends amounting
to £9,800. And the average
adjusted profits per annum on the ordinary shares amounted, as we
have seen, to £10,955 per
In my opinion, therefore, the value of 12s. 6d. attributed to
the shares by the respondents to this appeal and 17s. 6d. by the
trial judge is too low.
And bearing in mind the benefits that might flow from the
possible rebate of taxation on the sums already mentioned it is, in
my opinion,
by no means established that the assessment of the
appellant, the Commissioner of Succession Duties, of 37s. per share
is not correct.
The assessment of the Commissioner should therefore stand
especially in view of ss. 61 and 71 of the
Succession Duties
Act 1929-1942
Consequently this appeal should be allowed, the judgment of the
Supreme Court set aside, and the assessment of the Commissioner
I have had the advantage of reading the judgment prepared by
J. and agree in it. I should like, however, to
add for myself that there is some difference of purpose in valuing
property for revenue
cases and in compensation cases. In the second
the purpose is to ensure that the person to be compensated is given
a full money equivalent
of his loss, while in the first it is to
ascertain what money value is plainly contained in the asset so as
to afford a proper measure
of liability to tax. While this
difference cannot change the test of value, it is not without
effect upon a court's attitude in the
application of the test. In a
case of compensation doubts are resolved in favour of a more
liberal estimate, in a revenue case, of
a more conservative
estimate. But even so I cannot find ground for estimating the value
of the shares below thirty-seven shillings
Appeal allowed with costs. Order of Supreme Court set aside. In
lieu thereof order that appeal to Supreme Court be dismissed with
Solicitor for the appellant: A. J. Hannan, Crown Solicitor for
South Australia.
Solicitors for the respondents: Pickering & Cornish,
[1942] HCA 4
; (1942) 65 C.L.R.
[1944] HCA 9
; (1944) 69 C.L.R.
[1944] HCA 32
; (1944) 70 C.L.R.
] (1944) 69 C.L.R.,
at pp. 10, 11.
[1914] UKPC 77
; (1914) A.C. 1083,
at p. 1088.
] (1941) 1 K.B.
[1940] HCA 27
; (1940) 64 C.L.R.
[1946] HCA 6
; (1946) 71 C.L.R.
] (1920) L.R. 47 Ind.
App. 255, at p. 264.
] (1946) A.C.
[1907] HCA 82
; (1907) 5 C.L.R.
] (1937) A.C.
] (1944) 70
C.L.R., at p. 46.
] (1937) A.C. 26,
[1907] HCA 82
; (1907) 5 C.L.R.
418, at p. 431.
] (1937) A.C.
] (1915) 2 Ch.
[1907] HCA 82
; (1907) 5 C.L.R.
[1913] HCA 27
; (1913) 17 C.L.R.
223, at p. 233.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (505 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter