Lim & Zong [2021] FamCAFC 165 (27 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[2021] FamCAFC 165
Appeal from:
Zong & Lim (No 3)
[2021] FCCA 238
Appeal number(s):
NOA 5 of 2021
File number(s):
BRC 8160 of 2014
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
FAMILY LAW –
Application to discharge the Independent Children’s Lawyer – Whether
the primary judge erred in not discharging
the Independent Children’s
Lawyer – Consideration of the role and duties of the Independent
Children’s Lawyer –
Consideration of the relevant principles for
discharging an Independent Children’s Lawyer – Where no material
established – Findings open on the evidence – Appeal
– APPLICATION IN AN APPEAL –
Applications to adduce further evidence – Relevance – Where the
further evidence
does not establish material error – Applications
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
(1998) 197 CLR 172;
De Winter v De Winter
(1979) 23 ALR 211
(1979) FLC 90-605
Dean & Susskind
[2012] FamCA 897
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
Knibbs & Knibbs
[2009] FamCA 840
Leroux & Leroux
[2015] FamCA 1128
(2020) FLC 93-939
[2020] FamCAFC 20
Lloyd and Lloyd and Child Representative
(2000) FLC 93-045
Paco & Racina
[2014] FamCAFC 195
Sawyer & Sawyer
[2015] FamCA 982
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
The Appellant:
Litigant in person
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Lander Solicitors Queensland
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Ms Pendergast
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Julie Harrington Solicitor
BRC 8160 of 2014
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The appellant’s Application in an Appeal filed 25 June 2021 is
2. The appellant’s Application in an Appeal filed 3 August 2021 is
3. The Amended Notice of Appeal filed 29 April 2021 is dismissed.
form of the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be
subject to review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the
order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules 2004
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
has been approved by the Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
1 Apart from a brief hiatus in 2016, Mr Lim
(“the father”) and Ms Zong (“the mother”) have been
contested parenting proceedings in relation to their now nine year
old child for nearly seven years. It is unnecessary to traverse
much of the
extensive history of those proceedings, as the starting point relevant to this
appeal is 18 June 2018, on which date
a judge of the Federal Circuit Court made
an order appointing an Independent Children’s Lawyer to represent the
interests of
the child in the current iteration of the proceedings.
2 On 12 January 2021, approximately two weeks before the final hearing of the
parenting applications was due to commence, the father
filed an application in
which he sought to discharge the Independent Children's Lawyer. On 19 January
2021, the primary judge dismissed
the father’s application. The father
appeals against that order.
3 The mother and the Independent Children's Lawyer resist the appeal.
4 For the reasons which follow, the appeal must be dismissed.
5 Both the mother and father are of Chinese origin,
and their first language is Mandarin. They migrated to Australia in 2007, where
the child was born in 2012.
6 The father presently lives in Perth, while the mother lives in Brisbane
with the child. Although for some time the child was spending
time with the
father in Perth during school holiday periods pursuant to interim orders, that
time was temporarily suspended by order
in late 2019, and it has thereafter not
resumed, albeit at present seemingly only because of COVID-19 travel
restrictions between
Western Australia and Queensland.
7 On 29 October 2020 the matter was set down for trial on 25–29 January
2021, however did not then proceed. It is now listed
for trial in September
THE FATHER’S APPLICATIONS IN AN APPEAL
8 The father filed two Applications in an Appeal,
the first on 25 June 2021 and the second on 3 August 2021. Both seek to lead
evidence in the appeal.
9 Section 93A(2) of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the
Act”) gives this Court a discretion to admit further evidence on appeal.
That power is subject to s 96 but
is otherwise unfettered by legislation.
10 The principles relevant to the discretion were discussed in the High Court
(1998) 197 CLR 172, where McHugh, Gummow and Callinan JJ
114. No doubt the Full Court will readily admit further
evidence which is not in dispute and which the Court is able to evaluate
take into account in considering the appeal without the necessity to have the
proceedings re-heard. Further evidence of this
kind is particularly likely to be
admitted where the evidence relates to events occurring after trial. In the case
of undisputed
evidence which the Full Court can evaluate as part of the evidence
in the appeal, the discretion to admit the evidence may even be
exercised without the Full Court considering what effect it would have had on
the trial judge's decision. In that context,
the likely effect of the further
evidence on the Full Court's view of the evidence before the trial judge is the
important consideration.
Where there is no need for a new trial or extensive
taking of evidence, other discretionary factors such as the availability of the
evidence at the trial and the need for finality of litigation are likely to be
more relevant in the exercise of the discretion than
the effect that the
evidence would have had at the trial.
116. The failure to have adduced the evidence before the primary judge will be
a variable factor, the weight of which will depend
upon all the other factors
pertinent to the case. Where the evidence has been deliberately withheld, the
failure to call it will
ordinarily weigh heavily in the exercise of the
discretion. In other cases, the failure to call the evidence even if it could
been discovered by the exercise of reasonable diligence may be of little
significance. No invariable rule concerning the failure
to call the evidence can
or should be laid down in view of the wide discretion conferred on the court by
the section.
148. ... The power conferred by s 93A(2) is not a solvent for correcting orders
that the Full Court regards as unsatisfactory but
which contain no appealable
error. New hearings are not to be ordered merely because there is a real chance
that a different order
might be made by a different judge or that there is a
real chance that the order under appeal does not serve the best interests of
child. It is true that finality of litigation cannot play the part in the
exercise of the s 93A(2) discretion that it does in
the exercise of the
discretion to order a new trial in common law proceedings. Nevertheless, it does
have a role to play in the exercise
of the s 93A(2) discretion. Whatever the
limits of that role, it at least rules out the admission of further evidence
where the appellant
cannot establish any error in the making of the orders but
seeks to have a new trial because on the whole of the evidence now available
different orders might be made at that trial.
11 Turning to the documents sought to be adduced into evidence by the first
Application in an Appeal, they are as follows:
(a) An affidavit of the father filed on 20 January 2021,
that being the day after the orders were made by the primary judge now the
subject of this appeal. Self-evidently, that affidavit was not available to form
part of the material before the primary judge. The
affidavit annexes an airline
booking confirmation for the child dated 22 July 2020, for travel on 19
September 2020, a matter relevant
to Ground 1 of the appeal. However equally
self-evidently, the booking confirmation must have been in existence as at 19
2021, but was not put before the primary judge. No explanation for the
father’s failure to put the material before the primary
judge is advanced
by him. In any event, as shall be seen, the new evidence does not point to
material error by the primary judge.
This document will not be admitted;
(b) An email from the Australian Health Practitioners Regulation Agency
containing a definition of clinical psychologist. The date
of that email is 24
February 2021, and therefore self-evidently again it was not available to be put
before the primary judge. In
the primary judge’s reasons, he noted at [70]
that “[t]here is no definition from the Australian Health Practitioners
Regulation Agency of what a clinical psychologist is”; a matter relevant
to Ground 4. What the father now seeks to do is remedy
that evidentiary
deficiency, something which could have been attended to prior to 19 January
2021. No explanation is advanced as
to why it was not done. In any event, even
if now admitted, again the new evidence would not establish material error by
the primary
judge. This document will not be admitted;
(c) A family report prepared on 16 February 2021. Again obviously that was not
material that was available to put before the primary
judge. However it is
wholly irrelevant to the issue of whether the Independent Children's Lawyer
should have been discharged, or
whether the primary judge erred by failing to
discharge her. This document will not be admitted;
(d) An Application in a Case filed by the father on 19 January 2021, an order
made by the primary judge on 20 January 2021, the reasons
for those orders
delivered that day, and emails of various dates passing between the chambers of
the primary judge and the father.
Self-evidently none of these were able to be
put before the primary judge. However, it is impossible to see how they could
any way upon this appeal. These documents will not be admitted;
(e) A Notice of Address for Service dated 20 April 2020 and a list of documents
obtained from the Commonwealth Court’s Portal.
It appears that the former
document in some way relates to when the mother’s present solicitor first
acted for her in the proceedings,
a matter said to be relevant to Ground 3.
However not only was the document in existence prior to 19 January 2021, and no
explanation
proffered for why it was not put into evidence then, but it is nigh
impossible to see how it has any relevance, much less demonstrates
error by the
primary judge. The relevance of the list of documents filed in those proceedings
is likewise wholly opaque. Neither
of those documents will be
12 None of the documents referred to in the Application in an Appeal filed 25
June 2021 will be admitted. That application will therefore
be dismissed.
13 Turning to the second Application in an Appeal, the documents sought to be
relied upon are:
(a) An affidavit of the Independent Children's Lawyer
filed 28 July 2021;
(b) An affidavit of the father’s previous lawyer filed on 20 January
(c) Affidavits of the father filed in the proceedings on 19 April 2021 and 16
14 The father seems to be under the mistaken belief that an appellate court
should be brought up to date with progress in the proceedings.
Particularly
insofar as these documents contain further allegations by the father of
misconduct by the Independent Children's Lawyer,
he appears to rely on them to
show a continuing course of conduct, but that cannot be relevant to this appeal.
Otherwise the relevance
of these documents was not established, and they
obviously do not speak to error by the primary judge.
15 The Application in an Appeal filed 3 August 2021 will be dismissed.
THE APPEAL GENERALLY
16 At the outset it is useful to identify the
relevant principles that apply in considering whether or not an Independent
Lawyer should be discharged.
17 The Court’s power to appoint an Independent Children's Lawyer is
conferred by s 68L of the Act. It is indisputable that
implicit in that power
is the correlative power to remove an Independent Children's Lawyer.
18 The role of the Independent Children's Lawyer is articulated in s 68LA of
the Act. That section uses two subheadings: the first
is “general nature
of role of independent children's lawyer” and the second is
“specific duties of independent
children's lawyer”. As to the
former, s 68LA(2) provides:
The independent children's lawyer
(a) form an independent view, based on the
evidence available to the independent children's lawyer, of what is in the best
of the child; and
(b) act in relation to the proceedings and what the independent children's
lawyer believes to be the best interests of the
19 Sub-section (3) goes on to provide that:
The independent children's lawyer must, if satisfied
that the adoption of a particular course of action is in the best interests of
the child, make a submission to the court suggesting the adoption of that course
20 The “specific duties of the independent children's lawyer” are
expressed in s 68LA(5) in the following terms:
The independent children's lawyer
(a) act impartially in dealings with the
parties to the proceedings; and
(b) ensure that any views expressed by the child in relation to the matters to
which the proceedings related are fully put before
the court; and
(c) if a report or other document that relates to the child is to be used in the
proceedings:
(i) analyse the report or other
document to identify those matters in the report or other document that the
independent children's
lawyer considers to be the most significant ones for
determining what is in the best interests of the child; and
(ii) ensure that those matters are properly drawn to the court’s
attention; and
(d) endeavour to minimise the trauma to the
child associated with the proceedings; and
(e) facilitate an agreed resolution of matters at issue in the proceedings to
the extent to which doing so is in the best interests
21 A number of authorities have considered the removal of an Independent
Children's Lawyer, and specifically, the circumstances which
may justify such a
course. From those, the following points may be discerned:
inconsistent with the independent and professional discharge of an Independent
Children's Lawyer’s obligations for
her or him to advocate that a
particular course of action adverse to, or inconsistent with, the position of a
party, ought be taken
Whilst in a
unique position, the Independent Children's Lawyer owes the same professional
obligations to the Court as does any licenced
practitioner;
On occasion, the
Independent Children's Lawyer will be in an invidious position, but nonetheless
they should be no less courageous,
no less firm and no less cogent, in
advocating for results or
Inevitably the
role of the Independent Children's Lawyer involves an exercise of professional
judgment which may, on occasion, be
precarious and
appropriate for a litigant to endeavour to micro-manage the Independent
Children's Lawyer, or critique every step that they
It is certainly
not the case that, even if an Independent Children's Lawyer does make a mistake,
the Court will necessarily accede
to an application to have them discharged.
Significantly more than that is
It is inevitable
that the high standards of competence which the Court expects of Independent
Children's Lawyers are not always met.
Independent Children's Lawyers are, like
anybody, liable to human
A court should
be slow to discharge an Independent Children's Lawyer on the basis of largely
unsubstantiated complaints of one of
22 I should
also note that the Court has published guidelines for the conduct of Independent
Children's Lawyers. Relevant to this
application they provide that the
Independent Children's Lawyer must, if satisfied that a particular course of
action is in the best
interests of the child, make a submission to the Court
suggesting the adoption of that course. That, of course, is merely a repetition
of the duty imposed by s 68LA(3) of the Act.
23 Obviously, whether or not an Independent Children's Lawyer should be
discharged, involves the exercise of a discretion. The constraints
appellate interference with a discretionary decision are well known. In
(1936) 55 CLR 499
, it was said (at 504–505):
The manner in which an appeal against an exercise of
discretion should be determined is governed by established principles. It is
enough that the judges composing the appellate court consider that, if they had
been in the position of the primary judge, they
would have taken a different
course. It must appear that some error has been made in exercising the
discretion. If the judge acts
upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or
irrelevant matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he does
not take into account some material consideration, then his determination should
be reviewed and the appellate court may exercise
its own discretion in
substitution for his if it has the materials for doing so. It may not appear how
the primary judge has reached
the result embodied in his order, but, if upon the
facts it is unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may infer that
in some way there has been a failure properly to exercise the discretion which
the law reposes in the court of first instance. In
such a case, although the
nature of the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is
reviewed on the ground that
a substantial wrong has in fact
24 Finally, I should note that none of the grounds articulated in the Amended
Notice of Appeal filed 29 April 2021 are in fact proper
grounds of appeal.
Nonetheless I will address the challenges advanced under them as if they were
cast so as to properly raise them.
25 This ground provides as follows:
1. Wrong date when the chronology was
26 As expanded upon in the father’s Summary of Argument, this ground
challenges the conclusion at [21] of the primary judge’s
reasons as follows:
The chronology filed by the Independent Children's
Lawyer on 14 September 2020 states that the father had not purchased the air
That was correct at that stage.
27 There have been numerous interim applications decided in the course of
these proceedings as to the care arrangements for the child.
One of those
applications brought by the father sought to amend the collection arrangements
for the child so that the changeover
location for the purposes of the
child’s time with the father during school holidays would be the Perth
airport instead of
the Brisbane airport.
28 In anticipation of that interim hearing, the Independent Children's Lawyer
filed a case outline on 6 October 2020 containing a
chronology of relevant
events. The father challenges that chronology and in particular the entry where
it is stated:
14.9.2020 The Father filed an application in a case
listed in the void-19 list seeking to vary the orders he
consented to on 3 July 2020 and
despite not initially
purchasing an [sic] plane ticket for the child to travel to
Perth in the September school holiday period
(Independent Children’s Lawyer’s case information document filed 6
October 2020, p.10) (As per the original) (Emphasis
29 It is conceded by the mother and the Independent Children's Lawyer that
the chronology filed by the Independent Children's Lawyer
was in fact filed on 6
October 2020, not 14 September 2020 as the primary judge stated. Of itself, such
a mistake by the primary
judge would be of no materiality (
De Winter v De
(1979) 23 ALR 211).
30 However it appears as though the father’s real complaint is in
relation to that part of the entry for 14 September 2020,
which is emphasised
above. As the mother correctly identifies, it seems that the gravamen of the
father’s complaint is that
by the date of filing of the chronology, i.e. 6
October 2020, the Independent Children's Lawyer was then aware (at least
to what the father told the primary judge at the hearing), that the
father had in fact purchased the plane ticket for the child.
31 However it appears that the father may not appreciate that a chronology
purports to, by reference to date, set out events and circumstances
as at the specified date, rather than the events relevant to that date being
progressively updated as the facts change.
32 In his Summary of Argument, the father now contends that he first
purchased the relevant ticket on 22 July 2020, but that flight
was cancelled by
the airline as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. A new ticket was then reissued
on 17 September in lieu of the
33 However there was no evidence of that before the primary judge, and
indeed, according to the transcript, in answer to his Honour’s
“[w]ell, what I’m looking for is copy of the ticket or the receipt
showing the date you bought the ticket”,
the father explicitly told the
primary judge “[o]ne day ago. I ... 17 September” (Transcript 19
January 2021, p.5 lines
34 Further, even if it be that the Independent Children's Lawyer was mistaken
as to whether or when the father had purchased a ticket
for the child, and
acting upon that mistaken belief, misinformed the Court via her 6 October 2020
chronology, that is not conduct
which would justify her discharge, unless it
could also be shown that it was done either deliberately, or recklessly. The
falls far short of that.
35 No error of any materiality attends his Honour’s statement at [21].
This ground fails.
36 This ground provides:
2. Wrong topic. My topic here is [the Independent
Children's Lawyer] made misleading statements during January 2020
37 Under cover of this ground of appeal, it appears as though what is being
challenged is his Honour’s conclusion at [33] as
The next issue had to do with the appeal hearing and as
I read the father’s affidavit and as I listened to his submissions,
seems to be saying the Independent Children's Lawyer ought be discharged because
she would not support a stay of the orders of
38 The father contends that the relevant misleading he was alleging was not
in any interim hearing before Judge Tonkin, but rather
during the course of the
hearing of an appeal before Kent J from a decision of her Honour’s. It
appears as though the father
takes umbrage at then counsel for the Independent
Children's Lawyer’s submission, as recorded by Kent J at [15] of his
[2020] FamCAFC 20
(2020) FLC 93-939)
specific finding of fact by Judge Tonkin should not be taken as a finding, but
rather merely a recording of the mother’s
submission with apparent
acceptance. This contention by the Independent Children's Lawyer was rejected by
Kent J, and the father
sought to argue before the primary judge that, by making
that rejected submission, the Independent Children's Lawyer had in some
misconducted herself.
39 It is very difficult to see how that could possibly be so. The father
seems to place emphasis upon the Independent Children's Lawyer’s
“represent and promote the best interests of a child in family law
proceedings” and that they have “special
responsibilities”.
But whilst that is undoubtedly correct, it does not mean that putting an
argument which is not accepted
by an appeal court, in an effort to uphold a
decision of a Federal Circuit Court judge, comprises misconduct. Far from
40 In those circumstances, any mistake by the primary judge in properly
articulating the father’s contentions was not of any
materiality.
41 No error is demonstrated by this ground and it fails.
42 This ground reads:
3. No final extension of domestic violence order in
43 The genesis for this challenge appears to be at paragraphs [50]–[55]
of the primary judge’s reasons, which provide
as follows:
50 In fact, the mother’s lawyer on 20 July 2020
sent an email to the Independent Children's Lawyer stating that the Temporary
Protection Order had been granted.
51 Two months later, in the submission which the Independent Children's Lawyer
had put before this court, the Independent Children's
Lawyer referred, as the
father says to a final extension of that order.
52 I do not know what a final extension means.
53 I do not take that to mean a final Protection Order was made.
54 It appears to me that some type of extension order was placed upon the
Temporary Protection Order which was made against the father.
55 As stated by counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer, there is no
misleading conduct apparent on the part of the Independent
Children's Lawyer.
The mother’s counsel also agrees with that.
44 Although difficult to follow, in the father’s Summary of Argument,
he refers to a number of alleged statements by the Independent
Lawyer, over a series of hearings, about the finality or otherwise of a
protection order, and particularly whether it
was to last for two or five years.
45 Doing the best I can, the gravamen of the complaint seems to be that the
father believes the Independent Children's Lawyer was
contending in one or more
of those hearings there was a final protection order in place, whereas it was
only some species of temporary
extension. The significance of that distinction
is, of course, that a final order would arise, if not by consent, only after a
46 At worst, even if that was the Independent Children's Lawyer’s
position – and it is by no means clear – there
was obviously a state
of confusion as to what had occurred in the family violence proceedings.
Further, on at least one occasion,
it is clear that the Independent Children's
Lawyer was merely relaying what she had been told by the mother’s lawyer
bar table. That does not speak of misconduct, and even if it be,
certainly not of a kind that should see the Independent Children's
discharged. More to the point, it was well open on the evidence for the primary
judge to conclude as he did at [55], and no
error is established in relation to
that conclusion.
47 This ground fails.
48 This ground reads:
4. Whether [the Independent Children's Lawyer] complied
with a request from an order.
49 This challenge has its origins in an order that was made by Judge Tonkin
on 20 September 2019 (amended on 30 October 2019), as
6. Within 35 days of these orders, the Independent
Children's Lawyer is requested to recommend a clinical psychologist (who
proximate to the father’s residence) for the father to consult
with and prepare a report regarding whether there is a risk
to the mother and to
the child being exposed to further family violence by the
50 It appears not to be in contest that thereafter the Independent Children's
Lawyer made enquiries with the Family Court Child Dispute
Service section of the
Family Court of Western Australia, who recommended a particular psychologist,
the name of whom was passed
on to the father by the Independent Children's
Lawyer. As it transpired, she was not a clinical psychologist, but rather a
psychologist. At [67]–[75] of the primary judge’s reasons,
his Honour said as follows:
67 The father now complains that that psychologist, a Ms
G, charged him an amount of money, $1,540, that Ms G was not a clinical
psychologist
and that Ms G was not practising locally to the area the father
68 The father said this psychologist lived 75 kilometres away.
69 The father also said he received advice from the Australian Health
Practitioners Regulation Agency that Ms G was not a clinical
psychologist.
70 I will make this observation – I have seen the order of Judge Tonkin. I
have viewed that order which recommends a clinical
psychologist. There is no
definition in the order of what a clinical psychologist is. There is no
definition from the Australian
Health Practitioners Regulation Agency of what a
clinical psychologist is. It does appear that Ms G is a psychologist. It does
she is a practising psychologist.
71 The complaint of the father seems to be that the Independent Children’s
Lawyer did not follow the order.
72 The Independent Children’s Lawyer discharged a duty as best she could,
in my view.
73 She was under no obligation to recommend a clinical psychologist. It was a
request, and a request only.
74 She certainly made some quite appropriate inquiries with the Family Court of
Western Australia.
75 She was given a name of a person who practises in the area. So she discharged
51 It could not seriously be contended that by doing what she did, the
Independent Children's Lawyer in some way misconducted herself,
and much less,
in a way which warranted her discharge. The findings of the primary judge were
clearly open to him, and no error is
discernible in this regard.
52 This ground reads:
5. Whether [the Independent Children's Lawyer] filtered
out information from her chronology, which shows the father did not threaten
[the mother].
53 The relevant entry in the particular chronology appears to be that for 18
June 2018, which reads:
18.6.2018 the mother attended Suburb F police station
counter to seek clarification of the definition of what constitutes DV. She
she has received emails from the father and was not sure if they would
constitute a breach. She explained that the emails were
in Mandarin. She was
advised to obtain a translation of the emails.
(Independent Children’s Lawyer’s case information document filed 6
October 2020, p.8) (As per the original)
54 The father’s complaint is that on that occasion the mother also said
that she did not feel threatened by the emails which
she was referring to the
police. He says that by not including that material, which was favourable to
him, in the chronology, the
Independent Children's Lawyer misconducted herself.
As to this at [87]–[97] the primary judge said as follows:
87 The claim by the father is that the Independent
Children’s Lawyer had filtered out a quote which may – or in his
proves that, in my view, may go to prove that anything he said was not
threatening to the mother or she did not believe it was threatening
88 Firstly, it is up to the court to determine whether something is
threatening.
89 Obviously, if a person does not feel threatened, that may be the end of the
90 A person may very well misconceive any information they receive from another
party who may well be acting in a threatening manner
if, in fact, other
circumstances can be taken into account.
91 None of these issues have been put before this court in a trial sense for any
conclusion to be reached.
92 But it is not the Independent Children’s Lawyer who is filtering
93 The Independent Children’s Lawyer merely prepared a chronology.
94 A chronology is not evidence.
95 It is an aid, but it is not the evidence.
96 The evidence will come from either of these parents and come from documentary
evidence admitted from the Queensland Police Service,
if such has been obtained
under subpoena.
97 It is not an issue upon which the Independent Children’s Lawyer would
be discharged.
55 Correctly, counsel for the mother identifies that the chronology referred
to the source document, and plainly the Independent Children's
Lawyer was not
obliged to put in that document detail beyond that which she considered
56 No error is shown in relation to the primary judge’s conclusion in
this regard, which was plainly open on the evidence, and
this ground fails.
57 This ground provides:
6. Wrong topic. [The Independent Children's Lawyer]
missed information from her chronology that the father may not interested by WA
Police related to a child exploitation crime.
(As per the original)
58 Again this ground stems from items in the Independent Children's
Lawyer’s chronology, which items also appeared in an earlier
case outline
document filed by the ICL on 29 August 2019. The relevant items in the
chronology provided:
5.7.2019 Western Australian police executed a search
warrant at the father’s address in Perth based on “information had
been received that child exploitation material had been downloaded at the
29.7.2019 WA police record that Mr H attended wanting to know when he would
receive his mobile phones back. He was informed that
they would not be returned
to him until the conclusion of his current matter (before the court). He has
been charged in relation
to having child exploitation material.
(Independent Children’s Lawyer’s case information document filed 6
October 2020, p.9) (As per the original)
59 It appears that the document was before Judge Tonkin in January 2020, and
hence relevant to the appeal from her orders then made.
60 In his Honour’s reasons arising from that appeal, Kent J dealt with
this issue as follows:
16. The father’s discussion of that incident with
the primary judge was prone to raise some suspicion – the father first
telling the primary judge that one police officer attended, then that there were
10 officers and claiming not to know the name of
a gentleman present at his
house at the time of the search, stating only that he was a “man who looks
after his dog”
(at [67]; Transcript 2 September 2019, p.40-48). It appears
it was that man who the police were interested in, rather than the
61 It therefore seems clear that, despite there being no explicit reference
to it in the Independent Children's Lawyer’s chronology,
somehow or other
Kent J became aware that it was not the father who was the subject of the
Western Australian police investigation.
62 At [100]–[114] the primary judge said as follows:
100 The father’s house, as I understand the
evidence, was raided at one stage and some man he had in the house living there,
as I understand this, was found with child exploitation material on his
101 Obviously, the court is going to be concerned as to why a person is in the
father’s house has child exploitation material.
102 It seems that there may be evidence that the police in Western Australia at
some stage formed a policing view that the father
was not a person of
103 Now, that is as far as I can go.
104 It is up to the Independent Children’s Lawyer – it is important
that she put this material at the relevant time before
the court, which she
105 The father complains that the Independent Children’s Lawyer did not
tell Kent J in the Appeal that the father was not a
person of interest.
106 I do not know what the Independent Children’s Lawyer told Kent J in
the Appeal.
107 I do know Kent J said he did not consider it necessary to address all the
108 He also said it appears it was the man who police were interested in rather
than the father. Note the words ‘it appears’.
109 The father is quoting from the Appeal judgment. Kent J has not made any
findings either.
110 He is merely stating what I am stating as from the evidence.
111 I do not know how this case is going to be presented.
112 It may be presented in such a way where I am required to make a finding on
why this man is in the father’s house, but the
issue here is, is there any
misconduct, any bias or anything which would lead the court to form the view
that the Independent Children’s
Lawyer ought to be discharged on this
113 Clearly, the answer is no.
114 The Independent Children’s Lawyer has performed her duty on this
63 It is important to remember that a chronology is simply an aide, and is
not evidence. It is simply too long a bow to draw to say
that, by omitting to
put in the chronology that the father was not a person of interest to the
Western Australian Police, the Independent
Children's Lawyer thereby
misconducted herself in a way which justifies her removal. No error is
discernible in the primary judge’s
conclusion or reasoning in this
respect, which was patently correct.
64 This ground also fails.
65 This ground reads:
Wrong topic. [The Independent Children's Lawyer] did not
concerned about the child health and safety, but criticised the father did
buy the child’s tickets when it was unnecessary.
(As per the original)
66 Apart from this not being a proper ground of appeal, I cannot discern
within it any direct challenges to the findings or conclusions
of the primary
judge. Rather it seems to be an argument that, on occasion, the Independent
Children's Lawyer was not focussed upon
the best interests of the child, but
rather upon more peripheral matters, such as the circumstances surrounding the
purchase of the
child’s airline tickets. However that was not an argument
put before the primary judge, and even if it inferentially were,
it was well
open to the primary judge to not be persuaded that the Independent Children's
Lawyer was not properly acting in the best
interests of the child.
67 Finally I should note that under this ground, in the father’s
Summary of Argument, a further criticism is made of the primary
judge, namely
that his Honour considered the individual complaints separately, and not
collectively. It is unclear whether the father
pressed for a collective
consideration of all of his individual complaints, but given that none of the
complaints had substance,
whether viewed individually or collectively, a proper
basis for the discharge of the Independent Children's Lawyer was simply not
established. No error is discernible in the approach of the primary judge in
this respect.
68 This ground of appeal fails.
69 No ground of appeal is established, and therefore
the appeal must be dismissed.
70 In the event that the appeal was dismissed, no
party sought any order for costs. Each party will therefore bear their own
I certify that the preceding seventy (70)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 27 August 2021
Dean & Susskind
[2012] FamCA 897
Sawyer & Sawyer
[2015] FamCA 982
) at [57]. See also
Knibbs & Knibbs
[2009] FamCA 840
”) at [33]-[61] approved in
[2014] FamCAFC 195
[2015] FamCA 1128
at [47]-[50] and
[52]-[61] and
Lloyd and Lloyd and
Child Representative
(2000) FLC 93-045.
RTF format (493 KB)
Signed PDF/A format