Gregory McMahon and Department of Defence (Freedom of information) [2025] AICmr 169 (15 September 2025)
Gregory McMahon and Department of Defence
(Freedom of information)
[2025] AICmr 169
September 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of
Rocelle Ago,
General Manager Freedom of Information Case Management
Delegate of the
Australian Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Gregory McMahon
Department of Defence
Decision date
Freedom of Information — Amendment and
annotation of personal records — Whether the records are incorrect —
the records should be amended — (Cth)
Freedom of Information
s 55K of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(the FOI Act), I set aside
the internal review decision of the Department of Defence (the Department)
of 10 August 2021 and substitute my decision that:
applicant’s Australian Defence Force Organisation Record (ADO Record) and
Personnel Management Key Solution (PMKeyS) records
is to be amended as set out
, in accordance with s 50(2)(a) of the FOI Act.
a note is to be
added to the applicant’s ADO Record to cross-reference the
applicant’s records in PMKeyS as set out in
accordance with s 50(2)(b) of the FOI Act.
notes are to be
made to the applicant’s Army Record of Service Report, by way of paper
based manual additions as set out in
in accordance
with s 50(2)(b) of the FOI Act.
28 days of this decision, the Department must:
applicant’s records and add notes in accordance with my decision
provide the
applicant with an amended copy of the applicant’s records, including an
amended copy of the applicant’s Army
Record of Service Report, and
advise whether
it has fully implemented my decision or whether it will be seeking review of the
decision by the Administrative Review
decision discusses the application of s 50 of the FOI Act and Part 7 of the
Guidelines to the applicant’s request to amend
certain records of the
Department. It is primarily of interest to the parties in relation to the
specific records.
Reasons for decision
Scope of IC review
21 May 2021, the applicant applied to the Department under s 48 of the FOI Act
for a number of amendments to be made to certain
date records in the
applicant’s ADO Record and PMKeyS records.
applicant’s request, which the Department found was consistent with the
requirements of ss 48 and 49 of the FOI Act, sought
amendments to the following
information included in the records:
the date of the
applicant’s enlistment to the Regular Army National Service Supplement
the date of the
applicant’s appointment as a national service officer
the date of the
applicant’s completion of full time service in the ARA(NS), and
the date of the
applicant’s completion of National Service.
10 June 2021, the Department made a decision on the applicant’s request.
It agreed to make the first three amendments requested
by the applicant, within
the applicant’s ADO Record and PMKeyS records. However, the Department
declined the applicant’s
request for the date of the applicant’s
completion of National Service to be amended (the fourth amendment request) on
basis that this date record was not incomplete, misleading or incorrect.
Instead, the Department advised the applicant on how to
record their application
for amendment in this respect via an application for their records to be
applicant sought internal review of the Department’s decision on 28 June
2021. On 10 August 2021,
Department upheld its original decision to refuse the applicant’s request
to amend the date the applicant completed National
Service. The Department
advised the applicant that it would take reasonable steps to enable the
annotation of the applicant’s
service records to reflect the
applicant’s belief that their National Service continued into their
service in the Active Citizens
Military Force (ACMF), consistent with s 51 of
the FOI Act.
applicant sought IC review of the Department’s internal review decision on
28 September 2021.
the IC review, the Department reconsidered the fourth amendment request and
proceeded to make the following alterations:
Enlistment – 21 April 1971
Appointment as Officer – 07 October 1971
Completion of full time service in the ARA – 20 July 1973
Date transferred
to Reserves – 21 July 1973
the Department had made the alterations set out above at [
], it did not make a revised decision
under s 55G of the FOI Act. Accordingly, the decision under review continues to
be the Department’s
internal review decision dated 10 August 2021.
Notwithstanding
the amendments made by the Department during the IC review, the applicant
broadly contests that the Department’s
amendments in response to each of
four amendments requested by the applicant are inadequate or incomplete such to
render the amendments
incorrect or misleading.
an IC review in relation to a request under s 48 of the FOI Act, the agency
bears the onus of establishing that its decision is
justified or that I should
give a decision adverse to the
issue to be decided in this IC review is whether, in accordance with
s 50(2) of the FOI Act, the applicant’s ADO Record
and PMKeyS records
should be further altered or annotated. In making my decision, I have had regard
to the following:
applicant’s request for amendment of the records
Department’s decisions and reasons for decision of 10 June 2021 and
the records in
the Guidelines
issued by the Australian Information Commissioner under s 93A of the FOI
to which agencies must have
regard in performing a function or exercising a power under the FOI Act (FOI
Guidelines),
parties’ submissions.
Amendment of records (s
s 50(1) of the FOI Act, on application under s 48, an agency has a discretion to
amend a record of information if the agency
is satisfied that the record:
is a document of
the agency and contains personal information about the applicant
information that is ‘incomplete, incorrect, out of date or
misleading’, and
has been used,
is being used or is available for use by the agency for an administrative
s 50(2), an agency may make the amendment by altering the document
(s 50(2)(a)) or by adding a note to it specifying the respects
in which the
information contained in it is incomplete, incorrect, out of date or misleading
(s 50(2)(b)).
the extent that it is practicable to do so, the agency must, when making an
amendment under s 50(2)(a), ensure that the record
of information is
amended in a way that does not obliterate the text of the record as it existed
prior to the amendment (s 50(3)).
Whether the records should be amended as requested by the
Parties’ submissions
I have discussed above, during the course of this IC review, the Department made
further changes to the applicant’s ADO Record
and PMKeyS. In submissions
dated 18 June 2025, the Department confirmed amendments had been made to reflect
each of the four amendments
requested by the applicant, namely:
appointment as an officer
completion of full time service in the ARA(NS), and
date transferred
‘Reserves’.
response, the applicant submits that the changes are inadequate, saying
uncertainty continues to exist. In summary, the applicant
appears to refer to a regular enlistee rather than a national serviceman
the Department
does not accurately capture that the applicant volunteered for National Service
and it is insufficient that the ADO
record does not include references to
‘ARA (NS)’, ‘NS’ or ‘NS (Volunteer)’
the references
to ‘Original Hire Date’ and ‘ENL’ (enlistment) are
inaccurate and misleading
the ADO Record
records two events, a termination and a transfer occurring on successive days,
as one event occurring on one day, and
some entries
under the column heading ‘Position’ and ‘Dept’ show
distinctions, use two lines per entry and
show naming of units. The applicant
submits that this shows the ability of the ADO system to adequately describe the
applicant’s
first engagement as 'NS’ or 'ARA(NS)' to distinguish
their service from 'ARA’ service and expand this to include that
volunteered for national
applicant set out how they believe their record should be correctly documented
in a table.
However, in response,
the Department submits that the additional information the applicant is
requesting to add does not exist in
the ADO Record format.
applicant does not accept the Department’s position and says that the
Department has the ability to edit the free text entry
fields in the
applicant’s ADO Record and if they are currently unable to make the
amendments, the system is not fit for purpose.
The system should be changed to
accommodate the applicant’s request and that of other service personnel
who served during periods
of national
OAIC sought further information from the Department in relation to specific
issues raised by the applicant above.
response, on 4 August 2025, the Department advised it had made additional
changes to the applicant’s records. The Department
made these changes
after seeking further advice from ADF Human Resource Information Systems, the
area responsible for preparing the
ADO Record. This area confirmed that the ADO
Service record has a number of limitations including character length or
restrictions
in prefilled information that can be selected in tables. The
Department therefore submits that the specific details that the applicant
requesting to be added to their ADO Record cannot be accommodated by the system,
as the fields to enter the information do not
exist or are not configured for
service terms before 2001.
Department summarised each of the changes it had made to the applicant’s
records, and the limitations applying to those
Regarding the
first amendment to the date of enlistment to ARA(NS), the Department has amended
the date in line with the applicant’s
request. However, the Department
advised that the field containing the date is limited by the number of
characters its can contain
and it is not possible to show ‘ARA(NS)’
on the record.
However, these details are contained
in the applicant’s full PMKeyS history.
Regarding the
second amendment to the date of appointment as NS Officer, the Department has
amended the date in line with the applicant’s
request. However, the
Department advises that the field containing the date is limited by the number
of characters its can contain
and it is not possible to show ‘NS
Officer’ on the record. However, these details are contained in the
applicant’s
full PMKeyS history.
Regarding the
third amendment to the date of completion of full time service in the ARA(NS),
the Department has amended the date in
line with the applicant’s request.
This is listed in the full PMKeyS history as a transfer, being a transfer out of
the ARA(NS)
to ‘RES-A’.
Regarding the
fourth amendment to the date of the applicant’s completion of National
Service, the Department advises:
date transferred to the ACMF is listed in the in the full PMKeyS history as
‘RES-A’. This has been changed to read
‘ACMF’ in PMKeyS,
but this will not be shown on the ADO Record.
date of expiration of appointment after five years of service in compliance with
National Service Act 1964
is not recorded in the ADO
record. The date of re-appointment to the ACMF is also not recorded in the ADO
record. Paper based manual
additions have been made to the applicant’s
Army Record of Service Report containing this
information.
Department also addressed a number of the applicant’s other concerns. In
summary, the Department submits:
hire date’ is the date a member first enlisted into the ADF. It is a
system term that identifies when a personal
original commenced their service and
not a record of whether someone enlisted or was conscripted. It is not a field
that can be retitled
or adjusted due to system limitations. The only options
available in the system are ‘HIR(hire)’,
‘ENL(enlistment)’
or ‘REH(Rehire)’.
The columns the
applicant refers to are specific system position related data. They cannot be
changed as the position data is generic
to all service members who are posted to
that position over its lifetime. The columns contain the Department Identifier
Unit and the specific Unit or section the position belongs to.
‘Position’ detail relates to the actual position number and position
title. The applicant’s suggested entry
cannot be made.
An additional
transfer row would not be added as the section relates to posting history.
ACMF is not a
Dept ID nor a Unit, it is a Service Type and could not be entered in either the
Dept ID or Unit field.
applicant’s request to amend the description ‘Officer Training
Unit’ to include a reference to ‘Scheyville’
does not fall
within the applicant’s original
Department submits it has undertaken all amendments requested by the applicant
in their original amendment request and has therefore
complied with the
applicant’s request under s 48 of the FOI
applicant does not agree that their request for amendment has been fulfilled.
The applicant also takes issue with each of the
Department’s amendments
above and requests alternative amendments be considered. In summary, the
applicant continues to contest
the following:
The Department
relies on the limitations of the ADO Record, computerised formatting and entry
selections to deny the ability to make
further amendments. The Department has
not addressed whether these existing limitations render the ADO Record unfit for
purpose with
regard to national service records.
The descriptions
in the proposed ADO Record are insufficient. Specifically, the ADO Record leaves
spaces blank and does not use the
space available to give distinctions with
clarity and avoid misreading. The possibilities for increasing the character
fields with free text, or for adding to the menu of pre-filling
selections, have not been
considered.
Complete and
accurate details should be included on all ‘record’ type documents,
not just the PMKeyS record.
The Department
has not provided a copy of the ‘Army Record of Service
Consideration
Whether the personal information to which the request relates
contained in a document of the Department
the purposes of s 48 of the FOI Act, the records appear to have been lawfully
provided to the applicant
contain information that has been used, or is available for use, by the
Department for an administrative purpose. I am also satisfied
the records
contain ‘personal information’ – information or an opinion
who is reasonably
identifiable.
Whether the information in the records is incomplete,
incorrect, out of date or misleading
s 50(1)(b) of the FOI Act, the right to request amendment arises only where the
applicant’s personal information in the
record is incomplete, incorrect,
out of date or misleading. The FOI Guidelines note that a finding in this regard
requires a decision
maker to undertake a reasonable investigation and to assess
the available evidence.
Department has accepted that the relevant records were incomplete or inaccurate
and subsequently made amendments under s 50(2)(a)
of the FOI Act. On this basis,
I accept that the information contained in the relevant records is incorrect and
acknowledge the amendments
made by the Department.
The Department’s implementation of the request for
Department submits that although it is able to make some of the amendments
requested, not all of the amendments requested by the
applicant can be made due
to limitations of the ADO Record. I have considered the Department’s
explanation as to why it is
unable to alter the ADO Record to the extent
requested by the applicant and I am satisfied that the limitations of the ADO
prevents the Department from doing so.
note the FOI Guidelines provide that where information cannot be altered on the
document or in the electronic database, the folio(s)
or record(s) which contain
this information should be clearly cross-referenced to the relevant place where
the correct information
this basis, I consider that it would be sufficient for the Department to comply
with this requirement by cross-referencing the
applicant’s ADO Record with
PMKeyS which has been amended with the correct information. Further, the
Department submits that
paper based manual additions have been added to the
applicant’s Army Record of Service Report.
the Department did not make a revised decision under s 55G of the FOI Act during
this IC review prior to implementing the
amendments requested by the applicant,
having regard to the steps taken by the Department to amend the records and to
include notations
which cross-reference the relevant places where the correct
information is held, I accept that the actions taken by the Department
response to the applicant’s request for amendment satisfies the
requirements in s 50 of the FOI Act.
Whether an annotation should be made to the applicant’s
my finding that the limitations of the ADO Record prevents the Department from
altering the applicant’s ADO Record to
the extent requested by the
applicant, it is therefore open to the applicant to provide the Department with
a statement of the kind
referred to in s 51A(c) of the FOI Act, which will allow
the Department to annotate the ADO Record if, subject to s 51(2) of the
the Department considers the annotation(s) to be appropriate.
Separately,
I note that with respect to whether the ADO Record is not ‘fit for
purpose’ or whether improvements could
be made to the database, I do not
consider that these are issues that I can consider in this IC
Rocelle Ago
General Manager, Freedom of
Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian Information
Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Amendments to be made (s 50(2)(a) of the FOI
Notations to be made
(s 50(2)(b) of the FOI Act)
Australian Defence Force Organisation Record (ADO Record)
Personnel Management Key Solution (PMKeyS)
Army Record of Service Report
Date of enlistment (‘ENL’) – 21 April 1971
Date of enlistment to ‘ARA(NS)’ – 21 April
Not applicable
ADO Record to be cross-referenced with the PMKeyS record
Date of appointment (‘APPT’)– 07 October 1971
Date of appointment to ‘ARA(NS)’ – 07 October
Date of ‘transfer’ – 20 July 1973
Date of transfer out of ‘ARA(NS)’ to ‘RES-A’
– 20 July 1973
Date posted to ‘Unit’ – 21 July 1973
Date posted to ‘ACMF’ – 21 July 1973
Not applicable
Date of expiration of appointment after five years of service in compliance
National Service Act 1964
(Cth) – 23 March 1977
Paper based manual additions to be made to the applicant’s Army
Record of Service Report containing complete information
Date of re-appointment to the ACMF – 24 March 1977
Relevant provisions of
the FOI Act, FOI Guidelines, and decisions
Amendment of records (s 50)
Section 48 of the FOI Act sets out the circumstances in which a person can
apply for an agency to amend or annotate a document that
contains personal
information about that person. Section 49 of the FOI Act outlines the
requirements of that application, namely
that the application must:
(a) be in writing; and
(b) as far as practicable, specify:
(i) the document or official document containing the record of personal
information that is claimed to require amendment; and
(ii) the information that is claimed to be incomplete, incorrect, out of
date or misleading; and
(iii) whether the information is claimed to be incomplete, incorrect, out of
date or misleading; and
(iv) the applicant's reasons for so claiming; and
(v) the amendment requested by the applicant; and
(c) specify an address in Australia to which a notice under this Part may
be sent to the applicant; and
(d) be sent by post to the agency or Minister, or delivered to an officer of
the agency or a member of the staff of the Minister,
at the address of the
office of the agency or Minister (as the case may be) determined in accordance
with paragraph 15(2)(d).
Section 50 of the FOI Act states:
(1) Subject to section 51C, where the agency or Minister to whom such an
application is made is satisfied that:
(a) the record of personal information to which the request relates is
contained in a document of the agency or an official document
of the Minister,
as the case may be; and
(b) the information is incomplete, incorrect, out of date or misleading;
(c) the information has been used, is being used or is available for use by
the agency or Minister for an administrative purpose;
the agency or Minister may amend the record of information.
(2) The agency or Minister may make the amendment:
(a) by altering the document or official document concerned to make the
information complete, correct, up to date or not misleading;
(b) by adding to that document or official document a note:
(i) specifying the respects in which the agency or Minister is satisfied
that the information is incomplete, incorrect, out of date
or misleading;
(ii) in a case where the agency or Minister is satisfied that the
information is out of date--setting out such information as is
required to bring
the information up to date.
(3) To the extent that it is practicable to do so, the agency or Minister
must, when making an amendment under paragraph (2)(a),
ensure that the record of
information is amended in a way that does not obliterate the text of the record
as it existed prior to
the amendment.
Section 51 of the FOI Act specifies:
(1) Where an agency or Minister decides not to amend a document or official
documents wholly or partly in accordance with an application
under section 48,
the agency or Minister must:
(a) take such steps as are reasonable in the circumstances to enable the
applicant to provide a statement of the kind mentioned in
paragraph 51A(c);
(b) subject to subsection (2), annotate the document or official document
concerned by adding to it the statement so provided.
(2) Paragraph (1)(b) does not apply if the agency or Minister considers the
statement to be irrelevant, defamatory or unnecessarily
voluminous.
(3) For the purposes of this Act, the provision by the applicant of a
statement under subsection (1) is taken to be an application
made under section
51A on the day the statement is so provided.
Section 51B of the FOI covers the annotation of records and states:
(1) Subject to section 51C, where the agency or Minister to whom such an
application is made is satisfied that the record of personal
information to
which the request relates is contained in a document of the agency or an
official document of the Minister (as the
case may be), the agency or Minister
must annotate the document or official document by adding to it the statement
provided by the
applicant under paragraph 51A(c).
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if the agency or Minister considers the
statement to be irrelevant, defamatory or unnecessarily
voluminous.
Part 7 of the FOI Guidelines provides further information about the amendment
and annotation of information under the FOI Act.
In so far as when information will be considered ‘incorrect’
paragraphs [7.17] – [7.18] of the FOI Guidelines explain:
‘Incorrect’ has its normal everyday meaning. Personal information
is incorrect if it contains an error or defect. An example
is inaccurate factual
information about a person’s name, date of birth, residential address or
current or former employment.
An opinion about an individual given by a third party is not incorrect by
reason only that the individual disagrees with that opinion
or advice. The
opinion may be ‘correct’ if:
it is presented
as an opinion and not objective fact,
it correctly
records the view held by the third party, and
is an informed
assessment that takes into account competing facts and views.
when information will be considered ‘incomplete’,
‘misleading’, or ‘out of date’ the FOI
Personal information is incomplete if it presents a partial or misleading
picture, rather than a true or full picture. For example,
a statement that an
individual has only two rather than three children will be incomplete if that
information is held for the purpose
of, and is relevant to, assessing a
person’s eligibility for a benefit or service.
Information is misleading if it could lead a reader into error or convey a
second meaning which is untrue or inaccurate. For example,
an applicant may
claim that a record of opinion or advice is misleading because it does not
contain information about the circumstances
surrounding that opinion or
recommendation. The applicant may seek to have incorporated in the document
information that sets out
the context for that opinion or recommendation.
Personal information is out of date if it contains facts, opinions or other
pieces of information that are no longer current. An applicant
may request that
more recent information be inserted into the record as their circumstances
change. For example, an applicant may
request amendment of a statement that the
applicant lacks a particular qualification or accreditation that they have
subsequently
Personal information about a past event may have been accurate at the time it
was recorded, but have been overtaken by a later development.
Whether that
information is out of date will depend on the purpose for which it is held. If
point in time information from the past
is required for the particular purpose,
the information will not be out of date for that purpose. In these
circumstances, an agency
or minister must still ensure that the information is
complete and not misleading.
Regarding the amendment of recorded opinions, paragraph [7.24] of the FOI
Guidelines explains:
An agency or minister should be careful where a request for amendment relates
to a document containing advice, recommendations or
opinions of a third party
(including a group). Such records should be amended only if the information is
incorrect or incomplete,
or if the author was shown to be biased or unqualified
to form the opinion or to have acted improperly, or if there is some other
impropriety in the formation of the opinion. The applicant’s disagreement
with the opinion is not a sufficient reason
to amend the record.
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
The Department sought and
received an extension of time until 11 August 2021 in which to complete the
internal review from the Office
of the Australian Information Commissioner
FOI Act s 55D(1).
In particular ss 48, 50, 51
and 51A (set out at
See Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner
, Guidelines issued by the Australian Information
Commissioner under
Information Act 1982
(FOI Guidelines).
Relevant provisions of the
Guidelines are set out in
Refer Department’s
submissions dated 18 June 2025. The Department no longer appears to contest the
inaccuracy of the date.
Refer applicant’s
submissions dated 13 July 2025 and 24 July 2025.
Refer applicant’s
submissions dated 13 July 2025 and 24 July 2025.
Refer applicant’s
submissions dated 24 July 2025 and 11 August 2025.
Refer applicant’s
submissions 13 July 2025 and 24 July 2025.
The Department provided
updated versions of the applicant’s ADO Record and Pre-PMKeyS Table, which
includes additional information
regarding the applicant’s service, to the
OAIC and the applicant on 19 August 2025.
For example, there does not
appear to be any character length limitation for additional possible pre-filling
selections that would
identify the type of the applicant’s first
engagement, such as the inclusion of
‘NS(conscription)/NSV(NSVolunteer)’
to the pre-filling menu. The
applicant also requests the use of an additional pre-filling entry onto the menu
for the ADO Record
format, of ‘NS Officer Trg Unit’ (which
abbreviates ‘Training’ to ‘Trg’ to meet any character
length limitation). Refer applicant’s submissions dated 24 July 2025.
The Department’s
original decision of 10 June 2021 confirms that ADF Records provided the
applicant’s Service Record
to Army Headquarters.
See relevant definitions in
s 4(1) of the FOI Act and
FOI Guides [7.37].
FOI Guidelines [7.65].
FOI Guidelines at [7.20]
– [7.23] (footnotes omitted).
RTF format (22.3 MB)
Signed PDF/A format