DRiV IP, LLC [2024] ADO 3 (3 October 2024)
DESIGNS ACT 2003
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF DESIGNS WITH REASONS
Re: Registered design numbers
201914249 and 201914251 (class 14-02) –
both being in respect of an
Electronic device including a display screen; Display screen
name of DRiV IP, LLC
Benjamin Goldsworthy
REPRESENTATION:
John Hogan of FB Rice Pty Ltd
Designs Act 2003
(Cth) – Examination of designs under
–practice of viewing a product ‘at rest’ –
interpretation of the meaning of ‘visual features of a product’
‘product’ – designs found to be not distinctive over the prior
art base – proposed amendments not allowable
or ineffective –
registrations of each design to be revoked
proceeding concerns two designs (‘Designs’) which have been
registered under the
Designs Act 2003
The Designs
were entered on the Register of Designs with the following
particulars:
Design number
: 201914251
: DRiV IP, LLC (‘Owner’)
: Electronic device including a display screen; Display
: 30 July 2019
Priority date
: 31 January 2019 (‘Relevant
Convention details
: Number: 29/678998; Country: United States of
America; Filing Date: 31 January 2019
Statement of newness and distinctiveness
: Newness and distinctiveness
of the design reside in features of pattern and/or ornamentation of a logo on
the product, those features
being shown in solid unbroken lines in the
accompanying representations, wherein the broken dash-dash lines of even length
portions of the product or environmental subject matter that form no
part of the design (‘SoND’)
Representations:
see Schedule 1.
Design number
: 201914249
: Electronic device including a display screen; Display
: 30 July 2019
Priority date
: Relevant Date
Convention details:
Number: 29/678995; Country: United States of
America; Filing Date: 31 January 2019
Statement of newness and distinctiveness
: this is the same as the
Representations:
see Schedule 2.
Examination background
3 April 2023, the Owner sought examination of the Designs under s 63(1). During
the examination, the Examiner raised the same citations
against each of the
Designs by written reports. I reproduce the citations at Schedule 3 to these
written reasons (‘Citations’).
When examining the Designs the
Examiner considered the products pictured in the representations of the Designs
to be ‘at rest’,
an example depiction of which I set out at Schedule
4 (‘Blank Representation’).
considering submissions from the Owner’s Attorney, the Examiner maintained
the Citations which meant that the Designs
are not new and distinctive. The
Owner requested to be heard in that event. On 4 July 2024, the Owner filed
written submissions prepared
by John Hogan of FB Rice Pty Ltd
(‘Owner’s Submissions’). I am to decide this matter as a
delegate of the Registrar
of Designs (‘Registrar’) and do so with
reference to the examination reports, written responses and all submissions made
by the Owner. This process does not amount to a review of the examination,
though I do refer to the examination history of the Designs
and research reports
in determining this matter.
summary, I am satisfied that all of the Citations, other than that dated 29
March 2019, were published in a document prior to the
Relevant Date.
note that other than making submissions on the issue of how the Designs should
be examined, the Owner offers no effective argument
that when compared with the
prior art base, if considered ‘at rest’, the Designs are new and
distinctive. I am satisfied
that the Designs, considered ‘at rest’,
are substantially similar in overall impression, thus not distinctive, when
with the prior art base, for example when compared with the prior art
dated 22 January 2019 which includes the following
Accordingly,
if the Blank Representation is the appropriate construction of the Designs at
examination, it follows that the Designs
are not distinctive and must be
core question to be answered in this matter is how the examination of the
Designs should be approached. That is, whether the Designs
should be examined
‘at rest’ such that the circular image and/or DRIV text appearing in
the representations of the Designs
is effectively ignored. Currently the
practice of the Registrar is to examine designs ‘at rest’, meaning
that for the
purposes of the comparison with prior art, a product will be taken
to be switched to an off state. An obvious implication of this
is that images
that may be displayed on a screen when switched on, are not visual features for
the purposes of any comparison with
The basis for this approach
was explained in
’) where a delegate
of the Registrar found that the visual matter shown as having been displayed on
the screen is not viewed
as a visual feature which is ‘
the product per se.
Relevant legislation and materials
the Act a person may file an application in respect of a
Relevantly, a design
application may be in respect of one design in relation to one product or one
design that is a common design
in relation to more than one
‘design’ is defined in s 5 as being the overall appearance of the
product resulting from one or more visual
features of the product.
set out relevant sections of the Act below:
5 Definitions
In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears:
artistic work
has the same meaning as in
corresponding design
, in relation to an artistic work, has the
same meaning as in Division 8 of Part III of the
, in relation to a product, means the overall appearance
of the product resulting from one or more visual features of the product.
Note: See also
has the meaning given by
visual feature
has the meaning given by
6 Definition of
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a thing that is manufactured or hand made
is a product (but see subsections (2), (3) and (4))
(2) A component part of a complex product may be a product for the purposes
of this Act, if it is made separately from the product.
(3) A thing that has one or more indefinite dimensions is only a
product for the purposes of this Act if any one or more of the following
to the thing:
(a) a cross‑section taken across any indefinite dimension is fixed
or varies according to a regular pattern;
(b) all the dimensions remain in proportion;
(c) the cross‑sectional shape remains the same throughout, whether
or not the dimensions of that shape vary according to a ratio
or series of
(d) it has a pattern or ornamentation that repeats itself.
(4) A kit which, when assembled, is a particular product is taken to be that
7 Definition of
visual feature
(1) In this Act:
visual feature
, in relation to a product, includes the shape,
configuration, pattern and ornamentation of the product.
(2) A visual feature may, but need not, serve a functional purpose.
(3) The following are not visual features of a product:
(a) the feel of the product;
(b) the materials used in the product;
(c) in the case of a product that has one or more indefinite dimensions:
(i) the indefinite dimension; and
(ii) if the product also has a pattern that repeats itself—more than
one repeat of the pattern.
8 References in this Act to a design
In this Act, a reference to a design is a reference to a design in relation
to a product.
I need not set out the contents in full, I note that throughout these written
reasons I also refer to the 74th report of the
Australian Law Reform Commission
which was tabled in the Australian Parliament (‘ALRC
The ALRC Report
contains recommendations to modernise and simplify Australian designs before
enactment of the Act. These recommendations
were aimed at improving the rights
of those who design the innovative visual features of manufactured products. The
Government response
to those recommendations resulted in the Act.
Relevantly,
of the ALRC Report states:
In the Commission's view a screen display
is a use of a product - the monitor or other computer hardware - it is not
itself a product.
Nor is it the visual appearance of any product. The visual
appearance of the monitor or other computer hardware is the product at
in use. The fact that the screen display is generated by a computer program does
not make it the visual appearance of that
program any more than a printed page
is the visual appearance of the printer
. It follows that a screen display
does not qualify for protection as a design either as the design of a computer
program or on any
other ground
. In the Commission's view this is appropriate
and no special provision needs to be made for screen displays either confirming
qualifying this.
Recommendation
20 in the ALRC Report recommended that, ‘[s]creen displays should not be
able to be protected as designs. It
is not necessary to include any special
provision in the new designs legislation to confirm this’. The Australian
responded to this recommendation with an unqualified
acceptance.
Background to approach of the examination ‘at
Owner states that the reasoning in
relies on the reasoning in
Comshare Incorporated
and submits that the reasoning in
is based on a flawed
interpretation of the Act. It also submits that I should be cautious of any
reliance on the ALRC Report in relation
to the interpretation of the words of
the Act. The Owner refers me to a number of decisions, which I now
the delegate interpreted
defines ‘visual feature’, as including only ‘the shape,
configuration, pattern and ornamentation
The delegate was
not convinced that an image that appears on a display screen would normally be
considered a quality or attribute
a display screen as such. The
delegate considered the ordinary meaning of the word ‘of’ in its
particular statutory context
as requiring the visual features being
‘qualities and attributes’ of the product. The matter the subject of
was found to be not ‘of’ the product. This was not merely
because those features are transient or non-durable features.
It was because of
the statutory construction of the effects of the words and their definition,
including the effect of the word ‘of’.
To the extent that the matter
was viewed as requiring confirmation, or that the words of the Act were
ambiguous, the delegate supported
their position by the findings and
recommendations in the ALRC Report.
which was referred to by the delegate in
designs for an article entitled ‘computer screen’. Monopoly was
claimed in the pattern or ornamentation of a
computer screen as shown in the
representations. The representations showed screens with graphic and textual
information. At that
Designs Act 1906
(Cth) (‘1906
Act’) defined ‘design’ as being ‘features of shape,
configuration, pattern or ornamentation
applicable to
article...’. The delegate found that the designs were not
‘applicable to’ an article within the meaning of the
1906 Act. The
delegate also rejected the argument that graphic and textual matter appearing on
a computer screen was a design within
the meaning of s 4(1) of the 1906 Act on
the basis that the transitory nature of the display did not give one individual
and specific
appearance for the article. Further, the delegate found that
designs which were not ‘durable or permanent’ did not amount
designs under the 1906 Act.
delegate in
relied, in part, on
Firmagroup Australia Pty Ltd
v Byrne & Davidson Doors (Vic) Pty Ltd
where the High Court of Australia found that the meaning of ‘design’
expressly excludes ‘a method or principle
of construction’ and this
is ‘implied in the true conception of a design in the earlier statute
The High Court found
that for there to be a ‘design’ under the 1906 Act, what was
required was ‘one particular
individual and specific appearance’.
The High Court supported the position that a feature which does no more than
a general characteristic of shape is a method or principle of
construction and is therefore outside the protection of the 1906
To this end the High Court
also endorsed the statement that, ‘...[i]f it is possible to get several
different appearances,
which all embody the general features which he claims,
then those features are too general, and amount to a method or principle of
construction’.
reason to doubt the approach and the result in
to the extent it
. Regardless, whilst
it does not necessarily turn on the same reasoning.
is based on the statutory interpretation of the words of the Act.
Regardless,
the Owner also submits that the decision in
Altoweb Inc
should be followed instead of
in considering
whether the Designs should be examined ‘at rest’.
concerned an application under the 1906 Act for a design for ‘a computer
display screen’. The Deputy Registrar in
found that,
‘there is no issue to be taken with the application, nor should the
application be refused, based solely on any
contention that the pattern is
transient, ie present at some times and not others, provided the other
requirements of [the 1906 Act]
satisfied’.
However, the
Deputy Registrar also
found that the application could not proceed to
registration for lack of suitable subject matter (ie, non-compliance with the
of ‘design’). That is because they considered a
‘computer display screen’ to not be an ‘article’
required by the 1906 Act.
Specifically,
the Deputy Registrar in
noted that:
... the pattern
of the design is displayed on the computer screen by software that is totally
independent of the computer screen as
manufactured and as sold. The display of a
pattern on a computer screen via software that is independent of the screen,
i.e. is not
inherently built into the screen, does not meet the requirement that
the features of the design are in the finished
Owner submits that where a pattern is displayed on a computer screen by software
that is inherently built into the screen, this
would meet the requirement that
the visual features are of the product.
Deputy Registrar in
referred to
Apple Computer Inc v Design
concerned a design application made to the United Kingdom Designs Registry
(‘UK’) for the type of icon which is
said to be built into a
computer and not the type which appear temporarily when a computer program was
loaded. The icons were switched
on and produced by the operating system of a
computer. Initially, the UK refused to register the design on the basis that,
reliance on computer software to “apply” the design
selectively to a computer screen did not equate to the design being
an industrial process or means’. Furthermore, the UK concluded that user
interfaces as such were not ‘articles’
within the meaning of the
Registered Designs Act 1949
(UK) (‘RDA’). The applicant
appealed to the Registered Designs Tribunal and the Designs Registry did not
appeal absent the assistance of a contradictor, Jacob J found that the RDA
required that features claimed be features in the finished
article. Based on s
1(3) of the RDA, the key questions were: (1) was there an ‘article’;
and (2) was there a feature
or pattern or ornament ‘applied to an article
by any industrial process’. Justice Jacob found that a ‘computer
with an operating system that displays the icons concerned’ was an
‘article’ for the purposes of RDA and that there
was feature of
pattern so applied by an industrial process and the appeal was allowed. I note
Apple Computer Inc v Design Registry
KK Suwa Seikosha's Design Application
where the court held that icons, consisting of a design to be applied to a
display panel for an electric watch were registrable under
appears to be concerned with a scenario involving twisted nematic liquid
crystal display screens, such as those found in early digital
wristwatches.
the decisions to which the Owner refers me, other than
, concerned
the language of the 1906 Act and the RDA which is different to that found in the
Act. After considering the cases to which
the Owner refers me, I am satisfied
that the ALRC Report is an extrinsic material which should be given careful
consideration in
the interpretation of the Act when appropriate, as per the
considerations set out in the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(‘AIA’), which I discuss further below.
Meaning of ‘product’
important part of the Owner’s Submissions is that the word
‘product’ in the Act includes non-physical matter,
such as an icon
or a graphical user interface (‘GUI’) per se. It develops this
argument by then submitting that for example,
if a GUI or an icon as such, are
each an eligible ‘product’ under the Act, then it would be improper
for a registered
design that specifies the product as being, for example, a
‘graphical user interface’ to have the visual features of
disregarded, because the GUI’s appearance is unaffected by whether the
product is ‘at rest’.
submissions partly require me to assess whether, for example, a GUI, would be
registrable under the Act in its own right. The
delegate in
dealt with such a submission about the meaning of the word
‘product’, noting that s 7 states that a ‘design’
the purposes of the Act is a design in relation to ‘
screen display matter, if a visual feature(s), would be a visual feature(s) in
relation to any number of different
This result appears to
be consistent with the decision in
Corporation
delegate found that the word ‘product’ in the Act requires a thing
bearing visual features and that a type font
would not qualify as
...I do not think that the present design shows a product
bearing visual features. Rather, the representations show a collection of
features intended to be applied to unspecified products in unspecified
arrangements.
In my view, the present design does not disclose a product bearing visual
features. It only discloses visual
features...
Owner submits that there is a more general meaning to the word
‘product’, as appearing in the Act, than just a thing
manufactured or hand made. The Owner submits that s 6 should be read as a
deeming provision. That is, s 6 should not be
read as an exhaustive definition
and its effect is that it simply clarifies that a thing which is manufactured or
hand made is
in the meaning of the word ‘product’.
The Owner refers me to the dictionary definition of a ‘product’ as
Macquarie Dictionary
being, ‘a thing produced by
any action or operation, or by labour; an effect or
The Owner asserts
that this is the meaning which should be attributed to the word
‘product’ in the Act.
starting point for determining the legal meaning of words in an enactment should
be the words of the enactment and their ordinary
There must be a reason
to depart from the literal or grammatical meaning of a provision and I should
strive to give meaning to every
Leisure Industries Pty Ltd v Pacific Gaming Pty Ltd
, Tamberlin J observed
that it, ‘is appropriate to adopt a “liberal interpretation”
to intellectual property legislation,
including the [
(Cth)], and to avoid a narrow, literal approach specific to a particular
technology or unduly limited to the state of the art as at
the date when the
relevant provisions were
However, his
Honour added that it is, ‘also important to ensure that the result
contended for reasonably arises from the language
selected by
parliament.’
interpreting a provision of an enactment, the interpretation that would best
achieve the purpose or object of the enactment (whether
or not that purpose or
object is expressly stated in the enactment) is to be preferred to each other
interpretation.
is titled ‘Definitions’ and provides in part, ‘[i]n this
unless the contrary intention appears
... product has the meaning
given by section 6’.
presence of the phrase ‘...unless the contrary intention appears...’
purports to prescribe in plain words of necessary
intendment where a person
reading the Act will (absent a contrary intention) find the meaning of the word
Had the legislature intended there to be such an open
definition of product, as asserted by the Owner, it would have used open wording
such as ‘includes’ in s 6. By contrast, see the inclusive definition
of ‘visual feature’ in s 7. Further,
a thing which is manufactured
or hand made would come within the description of the word
‘product’, on the ordinary meaning
of the word, without the need for
any deeming provision to make that so. As such, I proceed on the basis that the
words of s 6 are
what provides the reader of the Act the meaning of the word
‘product’ wherever it sits in the Act, unless a contrary
can be found in any specific instance.
the definition of product in s 6, is the word ‘manufacture’ and the
phrase ‘hand made’. One dictionary
definition of the word
‘manufacture’ in the
Macquarie Dictionary
is that it refers
to the verb involving, ‘the making of goods or wares by manual labour or
by machinery, esp. on a large
‘hand made’ is defined therein as ‘made by hand, not
The High Court
of Australia in
National Research Development Corporation v Commissioner of
commented that the word ‘manufacture’ as ‘a word
of everyday speech generally’ conveys the idea of making
In everyday speech
generally, a person would not say that they ‘manufacture’ software,
GUIs, icons or graphical symbols
as such. Nor would one naturally prefer to say
that these are made by hand. These things are perhaps more likely to be referred
as having been ‘created’, ‘authored’ or
‘designed’, which are tellingly not the kind of words
chosen by the
legislature. The word ‘manufactured’ is in the past participle form.
The ordinary meaning of the words
‘manufactured or hand made’ in the
context of s 6 appear to be confined to the making of a physical thing,
a working of a material into a physical form for use.
meaning of a provision in an enactment must be determined by reference to the
language of the instrument viewed as a
This will include the
subsections in s 6 and all other sections of the
All subject matter referred
to in ss 6(2) to (5) appear to refer to physical things. For example, s 6(2)
refers to a ‘component
part’ of a ‘complex product’
which is made separately. Subsection 6(3) states that things which have
dimensions may be products, subject to certain conditions. Where the
dimensions of a thing are indefinite, but do not meet those
conditions, it may
otherwise not be a product for the purposes of the Act. Section 6(4) refers to
‘kits’ which require
assembly. On the interpretation that the Owner
asserts, how non-physical things, for example for an icon, would interact with
subsections is not clear. All these subsections relate to subject matter
which involves, for example, the assembly of physical things.
They reinforce
that for the purpose of the Act a product refers to a physical thing.
provisions of the Act outside of s 6 also appear to confirm that the word
‘product’ for the purposes of the Act refers
to physical things, or
at least that visual features in the absence of a physical thing would not be
included in the meaning of that
I turn to some specific
examples and note that almost all the actions listed in ss 10 and 71 as the
exclusive rights and infringing
actions relate to a form of exploitation
performed on apparent physical
An important right is
the right to ‘make or offer to make a product, in relation to which the
design is registered, which embodies
It is unclear how
matter appearing on a display screen such as a graphic image or an icon, as
such, can ‘embody’ visual
features of shape and configuration in a
product for the purposes of the
Furthermore, in ordinary
language, and in this legislative context, one would not say that they
‘make’ or ‘import’
something when dealing with a GUI or
icon. These things are not ‘made’ other than perhaps at the point
they are first
created. More accurately put, a GUI, or icon, is first
‘made’ or ‘authored’, after which it might only be
‘copied’ or ‘reproduced’. Section 72 refers to
‘repairs’, ‘decayed or damaged’ component
replacement of ‘incidental items’—qualities and functions
generally not associated with the digital image.
The definition of
‘complex product’ in s 5 states that these words mean, ‘at
least 2 replaceable component parts
permitting disassembly and re‑assembly
of the product’. These words appear to refer to things which permit
physical connection.
the language of the Act is cast so as to apparently concern physical things to
the exclusion of non-physical things.
also agree with the reasons of the delegate in
where they state
that a registered design is for ‘
product’ and a screen
display would involve an appearance of potentially multiple products. This is
because a screen display
per se as such is not physical and can be incorporated
into any number of products. Accordingly, since I have found that the definition
in s 6 is exhaustive, then (absent any contrary intention – none of which
have been drawn to my attention, nor are any apparent
to me) the likely ordinary
meaning of the word ‘product’ again does not refer to non-physical
the extent that it might have been necessary to consider them, extrinsic
materials to the Act also confirm the meaning of the word
as referring to physical things, or at least that a GUI or an icon would not be
included in that word.
Furthermore, to the extent that there is ambiguity about the definition of
‘product’, as contended by the Owner, it may
also be appropriate to
have recourse to extrinsic
These extrinsic
materials include the Explanatory Memorandum to the Designs Bill 2003
(‘EM’) and ALRC Report which support
such an interpretation.
EM states that the definition of the word ‘product’ is,
‘...intended to emphasise the industrial nature of design
protection, and
to exclude naturally occurring things from design
protection’.
statement indicates that the definitional role of s 6 involves a level of
exhaustion to the meaning and the exclusion of some
subject matter. The
regulation impact statement, as part of the EM, in discussing the rationale for
the legislation notes that, ‘the
Registrar accepts an extremely diverse
range of products including light fittings, bicycles, extrusions, farm
machinery, textiles,
toys, fashion garments and statues from applicants involved
in a variety of industrial
All these are
examples of things bearing visual features.
ALRC Report also notes that the definition of ‘product’ is intended
to exclude naturally occurring things from protection
and emphasise the
industrial nature of design
protection.
The ALRC Report adds
that a water jet of a fountain would be excluded from the then draft definition
of product.
This also suggests
that things of a temporary or transient nature would be excluded from
protection. The ALRC Report thus further
supports an interpretation which does
not include screen display items, such as GUIs or icons, within the word
and refers to the reasons in
I view the ALRC
Report as indicating that the apparent status quo was to be preserved in the
repeal of the 1906 Act and enactment
of the Act and that no substantial or
specific changes would be required to achieve this. The ALRC Report also
indicates that the
intention of s 6 is to control the subject matter over which
an application for registration of a design may be made. Overall, I
the summary of this background that the delegate provides in
Technologies
where they noted that, ‘[t]he new design definition
[occurring in s 6] was aimed at excluding “naturally occurring things
design protection” but did not substantially widen the scope of things
that could attract design
protection.’
underlying purpose of the Act is to foster innovation and reward the same, by
offering a temporary monopoly to people that come
up with new and distinctive
visual features of products. However, the Act seeks to achieve this subject to
the contouring of the
word ‘product’ which refines the subject
matter qualifying for
protection.
This is confirmed by
the text of the Act, the EM and ALRC Report.
note that the Owner briefly refers me to the laws of overseas jurisdictions and
submits that an interpretation of the term ‘product’
as inclusive of
things such as GUIs and icons would be consistent with the United Kingdom and
European Union (‘EU’) legislation.
These jurisdictions employ the
word ‘product’ in their legislation for the protection of registered
designs. The definition
of ‘product’, in both jurisdictions,
importantly provides an indicative list in the definition of
clarifying that certain subject matter is included. The
law in the EU for example, provides that, ‘“product” means
industrial or handicraft item,
inter alia parts intended to be
assembled into a complex product, packaging, get-up, graphic symbols and
typographic typefaces, but
excluding computer
Kingdom provision similarly provides that, ‘“product” means
any industrial or handicraft item other
than a computer program;
particular, includes
packaging, get-up, graphic symbols, typographic
The approach in
these jurisdictions, to the extent that it is relevant, underscore the very
necessity of words additional to the
words ‘product’, and
‘manufactured or hand made’, to take the legal meaning of the words
beyond the ordinary
meaning referring to physical things that I have already
discussed above.
these reasons, my reading of the word ‘product’ in the Act is that
it does not refer to non-physical things, such
as icons or GUIs, in the way
asserted by the Owner. Accordingly, this argument does not assist the Owner
where it asserts that the
Designs should not be examined ‘at
Conclusions on the issue of ‘at rest’
examination
Owner’s Submissions do not take the question of whether the Designs should
be examined ‘at rest’ much further
than the submissions which were
. One difference between this matter and that in
is the presence of the additional linework indicating an overall device
expanded beyond a rectangular shape. Even so, the delegate
considered a display screen to qualify as a product. On an ordinary reading of
the Act the icons as depicted in the representations
to the Designs would not be
visual features ‘of’ the product(s) specified. For completeness I
also note that it is uncontroversial
that there are tangible products specified
in each of the Designs. I am satisfied that the Designs should be examined
When so examined the Designs are not distinctive when
compared to, at least, the prior art dated 22 January 2019.
also note that at examination it would not be a reasonable and ordinary
interpretation of the Designs to construe the highlighted
features as being
non-transitory (for example laminated or physically printed onto the display
screen) and thus proceed with the
examination on the basis that the visual
feature of the product are permanently visible. The representations of the
Designs appear
to show a non-permanent icon displayed on a device, which when
powered in an ‘off’ state would cease to be visible. Such
interpretation would also not accord with what appears to be present in the
basic applications of the Designs filed in the United
States of America. For
completeness I also note that the SoND together with the product name and
representations of the Designs do
not assist in reaching any other
interpretation.
Proposed amendments
66 provides that:
66 Amendment of registration
(1) This section applies if the Registrar is satisfied, in the course
of examining a registered design, that a ground for revocation
registration of the design has been made out.
(2) The Registrar must notify the registered owner of the design
to that effect.
(3) The registered owner of the design may request that the
Registrar amend the Register in such a way that the ground for revocation
(4) A request under subsection (3) must be made in the manner
prescribed by the regulations.
(5) The Registrar must consider and deal with the request in the
manner prescribed by the regulations.
(6) An amendment must not be such as to:
(a) increase the scope of the design registration; or
(b) alter the scope of the registration by the inclusion of matter
that was not in substance disclosed in the original design application,
representations or other documents.
Owner requests an amendment to the product name of each of the Designs
Electronic device including a display screen on which a logo is
visible at least when the device is used as intended; Display screen
logo is visible at least when the screen is used as intended
the alternative the Owner also requests an amendment to the product name of each
of Designs as follows:
Electronic device including a display screen
on which a logo is visible at least when the device is used as intended, the
device having
all things necessary for the logo to be visible on the screen;
Display screen on which a logo is visible at least when the screen
the screen having all things necessary for the logo to be visible on the
in the alternative the Owner also requests an amendment to the product name of
each of Designs as follows:
Electronic device including a display
screen on which a logo is non-transiently visible; Display screen on which a
logo is non-transiently
in the alternative the Owner also requests an amendment to the product name of
each of Designs as follows:
Electronic device including a display
screen on which a logo is non-transiently visible, this device having all things
necessary for
the logo to be visible on the screen; Display screen on which a
logo is non-transiently visible, the screen having all things necessary
logo to be visible on the screen
proposed amendments all have at least one problem. Some proposed amendments do
not overcome the issues as required by s 66 because
they do not overcome the
difficulties the Designs face because of the practice of examination of designs
‘at rest’. Furthermore,
some of the proposed amendments would alter
the scope of the Design by the inclusion of matter that was not in substance
in the original design applications, representations or other
suggested language of ‘non-transient’ is somewhat obtuse–
non-transient is not the same thing as permanent –
as such the issues
identified above likely would apply to such phrasing. This would anyways alter
the scope by inclusion of matter
not impliedly or expressly present in the
original application. Even if the features are permanently visible, the proposal
the product name would shift the fundamental nature of the product away
from what on an objective reading of each of the applications
as a whole, as
showing a screen with a transient icon to one which would include a permanently
displayed icon.
what now appears as a feature temporarily displayed upon the screen of a
handheld device, with a fixed image stuck to or
embedded in some permanent way
on that same screen would also likely make certain actions not originally an
infringement, amount
to infringing conduct and thus increase the scope of the
design registrations.
the amendment(s) could lead to a person infringing the rights of the Owner of
the Designs, whereas the registrations as
they appear now would not have had
this effect.​​​ If not indicating permanent visibility then
the proposed amendments
to the product name do not overcome the issues the
Designs face with an ‘at rest’ examination.
Accordingly,
I refuse all amendment requests present in the Owner’s
Submissions.
am satisfied that examination of the Design ‘at rest’ is the correct
approach in this matter. Since the Designs are
substantially similar in overall
impression to at least one of the Citations, the Designs were not distinctive at
the Relevant Date,
and must be revoked.
an appeal within the appeals period, the Designs will be revoked. If the
Registrar is served with a notice of appeal from this
decision before the time
of revocation, I direct that revocation shall not occur until the appeal has
been withdrawn or discontinued.
Otherwise, the disposition of the examination
should be in accordance with the Court’s order or
Benjamin Goldsworthy
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and Hearings
Trade Marks and Designs
Date of publication
Unless I otherwise specify,
throughout these written reasons a reference to a section of an enactment is a
reference to a section
Designs Act 2003
The Owner provides documents
which I accept as evidence of the filing in the convention country of the United
States of America of
an application to register a design patent less than 6
months before filing an application to register the Designs in Australia.
Accordingly, by
and reg 3.06(2) of the
Designs Regulations 2004
(Cth) the priority date of the Designs is deemed to be the day when the
basic application was made.
Designs Examiners’
Manual of Practice and Procedure
[2017] ADO 6 (Hearing
Richards) (‘
Section 21.
Section 22.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 74 (1995) (‘ALRC
Paragraph 4.32 (emphasis
[1991] ADO 2 (Delegate
Original emphasis.
Firmagroup Australia Pty
Ltd v Byrne & Davidson Doors (Vic) Pty Ltd
[1987] HCA 37
, [5] (Wilson,
Brennan, Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ) (‘
Malleys Ltd v J W Tomlin
[1961] HCA 77 (Taylor
, Menzies and Owen JJ)
[5]. See also,
[2002] ADO 2 (Deputy
Registrar Portelli) (‘
[2002] FSR 38 (Jacob
(Designs Review Tribunal). This was also applied recently in
(Singapore) Pte Ltd v The Controller of Patents and Designs
AID/2/2019 (Ravi Krishan Kapur J) in relation to the
Designs Act 2000
166 (Falconer
[2008] ADO 2 (Hearing
Officer Herald).
Macquarie Dictionary
(9e, 2023) ‘product’.
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
, [69]-[71] (McHugh, Gummow,
Kirby and Hayne JJ) (‘
Project Blue Sky
Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
(Hayne, Heydon, Crennan and Kiefel JJ).
Project Blue Sky
[71] and [78].
[2000] FCA 1273
Aristocrat Leisure
’) referring to
Sega Enterprises Ltd v
Galaxy Electronics Pty Ltd
[1996] FCA 761 (Burchett
Aristocrat Leisure
ibid. See also,
Computer Edge Proprietary Limited v Apple Computer
[1986] HCA 19
(1986) 161 CLR 171
, 187-188 (Gibbs CJ) and
Australasian Performing
Rights Association Ltd v Telstra Corp Ltd
[1995] FCA 1476
(1995) 131 ALR 141
, 155 (Sheppard
J, dissenting).
AIA s 15AA.
My emphasis added.
Macquarie Dictionary
(Online, accessed 3 October 2024) ‘manufacture’.
Macquarie Dictionary
(Online, accessed 3 October 2024) ‘handmade’.
[1959] HCA 67 (Dixon
Kitto and Windeyer JJ) (emphasis added). The High Court there was considering
the effect of the words ‘manner of new manufacture’
for the purposes
Patents Act 1952
(Cth), which I contrast with the words
‘manufactured or hand made’ as contained in the Act.
Project Blue Sky
25) [69] (McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ);
Metropolitan Gas Co v
Federated Gas Employees’ Industrial Union
[1925] HCA 5
455 (Rich and Isaacs JJ).
AIA s 15AB(1).
Ariosa Diagnostics Inc v
Sequenom Inc
[2021] FCAFC 101
, [260] (Middleton, Nicholas and Burley JJ)
where the Court, concerning words in the
Patents Act 1990
commented that, ‘[t]his language, and particularly notions of making,
hiring, disposing of and keeping, most naturally
connote acts done with
tangible things
’ (emphasis added).
Section 10(1)(a).
Seafolly Pty Limited
v Fewstone Pty Ltd
[2014] FCA 321 (Dodds-Streeton
Polo/Lauren Co LP v Ziliani Holdings Pty
[2008] FCAFC 195 (Black
CJ, Jacobson and Perram JJ)
Aristocrat Technologies
Australia Pty Limited
[2021] ADO 1
, [28] (Hearing Officer Barbey)
Aristocrat Technologies
AIA s 15AB(2)(a).
AIA ss 15AB(1) and
15AB(2)(b) and (2)(e).
Recommendation 10.
ALRC Report, [4.9].
ALRC Report, [4.30]-[4.32]
and Recommendation 20.
Aristocrat Technologies
[18] (citations omitted).
The interpretation of the
word ‘product’ supplied by the Owner also may have interesting
questions for the objects and
purposes of the copyright/design overlap
provisions, including ss 18 of the Act and s 74, 75 and 77 in Part III, Division
State of Escape Accessories Pty Limited v Schwartz
[2022] FCAFC 63
(Greenwood, Nicholas and Anderson JJ) the Court stated that, ‘[t]he policy
behind the overlap provisions is to ensure
that works which are functional and
intended for mass production in three dimensional form
should not be
afforded protection under [the
]’ (emphasis added). In
(n 39) [54] the Full Federal Court referred to the policy of the
legislation stating that, ‘it is plain, we think, that the
definition of
“corresponding design” is intended to cover a situation where an
artistic work is
embodied in three dimensions
’. See also,
(n 39) [451]. In applying
, should one differentiate between
a product in three-dimensional form and a one which is in a two-dimensional form
which depicts
objects with shape and configuration on a display screen? Would,
for example, a wholly digital propagation of more than 50 purported
non-physical
digital products appearing only on a screen imperil a corresponding design
registration in relation to a physical product,
where no physical thing has been
made to the design? Would a mass supply of, for example, a non-physical digital
product amount to
industrial application such that it imperils copyright
infringement actions because of
? Would matter
appearing on a screen such as a graphic image or an icon, as such,
‘embody’ visual features of shape and
configuration in a product for
the purposes of the Act? Whilst these may present further problems for the
Owner’s preferred
interpretation of the word ‘product’, it has
not been necessary for me to explore and answer these questions.
Article 3(b) Council
Regulation (EC) No 6/2002 (emphasis added).
Registered Designs Act 1949
(UK) (emphasis added).
Douglas v Tickner
[1994] FCA 252
, [43]-[44] (Carr J);
Transport Accident Commission v Hogan
[2013] VSCA 355
, [47] (Macaulay AJA and Redlich, Priest JJA).
Corporation
, [16] (n 21). See also,
Ethyl Corporation's Patent
RPC 169 (Lloyd-Jacob
The Distillers Co
Ltd’s Application
(1953) 70 RPC 221
, 223 (Lloyd-Jacob J).
RTF format (32.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format