'AYN' and Fortrend Securities Pty Ltd (Privacy) [2025] AICmr 167 (15 September 2025)
‘AYN’ and Fortrend Securities Pty Ltd
[2025] AICmr 167
(15 September 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of
Justin Lodge, Acting
General Manager, Privacy Case Management
Delegate of the Australian
Information Commissioner
Complainant
Fortrend Securities Pty Ltd
Decision date
Case reference number
(Cth) — Australian Privacy
Principles — Employee records exemption — Whether act or
practice is directly related
to employment relationship — APP 6
— Disclosure of personal information — Compensation for
non-economic loss awarded
— Aggravated damages awarded — Apology
— Specified steps to address interference
Determination
find that Fortrend Securities Pty Ltd (
) interfered with the
complainant’s privacy within the meaning of
) by disclosing the complainant’s
sensitive health information to a third party in breach of Australian Privacy
Principle (
Declarations
find the complaint substantiated and make a determination under
, declaring that:
a. the respondent has engaged in
conduct constituting an interference with the complainant’s privacy by
disclosing the complainant’s
Medical Certificate to a third party for an
unrelated secondary purpose, in circumstances where the complainant did not
consent and
the exceptions in APP 6.2 do not apply.
b. the respondent must:
of the determination, issue a written apology to the complainant which
acknowledges that it has interfered with their privacy in
its handling of their
personal information; and
(ii) within
of the determination, must pay the complainant $10,000 for
non-economic loss caused by the interference with the complainant’s
(iii) within
of the determination, engage an independent reviewer with
policies, procedures and processes, including privacy training
(iv) within
of the determination, require the independent reviewer to
produce a report outlining their findings and any recommended actions
of receiving the independent reviewer’s report, provide a copy
of the report to the Commissioner
(vi) within
of receiving the independent reviewer’s report, report to
the Commissioner on what it has done to implement those findings
recommendations.
Findings and Reasons
decision finds the complainant’s former employer breached APP 6 by
disclosing a medical certificate about the complainant
complainant’s client. Significantly, in addition to finding the respondent
must pay the complainant $10,000 for non-economic
loss caused by the
interference with the complainant’s privacy, and take other steps to
address the interference, it finds
the respondent must pay $3,500 for aggravated
damages. In making this finding, the decision notes that the respondent
purposely acted
in a manner that was likely to harm the complainant and
displayed indifference towards its privacy obligations in respect of an
sensitive health information. It finds that the
respondent’s conduct was malicious, improper and unjustifiable in the
circumstances.
complainant was previously employed by the respondent and gave notice of their
resignation to the respondent on 18 November
complainant claims that while attending the respondent’s workplace during
his 30-day notice period, they experienced hostile
and aggressive behaviour from
the respondent’s Managing Director due to their decision to resign. As a
result, the complainant
felt anxious and emotionally distressed, so they sought
medical advice from a psychiatrist and obtained medical certificates which
stated they were unfit for work. The complainant provided copies of the medical
certificates to the
respondent.
complainant claims that after they left their job, the Managing Director told
the complainant’s clients that the complainant
was suffering from a
nervous breakdown and was unfit to continue managing client
portfolios.
When one client of the
complainant (
) took issue with the claims, the Managing
Director told the Client they had a medical certificate to prove
complainant alleges that the respondent posted their medical certificate dated 9
December 2022 (
the Medical Certificate
) to the Client to discredit the
complainant and cause them reputational
respondent maintains that it has not breached any ‘privacy rules or
regulations’ and denies the complainant’s
allegations.
The investigation
complainant made their complaint to the Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner (OAIC) on 27 April 2023.
30 January 2025, a delegate of the Australian Information Commissioner
Commissioner
) opened an investigation under
into the respondent’s acts and practices which are the subject of the
preliminary view was sent to the parties for comment on 30 June 2025. The
complainant and respondent both provided submissions in
Application of relevant law
APPs in Schedule 1 of the
regulate the handling of personal
information by Australian government agencies and certain private sector
organisations (
APP entities
APP entity is prohibited from doing an act or engaging in a practice that
breaches an APP.
An act or practice
of an APP entity is an interference with the privacy of an individual if
the act or practice breaches an
am satisfied that the respondent is an APP entity because it has had an annual
turnover greater than $3 million in a financial year
since 21 December 2001 and
is therefore not a small business
The respondent is also
not a registered political party, an agency, a State or Territory authority or a
prescribed instrumentality
of a State or
that the respondent denies receiving or disclosing the Medical Certificate, the
issues to be decided in this decision are whether
the respondent collected, held
and disclosed the Medical Certificate to the Client, and if so, whether the
disclosure breached APP
6. I have also considered the application of the
‘employee records exemption’ in
making this determination, I have considered:
Australian Privacy Principles Guidelines
Guide to privacy regulatory
the information
and submissions provided by the
party has applied for a hearing under
For the purposes of
, I am satisfied that:
acts and practices to which the investigation relates can be adequately
determined in the absence of a hearing with the complainant
and respondent;
are no unusual circumstances that would warrant holding a hearing before making
this determination.
Whether the respondent collected and held the Medical
Certificate and disclosed it to the Client
summary, the complainant alleges:
The complainant
was previously employed by the respondent and gave notice of their resignation
to the respondent on 18 November
After giving
notice of their resignation, the complainant continued to attend the
respondent’s office to work through the 30
day notice period. However,
their decision to leave enraged the Managing Director of the respondent, who
created a hostile and emotionally
distressing work environment for the
complainant.
This included the
Managing Director making threats in a phone call to the complainant saying they
would ‘go to
The complainant
felt anxious and emotionally distressed as a result of these interactions, so
they sought medical advice from a psychiatrist
on 23 November 2022 and obtained
a medical certificate which stated they were unfit for work for the period
between 23 November 2022
and 9 December 2022. The complainant subsequently
submitted the medical certificate to the
respondent.
complainant was on medical leave, the Managing Director continued to contact the
complainant in a way that the complainant
found to be stressful and
threatening.
As a result, the
complainant continued to feel distressed and anxious. On 9 December 2022 the
complainant attended a doctor’s
appointment and obtained the Medical
Certificate which stated they were unfit for work between 12 December 2022 and
16 December 2022.
The complainant subsequently emailed the Managing Director on
12 December 2022 attaching the Medical
Certificate.
complainant had left their job with the respondent, several of the
complainant’s clients advised the complainant that
the Managing Director
of the respondent had said that the complainant was suffering from a nervous
breakdown and was unfit to continue
managing client
portfolios.
The Client took
issue with the claims, at which point the Managing Director told the Client they
had a medical certificate to prove
On 13 January
2023, the Client sent an email to the complainant with an image of the
complainant’s Medical Certificate dated
9 December 2022 which they had
received by post.
The envelope
which contained the Medical Certificate did not identify the sender. However,
the complainant advised that only the respondent
could have sent the Medical
Certificate to the Client because they only provided the respondent with a
respondent maintains that it has not breached any ‘privacy rules or
regulations’ and denies the complainant’s
allegations. The Managing
Director of the respondent denies receiving or disclosing the Medical
Certificate.
The respondent
contends the complaint is based on speculation, hearsay, and contradictory
material, and no probative
links the respondent to
any disclosure.
complainant also referred the OAIC to evidence given in court proceedings which
the Managing Director of the respondent now denies.
The respondent submits that
the complainant is unable to rely on that evidence in this matter. In my view
there is sufficient other
evidence before me to determine this matter, and it is
unnecessary for me to consider that evidence or make a finding about the
respondent’s
submission on that issue.
Did the respondent collect and hold the Medical
Certificate?
Managing Director of the respondent denied the respondent received the Medical
Certificate. However, the complainant provided
the OAIC with a copy of an email
dated 12 December 2022 sent from them to the Managing Director and another staff
member at the respondent’s
business email address attaching the Medical
Certificate.
circumstances, I accept that the respondent collected the Medical Certificate.
Did the respondent disclose the Medical Certificate to the
I acknowledge the respondent denies disclosing the Medical Certificate to the
Client, they have provided unreliable information
and few particulars about the
events surrounding the alleged
disclosure.
contrast the complainant has provided a detailed account of what occurred,
supported by contemporaneous file notes and emails.
I do not accept the
respondent’s submission that the complainant’s file notes and emails
are unreliable or inconsistent.
on their statutory declaration and supporting evidence, I accept the
complainant’s version of events as described above
at paragraph [
]. Most relevantly, based on the
complainant’s contemporaneous file notes, emails and statutory
declaration, I accept:
On 4 January
2023, the Client told the complainant that the Managing Director had called the
Client and said that the complainant
had a ‘complete nervous
breakdown’. The Client also told the complainant that the Managing
Director said they had a
medical certificate verifying the nervous
On 12 January
2023, an associate of the complainant emailed them and advised that the Managing
Director said that the complainant
‘had a nervous breakdown’ and
they ‘have a Dr certificate to prove
On 13 January
2023, the Client sent an email to the complainant including a screenshot of a
document they received by post. The document
was the Medical Certificate dated 9
December 2022, noting that the complainant was unfit for work duties on 12
December 2022 until
The Medical
Certificate included the words ‘PERSONAL AND IN CONFIDENCE NOT TO BE
RELAYED TO ANY THIRD PARTY WITHOUT REFERENCE
TO THE AUTHOR’ at the top of
respondent could have sent the Medical Certificate to the Client because the
complainant only provided a copy to the
respondent.
the document did not identify the sender, having regard to the evidence and the
circumstances, including that the complainant
only provided a copy to the
respondent, I find that, on balance, the respondent disclosed the
complainant’s Medical Certificate
to the Client.
Employee records exemption
the respondent has raised the application of the ‘employee records
considered whether this exemption applies.
private sector employer’s handling of employee records in relation to
current and former employment relationships is exempt
from the APPs in certain
circumstances.
Section 7B(3)
relevantly provides that an act done, or
practice engaged in, by an organisation that is or was an employer of an
individual, is
exempt if the act or practice is directly related
current or former employment relationship between the employer and the
individual; and
b. an employee
record held by the organisation and relating to the
individual.
An employee record is defined in the
as a ‘record of personal
information relating to the employment of the employee’ and includes
health information about
is apparent that the complainant was an employee of the respondent at the time
they provided the Medical Certificate to the Managing
Director. It is also
apparent that this was for the purposes of their employment. The Medical
Certificate was therefore an employee
record held by the respondent.
issue then is whether the respondent’s alleged disclosure of the
complainant’s medical record was directly related
to the employment
relationship between the complainant and the respondent.
have considered previous determinations which address this
Noting that the
complainant was no longer employed by the respondent at the time of the
disclosure, and there does not appear to
have been any employment related
purpose for disclosing the Medical Certificate to the Client, I do not consider
the disclosure was
related to the respondent’s employment relationship
with the complainant.
circumstances where the first limb of
is not satisfied, I find that
the employee records exemption is not applicable. Consequently, the disclosure
falls within the ambit
, and I will now consider whether the
disclosure breached APP 6.
APP 6 – Use or disclosure of personal information
found that the respondent collected and disclosed the complainant’s
sensitive health information, and that the employee
records exemption does not
apply, I have considered whether the disclosure breached APP 6.
6.1 states that if an APP entity holds personal information that was collected
for a particular purpose (
primary purpose
), the entity must not use or
disclose the information for another purpose (
secondary purpose
individual has consented to the use or disclosure of the information; or
6.2 or 6.3 applies in relation to the use or disclosure of the
information.
6 is only applicable if an entity ‘holds’ personal information. An
entity ‘holds’ personal information
if it has possession or control
of a record that contains personal
information.
information means information or an opinion about an identified individual, or
an individual who is reasonably identifiable,
whether the information or opinion
is true or not, and whether the information or opinion is recorded in material
form or not.
information includes health information about an
individual.
It is apparent that
the complainant’s Medical Certificate comprises health information because
it includes the complainant’s
full name, and states they attended a
medical appointment and were unfit for work for a specified
at paragraph [
], I found that the
respondent collected and held the Medical Certificate. It is apparent from the
contents and context of the email
from the complainant in which they provided
the Medical Certificate to the respondent that the purpose of collection was
establishing
the complainant was unfit for work over the relevant period.
at paragraph [
], I found that the
respondent disclosed the Medical Certificate to the Client. The respondent
indicated that if it handled the Medical
Certificate (which it denies) it would
have been for the purpose of managing the complainant’s resignation. The
complainant
alleges the respondent disclosed their Medical Certificate to
discredit the complainant with their clients and cause them reputational
Having regard to the broader circumstances as outlined above, I accept
any case it is apparent that the disclosure was not for the primary purpose of
assessing the complainant’s fitness to work,
or for the purposes of their
employment more generally, because the complainant was no longer employed by the
respondent at the time,
and there was no need to disclose the Medical
Certificate to a client of the complainant for these purposes. In my view, the
complainant
did not consent to the respondent’s disclosure of their
personal information, nor do I consider that the exemptions in APP
I find that the respondent disclosed the complainant’s personal
information for an unrelated secondary purpose, in circumstances
complainant did not consent and where the exceptions in APP 6.2 did not apply.
On this basis I find that that the respondent
breached APP 6.1.
regard to my finding at paragraph [
], I have considered whether I ought to
make declarations under
to address the
respondent’s interference with the complainant’s privacy.
complainant seeks the following remedies from the respondent:
acknowledging that it interfered with their privacy; and
compensation of
$15,000 in ‘aggravated damages’, for the ‘significant
reputational damage and personal pain’
that they have
complainant also requested that the OAIC consider pursuing civil and if
appropriate, criminal penalties against the respondent
and its Managing
The OAIC has no
disclosure. Further, I consider that this
complaint can be resolved via
determination under
Compensation
have the discretion to make a declaration that a complainant is entitled to
compensation for any loss or damage suffered by reason
of the act or practice
that is the subject of the complaint.
This includes loss or damage for
injury to the feelings of a complainant, and humiliation suffered.
However, the exercise of that power
is at my discretion.
I am guided by the following principles when awarding compensation:
complaint is substantiated and loss or damage is suffered, the legislation
contemplates some form of redress in the ordinary
awards should be
restrained but not minimal;
in measuring
compensation, the principles of damages applied in tort law will assist,
although the ultimate guide is the words of
the statute;
appropriate case, aggravated damages may be awarded;
compensation
should be assessed having regard to the complainant’s reaction and not to
the perceived reaction of the majority
of the community or of a reasonable
person in similar circumstances.
have also had regard to previous awards of compensation under the
Non-economic loss
the complainant seeks aggravated damages, it is first necessary to establish
that the complainant has suffered some form of
loss or damage because of the
Non-economic
loss takes many forms and may include pain, humiliation, hurt feelings, anxiety
and distress, disruption to an individual’s
life, or damage to
psychological heath and family relationships.
complainant submits that they have suffered personal pain, distress and
embarrassment because of the respondent’s interference
In their submissions,
the complainant stated that:
It was a humiliating experience to have to explain to my clients that I was not
having a “mental breakdown” as described
to them by [Managing
Director] and to then have to further discuss my private medical
certificate.
respondent submits the complainant has provided no evidence of damage or
distress and contends awarding compensation and other
remedies would be punitive
and excessive.
support of their claim, the complainant provided evidence in the form of a
statutory declaration and a letter from their treating
psychiatrist. In their
statutory declaration, the complainant states:
‘These circumstances mean that their impact on me and my wellbeing extends
well beyond what would have arisen merely from disclosure
of my private medical
information. It was a serious and deliberate abuse of power designed to inflict
maximum harm and embarrassment
to me by taking advantage of his knowledge of my
private medical situation and information. He further exacerbated this by the
statement that I had suffered a nervous breakdown. His conduct was deeply
hurtful and humiliating. It has caused both personal and
professional distress,
including anxiety and depression which I continue to deal with to this day. This
is confirmed by the letter
from my treating psychiatrist
letter from the complainant’s treating psychiatrist confirms what the
complainant said in their statutory declaration and
supports that the
complainant has suffered anxiety and depression as result of the
respondent’s actions.
on the evidence provided I accept that the complainant has suffered significant
humiliation, hurt feelings and embarrassment
due to the breach of privacy by the
respondent.
assessing the quantum of non-economic loss that should be awarded, I have had
regard to the harm to the complainant arising from
the disclosure of their
Medical Certificate to the Client. I have also had regard to previous matters
and Serco Group Pty Limited (Privacy)
(16 June 2022): where the complainant was awarded $2,500 for hurt
feelings arising from the unauthorised disclosure of their personal
information
to various third parties.
Australian Information Commissioner
[2024] AATA 1100
(10 May 2024): where the then Administrative Appeals
Tribunal set aside a decision of the Australian Information Commissioner to
award compensation of $5,000 for non-economic loss. The tribunal was guided by
the principal that awards for compensation should
be restrained, but not
minimal, and concluded that a restrained award was $10,000 for non-economic
loss. The case involved the publication
of the complainant’s personal
information on a publicly accessible register over a period of 30 days.
and ‘SE’ and Northside Clinic (Vic) Pty Ltd
[2020] AICmr 21
(12 June 2020): where the complainant was awarded $10,000
for psychological damage and distress caused by the unauthorised disclosure
the complainant’s sensitive information to an incorrect recipient.
Telstra Corporation Limited
(30 October 2014) in which the then Commissioner stated 'the
complainant has suffered significant anxiety and distress including
I believe a
well-founded fear for his physical safety and that of his partner, as a result
of the breach'. The complainant was awarded
compensation for non-economic loss
of $18,000.
view of the evidence available to me, including the complainant’s
statutory declaration and the letter from their psychiatrist
which supports
their claim that they have suffered embarrassment, distress as well as anxiety
and depression as a result of the disclosure,
I consider the complainant should
be awarded $10,000 in non-economic loss.
Aggravated damages
outlined at paragraph [
complainant seeks an award of $15,000 for aggravated damages because they
consider that the disclosure of their personal
‘malicious and high-handed’;
b. intended to ‘discredit and embarrass’ him to his clients; and
c. calculated to cause harm to his professional reputation.
damages are ‘compensatory in nature, being awarded for injury to...
feelings caused by insult, humiliation and the
Aggravated damages may be awarded in
various circumstances, including where:
a. the respondent has
behaved ‘high-handedly, maliciously, insultingly or
oppressively’;
b. the ‘manner in which a defendant conducts his or her case may
exacerbate the hurt and injury suffered by the
plaintiff;’
c. the conduct necessary as a basis for an award of aggravated damages can be
described as being ‘improper, unjustifiable or
lacking in bona
d. the circumstances in which the respondent’s conduct takes place,
such as in an employment relationship, may themselves give
rise to an element of
aggravation
determining whether to award compensation for aggravated damages, I have had
regard to other privacy determinations involving claims
for aggravated damages,
‘VJ’, ‘VK’,
‘VL’ and ‘VM’ (Privacy)
(2 September 2020): where the complainants were awarded $1,500 for
aggravated damages, arising from the respondent’s conduct
insulting, demonstrated a disregard for the complainants privacy rights and
exacerbated the harm suffered by the complainants.
‘SF’ and ‘SG’ (Privacy)
(19 June 2022): where the complainant was awarded $2,000 for
aggravated damages as a result of the respondent’s conduct which
insulting and exacerbated the complainant’s injury by harming her feelings
of dignity. The respondent also failed to engage
with the OAIC until a late
stage in the investigation, causing delay in resolving the matter.
QF’ & Others and Spotless Group Limited
(28 May 2019): where the Australian Information Commissioner added
an award of aggravated damages to the complainants in the amount
of $1,500 due
to the conduct of the respondent, particularly its indifference towards its
employment relationship.
their statutory declaration the complainant states:
‘...one of the most distressing steps [the Managing Director] took was
providing a medical certificate I provided him as my
employer (at the time) to a
client and claiming that the reason I had left Fortrend was that I had suffered
a nervous breakdown.
This breach was not minor nor was it an inadvertent mistake. As my employer,
[the Managing Director] knew that I receive ongoing
treatment for my mental
health. He used this position to try and smear my good standing with this client
with the full knowledge
that it could harm me personally and
professionally.’
regard to the evidence and the circumstances I accept the complainant’s
submission that the respondent disclosed the
complainant’s sensitive
health information contained in the Medical Certificate to the Client with the
intent to harm the complainant
in the manner alleged. In my view this conduct
was malicious, improper and unjustifiable in the circumstances.
reaching this view I have considered that the privacy breach occurred in
circumstances where the respondent gained access to sensitive
health information
in the course of an employment relationship, in which the respondent exercised a
degree of authority over the
complainant and had the ability to adversely affect
their interests. The relationship of employer and employee is described in
as one that imports implied duties of confidentiality and mutual
complainant’s employer, the respondent was in a position of trust and
confidence with respect to the complainant and
their personal information that
it held. In disclosing the complainant’s Medical Certificate to the Client
in circumstances
where it had no need or authorisation to do so, the respondent
acted in a manner that was likely to harm the complainant and displayed
indifference towards its privacy obligations in respect of the employee’s
sensitive health information.
have also considered the respondent’s lack of cooperation during the
OAIC’s investigation, including that throughout
the investigation the
respondent has provided the OAIC with unreliable and inaccurate
information.
regard to the above factors, I award aggravated damages to the complainant of
Justin Lodge
Acting General Manager, Privacy
Case Management
Delegate of the Australian Information Commissioner
Review rights
(Cth) states that a party may apply
to have a decision under
or (1A) to make a determination reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (
). The ART provides independent merits
review of administrative decisions and has power to set aside, vary, or affirm a
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days
after the day on which the person is given the privacy determination
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
(Cth); r 5(3)
Administrative Review Tribunal Rules 2024
(Cth)). An application fee may
be payable when lodging an application for review to the ART. Further
information is available on
the ART’s website (
www.art.gov.au
) or by telephoning 1300 366
A party may also apply under
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
have the determination reviewed by the Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia or the Federal Court of Australia. The
Court may refer the matter back
to the OAIC for further consideration if it finds the Information
Commissioner’s decision was
wrong in law or the Information
Commissioner’s powers were not exercised properly. An application to the
Court must be lodged
within 28 days of the date of the determination. An
application fee may be payable when lodging an application to the Court. Further
information is available at
https://www.fcfcoa.gov.au/gfl
www.federalcourt.gov.au/
C1 – Privacy complaint
form dated 27 April 2023.
R4 – Email from the
respondent to the OAIC dated 6 September 2024; R5 – Email from the
respondent to the OAIC dated 11
October 2024; R6 – Email from the
respondent to the OAIC dated 31 January 2025.
Email from the respondent to the OAIC dated 24 July 2024.
December 2022 version
December 2024 version
to privacy regulatory action — OAIC
Except as addressed at
paragraph [20].
C1 – Privacy complaint
form dated 27 April 2023 and C5.1 – Statutory Declaration of 8 July 2025
[1] and [9].
C5.1 – Statutory
Declaration of 8 July 2025 [2].
Ibid [11]-[12].
Ibid [13]-[17].
C1 – Privacy complaint
form dated 27 April 2023. C5.1 – Statutory Declaration of 8 July 2025
C5.1 – Statutory
Declaration of 8 July 2025 [23].
C1.6 – Attachment 6 to
C1: Email from complainant to complainant’s representatives dated 13
January 2023.
C5.1 – Statutory
Declaration of 8 July 2025.
R9 - Statutory declaration
of 6 July 2025.
The respondent noted this
includes corroborating evidence from the Client.
In addition, the respondent
submits the proposed findings, declarations, and remedies are unjustified and
should not proceed. R5
– Respondent’s response to the preliminary
C6.2 - Email dated 12
December 2022.
For example, see paragraph
Respondent’s response to the preliminary view.
C1.4 – Attachment 4 to
C1: File note of conversation between the complainant and the Client dated 4
January 2023.
C1.5 – Attachment 5 to
C1: Email/file note dated 12 January 2023.
C1.6 – Attachment 6 to
C1: Email from complainant to complainant’s representatives dated 13
January 2023 (including an
email from the Client to the complainant dated 13
January 2023).
C1 – Privacy complaint
form dated 27 April 2023. C6.2 – Email from the complainant. In particular
the complainant sent
the email to the General Manager and another staff member
of the respondent.
‘ALJ’ (Privacy)
[2024] AICmr 131
(20 June 2024) and
‘QF’ & Others and Spotless Group
[2019] AICmr 20
(28 May 2019)
C1.6 – Attachment 6 to
C1: Email from complainant to complainant’s representatives dated 13
January 2023.
C2 – Email from the
complainant to the OAIC dated 9 August 2024; C4 – Email from the
complainant to the OAIC dated 2
February 2025.
C2 – Email from the
complainant to the OAIC dated 9 August 2024; C4 – Email from the
complainant to the OAIC dated 2
February 2025.
52(1)(b)(iii).
Hall v A & A Sheiban
[1989] FCA 72
(1989) 20 FCR 217
as referred to in
Rummery and
Federal Privacy Commissioner and Anor
[2004] AATA 1221
, [32]-[35] and affirmed in
HYYL and Privacy
Commissioner
[2023] AATA 2961
(13 September 2023) at
and Privacy Commissioner
[2023] AATA 2961
(13 September 2023), [160] citing
NWFQ and Privacy Commissioner
[2019] AATA 1302
it is incumbent on a
decision-maker under this Act to calibrate any award of damages with similar
awards made under the same Act,
as opposed to, say, damages awarded in personal
injuries cases. This reflects the reality that a different yardstick is required
to measure loss or damage flowing from a breach of privacy from harm sustained
under other areas of jurisprudence
NWFQ v Privacy
Commissioner
[2019] AATA 1302
, [83]-88];
C2 – Email from the
complainant to the OAIC dated 9 August 2024; C4 – Email from the
complainant to the OAIC dated 2
February 2025.
C4 – Email from the
complainant to the OAIC dated 2 February 2025.
C5.1 – Statutory
Declaration of 8 July 2025.
C2 – Email from the
complainant to the OAIC dated 9 August 2024; C4 – Email from the
complainant to the OAIC dated 2
February 2025.
C2 – Email from the
complainant to the OAIC dated 9 August 2024; C4 – Email from the
complainant to the OAIC dated 2
February 2025; C3 – Email from the
complainant to the OAIC dated 16 September 2024.
Lamb v Cotogno
[1987] HCA 47
Hall v A & A Sheiban
[1989] FCA 72
Elliot v Nanda &
Commonwealth
[2001] FCA 418
(11 April 2001), [180];
‘D’ and Wentworthville
Leagues Club
(9 December 2011), [52]; ‘
S’ and Veda
Advantage Information Services and Solutions Limited
[2012] AICmr 33
(20 December 2012), [93];
AeroCare Pty Ltd
4] AICmr 32
(8 April 2014)
‘HW’ and Freelancer
International Pty Limited
[2015] AICmr 86
(18 December 2015), [379].
Others and Spotless Group Limited
[2019] AICmr 20
Triggell v Pheeney
[1951] HCA 23
Others and Spotless Group Limited
[2019] AICmr 20
Rummery and Federal Privacy Commissioner and Anor
[2004] AATA 1221
C5.1 – Statutory
Declaration of 8 July 2025 at [4] – [5].
For example,
(2000) 75 AJRD 312.
See, for example, paragraph
21 above – the Managing Director advised they did not receive the Medical
Certificate despite the
complainant providing an email from them to the Managing
Director attaching the Medical Certificate.
RTF format (11.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format