URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/DTLJ/2001/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:55:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McRobert, Andrew --- "Digital Music & Copyright: Third Party Liability & Home Tapin" [2001] DigTechLawJl 2; (2001) 3(1) Digital Technology Law Journal 2
Music & Copyright: Third Party Liability
& Home Taping
Andrew McRobert
Senior Research Fellow
Asia Pacific Intellectual Property Law Institute
Murdoch University
Introduction
Music Technology - a Primer
(MPEG-1, Audio Layer 3)
Peer-to-Peer
The Napster
The Gnutella
United States
Subsistence
of Copyright in Digital Music
Liability of Users
'Home Taping'
of Napster for Vicarious Copyright Infringement
of Napster for Contributory Infringement
Sony Corp of
America v Universal City Studios Inc.
Subsistence
of Copyright in Digital Music
Liability of Napster Users
Fair Dealing
'Home Taping'
of Napster for 'Authorising' Infringement
Subsistence
of Copyright in Digital Music
Treaties Implementation
of Napster Users
'Home Taping'
Liability of
posed by de-centralised file-sharing technologies
Introduction
The Internet is something of a
double-edged sword for the recorded music industry. Whilst it presents
itself as a radically reinvented
delivery model for digital music
facilitates sophisticated copyright infringement on a global scale.
recording industry has been slow in adopting Internet technology for
two main reasons. First, there has been a lack of a secure
digital file
formats which incorporate copying protection mechanisms. Second, the
Internet threatens the position of the recording
companies as the
'middleman' between artists and consumers, as digital technology allows
artists to record and then distribute their
songs directly to consumers
at minimal cost.
The failure of the major recording labels to make
the transition to online distribution has allowed a number of
unauthorised online
music distribution technologies to emerge. Perhaps
the most infamous of these technologies is the software owned by
("Napster"). At
its peak, Napster had more than 20 million users worldwide
and the company expected that number
to grow to 75 million by the end of 2000.
At peak times, there were about a million simultaneous users of
Napster. To put that figure in perspective, America Online (the largest
ISP in the United States with a market capitalisation of about US$108.5
billion), has about 1.6 million users at peak hour.
The litigation concerning
Napster's MusicShare software has received widespread mainstream media
coverage. In the litigation, the
Recording Industry Association of
America ("RIAA") and eighteen record companies
allege that Napster is "running an online bazaar devoted to the piracy
rendering it
liable for, inter alia, contributory and vicarious copyright
infringement. In July 2000, Napster was ordered by the
Ninth Circuit to
filter out all songs in which the plaintiffs' held copyright. The
result of the required modifications to the MusicShare
software was to
drive most of Napster's consumers, and most of the available files,
away from the service. Napster conceded that
a few of the songs
identified by the plaintiffs were still slipping through the service
before it voluntarily shut itself down for
"database upgrades" on 1
July 2000. However, only about 100,000 to 150,000 people were still
using the service, sharing an average
of just 2.5 songs, according to
consulting firm Webnoize.
In September 2001, Napster reached a tentative
settlement of a separate lawsuit involving the National Music
Publishers' Association
and struck a deal on distributing songs for a
fee. Under the settlement, Napster will pay $26 million in damages for
infringement
of copyright. The deal is intended to compensate
songwriters and music publishers in respect of the copyright vesting in
song lyrics
and melodies (but not in respect of the sound recording
RIAA, which represents a much bigger hurdle, given that its members
are now setting up competing services such as MusicNet.
paper is not intended to serve as a chronology of the Napster
litigation, but rather to examine two of the central issues arising
the Napster litigation under United States, Australian and Chinese
infringement of copyright by others; and (2) the issue of 'home
taping'. The analysis suggests that whilst current copyright principles
are adequate to deal with the challenges posed by Napster-like
technology, they are ill-equipped to counter more ingeniously designed
distribution technologies, such as those based on the Gnutella
Music Technology - a Primer
(MPEG-1, Audio Layer 3)
is a standard, non-proprietary compression algorithm designed to make a
digital audio file smaller by a factor of approximately
twelve to one
while preserving the original
level of sound quality when played. The format was developed in 1992 by
the Moving Pictures Expert
Group of the International Organisation for
Standardisation in conjunction with the Fraunhofer Institute. MP3
achieves the reduction
in file size through the use of software called
a 'codec' (compressor/de-compressor algorithm) and a process referred
to as 'psycho-acoustic
masking'. The process relies on the imperfect
nature of human hearing and allows certain inaudible tones from a piece
of music to
be stripped out before compression.
MP3 is the most popular music
file format in use on the Internet, due in part to the fact that it
does not contain any security features
such as watermarks or serial
copying protection mechanism.
Peer-to-Peer
Peer-to-peer
networking (often referred to as P2P), is a communications model in
which each party has the same capabilities and either
initiate a communication session. It can be contrasted with alternative
communications models such as the client/server
model and the
master/slave model. In some cases, peer-to-peer communications are
implemented by giving each communication node
both server and client capabilities.
Internet, peer-to-peer is a type of transient network that allows a
group of computer users with compatible networking software
applications to connect with each other and directly access files from
one another's hard drives. Napster and Bearshare (a Gnutella
client) are examples of this kind of peer-to-peer software.
A user must first download and run the particular
peer-to-peer networking application. After launching the program, the
user enters
the IP address
computer belonging to the network, or employs an automated tool to
perform this function.
computer finds another network member online, it will connect to that
user's connection (who has obtained their IP address
from another
user's connection and so on).
The Napster
"MusicShare" software was available as a free download from its Web
site located at
http://www.napster.com
The software became fully functional once a user registered with
Napster by selecting a username and a password. Persons who registered
were not required to use their real name or address.
Once a user logged on to the
Napster network (simply by connecting to the Internet and running the
Napster software), the MusicShare
software interacted with a Napster
server. If the user had enabled the sharing of MP3 files on their
computer, Napster uploaded the
names of the user's files to its servers
(and not the music files themselves). Once the filenames were
successfully uploaded to the
server, they became a 'location' on the
network. A particular user's MP3 files were only accessible to other
users while he or she
was online.
All Napster users were able to access the MP3
files located on other users' computers by using a built-in tool to
song, either by the name of the artist or the
title of the song. The software performed a simple text search of the
file names indexed
on the relevant server and returned a list of
specific MP3 file names to the user. The user was then required to
peruse the list
in order to determine if the desired digital music file
was among those listed.
the desired song was listed, the requesting user simply double-clicked
on the file to download it to their computer
The server-side software then engaged in a dialogue with the requesting
user's software and that of the user hosting the MP3 file
user"). The Napster server to which the requesting user is connected
obtained IP address information from the host user. The
server then
communicated the host user's address information to the requesting
user, whose software established a connection with
the host user's
software and subsequently downloaded the MP3 file from the host user's
The significance of this approach is that MP3
files were transferred over the Internet as between users, and were
neither stored,
nor passed through, any Napster controlled server.
The Gnutella
is a protocol
designed for
sharing files in a distributed network. The Gnutella protocol was
designed by AOL's Nullsoft division to surpass the
file sharing
capabilities of Napster, but was soon released into the public domain.
It allows a user to share any type
of file from his or her computer and make it available to anyone using
Gnutella-based software
(such as the Bearshare
or LimeWire
programs). Therefore,
Gnutella-based clients are not limited to sharing MP3 files, but also
share digital movie files, as well as
a number of other types of
content. By way of example, a user with sufficient bandwidth
can download every episode of the
Warner Brother's TV series "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" through the
Gnutella network.
no Gnutella servers in the traditional sense, like web servers or mail
servers. A Gnutella client is a server. This means
that Gnutella is a
distributed protocol, where every machine in the network is connected
to every other machine and no single server
is responsible for
distributing all of the content. Therefore, if one computer goes down
the network is unaffected, because all the
other machines are connected
to each other through multiple redundant connections.
Gnutella protocol follows the peer-to-peer model explained above. When
you use a Gnutella program like Bearshare to do a search
software sends a search query to all the computers you are connected
to. These computers return their results to you and
pass your query on
to each of the computers they are connected to. This process continues
and scans the Gnutella-net for the file
you are looking for.
analyst has described the Gnutella architecture in the following way:
Napster, iMesh or any of the other similar systems, no central point
links people together and serves as an index to all of
their files and
other in a massive digital daisy chain, passing
the line as they come in."
This decentralised file sharing architecture has
significant implications for the policing and prosecuting of copyright
infringements.
& Digital Music Technology
United States
Subsistence
of Copyright in Digital Music
The music files exchanged
through the use of Napster would
in the majority of cases be subject to two distinct copyrights under
the United States
1976 ("U.S. Act")
that is, the copyright in the
musical composition and the copyright in the sound recording.
As is the position under
Australian and Chinese law, the copyright in a sound recording protects
an artist's particular rendition
of a song and is independent of the
musical and/or literary work copyrights.
submits that the definition of "sound recording" in the U.S. Act is
sufficiently broad to cover musical compositions recorded
on a compact
disc (CD), computer's hard disk or similar storage media
106 of the U.S. Act provides that owners of copyright enjoy certain
exclusive rights, including the right:
reproduce the copyrighted work in copies or phonorecords;
distribute copies or phonorecords of the copyrighted work to the public
by sale or other transfer of ownership, or by rental, lease,
In the case of literary and musical
works, to perform the copyrighted work publicly;
the case of literary and musical works, to display the copyrighted work
publicly; and
In the case of sound recordings, to
perform the copyrighted work publicly by means of a digital audio
transmission.
the 1976 Act did not provide the owners of copyright in sound
recordings with a public performance right. Indeed, no public
performance right was introduced until the passing of the
Performance Right in Sound Recordings Act
(US) in 1995.
Pursuant to this Act owners of copyright in sound recordings were
granted the exclusive right to authorise the digital
transmission of
their works.
Certain Internet communications are also
encompassed. The basis of these can be traced to Article 8 of the WIPO
("WCT") which provides that:
authors of literary and artistic works shall enjoy the exclusive right
of authorizing any communication to the public of their
works, by wire
or wireless means, including the making available to the public of
their works in such a way that members of the public
may access these
works from a place and at a time individually chosen by them."
provision was seen as necessary in light of the problems that some
member states had experienced with existing technology-specific
definitions such as broadcasting and cable diffusion.
Under the U.S. Act copyright
owners in musical works have the exclusive right to perform or display
the work publicly. "To perform
or display a work 'publicly'" is defined
in s101 as,
to transmit or otherwise communicate a performance or display of the
work to ... the public, by means of any device or process,
whether the
members of the public capable of receiving the performance or display
receive it in the same place or in separate places
and at the same time
or at different times."
definition of "transmit or otherwise communicate" is given in the Act.
As will be seen in the ensuing discussion, the new communication
has a bearing on the copyright liability of users of the Napster
Liability of Users
a plaintiff cannot succeed on a claim of contributory or vicarious
one must first examine the
potential liability of MusicShare users.
is likely that users will infringe a number of the exclusive rights of
in the typical
operation of Napster. For example:
Infringement of the exclusive reproduction right
'Ripping' songs from CD or
other media to a computer hard disk drive ("HDD") in order to exchange
them through Napster; and
Downloading MP3 files
to their computer;
Infringement
of the exclusive right to "perform or display the work publicly" and
the digital transmission right in relation to sound
recordings when:
A host user's software transfers MP3
recordings to a requesting user's computer; and
files are played (or "streamed") by a requesting user as they are
downloaded.
combat the contributory and vicarious infringement claims, Napster has
raised two affirmative defences in support of MusicShare
users. First,
that their use constitutes 'fair use' under section 107 of the U.S.
legislation. Second, that such use is covered by
the 'home taping'
exception contained in s1008 of the Act. The following section of this
paper discusses these two defences.
The U.S. fair use doctrine is
a common law doctrine employed by the judiciary to counteract the broad
definition of exclusive rights
in the statute.
Section 107 of the U.S. Act provides a non-exhaustive list of factors
to employ in analysing a fair use claim. These factors include:
The purpose and character of the use, including
whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for non-profit
educational purposes;
The nature of the
The amount and substantiality
of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole; and
The effect of the use upon the potential market
for or value of the copyrighted work.
to the first factor, Napster has sought to characterise Napster as
predominantly facilitating private non-commercial 'sharing'
The term 'sharing' is somewhat
misleading, in that if I 'share' a CD with a friend, no reproduction of
the CD is involved. In the
Internet file-sharing context, music files
are reproduced each time they are downloaded to a user's computer, and
each user can individually
enjoy the piece of music.
fact that MusicShare users got something for free that they would
ordinarily have to buy suggests that they reaped an economic
by using Napster's software.
creative nature of the copyright material exchanged through MusicShare
tips the balance away from a finding of fair use under
fact that the uploading and downloading of MP3 files using MusicShare
involves copying the entirety of the copyright work further
weakens the
fair use claim. In
Sony -v- Universal City Studios
("Sony"), the
U.S. Supreme Court held that wholesale copying for private home use can
tip the fair use analysis in favour of the
copying is likely to adversely affect the market for the copyright
there does appear to be some merit in the claim by Napster that its
software contributes to sales of recorded music by acting
'listening station', whereby users can 'road test' recordings that they
are interested in before purchasing. At the peak
of MusicShare's
popularity, sales of CDs in the United States were at an all time high.
However, one submits that the
following posting on the
Napigator.com
Web site (in response to news reports that Napster was contemplating
charging a monthly access fee), points to the long-term effect
Napster on the market for recorded music:
bucks a month ... for all I care they could set it to $500 a month. I'm
not paying ... I don't know, but I don't feel that
paying for something
I can get for free's a good idea."
provides users with unrestricted access to both authorised and
unauthorised sound recordings.
Napster's claims to the contrary, the primary value of Napster to its
users is the ability to download music for free that
otherwise have to pay for
Given the above
considerations, it is unlikely that a court would uphold the fair use
'Home Taping'
Napster also claims that its
users are protected by the 'home taping' immunity conferred by section
1008 of the U.S. Act. This section,
introduced by the
provides that:
"No action may be brought under this
title alleging infringement of copyright based on the manufacture,
importation, or distribution
of a digital audio recording device, a
digital audio recording medium, an analog recording device, or an
analog recording medium,
or based on the non-commercial use by a
consumer of such a device or medium for making digital musical
recordings or analog music
recordings."
The application of the AHRA to
the 'brave new world' of digital music on the Internet, a development
unforseen by its drafters, was
the subject of proceedings in the 1999
decision of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in
Industry Association of America -v- Diamond Multimedia Systems
("Diamond").
involved an application by the RIAA for an injunction under
ss1002(a)(1) and 1003(a) of the U.S. Act to prevent the release of
"Rio PMP 300" portable MP3 player ("Rio"). These sections
prohibit the sale of "digital recording devices" which do not
incorporate
the Serial Copy Management System ("SCMS"), or do not
comply with certain administrative requirements. Copyright infringement
not pleaded in the case.
Ninth Circuit ruled that the Rio did not directly reproduce a digital
music recording because music files stored on a computer's
hard drive,
the source of the Rio's MP3 files, are excluded from the statutory
definition of a "digital music recording".
This is due to the fact that a computer hard drive is comprised of more
than "only sounds, and material, statements, or instructions,
incidental to those fixed sound" as required by the relevant statutory
definition.
Furthermore,
the Court concluded that the statutory language of section 1001(5)(B)
specifically precludes computer hard drives from
the definition of
digital music recordings.
Court stated,
, that a computer does not
constitute a "digital audio recording device" under the Act, as it is
not "designed or marketed for the
primary purpose of ... making a
digital audio copied recording for private use"
The United States Copyright
Office and the Department of Justice filed an amicus curiae brief with
the Ninth Circuit criticising Napster's
assertion of the s1008 defence,
saying that it would allow people to trade music "on a scale beggaring
anything Congress could have
ruling that computer hard
drives are outside the scope of s1008, it would appear that users of
file sharing software such as Napster
or Bearshare cannot avail
themselves of the immunity from prosecution conferred by that
of Napster for Vicarious Copyright Infringement
The test for vicarious
Bernstein and Co. -v- H.L. Green Co.
("Shapiro"), is as follows:
right and ability to supervise infringing activities by the direct
infringer (but not necessarily knowledge); and
direct financial interest in the direct infringement.
liability prevents those who profit from copyright infringement from
hiding behind an undercapitalised operation when the
There can be no
finding of vicarious or contributory infringement absent proof of
direct infringement.
to the first limb of the test, courts have generally looked to the
practical, as opposed to the legal ability of a third party
the activities of the direct infringer.
Some guidance on the issue of
Napster's liability for vicarious infringement case can be gleaned from
case law. In the first case,
Polygram -v- Nevada/TIG
the plaintiff
alleged that the defendant, the trade show organiser of COMDEX, was
vicariously liable for the infringements perpetrated
by four of 2,000
exhibitors who publicly performed six copyright songs at the trade
show. Whilst the court held in favour of the
defendant on another issue
it provided a detailed discussion,
, of the vicarious liability issue.
the issue of control, the court recognised that the defendant had
various regulations, none of which prohibited the unauthorised
broadcast or performance of copyright music during the exhibition. The
court noted that the defendant's employees enforced the regulations
that the defendant instructed exhibitors to comply with copyright laws.
As a result, the court concluded that the defendant had
the right and
ability to control the direct infringers.
On the financial benefit issue,
the defendant acknowledged that music was an integral part of the
exhibition, and that banning music
would be a dramatic departure from
its standard operating procedures.
concluded that only some degree of financial benefit attributable to
the direct infringement was necessary in order for
the financial
benefit element of the test to be satisfied.
Fonovisa Inc. -v-
Cherry Auction Inc.
("Fonovisa")
the plaintiff brought an action against the operators of a swap meet
alleging, inter alia, contributory and vicarious
Cherry Auction Inc. permitted
vendors to sell counterfeit recordings of music that infringed the
plaintiff's copyright. In discussing
the control issue, the court made
note of the fact that Cherry Auction had the right to terminate vendors
for any reason whatsoever
and through that right had the ability to
control the activities of vendors on the premises.
Further, Cherry Auction promoted the swap meet and controlled the
access of customers to the swap meet area. Schroeder J analogised
situation with that existing in
Gershwin Publishing Corp.
-v- Columbia Artists Management Inc.
("Gershwin"), ruling that the control element was satisfied because the
defendant (1) could control the direct infringers through
its rules and
regulations; (2) policed its booths to make sure the regulations were
followed; and (3) promoted the show in which
direct infringers
participated.
J, in holding the financial benefit limb to be satisfied, noted that
the defendants reaped substantial financial benefits
from admission
fees, concession stand sales and parking fees, all of which "flowed
directly from customers who want[ed] to buy the
counterfeit recordings
at bargain basement prices".
stated that the court's decision in this regard was fortified by the
line of cases that imposed vicarious liability on
the operator of a
business where "... infringing performances enhance the attractiveness
of the venue to potential customers".
Schroeder ruled that the sale of pirated recordings at the swap meet
was a "draw" for customers, similar to the draw of the
performance of
pirated music in the line of dance hall cases canvassed in
Significant parallels
exist between the above cases and the issues under consideration in the
Napster litigation. At the material
time, Napster's terms and
conditions of use stated, inter alia:
Unauthorized copying, distribution, modification, public display, or
public performance of copyrighted works is an infringement
have been created or distributed without copyright
owner authorization
... you agree to comply with all of the notices, terms and conditions
posted on the Napster web site, including
but not limited to the Terms
of Use and the Napster Copyright Policy posted thereon ... 4. ...
Napster, Inc. may terminate this license
at any time if you are in
breach of any of these terms and conditions of use. Upon such
termination you must and agree to immediately
destroy all copies of the
[software]."
Further, when
Napster was provided with a list of users who had allegedly infringed
it cut the users'
access to its system
These factors
suggest that Napster had the right to control its users.
Napster has argued that it is technologically infeasible to distinguish
between authorised and unauthorised material, this
assertion does not
ring true. Napster's servers maintain a constantly updated list of
files, labelled with title and artist information.
This information
forms the entire basis of Napster's search facility, and is the sole
basis by which Napster users identify songs
to download. It would
require only a technically simple modification to the software in order
for it to read a list of unauthorised
song titles and use this list to
filter search results returned to users. Indeed, Napster employed
filtering technology based on
song filenames in an attempt to comply
with orders made by Justice Patel in mid-2000.
The issue of direct financial
benefit is more complex. Certainly the company's announcement of a deal
with BMG indicates that it is
a commercial venture.
However, there is little evidence that it has at all material times
derived a direct financial benefit from its service. Perhaps
strongest argument on this issue is that the substantial user base that
Napster has cultivated has attracted a substantial level
capital to the company, as well as increasing recognition of the
'Napster' name among consumers. Further, the unauthorised
available through Napster enhances the attractiveness of its service,
similar to the sale of counterfeit recordings in
. This notwithstanding, one submits that there may be some difficulty
establishing the second limb of the test.
of Napster for Contributory Infringement
The U.S. action for
contributory copyright infringement originates in tort law and stems
from the notion that one who materially contributes
to another's
infringement should be held accountable.
Although there is no express statutory basis for the doctrine,
contributory infringement is recognised as a valid basis for finding
person jointly and severally liable for the infringement of a
The classic
statement of the doctrine is contained in the following passage from
"One who, with knowledge of the infringing
activity, induces, causes or materially contributes to the infringing
conduct of another,
may be held liable as a 'contributory' infringer."
does not need to establish actual knowledge of specific infringing
acts, it is sufficient if the defendant has reason to know
of the third
party's direct infringement.
The author submits that the argument that Napster
"materially contributes" is stronger than any claim that it "induces"
or "causes"
the infringement. In
Schroeder J, in discussing the 'material contribution issue', stated
that it would have been difficult for the infringing activity
place on the scale alleged without the support services provided by the
swap meet proprietors.
stated (at 264):
"[The defendant] actively strives
to provide the environment and the market for counterfeit recording
sales to thrive. Its participation
in the sales cannot be termed
'passive', as [the defendant] would prefer."
Ninth Circuit rejected the approach of the District Court in that case
that the contribution to infringement should be limited
circumstances in which the defendant "expressly promoted or encouraged
the sale of counterfeit products, or in some manner protected
identity of the infringers".
preferred the analysis of the Third Circuit in
Industries Inc. -v- Aveco Inc.
that "providing the site and facilities for known infringing activity
is sufficient to establish contributory liability"
It has been held that a BBS
operator who actively encourages the uploading of material by
subscribers participates in the infringing
In another case, a BBS operator, who had been notified of certain
infringing activity but did not remove the material, was found
materially contributed to the activity.
Schroeder J is one of the
judges that heard Napster's appeal against the original preliminary
injunction. Her Honour has been reported
as saying that the swap meet
"controlled what was going on,
on those premises. Here, Napster doesn't have any idea what's being
transmitted".
respectfully disagrees with her Honour's view. There can be little
doubt that Napster had knowledge that acts of copyright
infringement
were carried out through the use of its service, indeed its terms and
conditions of use contemplated this possibility.
The fact that the
technology in this case does not require physical interaction between
Napster and its users should not be a material.
Indeed, it is alleged
that a document authored by Napster co-founder Shawn Fanning mentions
the need to remain ignorant of users'
real-life identities "since they
are exchanging pirated music".
Napster has
also been informed on a number of occasions that infringing sound
recordings are being traded through its facilities
It would appear, certainly in
view of the Ninth Circuit's decision in
that Napster "materially contributes" to its users' infringement. It
"actively strives to provide the environment and the market
infringement] to thrive".
Sony Corp of
America v Universal City Studios Inc.
decision is a
seminal decision, representing a special category of case within the
vicarious and contributory copyright infringement
doctrines. In
Universal City Studios sued the Sony Corporation for, inter alia,
contributory and vicarious copyright infringement. Universal alleged
that Sony's Betamax video recorders facilitated unauthorised copying of
protected Universal programs by consumers.
discussing Universal's allegations, the Supreme Court noted that in
certain situations "the imposition of vicarious liability is
just [because] the contributory infringer [is] in a position to control
the use of copyrighted works by others and had
authorized the use
without permission from the copyright owner".
The Court noted that the situation in
distinguishable from such a case in that Sony did not have an ongoing
relationship with the ultimate consumer.
The Court further stated that:
"... [i]f vicarious
liability is to be imposed on petitioners in this case, it must rest on
the fact that they have sold equipment
with constructive knowledge of
the fact that their customers may use that equipment to make
unauthorised copies of copyrighted material.
There is no precedent in
the law of copyright for the imposition of vicarious liability on such
The Court drew an analogy with the principle of
patent law that the sale of "a staple article or commodity of
commerce suitable for
substantial non-infringing use[s]" does not
constitute contributory infringement.
The Court went
on to say that:
"... the sale of copying equipment,
like the sale of other articles of commerce, does not constitute
contributory infringement if
the product is widely used for legitimate,
unobjectionable purposes. Indeed, it need merely be capable of
substantial non-infringing
The Court concluded that "time-shifting" of
television programmes
fell within the
parameters of the fair use doctrine.
submits that the
"non-infringing use"
principle has little application to the Napster litigation. The
critical factor in
, and the point of
departure from previous cases, was that the defendant in that case
merely sold an 'article of commerce' and did
not have an ongoing
relationship with the consumer. The same cannot be said of Napster.
Given this, the fact that Napster may have
a number of substantial
non-infringing uses is irrelevant.
Subsistence
of Copyright in Digital Music
Under Australian copyright
law, a typical pop song would attract a separate copyright in the
literary work (in the lyrics), the musical
work (the musical
composition) and copyright in the sound recording under the
(Cth) ("Act").
"sound recording" is defined in
as the "aggregate
of sounds embodied in a record". "Record" is in turn defined as any
"disc, tape, paper or other device in which
sounds are embodied". These
definitions are sufficiently broad to cover digitally recorded music,
including music files stored on
personal computers.
Significant revisions to
Australian copyright law were introduced with the enactment of the
Amendment (Digital Agenda) Act
("Digital Agenda
which entered into law on 4 March 2001. The primary purpose of the
Digital Agenda
was to bring Australia's copyright legislation into
conformity with its international obligations under the WIPO Copyright
and WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty concluded in 1996.
to these amendments, the exclusive rights of 'broadcasting' and 'cable
diffusion' were replaced by a single right of "communication
, which lists the exclusive rights of copyright
owners in literary and musical works, now includes the following
To reproduce the
work in a material form;
To publish the work;
perform the work in public; and
To communicate
the work to the public.
defines "communicate" as:
" ... to make
available online or electronically transmit (whether over a path, or a
combination of paths, provided by a material
substance or otherwise) a
work or other subject matter ..."
The Digital Agenda
also includes for the first
time a definition of "to the public", defining the term as meaning the
public inside or outside Australia.
rights exist in relation to sound recordings by virtue of
Liability of Napster Users
It is likely that a typical Napster user would
infringe a number of distinct copyrights through the typical operation
of the MusicShare
software. For example:
Infringement of the reproduction right by:
'Ripping' tracks from CD to a HDD to exchange the files
through Napster; and
Downloading MP3 files to
their computer;
Infringement
of the right of "communication to the public":
By sharing files through Napster, that is, "making them
available to the public"; and
When a host user's
software transfers a MP3 file to a requesting user's computer;
playing of MP3 files as they are downloading 'streaming' may infringe
either the right of public performance (depending on the
user's context), or an infringement of the communication right.
Fair Dealing
Division Three of the
sets out various exceptions to infringement.
, which permits
certain uses of copyright works for the purpose of research or study,
lists the factors to be taken into account in
determining whether or
not a dealing with a copyright work is 'fair'.
The factors to be considered are:
purpose and character of the dealing;
of the work or adaptation;
The possibility of
obtaining the work or adaptation within a reasonable time at an
ordinary commercial price;
The effect of the
dealing upon the potential market for, or value of, the work of
adaptation; and
In a case where part only of the
work or adaptation is copied - the amount and substantiality of the
part copied taken in relation
to the whole work or adaptation
Although these factors are technically limited to
the 'research or study' fair dealing defence, it is generally accepted
should also be referred to in relation to other heads of fair
Referring to
the argument made above in relation to similar considerations under
section 107
of the U.S.
, it is most unlikely that the infringing
acts of Napster users would qualify as fair dealings under Australian
'Home Taping'
The only 'home taping' style
exception under Australian copyright law is contained in
section 111
. This section states that a broadcaster's copyright is not
infringed by the making of a copy of a broadcast for "private and
use". However, the exception is narrow and the taping of many
broadcasts will infringe copyright in the underlying literary, musical,
dramatic and artistic works contained in the broadcast.
Given the near impossibility of pursuing
individual home copying infringements, the Australian Government
attempted to impose a levy
on blank tapes, and an exemption for home
taping, similar to the scheme created by the AHRA in the United States
However, the scheme was declared
invalid under
Constitution
by the High Court in
Tape Manufacturers Association Ltd -v- Commonwealth of Australia.
of Napster for 'Authorising' Infringement
section 13(2)
it is provided that the exclusive right to do an act in relation to a
work or other subject matter includes the right to authorise
to do that act in relation to that work or subject matter. Under
, it is provided that the copyright in a
work or other subject matter is infringed by a person who, not being
the owner of the copyright
and without a licence from the same, does or
authorises the doing in Australia of any act comprised in the
Authorisation of
infringement is a separate and distinct head of liability from any
liability based on general principles of vicarious
liability or agency
The original judicial view of
'authorisation' in Australian was narrow, requiring something akin to a
positive act or express permission
to perform an act in breach of
following the decision of the Australian High Court in
of New South Wales -v- Moorhouse
("Moorhouse"), the word 'authorise' has its dictionary meaning of
"sanctioning, approving or countenancing".
It must be established that a
direct act of infringement has taken place before any question of
authorisation of infringement can
the question before the Court was whether or not the University of New
South Wales should be held liable for authorising the various
infringement carried out by students using the library's photocopying
facilities.
following passage from the judgment is often cited as correctly stating
the Australian test for authorising infringement.
"Express or
formal permission or sanction, or active conduct indicating approval,
is not essential to constitute an authorisation:
Inactivity or
indifference, exhibited by acts of commission or omission, may reach a
degree from which an authorisation or permission
may be inferred ...
However, the word 'authorise' connotes a mental element and it could
not be inferred that a person had, by mere
inactivity, authorised
something to be done, if he neither knew nor had reason to suspect that
the act might be done ... "
The university had reasonable grounds to suspect
that some infringements would occur if adequate precautions were not
taken. The university
failed to take any precautions, as there was no
effective supervision of the machines nor adequate notices placed on or
machines instructing users as to the position relating to
Pursuant to the Digital Agenda
amendments,
Australian copyright legislation codifies the Moorhouse test in
sections 36(1A)
(1A). Under those provisions a Court will be
required to have regard to:
extent, if any, of the person's power to prevent the doing of the act;
nature of the relationship between the person and the infringer; and
the person took reasonable steps to prevent or avoid the infringement.
When considering copyright
infringement claims against manufacturers of copying equipment or
media, courts in Australia and the UK
have not explicitly taken the
'non-infringing use' approach adopted in the U.S., preferring instead
to base their reasoning on the
degree of control that the manufacturer
can reasonably be expected to be able to exert in respect of the
after-sales use of its product
by consumers. This is well illustrated
in the decision of the House of Lords in
CBS Songs Ltd -v-
the Court was asked to grant an injunction against
Amstrad to prevent it selling double cassette decks that were capable
cassettes at twice the normal speed.
The plaintiff contended that the equipment would lead to widespread
authorising such infringement. The court refused to grant the relief
sought by the plaintiffs, on the ground,
"No manufacturer and no machine confers on
the purchaser authority to copy unlawfully. The purchaser or other
operator of the recorder
determines whether he shall copy and what he
shall copy. By selling the recorder [the defendants] may facilitate
copying in breach
of copyright but do not authorise it ... the operator
of an Amstrad tape-recording facility, like all other operators, can
decide whether to record or play and what material is to be
As Amstrad was not in a position to be able to
control the subsequent uses of its product by consumers, it could not
be said to have
'authorised' any infringement of the plaintiff's
Although Lord Templeman in
did not refer to the
and its 'non-infringing use' principle, it does appear from his
judgment that the fact that the equipment had lawful purposes
The decision of Whitford J in
Inc v Ames Records & Tapes Ltd
also merits attention in this
context. Here, the defendant operated a record lending library from
which records were lent to subscribers
in circumstances where they
might be used for home taping. The Court held that the defendants were
enabling and assisting home taping
but not 'authorising' it in the
necessary sense. It is interesting to note that Justice Gummow in
delivering his judgment in
WEA International -v- Hanimex
view that the result in
would have been
different if "the retaping had taken place on the defendant's premises
with a machine made available by him".
In such a situation, the requisite degree of control would exist, and
authorisation could be established.
following passage from Lawton L.J.'s judgment in
Amstrad -v-
British Phonographic Industry Ltd
usefully illustrates the distinction between
the copying equipment cases:
"[Once Amstrad] had
sold their models ... they had no control over how they were used. It
is this fact which distinguishes this case
from the Moorhouse case. In
that case the University were at all material times in a position to
control the use of the photo-copying
machine which had been used to
infringe copyright."
It is the issue of the degree of control that a
third party can exercise over either the direct infringer or the
copying facilities
that is determinative of the question of
authorisation liability under Australian law
As argued above, Napster is
not in the same position as a supplier of electronic equipment (such as
a video recorder or a home stereo
system). Napster exercises control
over persons permitted to access its servers, and can prevent users of
Napster from exchanging
certain MP3 files. To paraphrase the
court, the architecture of Napster is such that infringement is
"likely" to occur "unless some means [is] adopted to prevent that
being done."
Subsistence
of Copyright in Digital Music
Article 3 of the
Law of the People's Republic of China
("CCL") states,
, that copyright
subsists in "written [and] ... musical ... works". Article 4 of the
Regulations
for the Implementation of Copyright Law of the People's Republic of
1991 ("Regulations") define "written works" and
"musical works" respectively as "... works expressed in written form,
such as novels,
poems, essays and theses" and "such works as symphonic
works and songs, with or without accompanying words, which can be sung
performed".
member of the Berne Convention and works created in a member state are
protected under the CCL.
Article 10 outlines the exclusive rights of the
owners of copyright in written and musical works, which include:
The right of publication, that is, the right to
decide whether to make a work available to the public; and
right of exploitation and the right to remuneration, that is, the right
of exploiting one's work by means of reproduction, performance,
broadcasting, exhibition, distribution, making cinematographic,
television or video production, adaptation, translation, annotation,
compilation and the like, and the right of authorizing others to
exploit one's work by the above-mentioned means.
Due to a somewhat curious
approach to drafting, Article 45 independently lists the various
grounds of copyright infringement.
This article provides that:
"Anyone who commits any
of the following acts of infringement shall bear civil liability ...
(5) exploiting a work by performance,
broadcasting, exhibition,
distribution, making cinematographic, television or video productions,
adaptation, translation, annotation,
and compilation, or by other
means, without the permission of the copyright owner, unless otherwise
provided in this Law ... (8)
committing other acts of infringement of
product of this approach is that whilst copyright owners enjoy the
exclusive right of "reproduction" under Article 10(5), exploiting
work by "reproduction" is not listed as an act constituting
infringement under Article 45.
it could be argued that unauthorised exercise of the reproduction right
conferred by Article 10(5) constitutes "committing
other acts of
infringement of copyright" as contemplated by Article 45(8).
music files exchanged using Napster's software would also attract
Article 39 of the CCL relevantly provides that "a producer of sound
recordings ... shall have the right to authorize others to reproduce
and distribute his sound recordings ... and the right to receive
remuneration therefor".
recordings" are defined under Article 6(2) of the
Law Implementing Regulations
1991 ("Regulations") as "the
original recordation of any sound" and "producer of sound recordings"
is defined in Article 6(5) as "a
person who makes sound recordings".
Although these definitions are somewhat vague, they would appear to
cover digitally recorded
Treaties Implementation
is not a party to either the WCT or WPPT, and the CCL does not, in its
current form, adequately protect copyright owners in
relation to the
exploitation of their works on the Internet. China is currently
finalizing revisions to a number of its intellectual
property laws,
including the CCL.
Rather than the technology
neutral right of "communication to the public" contained in the WCT
(and the Australian legislation), the
CCL retains the exclusive right
of "broadcasting". "Broadcasting" is defined in the Regulations as
"disseminating the work by wireless
radio waves or cable television
This definition would not encompass a
communication of a digital work over a typical computer network. This
notwithstanding, the uploading
(copying) of material to a Web server
would appear to be caught by the reproduction right. The application of
the CCL to Internet
technology was the key question before the Beijing
First Intermediate People's Court (BFIPC) in
Wang Meng and
Others -v- Beijing Cenpok Intercom Technology Co. Ltd
Chinese writers filed suit alleging unauthorised and illegal copying
and distribution of their works over the Internet.
The defendant
contended that Article 10(5) of the CCL did not cover works posted on
the Internet.
The BFIPC's
approach centred on the interpretation of the words "and the like"
contained in Article 10(5). The Court upheld the decision
of the lower
court that the words should be treated as encompassing Internet
distribution of works. The Court also rejected the defendant's
that it had no control over the actual content of its Web site.
of Napster Users
is likely that a typical Napster user would infringe a number of the
exclusive rights of copyright owners in songs under Chinese
Infringement of
the reproduction right by:
songs from CD to a HDD; and
Downloading MP3 files
to their computer;
Infringement
of the performance right by playing MP3 files as they download
(depending on the requesting user's context).
commentators have also suggested that the non-commercial "distribution
[of copyright works] without the permission of the copyright
constitute an infringement of copyright, subject to civil liability,
under Article 45(5).
'Home Taping'
There appears to be scope for
arguing that a home taping 'fair use' exception exists under the CCL.
Article 22 relevantly provides
that the "use of published works for
private study, research and self entertainment" is considered to be a
'fair use' and no action
for copyright infringement shall lie.
Chinese commentator, Professor Zheng Chengsi has argued that:
22(1) provides that use of a published work of another for the user's
own individual study, research or self-entertainment
is permissible.
This clause includes fair dealing for personal use. Such use ... is not
limited to reproduction. It applies to all
manner of exploitation as
provided in art. 10(5) of the Chinese Copyright Law, except broadcast
and distribution ... such personal
use is not limited to personal study
and research, but extends to personal entertainment."
He further notes that the
Chinese interpretation of the wording of Article 22(1) suggests that
making more than one copy of a work
may be permitted under the personal
use exemption.
Zheng later states that whilst the exact scope of the Chinese fair
dealing exceptions are yet to be determined, the majority
drafters agree that Chinese courts should have regard to section 107 of
in determining whether or not a use is 'fair'.
However, on a plain reading of
the English translation of Article 22(1), it would appear that any use
that can be categorised as
"personal use" is permitted. It has been
suggested that the fair use exceptions are broader than is allowable
under the Berne Convention
(and Article 9(2) of TRIPs), particularly
the exception for "self entertainment".
Liability of
for present purposes that the activities of typical Napster users would
not be permitted under Article 22(1), one then turns
to consider the
potential liability of Napster itself under Chinese copyright law.
Chapter Two of the CCL outlines the economic
rights of owners of copyright as:
"... the right of
exploitation and the right to remuneration, that is, the right of
exploiting one's work by means of reproduction,
performance,
broadcasting, exhibition, distribution, making cinematographic,
television or video production, adaptation, translation,
annotation,
compilation and the like, and the right of authorizing others to
exploit one's work by the above-mentioned means;"
(emphasis added)
Article 39 provides that:
"A producer of sound
recordings ... shall have the right to authorize others to reproduce
and distribute his sound recordings ...
and the right to receive
remuneration therefor." (emphasis added)
taken in conjunction with Articles 45(5) & (8) of the CCL, an
action for infringement by authorisation would appear to be
under Chinese law. However, it is not yet clear whether the Chinese
concept of 'authorisation' will align itself with the
"sanctioning,
approving or countenancing" approach of Australian courts, or the more
restrictive approach of courts in the United
It is worth noting in this context that in March
2000, the Chinese Ministry of Culture issued the C
Relevant Issues Concerning the Online Business of Audio-Visual Products
("Circular"), which contains various regulations in relation to
dealings in audio-visual products over the Internet.
Article 1 of the Circular
states that all online business activities dealing in audio-visual
products are prohibited unless authorised
by the appropriate
administrative agencies. Article 2 then states that any business
wishing to deal in such products must report
to the provincial
administrative department in charge of the relevant audio-visual market
to register, and must obtain an "audio-visual
business license" in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Regulations
on the Administration of Audio-Visual Products
Foreign-funded and Chinese-foreign joint ventures are not permitted to
operate an online business involving audio-visual products
Article 5 of the Circular,
states that:
"Audiovisual products to be sold over
the Internet must be legal products manufactured by domestic
audiovisual-product producers ...
The following business activities are
forbidden: ... illegal audiovisual products, including smuggled and
pirated products ... Selling
imported audiovisual products over the
Internet, dealing in MP3 music products downloaded from the Internet,
and wholesale transactions
of audiovisual products over the Internet
are also prohibited."
The Circular appears to be a supplement to the
Administration
of Audio and Video Products Regulations
1994, and focuses on
licensing commercial activities relating to audio and video products,
rather than establishing civil causes
Challenges posed by
de-centralised file-sharing technologies
The following words of one Australian commentator
hint at the problems facing the music industry:
where defendants have put it beyond their power to prevent the
infringement, for instance by selling or giving away the means
[an act of infringement] can be committed, it will be less likely that
this will amount to authorisation ..."
Whilst the above discussion
indicates that current concepts of third party copyright liability are
likely to be adequate to deal with
'Napster-like' software
applications, the same cannot be said of software employing a true
distributed, peer-to-peer architecture.
the supply of decentralised file sharing software (such as Gnutella) is
analogous to the supply of electronic goods in
, where an ongoing relationship with
the consumer is absent. It is unlikely that a plaintiff could establish
the requisite degree
of control in order for liability to attach to the
designers of this type of software. Even if legal liability did attach,
software is made publicly available, the only way of shutting
down the network is to pursue individual infringers.
It would appear that the recorded music industry
may target ISPs in its efforts to combat Gnutella-like technologies.
Whether or not Australian ISPs
would be legally prudent in complying with any threats of litigation
from music publishers is questionable,
given current authority on
'authorisation' liability, and the exceptions from liability contained
sections 39B
The increasing popularity of
Internet file sharing technologies poses a significant threat to the
interests of the recorded music
to a levy-based solution, such as that employed in Germany
appears fraught with difficulty.
Imposing a levy on blank recording media such as audio tapes, audio
recorders (digital or analog),
in order to compensate copyright owners,
is logically defensible. Levying a royalty on multi-purpose devices
such as personal computers
or computer hard disks is another question
entirely. The
litigation in the United
States illustrates the difficulty in delineating the boundary between
products that should attract a levy
and those that should not. Industry
opposition to any such levy on computer hardware would be likely to be
considerable.
The recording
industry's technological saviour, the Secure Digital Music Initiative
is also under fire, with reports that all of the
SDMI protection
mechanisms have been circumvented.
also reports that recent technology introduced by various record
companies, which was intended to prevent the 'ripping'
of CD audio
tracks into MP3 files, have been hacked.
Certainly, it seems somewhat nave to believe that any
technological protection mechanism will not be circumvented in time.
an effective tool in the recording industry's fight against
unauthorised 'home taping'.
New technology now provides the copying
facilities free of charge and has given individuals access to a global
pool of recordings.
Whilst the law will continue to serve a vital role
in preventing commercial enterprises from profiting through dealing in
unauthorised
sound recordings, it is unlikely that it will ever provide
a sufficient answer to the problem of 'home taping'.
However, if music publishers
successfully develop innovative and high quality delivery mechanisms
for digital music, they may maintain
their commercial viability. By
making legitimate digital music distribution technologies more
user-friendly and comprehensive than
their illegitimate counterparts,
music publishers will have a service that consumers are willing to pay
a reasonable price for.
B.Sc (Comp. Sci.) LLB LLM, Senior Research Fellow, Asia Pacific
Intellectual Property Law Institute, Murdoch University, Western
As one commentator
has noted, the emergence of the Internet as a mechanism for marketing
and distributing music will bring about
a fundamental change in the
perception of music as a product to that of music as content: see
Garlick M, "Pricing Recorded Music
in an Online World", Gilbert
& Tobin, 1 July 2000 at
http://www.gtlaw.com.au/pubs/pricingrecordedmusic.html.
"Internet Piracy -
The Problem and The Response", IFPI at
http://www.ifpi.org/antipiracy/internet_piracy.html.
Plaintiff's
Complaint for Contributory and Vicarious Copyright Infringement,
Violations of California Civil Code Sect. 980(a)(2),
Competition, Case No. C99-5183-MHP, filed 6 December 1999 ("Complaint")
at pp 9-12.
For further
information on the ownership of Napster: See Gomes L, "UCLA, Rock Group
Limp Bizkit, Others May Prosper if Napster Goes
Mainstream", Wall
Street Journal Interactive, 2 November 2000 at
http://interactive.wsj.com/articles/SB973125431509468152.htm.
Harmon A, "Online
Davids vs. Corporate Goliaths", New York Times, 6 August 2000 at
http://www.nytimes.com/library/review/080600napster-review.html.
Opinion of Patel J
on Application for Preliminary Injunction, Case No. C 99-5183 MHP,
delivered 2 July 2000, U.S. District Court
for the Northern District of
California at p 4.
Mann C, "One Hot
Property: Napster is Beginning to Rival Even AOL",
31 October 2000 at
http://www.inside.com/story/Story_Cached/0,2770,13276_9_12_1,00.html
Including Sony
Music Entertainment Inc., Geffen Records, BMG, Universal Records, EMI
& Virgin Records.
n. 3 above, at p 1.
Borland J, "Napster gets temporary reprieve" at
http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-6605948.html.
See further
Zeidler S, "MusicNet says to roll out platform in coming weeks" at
http://www.siliconvalley.com/docs/news/reuters_wire/1487585l.htm.
http://www.iis.fhg.de/amm/techinf/layer3/index.html.
Smith T, "Digital Distribution of
Music", Copyright World, April 2000, 15.
In the current context, a personal
See further
http://searchnetworking.techtarget.com/sDefinition/0,,sid7_gci212769,00.html
An IP address
is a 32-bit number that uniquely identifies each sender or receiver of
information that is sent in packets across the
Such as "G-Net Wizard": see
http://www.bearshare.com/help/faqbearshare.htm.
The following
facts regarding Napster's architecture are taken from Patel J's ruling
on the preliminary injunction, delivered 26
July 200, n. 6 above, and
the various depositions referred to therein.
In this sense Napster 'locations'
are transient, they are repeatedly added or removed each time a user
signs on or off the network.
The returned file names may have contained typographical errors or
otherwise inaccurate descriptions of the content of the files
names were determined by each host user.
Napster 'locations' could also be
accessed through Napster's 'hot-list tool feature'.
Napster facilitated the same mode
of file transfer whether a user accessed a specific MP3 file through
the search engine or hot-list.
Until January 2000, Napster incorporated a feature whereby if a
download of a song was interrupted (for example by the host user
logging off the network), it would locate the song on another connected
computer and automatically resume the download: see Berschadsky
"RIAA v Napster: A Window Onto the Future of Copyright Law in the
Internet Age",
J. Marshall J. Computer & Info. L.
A protocol is
simply a standard format that allows two pieces of software to
communicate. For the complete Gnutella protocol specification,
http://www.clip2.com/GnutellaProtocol04.pdf.
http://www.bearshare.com/gnutella.htm.
See further
http://www.bearshare.com./
See further
http://www.limewire.com./
definition of this term see:
http://searchnetworking.techtarget.com/sDefinition/0,,sid7_gci211634,00.html
"RIAA: Gnutella not yet a threat" at
http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-5383626.htm.
believes the term 'sharing' to be misleading in that the music files
are duplicated through downloading, and not "shared"
in any real sense.
The term "exchange" is used in this paper.
Codified as Title 17 of the United
States Code (U.S.C.).
A similar situation exists under Chinese law. Under Australian law, the
lyrics of a song constitute a separate literary work copyright
musical work copyright.
'Sound recordings' are defined in s101 as: "... works that result from
the fixation of a series of musical, spoken, or other sounds
regardless of the nature of the material objects, such as disks, tapes,
or other phonorecords, in which they are embodied". "Phonorecord"
turn defined as "... material objects in which sounds ... are fixed by
any method now known or later developed, and from which
the sounds can
be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either directly or
with the aid of a machine or device".
See Brauner S, "High-Tech Boxing
Match: A Discussion of Copyright Theory Underlying the Heated Battle
Between the RIAA and MP3ers",
Va. J.L. & Tech
See also WIPO
Performances and Phonograms Treaty 1996 ("WPPT").
See for example T Aplin,
"Liability of Internet Service Providers for Moral Rights Infringement
in Australia" [1999] 1(1)
Dig. Tech. L.J.
http://wwwlaw.murdoch.edu.au/dtlj/articles/vol1_1/aplin.html
F. Macmillan & M. Blakeney, "The Copyright Liability of
Communications Carriers" 1997 (3)
Journal of Information,
Law and Technology
http://elj.warwick.ac.uk/jilt/commsreg/97_3macm/
Communication Corp. -v- Network Productions Inc.
829 at 844;
Sony Corporation of America -v- Universal City
Studios Inc.
[1984] USSC 14
464 U.S. 417
(1984) at 434.
In this paper the term "songs"
refers collectively to musical compositions and sound recordings.
Distributing MP3 files through
file sharing software may render a user criminally liable under the
Electronic Theft
("NET") 1997, codified as
17 U.S.C. 506
18 U.S.C. 2319.
In November 1999, a college student in Oregon
pleaded guilty and was sentenced under the
to two years probation
for posting pirated material (including over 1,000 MP3 files) on his
Web site. The
imposes liability regardless of profit motive. See
Sullivan J, "MP3 Pirate Gets Probation", Wired News, 24 November 1999
http://www.wired.com/news/mp3/0,1294,32276,00.html
Cf s132(2) of the
Sony -v- Universal City Studios
[1984] USSC 14
(1984) at 433.
Opposition of Defendant Napster to Plaintiff's Motion for Preliminary
Injunction, Case No. 99-5183 MHP/C 00-0074 MHP, at 5-8.
Sega Entertainment
Ltd -v- MAPHIA
857 F. Supp 679
at 687 (N.D. Cal. 1994).
Row Publishers Inc. -v- Nation Entertainment
[1985] USSC 128
471 U.S. 539
at 563 (1985);
Playboy Entertainment Inc. -v- Frena
F. Supp. 1552
at 1558 (M.D. Fla. 1993).
[1984] USSC 14
464 U.S. 417
Id at 449-50, 456.
See "2000 Midyear Market Report on
U.S. Recorded Music Shipments" at
http://www.riaa.com/MD-US-3b-00-mid.cfm.
See also Selvin J, "Did Napster help boost record sales?" at
http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?file=/chronicle/archive/2001/08/05/PK220163.DTL
and "Music sales slide despite Napster demise" at
http://www.siliconvalley.com/docs/news/tech/083036.htm.
Message Board Forum, posting from "Onymous", 4 November 2000 at
http://forums.napigator.com/read.php?f=4&I=12995&t=12995&1=0
(visited 6 November 2000).
A significant number of unsigned artists used Napster to distribute
their music independently of the large recording companies.
An early version of the Napster
Web site advertised the fact that users could find their favourite
music without "wading through
page after page of unknown artists": see
n. 6 above, at 6. The plaintiff record companies claim that the
"recordings of every artist
on the Billboard Top 200C as well as every
sound recording on the Billboard Hot 100 C can be located on and
downloaded from Napster":
see n.3 above, at 15.
Section 1008 was introduced
against the background of increasingly available DAT technologies. The
primary purpose of the AHRA was
to grant the right to consumers to home
record copyrighted material in exchange for a levy on, and the
implementation of copyright
protection mechanisms in, "digital audio
recording devices" as defined by the Act. The AHRA constituted the
legislative recognition
of a compromise reached between the recording
industry and the electronics industry in 1989 when both groups met in
Athens, Greece,
to form an industry cooperative. See further Gosse E,
"The RIAA Could Not Stop the Rio - MP3 Files and the Audio Home
Recording Act",
U.S.F.L. Rev.
Rosenberg S, "Anticipating Technology: A Statute Bytes the Dust in
Industry Association of America v Diamond Multimedia Systems Inc.
Vill. L. Rev.
Section 1001 defines a "digital
audio recording device" as: "Any machine or device of a type commonly
distributed to individuals
for use by individuals, whether or not
included with or as part of some other machine or device, the digital
recording function of
which is designed or marketed for the primary
purpose of, and that is capable of, making a digital audio copied
recording for private
[1984] USSC 14
180 F. 3d 1072
(9th Cir. 1999).
A "digital music recording" is defined as: "[a] material object (i) in
which are fixed, in a digital recording format, only sounds,
material, statements, or instructions incidental to those fixed sounds,
if any; and (ii) from which the sounds and material can
be perceived,
reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either directly or with the aid
of a machine or device": 17 U.S.C.  1001(5)(a).
Ibid at 1077-1078.
17 USC  1001(5)(B)
states that: "A 'digital music recording' does not include a material
object (i) in which fixed sounds consist
entirely of spoken word
recordings; or (ii) in which one or more computer programs are fixed,
except that a digital musical recording
may contain statements or
instructions constituting the fixed sounds and incidental material, and
statements or instructions to be
used directly or indirectly in order
to bring about the perception, reproduction, or communication of the
fixed sounds and incidental
Ibid at 1078 referring to
U.S.C. 1001(3).
curiae brief of U.S. Copyright Office and U.S. Department of Justice at
http://www.loc.gov/copyright/docs/napsteramicus.html.
[1963] USCA2 234
316 F. 2d 304
(2nd Cir. 1963). See further
Polygram International
Publishing Inc. -v- Nevada/TIG Inc.
855 F. Supp 1314
Inc. -v- Cherry Auction
[1996] USCA9 196
76 F.3d 259
(9th Cir. 1996) at
See Ferron W
& Daley-Watson C, "On-line Copyright Issues: Recent Cases and
Legislation Affecting Internet and Other Service Providers
Publishers", Section IV(C) at
http://www.seedandberry.com/online_copyright_issues.htm.
Corp. of America -v- Universal City Studios Inc.
[1984] USSC 14
(1984) at 434.
For e.g. in
Gershwin Publishing Corp. -v- Columbia Artists
Management Inc.
[1971] USCA2 272
443 F.2d 1159
(2nd Cir. 1971) the defendant
lacked the contractual ability to control the direct infringer. This
notwithstanding, the court held
that the defendants were in a position
to police the direct infringers due to the defendant's "pervasive
participation in the formation
and direction" of the direct infringers,
including promoting and advertising them (at 1163). See also
Inc. -v- Cherry Auction Inc.
[1996] USCA9 196
76 F. 3d 259
(9th Cir. 1996)
Davis -v- E.I. DuPont de Nemours & Co.
F.Supp. 612 (S.D.N.Y.
Polygram International Publishing Inc. -v- Nevada/TIG Inc.
F. Supp.1314, at 1328-29 (Mass. Dist. Ct. 1994).
The court ruled that the plaintiff
had failed to provide sufficient evidence of, inter alia, lack of
authorisation on behalf of the
organisers.
Above, note 64 at 1328.
Artists Music -v-
Reed Publishing
31 U.S.P.Q. 2d 1623 (S.D.N.Y.
Above note 64 at 1330.
[1996] USCA9 196
76 F. 3d 259
(9th Cir. 1996).
This decision was referred to by
Justice Patel in her ruling on the motion for preliminary injunction
against Napster on 26 July
Ibid at 262.
[1971] USCA2 272
443 F.2d 1159
(2nd Cir. 1971).
Ibid at 263.
Ibid at 263.
However, the users could simply
re-register with Napster under an alternative user name: See further
Wheeler M, "Napster reloads
Metallica fans", ZDNet, 1 June 2000 at
http://www.zdnet.com/zdnn/stories/news/0,4586,2580227,00.html
See further
Hansen E & Bowman L, "Court: Napster filters must be foolproof"
http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-6549898.html.
See further
Sutel S, "BMG ends Napster war", AustralianIT, 1 November 2000 at
http://australianit.com.au/common/storyPage/0,3811,1370041^442,00.html
Inc. -v- Cherry Auction Inc.
[1996] USCA9 196
76 F. 3d 259
1996) at 264;
Sony -v- Universal City Studios
[1984] USSC 14
Inc. -v- Cherry Auction Inc.
[1996] USCA9 196
76 F. 3d 259
(9th Cir. 1996)
at 261 citing
Sony-v- Universal City Studios Inc.
[1984] USSC 14
at 435 on this issue.
n. 61 above, at 1162. See also
Universal City Studios -v-
Sony Corp. of America
[1982] USCA9 60
659 F. 2d 963
at 975 (9th Cir. 1981)
(reversed on other grounds).
Cable/Home Communication Corp. -v- Network Productions Inc.
F. 2d 829 (11th Cir. 1990) at 846. See also
Publishing Corp. -v- Columbia Artists Management
[1971] USCA2 272
Sega Enters Ltd -v- MAPHIA
Supp. 679 (N.D.
Cal. 1994) at 686-687.
n. 67 above, at 264.
800 F.2d 59
(3rd Cir. 1986).
Ibid, at 264.
Playboy Enterprises
Inc. v Russ Hardenburgh Inc.
982 F.Supp. 503
, 514 (N.D.
Ohio 1997).
Tech. Center v Netcom On-line Communication Serv. Inc.
F. Supp. at 1375.
Borland J, "Court adjourns without decision in Napster Case", at
http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-2895878.html.
n. 6 above, at
n. 3 above, at
Ibid at 264.
[1984] USSC 14
464 U.S. 417
Id at 438: "[t]he only contact
between Sony and the users of the Betamax ... occurred at the moment of
Ibid at 439.
CBS Songs Ltd -v- Amstrad Consumer Electronics plc
and Another
[1988] UKHL 15
(1988) 11 IPR 1
See 35 U.S.C.  271(c).
Ibid at 442. Notwithstanding the
Supreme Court's decisive ruling in
contributory infringement claims against manufacturers of electronic
consumer goods which 'facilitate' copyright infringement. NBC, ABC and
CBS, the three major U.S. television networks, recently initiated
proceedings against SONICblue Inc, the makers of the first
Internet-ready personal digital video recorder. The television networks
allege that SONICblue's ReplayTV 4000 allows users to make and
distribute illegal copies of television programs, which would violate
their copyrights by allowing users to distribute copies of programs
over the Internet. See further
http://www.siliconvalley.com/docs/news/tech/071594.htm
That is, recording a television
programme for viewing at a more convenient time.
See further
Corp. v Lorenzo and Sons Pty Ltd
[1991] FCA 617
(1992) 22 IPR 245.
Note however that Australia has
not yet acceded to either treaty.
Paragraphs 35-37 & 81 of Schedule 1 to the
Amendment (Digital Agenda) Act
There is also the possibility
that users of Napster could be held liable under s132(2) of the Act.
This section makes it an offence
to "distribut[e] infringing copies [of
of the copyright owner".
Certain fair dealings are also permitted for the purposes of criticism
or review, for reporting news and for use of works in judicial
proceedings or the giving of professional advice.
See also the similar wording of
s103C in relation to the sound recording copyright.
TCN Channel Nine
& Ors v Network Ten
[2001] FCA 108.
This is particularly so given
that the scope of the fair dealing defence under Australian law is less
flexible than the U.S. doctrine
of fair use.
Amendment Act
(Cth). Section 135ZZN would have
conferred a statutory right to copy sound recordings for private
domestic use of the person making
the copy. Cf Germany, which has one
of the most comprehensive copyright levy systems anywhere in the world:
see Art52a of German
http://www.ifrro.org/laws/law_germany.html
A German court recently ordered Hewlett-Packard to reveal how many CD-R
and CD-RW drives it has sold in the country during the
last three and a
half years. The case centered on the use of CD recording equipment to
duplicate music CDs. Germany levies a per-unit
fee on other types of
recording equipment, and the music industry wanted computer-based
drives to be included as well: see Geyer
H, "Arbitration Board at the
German Patent Office confirms levy for CD writers - Higher royalties
for digital copying" at
http://www.gema.de/eng/updates/pm_cdbrenner.html.
[1993] HCA 10
[1965] NSWR 405.
Karno -v- Pathe
Freres Pathephone Ltd
(1909) 100 LT 260 (KB).
[1975] HCA 26
(1975) 133 CLR 1
considering the early English decisions of
Falcon -v- Famous
Players Film Co Ltd
[1926] 2 KB 474
-v- Hulton & Co Ltd
[1923-1928] MacG Cop Cas 51
Songs Ltd -v- Amstrad Consumer Electronics plc and Another
[1988] UKHL 15
International Inc -v- Hanimex Corp Ltd
[1987] FCA 379
(1987) 77 ALR 456
APRA Ltd -v- Jain
(1990) 18 IPR 663
News Pty Ltd -v- Copyright Agency Ltd
(1996) 34 IPR 53.
Records Inc. -v- Charly Records Ltd
(Rimer J, 22 March
2000) referred to in Dickens P, "When is an Authorisation an
Authorisation?",
[2000] 7 EIPR 339.
An interesting parallel can be
drawn here between the facts in the Moorhouse case and the widespread
use of University computer networks
in the downloading of MP3 music
files: see King B, Campus Music Trades Continue" at
http://www.wired.com/news/school/0,1383,45807,00.html
[1999] FCA 1355
(1999) 46 IPR 321
News Pty Ltd -v- Copyright Agency Ltd
(1996) 136 ALR 273
Microsoft Corporation and Others -v- Marks and Anor
Ibid at 12-13.
News Pty Ltd and Others -v- Copyright Agency Ltd
[1988] UKHL 15
(1988) 11 IPR 1.
Amstrad had focused its marketing strategy on this feature, one
advertisement stating that its new model: "... now features 'hi-speed
dubbing' enabling you to make duplicate recordings from one cassette to
another, record direct from any source and then make a copy
and you can
even make a copy of your favourite cassette": Id at 8.
Similar reasoning was applied in
the Australian decision of
WEA International Inc v Hanimex
[1987] FCA 379
(1987) 77 ALR 456
Records -v- Audio Magnetics
[1979] FSR 1.
For example, his Lordship states
at page seven of his judgment that "[t]hese recording facilities may be
used for lawful or unlawful
purposes". In words reminiscent of the
Supreme Court in
his Lordship states at
page 9: "There is nothing express or implied in the Act which inhibits
the invention, manufacture, sale or
advertisement of electronic
equipment capable of lawful or unlawful reproduction".
[1982] Ch 91.
[1987] FCA 379
(1987) 77 ALR 456.
(1985) 6 IPR 257.
Note also that a person may be
liable as a joint or concurrent tortfeasor in relation to copyright
infringement by involvement in
the tortious acts which constitute the
infringement: See
Henley Arch Pty Ltd -v- Clarendon Homes
(Aust) Pty Ltd
(1998) 41 IPR 443
Corp. -v- Auschina Polaris Pty Ltd
[1996] FCA 1069
(1996) 71 FCR 231
CBS Songs Ltd -v- Amstrad Consumer Electronics plc
[1988] UKHL 15
at 12-15. Such involvement will be established where the
person: "... made the infringing conduct his own in the sense that the
deliberately, wilfully and knowingly pursued a course of
conduct that was likely to constitute the infringing conduct or was
indifferent to the risk of it":
Henley Arch Pty
Ltd-v- Clarendon Homes (Aust) Pty Ltd
(1998) 41 IPR 443
[1975] HCA 26
Adopted at the 15th Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Seventh
National People's Congress on September 7 1990 and effective
1 1991 (Official Translation).
See Article 2. As a result of the 1998 government reorganization, the
Chinese government established the State Intellectual Property
(SIPO) to monitor IPR protection and devise effective enforcement
measures in China: see United States Trade Representative
(USTR), 2000
National Trade Estimate on Foreign Trade Barriers (NTE), 31 March 2000
http://www.ustr.gov/reports/nte/2000/china.pdf.
The general
approach to drafting, and that adopted in Australia and the U.S., is to
define the exclusive rights of the copyright
owner and then to simply
state that infringement occurs when a person other than the copyright
owner does any one of the exclusive
rights contained in the copyright.
Unfortunately, the Chinese approach creates inconsistencies between the
rights comprised in the
infringement.
outlines a number of acts that may attract "administrative penalties".
The acts listed in this Article include: "... reproducing
distributing the work, for commercial purposes, without the permission
of the copyright owner ... reproducing and distributing
recording ... produced by others without the permission of its
producer". cf n. 29 and n. 90 above. See further Hanes K,
Infringement - not just costly, it's a crime", IP Asia (Dec. 1996), 31.
Note however
that it is the subject of administrative penalties under Article 46(2).
This appears
to be the approach of the Beijing First Intermediate People's Court in
the "Beijing Online" case discussed below.
Article 47 of the
Law Implementing Regulations
1991 ("Regulations"),
expressly provides that "Audio and video recordings produced and
distributed in the territory of China by foreign
producers shall be
protected by Copyright Law".
See the Special 301 Report of the United States Trade Representative at
http://www.ustr.gov/enforcement/special.pdf
and Zhang A, "Proposed Copyright Law Promises Better Remedies", IP Asia
(April 1999), 5; "China to Formulate Online Copyright Protections",
ChinaOnline, 8 May 2000 at
http://www.chinaonline.com/refer/legal/currentnews/secure/C00050170.asp.
Reported in
Sun A, "Beijing Appeal Court Ruled on a Major Case: Copyright Liability
for Internet Service Providers Determined", Asia
Pacific Law Institute
Update Vol. 1 No. 1, January 2000 at
http://www.apli.org./
Ibid at p 3.
some uncertainty as to whether the performance right covers only live
performances (for example recitation). Some commentators
argue that the
right should be interpreted so as to cover, inter alia, the performance
in public of sound recordings: See Feng P,
Intellectual Property in
China, (1997: China, Sweet & Maxwell) at p 101.
Schlesinger M & Smith E,
"Crimes of Copyright Infringement Explained: The Prospect for Strong
Judicial Enforcement Against Copyright
Infringement", in Cohen M, Bang
A & Mitchell S,
Chinese Intellectual Property Law
and Practice
, (1999: The Hague, Kluwer Law International) at
alternative translation of the Copyright Law substitutes "enjoyment"
for "self-entertainment".
Chengsi Z, Intellectual Property Enforcement in China: Leading Cases
and Commentary, (1997: China, Sweet & Maxwell) at p 22.
Ibid at p 59.
n. 129 above, at p 237.
Article 10(5).
See "China Regulates
Audio-Visual Online Commerce", China Online, 28 March 2000 at
http://www.chinaonline.com/issues/internet_policy/currentnews/open/c00032705.asp
"Ministry of Cultural Affairs Promulgated New Rules on On-line
Audio-Visual Transactions", Asia Pacific Law Institute, March 2000
http://www.apli.org/aplinews.html
Chang T & Chong C, "New PRC Internet Regulations", Coudert
Brothers, March 2000 at
http://www.coudert.com/practice/elawasiamar2000.htm.
Persons who were engaged in the
business of online dealings in audiovisual products were given until 1
May 2000 to obtain a licence
in accordance with the Circular.
In December 1999, Sony Music,
EMI, Warner Music, Universal and China Records Guangzhou instituted
litigation in the Second Intermediate
People's Court of Beijing against
two pirate MP3 sites operating out of China. Both of the sites
reportedly offered numerous domestic
and international MP3 recordings
for download. See "Internet settlement in China leads to joint IFPI/My
Web copyright campaign",
IFPI, 23 March 2000 at
http://www.ifpi.org/press/20000323.html
"My Web Denies China Pirate Web Site Accusation", ChinaOnline, 22
December 1999 at
http://www.chinaonline.com/issues/internet_policy/newsarchive/secure/9122120.asp.
On 15 August 2000, three people were arrested by Hong Kong Customs for
illegally offering MP3 songs for download: see Lo C, "Three
over HK pirate music Web site", South China Morning Post, 16 August
http://www.technologypost.com/internet/Daily/20000816083101135.asp.
Ricketson S,
Exclusive Rights of Copyright Owner & Infringement, The Law of
Intellectual Property : Copyright, Designs &
Confidential
Information, (LBC) p 164 (2000).
Borland J, "RIAA: Gnutella not yet a threat" at
http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-5383626.htm.
53-54h of the German Copyright Law (English translation at
http://www.ifrro.org/laws/law_germany.html
See also Knight W, "HP dragged through German courts over music
http://news.zdnet.co.uk/story/0,,s2082776,00.html
Gruenwald J, "Digital copyright tug o' war" at
http://www.zdnet.com/zdnn/stories/news/0,4586,2784806,00.html
See Bowman L
& Olsen S, "Free-speech lawsuit targets record industry" at
http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-6205709.html
McCullagh D, "Watermark Holes? C'est La Vie " at
http://www.wired.com/news/politics/0
,1283,43390,00.html.
Brown J, "SDMI Cracked!",
12 October 2000 at
http://www.salon.com/tech/log12000/10/12/sdmi_hacked/index.html
Borland J, "Hacker cracks Microsoft anti-piracy software", at
http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-7590303.html.
See Borland
J, "Protected CDs quietly slip into stores" at
http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-6604222.html
Smith T, "Anti-rip CD system bypassed" at
http://www.theregister.co.uk/content/54/20766.html.
While it is
conceivable that future improvements in technological protection
measures may alter this situation, two further points
should be noted:
(1) Such technological measures cannot be 'backdated', that is, applied
to copyright content already in the marketplace.
However, a similar
effect may be possible through implementing such measures in
distribution mechanisms (e.g. file sharing software);
and (2) 'Crack
proof' technologies appear to be the stuff of myth and legend, as
evidenced by the proliferation of 'key generators'
and 'cracks' for
popular software applications: see generally n. 158 and n 159 above and
http://astalavista.box.sk./
due to the fact that most circumvention technologies are developed with
non-commercial motives, namely the technical challenge
involved and the
subsequent peer esteem. The developers of such technologies will in
most cases be difficult, if not impossible to
locate, thereby
frustrating attempts to prosecute them for any relevant breaches of
anti-circumvention laws. Further, the fact that
circumventing a technological protection measure is not prohibited
under Australian law only serves to exacerbate the
'home taping'
problem in the digital environment.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter