URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/DTLJ/1999/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:54:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Willis, Mike --- "Review of Alderson, Mathew (General Editor) Current Issues in Music Law (St Leonards, NSW: Prospect Media 1998)" [1999] DigTechLawJl 18; (1999) 1(3) Digital Technology Law Journal 18
Review of Alderson, Mathew (General Editor)
Issues in Music Law
(St Leonards, NSW: Prospect Media 1998)
Pacific Intellectual Property Law Institute, School of Law, Murdoch
This collection of papers
is principally directed at the Australian music industry although, in
examining many of the legal issues,
contributors draw on US and
European case law and legal developments, as well as international
perspectives.
introduces this text as a collection of articles concerning legal
issues (then) currently of particular interest to the
music industry.
The articles, we are told, have been ordered in a way which places the
most pressing or controversial topics at the
forefront. Towards the
latter part of the collection are those pieces dedicated to the more
'ongoing' matters. Each paper within
the anthology is designated a
Some of the
contributions were prepared specifically for this book while others,
the reader is told, have appeared in earlier publications.
which of the articles belong in which category is not revealed.
In the eyes of the editor, the most
controversial issue claimed to be facing the music industry was centred
around (then) recent
legislative changes to the
(Cth) and whether such changes were likely to
lead to a fall in the price of CDs. One is inclined to say that, as
controversial as
that issue was - and possibly remains so - it
constituted but one of several contentious intellectual property legal
issues within
the music industry at that time. Moreover, a number of
these issues may well prove to have greater impact on the industry in
long term and, indeed, several of them are discussed in this book.
Chapters 1, 2 and 3 discuss
the controversy mentioned above and deal with the 1998
amendments which have substantially removed
the parallel importation provisions applicable to sound recordings. The
discussions reflect
both sides to the argument with two decrying the
move and one in support of it.
contributors amongst this initial grouping include the Executive
Director of the Australian Record Industry Association and a
analysts at the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. One
does not have to be a legal genius to work out the
direction from which
these two parties approach the issue. The third contributor is a pair
of legal practitioners who talk with quite
a deal of passion and
conviction about the amendments as constituting an 'extremely
short-sighted' approach with potential 'devastating'
effects and likely
'irreparable' damage for the Australian record industry.
The articles usefully canvass the breadth of
issues which characterised a very protracted, if not energised, debate
in Australia.
With the benefit of hindsight, after twelve months or so
of the amendments taking effect, what seems clear is that the above
predictions along with another much-touted one of 'certain
detriment to the music industry and to Australian cultural development'
have failed to materialise. One should add, of course, that neither has
the projected gain been delivered. The price of CDs appears
been only marginally reduced.
At the same time, the issue continues to run. A
recent turn of events has seen the Australian Competition and Consumer
institute legal proceedings against Universal Music, Sony
Music, Warner Music, the Australian Record Industry Association and
Piracy Investigation Pty Ltd. The Commission is alleging that
these parties have taken unlawful action in order to discourage or
prevent Australian businesses from selling competitively priced
'parallel imports' of compact discs.
Moreover, the Government appears concerned not to let the matter rest.
A new amendment is now before the parliament designed to close
perceived loophole in the previous legislation. Its aim is to extend
application of the 1998 amendments to the
to cover 'enhanced' CDs.
Chapter 4 discusses the proposals outlined in the
Australian Government's 1997 Discussion Paper,
Performers'
Intellectual Property Rights
to strengthen the protection currently afforded performers' under the
. The authors take the view that the Paper's proposals
for a range of new copyright-style rights for performers may stifle
industry practice and development. They advocate instead the
introduction of a 'more effective and simpler' right of exploitation
for performers. The proposals remain under consideration by the
Government as part of a larger issue as to whether or not Australia
should accede to the WPPT.
Chapters 5 and 6 are two 'big
picture' articles examining the evolving role of media technology in
the music industry. Presumably
delivered to an audience of music
industry executives, these are articles largely about the need to
maintain 'control'. This is control
by musical organisations: control
of music, its presentation, marketing and exploitation. The challenges
posed by MP3 technology,
the potential for copyright law to be subsumed
by contract law, or the legal challenges posed by direct linkage
between creator and
consumer fail to arouse debate.
Perhaps with a more practical bent, Chapter 7 discusses the
adequacy and interaction of music-related copyright law and the
The authors take a wide-ranging look at an interactive future
maintaining that the challenges posed by the Internet are
technological,
practical and philosophical. They provide a
comprehensive look at the Internet processes which challenge copyright,
including the
act of making copyright material available on-line,
reproductions made in subsequent transmission and audiostreaming. It
these issues in the context of the
Digital Agenda
1997 Discussion Paper.
Notwithstanding the advent of the Government's
(Digital Agenda) Bill 1999
issues raised about the effectiveness of
exemptions to infringement within a digital environment, enforcement
and approaches to ISP
liability remain current.
8 and 9 deal with the interesting issue of sampling in music recording
and the challenges that such a process poses for both
the industry and
the courts. An industry perspective advocating a fair and reasonable
negotiated licensing regime sits astride a
legal officer's call for a
new approach to be taken to sampling by both the music industry and the
The final three
chapters then usefully examine the pitfalls and practicalities of
recording and music publishing agreements.
text is a coherent collection of articles touching on many of the
different facets of intellectual property law as it applies
music industry. There is much useful information about the relevant law
as well as music industry practice related to the
practical issues of
recording and publishing agreements. Whilst the battle over the revised
provisions concerning parallel imports
of sound recordings may have
been waged and lost, as indicated here, the debate nevertheless lives
For readers, the reality
is that copyright law is increasingly subject to the pressures for
reform brought on by technological developments.
There may possibly be
few areas where this is more manifest than that relating to the music
industry. Just as one reaches a point
where it looks safe to draw
breath from the unrelenting pressure to make suitable reforms within
the law, an urgency mounts to implement
more of them.
An obvious example of where that pressure is about
to effect change is the
The proposed new right of communication to the public will affect
owners of musical works and sound recordings, and performers will
longer have a diffusion right in fixations of their performances
because this activity will be incorporated into a more broadly
right of broadcast. Also, the provisions relating to technological
protection measures and rights management information
might be seen as
favourable to those players in the music industry wanting to avoid the
(so-called) 'disastrous' consequences of
music-on-demand. Clearly,
given its publication date, the text does not deal with the detail and
implications of what the Government
now proposes in the Bill.
Issues in Music Law
retails at $145 00 and is published by
Prospect Media Pty Ltd.
Two equally contentious issues that come to mind are the ongoing
development of MP3 technology and the implications for 'fair dealing'
copying of projected moves towards expanded copyright protection.
Another issue that is then taken up in this book is that concerning
challenge to music-related copyright protection posed by the digital
environment.
Australian Labor Party statement opposing the reform, quoted in
Megalogenis, G, 'Reality Check',
The Weekend Australian
10-11 July 1999.
See 'Tuning up for the Net',
The Weekend Australian
10-11 July 1999.
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, Media Release 166/99, 3
September 1999. The 'unlawful action' pertains to alleged
breaches of
sections 47, 46 and 45 of the
Trade Practices Act
1976 (Cth) involving (respectively) exclusive dealing, misuse of market
power and arrangements having the purpose or likely effect
substantially lessening competition.
These CDs contain copyright material additional to the sound recording,
eg film clips or photographs.
Australia. Joint publication of Attorney-General's Department and the
Department of Communication and the Arts,
Performers'
Intellectual Property Rights: Scope of extended rights for performers
, (Canberra: 1997) at <
http://www.dcita.gov.au/
The World Intellectual Property Organisation's Performances and
Phonograms Treaty 1996.
Australia. Attorney-General's Department and Department of
Communications and the Arts
(Canberra: AGPS, 1997).
This is apart from a very brief reference in Chapter 7 to then
foreshadowed copyright law reforms re the 'digital agenda'.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter