URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AboriginalLawB/1997/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:42:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clarke, Jenny --- "Should Parliament Enact the Hindmarsh Island Bill 1996?" [1997] AboriginalLawB 15; (1997) 3(89) Aboriginal Law Bulletin 15
Should Parliament Enact the Hindmarsh Island Bill 1996?
By Jennifer Clarke
The Hindmarsh Island Bill 1996 is currently before the Senate.
If enacted, it will remove the need for any further inquiry
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Heritage Protection Act
(Cth) (`the
Heritage Protection Act
') into the significance of
Kumarangk (Hindmarsh Island).
The Kumarangk area may or may not be of gender-restricted traditional
significance. However, the Bill provides a model for resolution
Indigenous heritage conflicts. I argue below that legislation of this kind is
undesirable in the Indigenous heritage context.
The Bill will prevent a declaration under
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Heritage Protection Act
being made over the bridge area. It will make
any existing applications for the area's protection ineffective
and prevent the area being protected on the application of
other Aboriginal people on different grounds.
Commonwealth power to enact the Bill
The Bill seems to fall within the Commonwealth Parliament's power to make laws
with respect to the people of any race for whom it
is deemed necessary to make
special laws. A `special' law is one which
operates differentially
the people of a
can be `special' if it
confers a benefit or imposes a disadvantage
those people.
Whether a special law is
`necessary' is for Parliament to judge, although the High Court might find
unconstitutional a law which
is a `manifest abuse of the power'.
The `races' power extends to `any identifiable sub-group among Australian
Aboriginals', Indigenous cultural heritage (even if it
is of general
significance to other Australians), and Indigenous land entitlements (native
Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Heritage Protection Act
is within the power. As an
amendment to it, the Bill also seems to be within the power. Parliament's
motives (avoiding a `further'
inquiry), and the Bill's `purposes' (allowing the
bridge to proceed), are irrelevant to its constitutionality. The fact that the
Bill affects non-Aborigines and their activities (for example the bridge and
its developers) is also not relevant if it has a `special'
operation on
Indigenous people,
in this case,
Ngarrindjeri people.
Is the Bill necessary?
The Bill is not necessary to ensure that the bridge may be built. Under
Heritage Protection Act
, the Minister has a discretion as
to whether s/he makes a declaration for the area's protection. There are some
steps that the Minister
must take before exercising this discretion (the most
significant being obtaining a report--see below). But the discretion is an
one, confined only by the scope of the Act and the rules of administrative law.
If the Minister decides that the bridge should
proceed, s/he may refuse to make
a declaration.
section 10(1)(c)
Heritage Protection Act
, the Minister must
commission a report where there is a live,
application for an
area's protection. This requirement may apply even when a prior report has been
However, French J in
suggested that, in some cases, it might be enough for the Minister
to consider aspects of a prior report. The Minister need not commission
report if the application is frivolous or vexatious. Applications must meet a
standard of precision--for example by specifying
the area sought to be
protected--before the Minister is required to obtain a report.
A report clearly must be obtained where there has been no previous report.
There has never been a valid
report about Kumarangk/Hindmarsh
. Two reports have been commissioned, but for reasons of
administrative law (the Saunders report)
or constitutional law (the Mathews report),
neither has any legal status. This outcome is unfortunate
(not least from the taxpayers' point of view). But the principles applied
the courts in overturning the two reports are unrelated to the substance of the
heritage dispute itself. There is a public policy
argument that Parliament
should overturn such outcomes only with legislation of
application
. General amendment of the
Heritage Protection Act
be preferable amendment specific to this dispute.
If the application on which Justice Mathews' report was based has not been
the Minister must commission
report (by someone other than a judge). Preparation of a new
report should not be as costly and time-consuming as preparation of
earlier reports. The reporter is required to provide affected persons with
procedural fairness, but need not conduct a full
The parties likely to make representations are identified
and their submissions prepared. A new reporter could take into account
collected by earlier reporters, provided s/he accords affected persons
procedural fairness regarding that material (including
a chance to rebut it),
and then makes up his or her own mind about its weight. The earlier reports do
not contain irrelevant information
to which the reporter should not have
Kumarangk and religion
Aboriginal land-related traditions are religious traditions.
In other contexts, the term `religion' has been broadly
defined by the courts so as to encompass Aboriginal tradition.
The three reports on Kumarangk's/Hindmarsh Island's traditional significance
and the threat to that significance posed by the bridge
proposal point to no
clear conclusion. The Saunders report found that the area was of traditional
significance to Ngarrindjeri women
and that the bridge threatened that
significance. In the light of subsequent public statements by some Ngarrindjeri
people and evidence
before the Stevens Royal Commission, this conclusion is not
reliable. However, Justice Stevens' report was based on evidence from
Ngarrindjeri women and also cannot be regarded as conclusive.
Justice Mathews' report is the most reliable, but its conclusions are
ambivalent. Her Honour said
it was open to the Minister to find that
Hindmarsh Island was a `significant Aboriginal area'
Protection Act
, but found
insufficient evidence of the threat of injury
or desecration posed by the bridge
. The report suggests that Ngarrindjeri
women may have been more forthcoming with information about
had the present Commonwealth Minister appointed a female Minister to consider
the Mathews report in his stead. It seems unfortunate
that he did not agree to
this request.
These findings leave open the
possibility
that the area is of religious
significance, and that its significance is threatened for reasons which
Ngarrindjeri women do not wish
to discuss publicly or with a male Minister. If
is significant
, and if that significance
is threatened
these details may emerge in a different forum--for example, in a complaint to a
United Nations committee (see below).
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) and international
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) (`the
') embodies
international standards of non-discrimination
(section 9)
and equality before
(section 10)
in relation to freedom of religion; standards found in the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination.
and the Convention do not protect freedom of
--they protect it against discriminatory
interference, including by governments (State, Territory and Commonwealth), or
unequal enjoyment
under legislation (State, Territory and
Commonwealth). However, the
does not limit the Commonwealth
Parliament's power
discriminatory laws
Nor does the
Constitution
stop the Commonwealth
Parliament from enacting such laws,
although the States are prevented from doing so by the combined operation of
section 109
Constitution
, the `inconsistency of laws'
But racial non-discrimination standards are an issue for the Commonwealth
internationally. Australia allows complaints to the United
Nations Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD). Arguably, the Bill would place
Australia in breach of our obligations
under the Convention, prompting a
Ngarrindjeri complaint. The decisions of international human rights bodies are
not binding on Australia
but, as the Tasmanian gay laws case
demonstrated, complaints to these bodies can embarrass
The CERD serves two functions: it receives both periodic reports from nation
states about their implementation of the Convention,
and individual complaints
the CERD accepted uncritically
the government's explanation of the operation of
Australian law.
However, the Committee
might engage in a more critical evaluation of Australian law if faced with an
individual complaint about it.
If Ngarrindjeri complained to the CERD, they
must first take reasonable steps to exhaust domestic remedies.
`Racial discrimination' is defined in the Convention
as including (the making of) distinctions
which have the purpose or effect of interfering with the equal
enjoyment of freedom of religion. States parties undertake to take
measures to
prohibit and eliminate such racial discrimination.
There has been some Australian litigation about racial
discrimination and Kumarangk/Hindmarsh Island. The South Australian Supreme
ruled that establishment of the
Stevens Royal Commission would not infringe section 9 of the
outlaws discriminatory acts as defined in the Convention), partly because the
`basis' of the decision to establish the Commission
was not the
the Ngarrindjeri people, but the
allegations of fabrication
Ngarrindjeri tradition.
However, it is not clear that the obligation to refrain from racial
discrimination should be interpreted so narrowly. If the South
Supreme Court is right, section 9 is ineffective to protect Indigenous people
from interference of a kind
which would not be visited on Christian
, even where it is justified on public interest grounds. Would an
Australian government establish an inquiry into whether Christian
beliefs were fabricated? Would the Commonwealth Parliament legislate so as to
remove protection for the free exercise of
religion by members of a church?
Parliament sometimes does curtail religious freedom in the name of morality,
national security or
public order
which provides a justification for this Bill). But it usually does so with
laws of general application
(for example laws preventing bigamy), not
laws explicitly focused on a particular area or racial group
The question of whether Parliament would treat other religions similarly is not
easy to answer because of the difficulty of comparing
Aboriginal religion with
Christian religion. Christian religion is essentially `private' and
individualistic: it seldom impinges
on the `public' issue of land development.
But land is the essence of Aboriginal religion, even when Aboriginal beliefs
are `secret' (in other words, gender-restricted). Anglo-Australians,
accustomed to dichotomous thinking, find it easy to separate
religious `belief'
from `action'. But this dichotomy is itself a cultural construct. If we are to
take minority religious beliefs
seriously, we should not insist that they
divide the mind from the body in the way that Anglo-Australians do.
The fact that Aboriginal religion is different from more familiar religions
does not justify its discriminatory treatment, although
it may necessitate
treatment (such as special heritage protection) in order that
all religions are treated
. In this context, the government's
attitude to the Bill and the
Heritage Protection Act
is rather alarming.
The Commonwealth's position (a position it also takes on the
Native Title
) is that the
Heritage Protection Act
is a `special measure'.
`Special measures' are permitted
by the Convention and
. A `special measure' is one taken for the sole purpose of
securing the adequate advancement of a disadvantaged racial group to ensure
members' equal enjoyment of human rights. Such measures must not lead to the
maintenance of separate rights for different racial
groups after the objectives
for which they were taken have been achieved. Thus, special measures have a
temporary, `catch-up' character;
they are directed to
disadvantage in the
enjoyment of human rights
. Some involve what would otherwise be racial
discrimination, because they interfere with the equal enjoyment of human rights
short term in order to bring about equal enjoyment of those rights in
the longer term. However, other special measures will not have
character--they will merely bring about equality in the short term in order to
ensure equality in the longer term.
Unfortunately, the High Court has ruled that
permanent measures which
respond to Aboriginal cultural difference
(for example land rights, and
probably heritage protection laws) are included in the category of `special
This decision depends on an
interpretation of `racial discrimination' which includes all kinds of racial
distinctions, benign and
invidious. However, arguably
measures which respond
appropriately to cultural difference
are not racially discriminatory.
Rather, they are equality measures. Therefore, such measures would fall outside
of the definitions
of `racial discrimination' and `special measures'.
Thus, I would take issue with the government's view that the
Protection Act
is a special measure which can be repealed or amended at
whim without Australia suffering international criticism.
Australia is obliged, under the Convention, to guarantee
racial equality before the law in the enjoyment of freedom of religion.
One of the ways in which we might meet this
obligation is by enacting laws which treat Indigenous religion
treating it differently
, such as by according it the protection given by
Heritage Protection Act
. The Bill's removal of such an equality
measure from an Aboriginal group may breach this general obligation. It may not
be necessary
to demonstrate that race is the
of the different
treatment of Ngarrindjeri people, only that the
of the Bill on
Ngarrindjeri people is harsher than its impact on other Australians. The mere
fact that the religion of other Australians
is not protected by the
Protection Act
may be irrelevant if that religion is protected by some
other means.
In any complaint to an international body regarding the Bill, presumably it
will become necessary for Ngarrindjeri people to disclose
some details of their
religion. This could be a crucial issue, since CERD members include men.
The International Covenant on Civil and Political
The Covenant requires the
protection of specified
rights--freedom of religion
and rights of
minorities to their own culture and religion
--as well as non-discrimination in the protection and
enjoyment of those rights.
Complaints to
the United Nations Human Rights Committee (HRC) about breaches of the Covenant
can only be made after Ngarrindjeri
people have taken reasonable steps to
exhaust domestic remedies.
The `minority rights' article has been the subject of several complaints by
Indigenous people.
Expropriation of
Indigenous land for resource development can violate cultural rights, as could
quarrying, were its impact serious.
Cultural rights can be interfered with even
where Indigenous land ownership is not recognised. `Culture' includes
particular way of life associated with the use of land resources
Laws interfering with minority culture
must bear some proportionality to protection of the culture itself
Arguably, the present Bill is not
proportionate to the protection of Ngarrindjeri culture--on the contrary, it
denies Ngarrindjeri
people an opportunity to protect their culture.
The `minority rights' article
requires states parties to take affirmative
measures to protect minority cultures
--not merely refrain from interfering
with those cultures.
But the Bill removes
such a positive measure from one group of Indigenous people.
Measures to
ensure the effective participation of members of minority communities in
decisions which affect them
may also be required.
But the Bill denies this participation in the case of the
Ngarrindjeri.
Constitutional freedom of religion
Section 116
Constitution
provides in part: `The Commonwealth shall not make any
law ... for prohibiting the free exercise of any religion ... '. `Religion'
traditionally been given a broad meaning. However, `for prohibiting the free
exercise of any religion' has been read narrowly.
In the Stolen Generations
litigation,
the High Court has been asked
to expand its view of how a law may `[prohibit] the free exercise of any
The traditional view is that
section 116
will only be infringed by a law which has as its
prohibition
of the free exercise of religion
explicitly designed
religious freedom, not one which does so indirectly or one
which merely
with religion.
Other constitutional limitations have recently been found
to be infringed by laws which transgress them
in substance
But difficult questions about cultural
difference arise in assessing a law's
different religions. A law which authorises development on a particular site
may have no impact at all on non-Aboriginal religious
beliefs, but considerable
impact on local Aboriginal religious beliefs.
The same kinds of arguments might be made before the High Court in a
constitutional challenge to the Bill as could be made before
the CERD or the
HRC. But the constitutional guarantee is more difficult to infringe than
international human rights standards, because
what it outlaws are laws
prohibiting
freedom of religion, not laws
interfering with
freedom of religion. It is not clear that the Bill
exercise of Ngarrindjeri religion. A law with that purpose or effect may need
to do more that simply cut off from protection
under Commonwealth law an area
of religious significance.
Conclusions
The Bill probably is constitutional. However, it adds nothing to the `security'
of the bridge proposal. It will be unnecessary if
Ngarrindjeri `proponents' of
the area's traditional significance do not seek to press their claims. Even if
they do, the Minister
already has a broad discretion to refuse to make a
declaration. The Ngarrindjeri claims have never been the subject of a properly
constituted inquiry under the
Heritage Protection Act
. Since material
collected by the two earlier reporters could be taken into account by a
reporter appointed now, the proper approach
would be to appoint another
If the area is of religious or cultural significance to Ngarrindjeri people,
the Bill may place Australia in breach of its international
obligations.
Complaints by Ngarrindjeri people to UN bodies are to be expected, and some
could be successful.
Even if the area is of no traditional significance to Ngarrindjeri people, the
Bill provides a bad precedent. Dispute-specific legislation
seems to be a
favoured technique of the present government for dealing with unwanted outcomes
in Indigenous affairs. For example,
legislation to remove the
right to negotiate of the Waanyi people was proposed in relation to the Century
Zinc mine last year. There
is no place for such ad hoc legislation in a nation
which respects the rule of law and human rights.
On 9 January 1997, the Bill was
in its second reading.
For a history of the controversial
Kumarangk heritage dispute, see J Clarke, `Chronology of the
Kumarangk/Hindmarsh Island Affair',
Aboriginal Law Bulletin
Section 9 allows for the making of
an interim (up to 60 days) protection declaration, and section 10 for the
making of a permanent
protection declaration (for a specified period). These
declarations are made by the Commonwealth Minister. Section 18 allows for
making of a temporary (48 hours) protection declaration by an authorised
In the past, these applications have been
made by Ngarrindjeri women who claim the area is of gender- restricted
traditional significance.
Although it can affect the
of applications made in the past, the Bill doesn't operate
retrospectively. It doesn't operate to knock out those applications, it
prevents the Minister acting on them.
Native Title Act Case
[1995] HCA 47
(1995) 183 CLR
This view of the power as authorising both
benign and invidious discrimination is supported by a strong line of authority,
Koowarta v Bjelke-Petersen
[1982] HCA 27
(1982) 153 CLR 168
Tasmanian Dam Case
[1983] HCA 21
(1983) 158 CLR 1
Native Title Act Case
[1995] HCA 47
(1995) 183 CLR 373.
Native Title Act Case
[1995] HCA 47
(1995) 183 CLR
It is not clear what kind of a law would amount to such an abuse.
Native Title Act Case
[1995] HCA 47
(1995) 183 CLR
Tasmanian Dam Case
[1983] HCA 21
(1983) 158 CLR 1.
Native Title Act Case
[1995] HCA 47
(1995) 183 CLR
Tickner v Bropho
[1993] FCA 208
(1993) 114 ALR
Norvill v Chapman
[1995] FCAFC 1726
(1995) 133 ALR
Norvill v Chapman
[1995] FCAFC 1726
, the Full Federal Court held that Professor Saunders had failed to
comply with a prescribed statutory procedure in publicising her
Wilson v Minister for Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Affairs
, unreported, High Court, September
1996, the High Court held that the Minister's appointment of Justice Jane
Mathews as a reporter
under the Act was contrary to the constitutional doctrine
of separation of judicial power, and therefore invalid.
Since the applicants told Justice
Mathews that they were reluctant to disclose gender-restricted information to
her after they were
informed that a male Minister would consider her report, it
may be that they do not now wish to press the application and are willing
withdraw it. This would mean that the bridge could proceed immediately.
Minister for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Affairs v WA and Douglas
, unreported, Full Federal Court,
28 May 1996, and
Wilson v Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
, unreported, High Court, September 1996.
There is ample anthropological opinion
in support of this view. For example, see R Berndt and C Berndt,
of the first Australians: Aboriginal traditional life, past and present
(5th edition), Aboriginal Studies Press, Canberra, 1992.
See, for example, the views of the High
Church of the New Faith v Commissioner for Payroll Tax (Vic)
[1983] HCA 40
(1983) 154 CLR 120
, and those of Latham CJ in
Adelaide Company of Jehovah's
Witnesses v Commonwealth
[1943] HCA 12
(1943) 67 CLR 116.
This option was suggested by Burchett J
Norvill v Chapman
Pareroultja v Tickner
[1993] FCA 465
As discussed above, the
Constitution
authorises such laws. A constitutional limitation on racially discriminatory
laws would require a constitutional amendment or a change
in the High Court's
view of the `races' power.
Considering Australia's ninth periodic
report in 1993, the CERD accepted the Australian government's argument that the
Native Title Act
was a `special measure', when at least some of the
Act's provisions discriminate
native title holders.
Article 1.1.
Articles 2 and 5.
ALRM v SA and Stevens
[1995] SASC 5224
(1994) 64 SASR 551.
Adelaide Company of Jehovah's
Witnesses v Commonwealth
[1943] HCA 12
(1943) 67 CLR 116.
Article 1.4.
Article 2.2.
Gerhardy v Brown
[1985] HCA 11
(1985) 159 CLR
Political history could present
difficulties for this argument. For example, apartheid was justified on the
basis of difference.
However, the difference between apartheid and Aboriginal
heritage protection lies in their impact on genuine equality. As Brennan
, `the difference between land rights and apartheid is the
difference between home and a prison'.
Even if the Act
measure, the form which such measures take may not be entirely within the
government's discretion. Complaints relating
to a state party's
to provide `special measures' might be made to the CERD: see the comments of de
Zayas quoted by Sarah Pritchard, `Special measures'
in Race Discrimination
Commissioner,
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
, AGPS, p 192.
Article 18.
Article 27.
Articles 2 and 26.
Lubicon Lake Band v Canada
CCPR/C/38/D/167/1984, March 28, 1990;
Lansmann v Finland
CCPR/C/52/D/511/192,
Lovelace v Canada Communication
24/1977, UN Doc
CCPR/C/OP/ 1(1988), 86-90;
Kitok v Sweden
UN Doc CCPR/C/33/D/197/1985.
My discussion of this jurisprudence is taken from Sarah Pritchard, `Special
measures' in Race Discrimination
Commissioner,
Racial Discrimination Act
, AGPS, p 192.
General Comment on Article 27, 1994,
paragraph 7.
Lovelace v Canada
, noted above.
HRC General Comment on Article 27, 1994,
paragraph 6.2.
HRC General Comment on Article 27, 1994,
paragraph 7.
Kruger v Commonwealth
Bray v Commonwealth
No D5/95, heard February 1996.
In that case, Aboriginal people have
argued that the Norther Territory `protection' laws infringed their freedom of
religion by
removing them (or their children) altogether from Aboriginal
Krygger v Williams
[1912] HCA 65
and the views of Barwick CJ on the `establishment clause' of section
(1981) 146 CLR 559 at 579.
Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs v Lebanese Moslem Association
(1987) 71 ALR 578
the Full Federal Court determined that the deportation of an Imam, while it may
have interfered with the free exercise
of the Islamic religion, did not
prohibit that religion's free exercise. Other judges have expressed the view
that section 116 may
be infringed by a law which has the purpose, or perhaps
direct effect, of infringing religion in the manner proscribed. See Mason
(1981) 146 CLR 559 at 615-6.
Cole v Whitfield
[1988] HCA 18
(1988) 165 CLR
Castlemaine Tooheys v South Australia
(1990) 169 CLR 436
v Queensland Bar Association
[1989] HCA 53
(1989) 168 CLR 461.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter