URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbJlIntLaw/2023/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Garnett, Richard --- "Foreign State Immunity and the Harassment of Dissidents" [2023] MelbJlIntLaw 11; (2023) 24(2) Melbourne Journal of International Law 284
I Introduction
II Territorial Tort Exception to Immunity
A Three Models
B Assault or Killing in the Forum State
C Assault or Killing outside the Forum State
D Extraordinary Rendition
E Computer Surveillance and Interference
F Psychological Harm
G The Territorial Tort Exception and Customary International Law
III Human Rights Exceptions to Immunity
A The Position in Customary Law
B North American Developments
IV Conclusion
FOREIGN STATE IMMUNITY AND HARASSMENT OF DISSIDENTS
Richard Garnett
Authoritarian states have long sought to suppress freedom of expression by
dissidents living in democratic societies. Acts of assault,
kidnapping, torture
and even assassination have been perpetrated by states, with computer
surveillance and targeting being the most
recent methods employed. The legal
position of dissidents and their families who seek redress for such conduct is
complicated by
the rules of foreign state immunity. While international
consensus exists in favour of the view that a foreign state should have
immunity for private or commercial acts, this rarely helps dissident claimants
since the conduct complained of is normally ‘sovereign’
Several states have enacted versions of the ‘territorial tort’
exception, which lifts immunity in cases of
tortious conduct of the foreign
state occurring in the forum state. This exception however has been interpreted
to impose immunity
in cross-border cases in some jurisdictions. There is also
the unresolved problem of human rights abuses that occur entirely outside
forum state.
I Introduction
Authoritarian regimes have long engaged in a variety of methods to suppress
opposition and dissent. Arrest, kidnapping, assault, torture
and even killing
have been routinely employed against persons who criticise the government or its
members. When such acts are performed
against dissidents or activists within the
territorial boundaries of the perpetrator state, then the conduct has been
traditionally
easy to conceal or deny with limited accountability for the state
or redress for the victim. However, where the dissident has escaped
to a foreign
country — especially one with liberal standards of freedom of expression
— not only is it more difficult
for the authoritarian state to control the
conduct of such a person, but any measures taken are more visible and
conspicuous. Yet
the desire of some states to monitor and silence their critics
remains strong, and recently there have been some spectacular and
cases of cross-border repression, including the killing of the United States
journalist Jamal Khashoggi in Türkiye
by Saudi Arabian government officials
and the poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko in the United Kingdom by individuals
acting on behalf
of the Russian government.
Harassment of dissidents may also take more subtle and less gruesome forms, such
as remote computer surveillance or assault in the
streets. How can a dissident
or his or her family obtain redress for injury caused by such acts?
Obviously, a claimant in such circumstances would hardly consider commencing
an action in the courts of the offender state. Not only
claimant’s safety and security be possibly imperilled by their travelling
to the foreign state, but such courts would
be unlikely to be impartial or
independent of their state’s executive in their adjudication of the claim.
The only real option,
therefore, is for the claimant to sue in the courts of
another state, where he or she is more likely to receive a fair hearing and
effective remedy. The issue explored in this commentary is the extent to which
such actions are possible. Specifically, will a
court in State B have
A or State B?
This inquiry involves an investigation into the law of foreign state
immunity, which is a doctrine of public international law whereby
state is immune from the jurisdiction of another country’s courts when
sued as a defendant. Some nation-states, such
as Australia, the UK and US, have
enacted immunity
legislation
others rely on treaty
principles of customary international law to determine such disputes. In the
past 50 to 60 years, the public international law
rules of immunity have changed
substantially. Before that time, it was well established in customary
international law that a state
could never be impleaded before the courts of
another country; it was said to enjoy absolute immunity from
adjudication.
The rationale for this view was
the sovereign equality of states — it was considered incompatible with a
state’s sovereignty
for it to be subject to the jurisdiction of another
state’s courts without
of absolute immunity began to weaken after the Second World War as states
increasingly engaged in commercial activities
with private corporations. The
idea developed that it was no longer appropriate for a state to enjoy all the
privileges of statehood
when it was acting in a similar manner to a private
entity. Specifically, a state should not be able to rely on the defence of
in all cases when sued in a foreign court. The interest of the private
claimant in obtaining redress for injuries and losses suffered
also had to be
considered. Consequently, a new rule of ‘restrictive immunity’
emerged based on the distinction between
sovereign acts and private or
commercial acts.
Generally speaking, sovereign acts are those of a particularly governmental
nature which no private person could ordinarily perform,
while private or
commercial acts can be performed equally by governments or private entities.
Another principle that loosened the grip of the doctrine of absolute immunity
was the assertion by states of their sovereign power
to regulate, as far as
possible, all matters within their territorial
While a foreign state’s
sovereignty remained an important factor in any decision to adjudicate, the
interest of the forum state
(state of adjudication) in protecting its nationals
and residents (and others temporarily present in the forum territory) from harm
was also relevant. A forum state has an ‘obligation to provide safety and
security for persons ... within its
territory’.
Hence, a further exception
to foreign state immunity emerged, known as the ‘territorial tort’
or non-commercial tort
principle, which allows a forum state court to adjudicate
wrongs committed by a foreign state in the territory of the forum. The
territorial tort exception applies to both sovereign and private acts of a
foreign state,
but is not accepted by all states, which has led to debate as to its status in
customary international law.
A more recent development in the law of foreign state immunity concerns
whether there should be an exception for human rights violations.
arises where an individual, for example, is tortured by a foreign state within
the state’s own territory. If the
claimant sues in a country which
recognises restrictive immunity based on the sovereign–private acts
distinction, the suit
will be barred because torture is considered to be a
sovereign act, particularly when employed against political activists. Equally
in countries that adopt the territorial tort exception, immunity applies because
the act occurred in the foreign state.
claimant dissident is left with no remedy. Various human rights exceptions to
immunity have been proposed to address this situation,
which are considered
further below.
This commentary will examine the doctrine of foreign state immunity in the
context of harassment of dissidents. The structure is as
follows: Part II
considers the territorial tort exception to immunity and its application to
certain situations such as assault,
killing, torture and computer surveillance
in relation to dissidents and the status of the exception in customary
international law.
Part III then considers the current position on human rights
and immunity, from the perspectives of both customary law and developments
North America.
II Territorial Tort
Exception to Immunity
All forms of harassment by foreign states and dissidents normally involve
intentional torts. In those nation-states that have immunity
legislation, as
well as those who are parties to the
United Nations Convention on
European Convention on State Immunity
’), the territorial tort exception to immunity is
language of each exception is, however, not uniform. In those states with no
immunity legislation and who are not a party to
there is normally no equivalent of the territorial tort exception and so the
sovereign–private/commercial acts distinction
is applied to the question
of immunity.
Application of this test would
lead to most dissident harassment claims being dismissed as the conduct of the
foreign state is generally
considered sovereign in nature, given the political
context in which it occurs. Hence, the US Supreme Court has confirmed that acts
of arrest, imprisonment and torture by a foreign state are an exercise of its
‘police powers’, not actions an ordinary
private person would
An assault on a political activist
by state agents has also been classified as a sovereign
state-sanctioned clandestine computer surveillance of a
By contrast, as noted earlier, the territorial tort exception in national
legislation (and the
) applies to both sovereign and
private acts of a foreign state. Attempts to limit the exception only to private
conduct have been
firmly rebuffed in court
commentary.
is therefore unsurprising that most of the cases in which foreign state
harassment of dissidents has been challenged have occurred
in states with the
exception. This context will be the primary focus of the commentary.
Consideration will first be made of the three main versions of the
territorial tort exception, followed by an application of those
principles to
specific examples of harassment of dissidents.
Three Models
There are three main versions of the territorial tort exception. The first is
found in the UK and Australian legislation. The second
is contained in the US
and Canadian immunity statutes, and a third model is provided in the
The UK and Australian legislation are relevantly identical. Section 5 of the
State Immunity Act 1978
’) provides that
‘a [foreign] state is not immune as respects proceedings in respect of ...
death or personal injury ...
caused by an act or omission in the United
Kingdom’. Similarly,
Foreign States Immunities Act 1985
’) provides that ‘a foreign state is not
immune in a proceeding in so far as the proceeding concerns ... the death of
personal injury to a person ... caused by an act or omission done or omitted to
be done in Australia’.
The second approach is found in the US and Canadian versions of the
territorial tort exception. Section 1605(a)(5) of the
Foreign Sovereign
Immunities Act 1976
’) removes immunity
for ‘personal injury or death ... occurring in the US and caused by the
tortious act or omission of
the foreign state’. Likewise, s 6(a) of
State Immunity Act 1985
(Canada) (‘
withdraws immunity ‘in any proceedings that relate to ... any death or
personal or bodily injury ... that occurs in
provides in art 12 that
a state cannot invoke immunity from jurisdiction before a court of another
state which ... relates to the pecuniary compensation for
death or injury to the
person ... caused by an act or omission which occurred in whole or in part in
the territory of that other
state and if the author of the act or omission was
present in that territory at the time of the act or
Article 11 of the
is similar, although more obscurely worded.
Instead of requiring ‘an act’ in the forum state that causes
personal injury
it refers to the ‘facts which occasioned the injury’
occurring in the forum.
The key feature of the UK and Australian provisions is that immunity is
excluded where the foreign state has performed an act or omission
in the forum
state’s territory causing death or personal injury to the claimant. The
focus is therefore on the place of the
act causing harm
and not the place
of harm itself. The drafters of the Australian legislation defended this choice
on the basis that determining the
place where a wrongful act or omission
occurred is usually simpler than determining where the damage
The large volume of cases in
private international law where courts have grappled with the question of where
a tort has occurred
may seem to belie this
Yet, choosing the place of the
act may be defended for two reasons. First, it aligns with the accepted
principle in common law systems
of private international law that the country in
which the wrong occurred is normally considered the most appropriate forum for
adjudication
it is consistent with the common law choice of law rule for torts which gives
considerable weight to the law of the place
If an English or Australian court
would exercise jurisdiction over a local tort and apply its law in such a case,
then it is logical
that it can adjudicate a claim against a foreign state based
on a tortious act occurring there.
By contrast, the US and Canadian provisions remove immunity in any proceeding
for ‘personal injury or death’ occurring
in the forum
The problem with a place of injury
or harm test is that it is imprecise and may lead to conflicting and arbitrary
results. For example,
does injury or harm mean the suffering of the immediate
injury following the tortious act or does it also include any place where
lingering harm or consequential loss is felt? It is entirely possible that a
dissident who experiences a violent attack in a foreign
state may continue to
suffer ongoing symptoms in another state after he or she has escaped there. If a
broad view of injury or harm
is taken, then the claimant would be entitled to
sue, but not if the narrow, immediate injury view is adopted. Also, even if the
term ‘injury’ is given the second, more expansive interpretation, it
would produce unjust results between similarly situated
claimants. Suppose two
claimants were victims of the same violent attack or torture but only one had
lingering symptoms after escaping
to the forum state. The second
claimant’s action could proceed in the forum but the first claimant could
not. Such an outcome
is discriminatory whereas an ‘act or omission’
approach is preferable in treating similarly aggrieved claimants alike.
US and Canadian courts have acknowledged this problem of differential
treatment of
relied upon it to develop an interpretation of their territorial tort exception
which dramatically expands the scope of immunity
at the expense of claimants. An
‘entire tort’ approach has been adopted, which means that a claimant
must show both an
act of the foreign state in the territory of the forum
injury or death
such an approach does treat claimants who suffer similar injuries abroad alike,
it does so by denying them
recovery. Consequently, a claimant can
never recover under the
in respect of a tort with a cross-border
aspect, which will be common in cases involving foreign states. The doctrine
therefore ‘incentivises
states to dodge suit by pleading collateral acts
US courts have repeatedly
defended this position on the basis that the legislative history states clearly
that the tortious act or
omission must also occur in US
but surely if this outcome was
intended, it would have been included in the text itself. Canadian courts have
(regrettably) followed
the US approach on this
Another distinctive feature of the US territorial tort exception (but not the
Canadian) is the ‘discretionary function’
defence, which grants
immunity where the claim arises from an act involving performance of a
discretionary function by the foreign
state. This defence aims to protect
‘planning’ as opposed to ‘operational’ decisions of
states and has two
First, the action must involve ‘an element of judgment or choice’
and second, it must be based on considerations of social,
economic or political
Fortunately, this defence has rarely been applied in dissident cases but there
is a recent (and disturbing) example of its employment
The approach taken in the
is also less generous
for dissidents than the UK and Australian provisions, but for a different
reason. Article 12 of the
also requires an act of the foreign state
to have occurred in the forum but then widens the scope of immunity by requiring
the author of the act be present in the forum at the time of
performance of the act.
According to the
International Law Commission’s commentary (‘
’), the ‘author present’ element was inserted to
cases of transboundary issues or trans-frontier torts or damage such as
export of explosives, fireworks or dangerous substances which
could explode or
cause damage through negligence ... [C]ases of shooting or firing across a
boundary ... are [also] excluded ...
This requirement also makes it difficult for a claimant to sue for
intentional torts, except in those relatively rare cases where
a dissident is
physically attacked or killed by foreign state agents in the forum. Even in that
case, however, if the author is deemed
to be the official of the foreign state
who planned the attack from outside the territory of the forum state (rather
than the agents
who committed the physical assault in the forum) the exception
may not apply. This issue is further considered later, but the uncertainty
art 12 of the
provides a powerful reason for states such as the UK
and Australia not to accede to the Convention. Moreover, since the
is not currently in force and has only been acceded to by 23 nation-states (none
of which are common law jurisdictions), it is unlikely
that the ‘author
present’ requirement represents customary international law.
In the next section, examination of the above immunity rules will be made in
four areas in which harassment of dissidents has commonly
occurred: (a) assault
or killing in the forum state; (b) assault or killing outside the forum state;
(c) ‘extraordinary rendition’
from the forum state to abroad; and
(d) computer and technological surveillance targeting the forum state. The
issues of psychological
harm and the status of the territorial tort exception in
customary international law will also be considered.
Assault or Killing in
the Forum State
Physical attacks on dissidents residing in the forum state have occasionally
occurred where officials of the foreign state have travelled
to the forum state
for meetings and encountered protests. In response to such demonstrations,
security guards of the foreign state
have assaulted or kidnapped protesters and
dissidents. If a claimant protestor commenced an action in the forum courts for
against the foreign state, immunity would not apply under any of the
models examined. First, in the case of the UK and Australia,
assuming that the
guards were employees of the foreign state or acting under its direction, the
state could be sued in tort based
on vicarious liability. The claimant faces no
immunity obstacle since the acts of the foreign state all occurred in the forum.
a conclusion was recently reached by the English High Court in
Al-Masarir v Saudi Arabia
where an individual complained of being physically assaulted on the streets of
London by agents of the foreign state.
Under Canadian and US law, the same result would be reached under the entire
tort principle since both the act of the foreign state
and the injury to the
claimant occurred in the forum. There is no ‘extraterritorial’
element. Such a situation has arisen
in several US decisions. In
Gerritsen v
De La Madrid Hurtado
, the claimant was distributing leaflets critical of the
Mexican government in front of its consulate in California and was assaulted,
kidnapped and interrogated by consulate
The Court found that the territorial
tort exception applied to strip the foreign state defendant of immunity.
Further, the Court
rejected the Mexican government’s argument that its
acts involved the exercise of a discretionary
Assault and kidnapping do not
involve decisions relating to the planning or formulation of government policy
but are purely operational
more recent example arose when Turkish security forces clashed with protesters
outside the Turkish ambassador’s residence
in Washington DC and several
injured protesters were permitted to sue for assault and battery. The
discretionary function exception
again did not apply because the
defendant’s actions in maintaining security were not grounded in social,
economic or political
The outcome under the
would likely be similar. While the
Convention requires an act of the foreign state to have occurred in the forum
and its author to
be present there, both elements would likely be satisfied in
the case of assaults by security guards or others in the forum
The more extreme situation, which fortunately arises rarely, is where a
foreign state commits an assassination or murder of a dissident
in the forum
state. A difference with the assault cases is that such grave attacks are
usually planned and organised by foreign state
officials outside the forum state
before being carried out by agents locally. This element potentially complicates
the immunity analysis.
A recent and glaring example of such an event is where the Russian government
sent two agents to the UK to kill a dissident opponent,
Alexander Litvinenko, by
poisoning him.
The operation was planned in
Russia and the operatives brought the poison into the UK. While no action was
ever brought against Russia
in the English courts by Litvinenko’s family,
it is clear that no immunity would have existed in such a case as ‘an
causing death had occurred in the UK — the poisoning. The fact
that other ‘acts’ of the foreign state which contributed
killing also occurred in Russia (for example, the planning of the attack) does
not alter this conclusion. Knowles J of the
English High Court addressed this
very situation in two recent decisions,
The judge emphasised that s 5 of the
only requires ‘
act or omission’ of the foreign state to have occurred in the forum for
immunity to be displaced.
Provided that
there is an act in the UK ‘which is causative of the requisite damage on a
basis’, the provision will be
Knowles J noted that the
legislation does not require that ‘
act’ of the foreign
state take place locally, unlike the US
. If the definite article
‘the’ had been used, the Court may have been required to identify
the most substantial or significant
act, which could lead to a foreign state
successfully claiming immunity if planning (which likely took place outside the
found to be the key element. Such an outcome would be highly unjust
for claimants. Consequently, s 5 of the
(and by extension, s 13 of
) does not require all acts or omissions of the foreign state to
occur in the forum, only that there be a single causative act.
Knowles J further supported this conclusion by reference to cases dealing
with conspiracies planned in one country to harm residents
in another. Such
conspiracy cases have been held to involve a single ‘composite act’
of planning and execution with s
satisfied by the occurrence
of either such act on forum territory.
reasoning would likely extend to the case of a letter bomb sent from the
territory of another state or a timed car bomb which
later explodes in the
territory of the forum state causing injury or death there. While the planning
and preparation of the bomb
occurred outside the forum state, the detonation of
the device took place locally.
Hence, in any future Litvinenko-type situation, an English (and, most likely,
an Australian) court would have jurisdiction to adjudicate
claims arising from
the acts of the foreign state perpetrator.
The issue of assassination of dissidents and political figures has also
arisen in the US, but here the position is less certain. In
Letelier v Chile
’), a former Foreign Minister of Chile fled to
the US after General Augusto Pinochet seized power in a
Letelier became a leading critic of
the regime and was assassinated in a car bombing in New
Investigators concluded that the
bombing had been carried out by Chilean Secret Service agents acting on the
instructions of the
Pinochet regime. Letelier’s family sued Chile in the
US for assault and battery causing death and Chile pleaded immunity.
It was noted earlier that the prevailing approach in the US to the
territorial tort exception is to require, for immunity to be displaced,
‘entire tort’ occur in the forum, that is, both act and
Yet interestingly, the decision in
seemed to defy this analysis by removing immunity in
circumstances where at least part of the tort occurred outside the US. The Court
itself acknowledged that
[a]lthough the acts allegedly undertaken by the Republic of Chile to obtain
the death of ... Letelier may well have been carried out
entirely within that
country, that circumstance alone will not allow it to absolve itself if the
actions of its alleged agents resulted
in tortious injury in this
Hence, the Court suggested that immunity will be removed where the injury
occurred in the US. Nevertheless, in the more recent decision
Kidane v Ethiopia
the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia suggested that
was consistent with the entire tort principle, since it ‘involved
actions occurring in the US that were — without reference
to any action
undertaken abroad — tortious’.
This explanation is hard to understand, since although there were acts (the
planting and detonation of the bomb) and injury that
occurred in the US, the key
instruction to commit the acts emanated from the foreign state. The current
authority of
may therefore now be in
A decision consistent with
Liu v Republic of China
Liu was shot and killed in California by a gunman acting on orders of the
government of the Republic of China. The Court found, with
limited reasoning,
that the territorial tort exception was satisfied since the government had
engaged in a conspiracy to kill Liu
in the forum through its
Such an approach is reminiscent of
the ‘composite act’ analysis adopted in English law, but again
appears to be a departure
from the ‘entire tort’ doctrine.
foreign states also sought to reinstate immunity by reference to the
discretionary function defence. In both decisions,
however, the plea was given
short shrift, with the Court in
stating that ‘there is no
discretion to commit or to have one’s officers or agents commit an illegal
Whatever policy options may
exist for a foreign country, it has no ‘discretion’ to perpetrate
conduct designed to result
in the assassination of an individual or individuals.
Likewise, in
, the defence did not apply because the defendant had no
discretion to violate the law of the Republic of China that prohibits
The position under the
should also be considered. While the
ILC Commentary
suggests that homicide, including political assassination,
would be encompassed by art 12 of the
Convention,
the problem again is that the
article requires both an act of the foreign state in the forum and the author of
that act to be present
there. The ‘author presence’ issue was noted
earlier and may pose a problem in the case of assassinations of dissidents
are planned abroad by the foreign state (which is often the case, as has been
seen). As noted earlier, ‘transboundary
injuries’ were intended to
be excluded from art 12,
and so if the
relevant ‘author’ of the assassination was found to be the official
who organised and approved the act,
as opposed to the person who carried it out,
immunity will prevail.
Assault or Killing
outside the Forum State
Finally, the position changes dramatically when a foreign state commits the
torts of assault, torture or killing wholly within its
own territory or in a
country other than the forum state. Under all the above approaches, a foreign
state continues to enjoy immunity
in such circumstances as there is no relevant
‘act’ of the state in the forum (
), let alone an ‘entire tort’ there (
). This conclusion has been confirmed in several
Extraordinary
A variation on the above situations is the ‘extraordinary
rendition’ cases where a dissident is abducted from the forum
agents of a foreign state and then transferred to the foreign state (or another
country) for interrogation and torture.
Applying the English/Australian approach above, it is likely that no immunity
would apply here as ‘an act’ being causative
of the claimant’s
injuries (the abduction) has occurred in the
The ‘composite act’
analysis may again be relevant.
The position in the US and Canada, however, is again unclear given the need
for the ‘entire tort’ to have been committed
locally. Perhaps if the
claimant framed his or her claim as one for unlawful abduction alone, not
including the acts of subsequent
torture, then it may plausibly be argued that a
completed tort has occurred in the forum. The problem, however, with this
is that § 1605(a)(5) of the
and s 6(a) of the
both require ‘personal injury’ to have occurred in
the forum state and no such harm may have been incurred by the abduction
only the subsequent torture.
A more positive result for claimants may be gained under the
Article 12 requires an act of the foreign state in the forum, the presence of
the author there at the time of the act and personal
injury. Assuming that the
abduction satisfies the first requirement, then the presence in the forum of
foreign state agents effecting
the claimant’s removal should suffice for
the second element. Commentary supports this conclusion, noting that art 12 of
would apply to the situation where the author
‘initiated’ an act in the forum state that was
‘consummated’
in the territory of another
the ‘author present’ requirement may prevent the
‘import’ of a trans-boundary civil wrong, it would
Computer Surveillance
and Interference
The third major category of harassment of dissidents involves a foreign state
using computers to target and monitor dissidents in
other countries or to steal
their data. This issue has arisen in several recent English and US decisions and
is likely to increase
in the future as technological advances obviate the need
for foreign states to enter the territory of other countries to harm
individuals.
The use of computer malware allows foreign states to target
activists from a distance and so presents greater opportunities for
deniability.
In two important decisions,
, Knowles J
of the English High Court held that a foreign state enjoyed no immunity where it
used spyware to target and monitor dissidents
Spyware has the effect of
‘convert[ing] a personal computer into a surveillance drone, capable of
recording its physical environment’
by activating a webcam or microphone
on the target computer.
In both cases the
claimants alleged that their iPhones or computers had been infected by spyware
sent by agents of the foreign state
that enabled accessing of information stored
on the devices.
The claimants in each case
sued for damages for personal injury (in the form of psychiatric harm) resulting
from misuse of private
information and
harassment.
As noted earlier, Knowles J reached the important legal conclusion that s 5
required only ‘an act’ of the foreign state to
have occurred in the UK, not the entirety of the tort. The act must be
‘causative of the requisite damage on a more than
This principle was satisfied
on the facts of both cases through the foreign states’ installing of
spyware on the iPhones and
computers of the claimants. The judge relied on
decisions in the field of cross-border hacking and interference with computers
establish the following proposition.
Where a computer device is located in the UK and is manipulated and made to
perform operations as a result of electronic instructions
sent from a computer
operator abroad, then an act has occurred within the UK under s 5 of the
While the spyware was sent from
computers abroad in
, it was received on the
claimants’ devices and had its natural and intended effects there in terms
of acquisition and transmission
US courts however have reached a different conclusion in applying the entire
tort doctrine. The leading US decision on the matter
arose out of a similar spyware attack on a dissident living in the US, who sued
for intentional intrusion upon seclusion.
The spyware had been used to intercept and record the claimant’s emails,
web searches and Skype calls.
The US Court
of Appeals for the District of Columbia found that it could not adjudicate the
matter because the entire tort had not
occurred in the US. The Court noted
at least a portion of Ethiopia’s alleged tort occurred abroad ...
[W]hether in London, Ethiopia or elsewhere, the tortious intent
plainly lay abroad and the tortious programming likewise occurred
abroad. Moreover Ethiopia’s placement of the spyware on Kidane’s
computer, although completed in the United States when Kidane opened the
infected e-mail attachment, began outside the United States.
It thus cannot be
said that the entire tort occurred in the United
Hence, the presence of two key aspects of the tort — the intention of
the foreign state and the transmission of the spyware
— occurred outside
the forum state which meant that immunity applied. The pernicious effect of the
‘entire tort’
doctrine in the context of remote cyber torts was
noted by the District of Columbia District Court, who held that had Ethiopia
‘a flesh-and-blood agent’ to Kidane’s house to install
the same device, immunity would not have
In effect, the doctrine imposes
immunity in every case involving a cross-border cyber tort.
case has been widely criticised by US scholars who have
suggested a variety of strategies to achieve a different outcome in future
cases, such as by use of the
Justice against Sponsors of Terrorism Act
adoption of a
‘targeting of victims in the US’
or creation of a new cyber tort
exception to immunity in the
Respectfully, such proposals miss the clearest and most effective solution to
the problem: adopting the wording in the UK and Australian
legislation to remove
immunity where a single causative act of the foreign state has occurred in the
forum. As noted earlier, application
of such a test will normally lead to the
denial of immunity in cases of cross-border computer surveillance and targeting.
Interestingly,
in a non-immunity case,
United States v Ivanov
, a US court
found that a violation of the
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act
occurred in
the US where computers there were accessed by a process initiated and controlled
from a foreign country (Russia).
though the tort was commenced abroad, the act of intrusion occurred in the
was amended to
remove immunity simply upon performance of an act by the foreign state in the
US, then this decision could be relied
upon to deny states immunity in future
cases involving cyber surveillance of dissidents.
Certainly, there seems to be no sign of any reconsideration of the entire
tort doctrine in the three most recent American cyber tort
Democratic National Committee v Russia
, Russia was held to be entitled to
immunity where it hacked into the computers of the Democratic National Committee
The territorial tort exception
did not apply because the offending conduct was executed from computers located
Likewise, in
Broidy Capital
Management LLC v Qatar
Broidy Capital
’), a dissident
was precluded from suing a foreign state which had infiltrated his computer
systems and stolen private documents
because the location of the computer
accessing the plaintiff’s network was in
Most recently, in
Rusesabagina v
, the Court more directly applied the reasoning in
reject a claim by a dissident for intrusion upon seclusion arising from computer
surveillance by a foreign state.
essential element of the tort — intent aimed at the claimant — was
located abroad.
Broidy Capital
case, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals
affirmed the decision of the District Court granting immunity but on a different
and arguably
even more disturbing ground. Immunity was upheld because the
foreign state could invoke the discretionary function
noted earlier that this defence applied when the act of the state involves
‘an element of judgment or choice’
and is based on considerations of
public policy.
The Court found that
Qatar’s decision to infiltrate the claimant’s computers involved an
exercise of discretion that
could only be discounted if it was shown to violate
Qatari law or public international law.
While Qatari law has criminal prohibitions against hacking, theft and disclosure
of trade secrets, they do not apply when performed
by government agents acting
under official authority. Peacetime espionage was also not found to be a
sufficiently clear breach of
public international law. The Court distinguished
the assassination cases of
on the basis that both
involved acts that were clearly unlawful under both law of the foreign state and
public international law.
The Court’s reasoning in
Broidy Capital
reveals the danger of
the discretionary function defence. A narrow focus on whether the conduct
breaches the law of the foreign state
or public international law surely
obscures the wider issue of the need to combat foreign state harassment of
dissidents and assaults
upon freedom of expression.
If that reasoning was not concerning enough, the Ninth Circuit Court of
Appeals then concluded that the acts of hacking and intrusion
were based on
considerations of public policy and so satisfied the second limb of the
Qatar undertook the challenged actions as one component of a public relations
strategy ‘to influence public opinion in the United
‘curtailing the influence of individuals’, such as [the claimant]
who ‘could undermine the standing
of the State of Qatar in the United
In other words, it is acceptable government policy to silence dissidents by
hacking into their computers and phones to intimidate
them and US law will not
hold foreign states to account for such conduct. No dissident is now safe from
electronic intrusions and
targeting. This conclusion is astonishing and shows
that the discretionary function defence must be removed immediately.
Article 12 of the
is also unlikely to avail a claimant in a
computer hacking situation. While consistent with the UK and Australian
legislation in
only requiring that there be an act of the foreign state in the
forum, the ‘author present’ requirement is likely to
be fatal to any
claim. In all the cases mentioned, the relevant interference or transmission of
spyware emanated from a place outside
the forum and so the relevant state actor
would not be present.
Psychological
Another contentious issue under the territorial tort exception is whether
damages for mental pain and suffering can be recovered.
There seems to be a
split here between the English/Australian view, in which damages for
psychological injury alone can be sought
assuming an act of the foreign state in
and the Canadian position, which
only recognises such harm when suffered pursuant to a physical
In practice, in the cases of assault, torture or killing, this distinction is
unlikely to be significant because physical injury will
have occurred as well
and so damages for psychiatric harm will be recoverable. Also, where a dissident
has incurred physical injury
from an act committed outside the forum state but
then suffers further psychological harm in the forum, no claim can be brought
either English or Canadian law. Hence, where a relative of a dissident
suffered psychological harm upon receiving news of the dissident’s
injuries and death, no recovery would be possible on either view.
Where the difference between the two views will be relevant is where the
dissident receives threats of violence or harm in the forum,
for example, by
telephone or computer. Such an allegation was made in
Al-Adsani v Kuwait
’) but was dismissed by the English Court of
Appeal because of a lack of evidence.
contrast, in the recent cases of
English High Court allowed the claimants to sue for psychiatric injury caused by
a foreign state’s infection of their
iPhones and computers with spyware
designed to conduct surveillance on
Significantly, the psychiatric
injury here was not parasitic upon or caused by a physical injury. Such recovery
would not have been
possible under Canadian law. Assuming, as noted earlier,
that the technological harassment of dissidents is likely to increase in
future, the English approach is preferred as more protective of claimants’
The position under the
is uncertain. While art 12 refers to
‘death or injury to the person’, the
ILC Commentary
unhelpfully states that the article ‘does not cover cases where there is
no physical damage’.
Commentators
have however suggested that since the text contains no such limitation, the
better view is that the domestic law applicable
to the tort should determine the
question of whether a claim for psychiatric illness constitutes an injury to the
The Territorial Tort
Exception and Customary International Law
Before leaving the territorial tort exception, a comment should be made about
its status in customary international law. While several
nation-states, as noted
earlier, have statutorily recognised the exception and the
such a provision, the general customary position is less clear. Indeed,
considerable uncertainty has been caused by the
2012 decision of the
International Court of Justice (‘ICJ’) in
Immunities of the State
involved a proceeding brought by Germany seeking a declaration that Italy had
breached customary international law by failing
to accord foreign state immunity
to Germany in actions brought in Italian courts. The actions involved civil
claims seeking reparation
for injuries caused by violations of international
humanitarian law committed by the Nazi regime during the Second World War. A
of the ICJ upheld Germany’s application, but the precise scope of
its decision is contested.
The strict ratio of the case is that customary international law requires a
state to be accorded immunity in proceedings for torts
allegedly committed in
the territory of another state by its armed forces while conducting an armed
Such a conclusion would leave
untouched most cases involving harassment of dissidents considered in this
commentary.
While such acts may be
performed by military or security officials of the foreign state, they do not
normally occur in the course
of a war or other military
The ICJ was not, however,
asked to determine the broader question of whether a territorial tort exception
existed in customary international
law, removing immunity in the context of
sovereign acts of a foreign state. Nevertheless, it did approve a decision of
the European
Court of Human Rights (‘ECtHR’) which suggested that
such an exception may not exist in customary
McElhinney v Ireland
’), the ECtHR
had to consider whether a decision by an Irish court to grant immunity to the UK
was consistent with a claimant’s
right of access to a court in art 6 of
European Convention on Human Rights
In the Irish court proceeding, the plaintiff alleged in a suit against the UK
that a British soldier on duty at a border checkpoint
had assaulted him in Irish
The Irish court upheld the
plea of immunity by the UK, finding that the soldier, in executing his duties,
was engaged in sovereign
or governmental
activities.
Under Irish law, the
sovereign–private acts distinction applied and so immunity was granted.
The ECtHR found the Irish court’s
employment and application of this test
to fall within ‘currently accepted standards’ of public
international law.
The ICJ in the
case referred with approval to
, noting that the case concerned the conduct of armed forces
although not in the context of armed
This last observation may
suggest that the ICJ was endorsing a slightly broader principle than that
applicable to the facts of
: immunity would
apply to any act in the forum when performed by any member of the foreign
state’s armed forces.
If this view
is correct, then the territorial tort exception would remain available in
customary international law in the case of
all other sovereign acts of a foreign
state such as harassment of dissidents by non-military agents of the
III Human Rights Exceptions
to Immunity
The Position in
Customary Law
It was noted earlier that under all the above approaches, a foreign state
continues to enjoy immunity for its non-commercial torts
occurring wholly
outside the forum state. The classic example of this is the case of kidnapping
and torture in the foreign state.
, the claimant, a dual
UK/Kuwait national, alleged that he had been tortured by Kuwait authorities in
that country and had suffered
physical and psychological injuries that continued
on his return to the UK.
The English
Court of Appeal confirmed that immunity applied as no relevant act of the
foreign state had occurred in the
The claimant also argued in
that in the case of acts of
torture occurring abroad, there should be an implied exception to immunity based
on the universal condemnation
of torture in public international law.
Prohibition of torture was said to be a rule of
fundamental norm of international law that overrides ‘lesser’
principles such as foreign state
The Court of Appeal rejected
the argument, finding that in the absence of an express statutory exception to
immunity for torture
or other human rights abuses, foreign states are
It would be inappropriate for
the courts to create such an exception where Parliament had refused to do
The applicant challenged the Court of Appeal decision in the ECtHR, alleging
that the grant of immunity resulted in a denial of the
right of access to a
court under art 6 of the
a very slim majority, the ECtHR held that there is no acceptance in
international law of the proposition that states are not entitled
to immunity in
respect of claims for damages for alleged torture committed outside the forum
The peremptory or
nature of the conduct was therefore not relevant to the question of
immunity. The same conclusion was also reached by the House of
Lords and the
ECtHR on similar facts in
Jones v Saudi
Jones v United
respectively.
in other common law jurisdictions (including Australia) have taken the same
approach to the question of
A variation of the above argument is that a foreign state impliedly
‘waives’ immunity in a torture action before another
court by becoming a state party to the 1984
Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
The contention is that
the requirement under art 14 of the Convention on member states to provide a
right to a civil remedy for torture
would be undercut if a foreign state’s
plea of immunity was upheld. This argument has also been rejected by national
First, accession by a state to the Convention does not amount to a submission to
the jurisdiction of other member states’ courts
to resolve torture
Second, art 14(1) of the
Convention does not apply to torture committed outside the forum
The most definitive statement on the question of whether a human rights
exception to immunity exists based on
is found in the judgment
of the ICJ in
. The Court considered that the
rules of foreign state immunity are procedural in character and confined to
determining whether the
courts of one state may exercise jurisdiction in respect
of the acts of another. By contrast, an analysis of whether a particular
tort is sufficiently grave as to amount to the breach of
to the substance or merits of the case and not the prior question of
To support its conclusion, the
ICJ relied on the national court and legislative practice referred to earlier
which rejected a
and the drafters’
deliberate decision not to include a
exception in the
The ICJ’s reasoning based on the substance–procedure distinction
is dubious. In the parallel field of private international
law, foreign state
immunity is likely considered substantive, not procedural, for choice of law
purposes, since its application bars
a claimant’s right of access to the
forum court.
Both Australian and Canadian authorities have suggested that any matter that
concerns the existence or enforcement of rights or duties
of parties should be
substantive, with the scope of procedure being limited to mechanical issues such
as the method for conducting
proceedings.
Immunity plainly affects
the parties’ rights and duties when its application leaves a claimant
unable to proceed in his or
A third attempt to create an exception to immunity for serious human rights
violations has involved asserting that a forum state has
a right to exercise
alternative means of redress.
earlier, the courts of an authoritarian foreign state are rarely an option for
dissidents from that state and so the forum
should exercise jurisdiction
‘by necessity’. This pathway was however again firmly blocked by the
case, with the Court rejecting
Italy’s argument that immunity should be denied ‘because all other
attempts to secure
compensation for the various groups of victims involved in
the Italian proceedings had
The ICJ said that it
could ‘find no basis in ... customary international law
makes the entitlement of a State to immunity dependent upon the existence of
effective alternative means of securing
issue therefore looks reasonably settled for now, at
least in common law jurisdictions.
Consequently, if nation-states wish to provide redress for dissidents who are
victims of human rights abuses abroad, they must legislate
an exception to
immunity or take a more active role in interceding with the responsible state on
behalf of the victim on the diplomatic
Legislatures in the US and Canada
have created human rights exceptions to immunity, but in a rather piecemeal and
overly executive-controlled
North American
Developments
Out of a concern that the territorial tort exception was not available to
lift immunity in cases involving human rights violations
outside the US,
Congress in 1996 amended the
. A new exception to immunity in §
1605A of the
was added for suits relating to acts of torture,
extrajudicial killing, aircraft sabotage, hostage taking or the provision of
support for such acts. While the exception allows suits to be brought
for wholly extraterritorial torts, there are two important
limitations on such
actions. First, the exception only applies to nations certified by the US State
Department as ‘state sponsor[s]
terrorism’.
As of 2023, only four
nations were on the list: Cuba, Iran, North Korea and
Second, the cause of action can
only be asserted by claimants who are US nationals, members of the US armed
forces or employees of
the US government at the time of the relevant acts giving
rise to the suit. Both elements greatly reduce the capacity of dissidents
bring claims against foreign states. Also, in the context of computer-based
harassment such as in
, the state sponsor exception cannot apply as
there is no act of terrorism as defined in § 1605A of the
In 2012, Canada also introduced a state sponsor of terrorism exception to
immunity, allowing Canadian nationals or permanent residents
who are victims of
terrorist activity to sue as well as other persons where the action has ‘a
real and substantial connection’
Once again, this exception may
apply to torts committed outside the forum state, but the foreign state
defendant must have been listed
by the Canadian government, following a
recommendation by the Minister of Foreign Affairs. As of 2023, only Iran and
Syria are on
activity’ is also restrictively defined to include hijacking, crimes
against diplomatic agents, hostage-taking,
bombing or financing of
Torture, assault and computer
intrusion are not included.
In 2016, the US Congress further amended the
by enacting the
, which creates a further, new exception to
A US national claimant may now
sue a foreign state for physical injury to a person or death occurring in the
US, caused by (a) an
act of international terrorism in the US and (b) a tortious
act of the foreign state, regardless of whether the tortious act
is wider than the state-sponsored terrorism exception in that a
suit can be brought against any foreign state, not merely one prescribed
executive. The territorial scope of
is not, however, entirely
clear. While the exception requires both physical injury or death and an act of
international terrorism
to have occurred in the US, the tortious act may have
occurred anywhere. It appears that
has not adopted the
‘entire tort’ requirement of the territorial tort exception, and
this was affirmed in
In Re Terrorist Attacks on September 11,
where Saudi Arabia was
stripped of immunity where it was alleged to have given assistance to the
hijackers to perpetrate acts of
terrorism on US soil.
In the context of harassment of dissidents, however,
may be less
by government agents in State A and then
returned to the US and sued the foreign
state. While
allows suits for extraterritorial torts, there must
still be an act of international terrorism and physical injury occurring
, neither of which would be present on these facts. The cross-border
letter bomb or car bomb referred to earlier may fall under the
exception, depending upon whether the detonation of the bomb amounts to an act
of terrorism in the US, rather than elsewhere. In
the case of computer-based
harassment, the same problem arises as with the state sponsor exception.
‘International terrorism’
is defined in the US Code to be
‘criminal activity that involves violent acts or acts dangerous to human
Most cyber attacks, such as
those involving the sending of spyware to a dissident’s electronic device
or data breaches in the
US would not be included. Conceivably, however, if the
cyber attack was accompanied by threats of violence to the dissident, there
be ‘acts dangerous to human life’, but the ‘physical
injury’ requirement would still be lacking.
Overall, the US/Canadian approach to immunity and human rights does not
markedly improve the position for dissident victims. While
the state sponsor of
terrorism exception uniquely allows a claimant (or their estate) to sue for acts
of torture, kidnapping or murder
occurring in foreign countries, it does so in a
highly selective and executive-controlled fashion. If a claimant does not have
‘fortune’ of being harmed by a designated state sponsor of
terrorism, then it cannot sue.
largely leaves immunity untouched in
the case of acts occurring outside the US, despite it professing to apply to
foreign torts.
In the area of cyberattacks the position is even worse. Not only
is immunity preserved by the territorial tort principle, but the
state sponsor
exceptions are largely ineffective. The present author
considers that the English approach, which gives a broad interpretation to
occurring in the forum and so catches cross-border cyber-attacks and state
sanctioned assaults and killings, is the preferable
approach, with one
qualification. The plight of those dissidents tortured and murdered overseas
remains acute and demands the addition
of a general statutory exception to
immunity for serious human rights violations.
IV Conclusion
Authoritarian states have long sought to suppress freedom of expression by
dissidents living in democratic societies. Acts of assault,
kidnapping, torture
and even assassination have been perpetrated by states, with computer
surveillance and targeting being the most
recent method employed. The legal
position of dissidents and their families who seek redress for such conduct is
complicated by the
rules of foreign state immunity. While international
consensus exists in favour of the view that a foreign state should have no
for private or commercial acts, this rarely helps dissident claimants
since the conduct complained of is ‘sovereign’
in nature. Several
states have enacted versions of the ‘territorial tort’ exception,
which lifts immunity for tortious
conduct of the foreign state in the forum.
While this pathway has been restrictively interpreted in the US and Canada,
whose courts
require the ‘entire tort’ to have occurred locally, in
the UK and Australia, it is enough if a single causative act has
taken place
there. Such an approach enables courts to adjudicate cases of cross-border
harassment, such as computer-based espionage
planned from abroad.
The problem, however, remains of human rights abuses that occur entirely
outside the forum state. While the US and Canada have enacted
exceptions to immunity for such violations, they are narrow in scope and
excessively controlled by the executive. For dissidents
to receive better
protection and opportunities for redress, a clear and unqualified exception to
immunity for human rights abuses
should be recognised.
* Professor, Melbourne Law School; Consultant and Counsel, Corrs Chambers
Westgarth. Email:
See Office of the Director of National
Intelligence (US),
Assessing the Saudi Government’s Role in the Killing
of Jamal Khashoggi
(Report, 11 February 2021).
For Australia, see
Foreign States
Immunities Act 1985
’). For the United
Kingdom, see
State Immunity Act 1978
the US, see
Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act
, 28 USC §§ 1330,
1332, 1391(f), 1441(d), 1602–11
For Canada, see
State Immunity Act
, RSC 1985, c S-18 (‘
United Nations Convention on
, opened for signature
2 December 2004 (not yet in force) (‘
’), with 23 state
parties, namely Austria, Benin, Czechia, Equatorial Guinea, Finland, France,
Iran, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Mexico,
Norway, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland;
Convention on State Immunity,
opened for signature 16 May
1972, 1495 UNTS
(entered into force 11 June 1976) (‘
’), between
Austria, Belgium, Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Switzerland and the United
The Parlement Belge
[1880] UKLawRpPro 10
(1880) 5 PD 197
Krajina v Tass Agency
[1949] 2 All ER 274.
(Germany v Italy) (Judgment)
[2012] ICJ Rep 99, 161 [2] (Judge Keith)
Holland v Lampen-Wolfe
[2000] UKHL 40
[2000] 1 WLR 1573
, 1588 (Lord Millett).
Alfred Dunhill of London Inc v
[1976] USSC 83
Trendtex Trading Corporation Ltd v Central Bank
[1977] 2 WLR 356.
It should be noted, however, that there was
Italian and Belgian jurisprudence from the early 20
century that
recognised a rule of restrictive immunity from jurisdiction: see Hazel Fox and
Philippa Webb,
The Law of State Immunity
(Oxford University Press,
ed, 2015) 154–5.
) 161–7 [2]–[14] (Judge
Keith), quoting
Schooner Exchange v McFaddon
[1812] USSC 15
, 136 (Marshall
CJ) (1812).
Sally El Sawah, ‘Jurisdictional
Immunity of States and Non-Commercial Torts’ in Tom Ruys, Nicola Angelet
and Luca Ferro
Cambridge Handbook of Immunities and International Law
(Cambridge University Press, 2019) 142, 143, citing Sompong Sucharitkul,
‘Fifth Report on Jurisdictional Immunities of States
Property’ [1983] II
Yearbook of the International Law Commission
Schreiber v A-G (Canada)
Al-Adsani v Kuwait
Letelier v Chile
DC, 1980) (‘
See below Part II(G).
See below Part III.
Holubek v United States
(1961) 40 ILR 73 (Supreme
Court of Austria);
Church of Scientology in the
Netherlands Foundation v Herold
(1980) 65 ILR 380 (District Court of
Amsterdam);
Schmidt v Home Secretary
[1997] 2 IR 121 (Supreme
Saudi Arabia v Nelson
[1993] USSC 33
, 360–2 (1993).
Al-Masarir v Saudi Arabia
[2023] 2 WLR 549, 593 [186] (‘
Broidy Capital Management LLC v
, 982 F 3d 582, 594–5 (9
Broidy Capital
For England, see, eg,
) 563 [60], 565 [66], 566 [71],
567–8 [77]. For the US, see, eg,
) 671. For Canada, see, eg,
International Law Commission,
Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of Its Forty-Third
, UN GAOR, 46
sess, Supp No 10, UN Doc A/46/10 (10
September 1991) 105 [8] (commentary to draft art 12) (‘
These provisions have been largely
replicated in other jurisdictions: see, eg,
Foreign States Immunities Act
(South Africa) s 6;
State Immunity Act
(Singapore, cap 313,
2014 rev ed) s 7;
Foreign State Immunity Law 2008
(Israel) s 5
(‘tort committed in Israel’);
Immunity of Foreign States from the
(Argentina) s 2(e).
The very recently enacted immunity legislation of China is in similar terms: see
«中华人民共和国外国国家豁免法»
[Foreign State Immunity Law of the People’s Republic of China]
(People’s Republic of China) National People’s Congress,
10, 1 September 2023, art 9.
See above n
and accompanying text for the 23
nation-states that have adopted this provision in their immunity laws.
The Russian law version of the
territorial tort exception appears to adopt this model: see
Federal Law on
in the Russian Federation
(Russia) art 11.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Foreign State Immunity
(Report No 24, 1984) 67 [114].
See generally Reid Mortensen, Richard
Garnett and Mary Keyes,
Private International Law in Australia
(LexisNexis, 5
ed, 2023) 49–55.
For Australia, see
Dow Jones &
Co Inc v Gutnick
(2002) 210 CLR 575. For England, see
VTB Capital plc v
Nutritek International Corp
[2013] UKSC 5
[2013] 2 AC 337.
For Singapore, see
Investments Ltd v Nicolai Baron von Uexkull
[2007] 1 SLR(R) 377, 393–4
[37]–[40] (‘
Rickshaw Investments
For Australia, see
Regie Nationale
des Usines Renault SA v Zhang
[2002] HCA 10
(2002) 210 CLR 491.
For Singapore, see
Rickshaw Investments
) § 1605(a)(5);
Persinger v Iran
[1984] USCADC 114
, 842–3 (DC Cir, 1984) (‘
(Estate) v Iran
[2014] 3 SCR 176
, 218–20 [70]–[73]
Jerez v Cuba
, 424 (DC Cir, 2014) (‘
Re Terrorist Attacks on
September 11,
714 F 3d 109
September 11 Case
O’Bryan v Holy See
Cir, 2009).
‘DC Circuit Finds Ethiopia
Immune in Hacking Suit:
Doe v Federal Democratic Republic of
’ (2018) 131(4)
Harvard Law Review
1179, 1185.
‘United States: Congressional
Committee Report on the Jurisdiction of United States Courts in Suits against
Foreign States’
(1976) 15(6)
International Legal Materials
) 218–20 [71]–[73].
Gerritsen v de la Madrid
[1987] USCA9 1095
819 F 2d 1511
’). See also Fox and Webb (n
United States v Gaubert
[1991] USSC 49
, 322–3 (1991), cited in
Broidy Capital
Risk v Halvorsen
[1991] USCA9 460
Cir, 1991).
See below n
and accompanying text.
ILC Commentary,
UN Doc A/46/10
) 104 [7] (commentary to
draft art 12).
) 593 [186].
Ibid 1518. See also
Alicog v Saudi
860 F Supp 379
, 383 (SD Tex, 1994).
Usoyan v Turkey
31, 35–6, 47 (DC Cir, 2021) (‘
Miango v Democratic Republic of Congo
, 288 F Supp 3d 117 (D DC,
’), where protestors successfully sued the
foreign state for assault by its security forces in the US.
ILC Commentary
, UN Doc A/46/10
) 103 [4] (commentary to
draft art 12).
Sir Robert Owen,
The Litvinenko
Inquiry: Report into the Death of Alexander Litvinenko
(Report, January
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5a8055
c340f0b62302692e48/The-Litvinenko-Inquiry-H-C-695-web.pdf
>, archived at
https://perma.cc/UH5J-KAWP
Shehabi v Bahrain
[2023] EWHC
) 576 [120] (emphasis in original).
Ibid 577 [124]–[126], citing
Heiser v Iran
[2019] EWHC 2074 (QB).
The reverse situation would equally
apply: a claim in relation to a letter bomb sent from the forum state to a
person in another
country would not be barred by immunity as a relevant act had
occurred in the forum state.
Ibid 665–6.
851 F 3d 7 (DC
One commentator suggested that
predates the development of the ‘entire tort’
doctrine and therefore may be decided differently now unless a special exception
were created (for policy reasons) for ‘assassination’ cases: Judi L
Abbott, ‘The Non-Commercial Tort Exception
to the Foreign Sovereign
Immunities Act’
(1985) 9(1)
Fordham International Law Journal
[1989] USCA9 1305
Cir, 1989) (‘
ILC Commentary,
UN Doc A/46/10
) 103 [4] (commentary to draft art
Ibid 105 [7] (commentary to draft art
ILC Commentary
that the reference to the ‘author’ of the act is to the
representative of the state who does the relevant conduct,
as opposed to
‘the state itself as a legal person’, this does not clarify the
issue: see ibid 106 [10] (commentary to
draft art 12).
Jones v Saudi Arabia
WLR 1424 (‘
Jones v Saudi Arabia
Siderman de Blake v Argentina
[1992] USCA9 1398
965 F 2d 699
Cir, 1992) (‘
Siderman de
Rusesabagina v Rwanda
, 652 F Supp 3d 1 (D DC, 2023)
Rusesabagina
Bouzari v Bahremani
OR (3d) 223 (‘
Bouzari v Bahremani
Jin v Xilai
[2016] ONSC 917.
Habib v Commonwealth
[2010] FCAFC 12
, 65–6 [2].
‘Logic and common sense’
would support such a result: Andrew Dickinson, ‘
Germany v Italy
the Territorial Tort Exception: Walking the Tightrope’ (2013) 11(1)
Journal of International Criminal Justice
Joanne Foakes and Roger O’Keefe,
‘Article 12’ in Roger O’Keefe and Christian J Tams (eds),
The United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and
Their Property: A Commentary
(Oxford University Press, 2013) 209, 222.
) 578 [127], 579 [130]–[132];
[136]–[138].
Scott A Gilmore, ‘Suing the
Surveillance States: The (Cyber) Tort Exception to the Foreign Sovereign
Immunities Act’
(2015) 46(3)
Columbia Human Rights Law Review
) 555 [15];
) [8]–[10].
) 555 [20];
) [23]–[24].
) 576 [120].
Ashton Investments Ltd v
OJSC Russian Aluminium
[2006] EWHC 2545
[2007] 1 All ER (Comm) 857.
) 579 [132].
Doe v Ethiopia
, 189 F Supp 3d
6, 20 (D DC, 2016).
John J Martin, ‘Hacks Dangerous
to Human Life: Using JASTA to Overcome Foreign Sovereign Immunity in
State-Sponsored Cyberattack
Cases’ (2021) 121(1)
Columbia Law
Justice against Sponsors of Terrorism Act
is examined
below in Part III(B).
Samantha N Sergent,
‘Extinguishing the Firewall: Addressing the Jurisdictional Challenges to
Bringing the Cyber Tort Suits
against Foreign Sovereigns’ (2019) 72(1)
Vanderbilt Law Review
The Homeland and Cyber Threat Act is a
bill introduced in the US House of Representatives in 2021 that would create a
new exception
(§ 1605C) for computer intrusions by
a foreign state: Homeland and Cyber Threat
Act, HR 1607, 117
Congress (2021).
175 F Supp 2d 367
, 374 (D Conn, 2001).
Ibid 372–3.
392 F Supp 3d 410
, 418–19 (SDNY,
Broidy Capital
Rusesabagina
Broidy Capital
See above n
and accompanying text.
Broidy Capital
Nigeria v Ogbonna
[2012] 1 WLR
139. For Australia, see (outside the immunity context)
Tame v New South
[2002] HCA 35
(2002) 211 CLR 317.
) 298 [62];
) 221 [76]–[78].
(1996) 107 ILR 536.
) 557 [31];
) [180]–[181].
ILC Commentary
) 104 [5] (commentary
to draft art 12).
Foakes and O’Keefe (n
Ibid 154–5 [139].
Ibid 135 [78].
Fox and Webb (n
) 468–9; Lucas Bastin, ‘Case
Note: International Law and the International Court of Justice’s Decision
[2012] MelbJlIntLaw 25
(2012) 13(2)
Melbourne Journal of International Law
) 135 [78], referring to
[2001] ECHR 763
(2002) 34 EHRR 13
, 334 [38] (‘
McElhinney v
McElhinney v Ireland
McElhinney v Williams
McElhinney v Ireland
) 131–2 [72].
Foakes and O’Keefe (n
) 224; Xiaodong Yang,
State Immunity
in International Law
(Cambridge University Press, 2012) 213.
Fox and Webb (n
) 468, 469. National court practice on
the question remains conflicting and inconclusive. Consistently with the ICJ
decision in
, some courts have held that a
foreign state enjoys immunity for the acts of its armed forces in armed
conflicts occurring within
the forum state:
Natoniewski v Germany
168 ILR 561, 576–82 (Supreme Court of Poland);
Margellos v Germany
(2007) 129 ILR 526
, 526 (Special Supreme Court of Greece);
AA v Germany
(2017) 168 ILR 588, 593–7 (Constitutional Court of Slovenia), discussed in
Jones v United Kingdom
(2014) 59 EHRR 1
Jones v United
’). By contrast, other courts have followed the line of Italian
jurisprudence based on
Ferrini v Germany
(2006) 128 ILR 658
effect that a foreign state is not immune for grave violations of human rights
by armed forces within the forum state:
Da Costa v Germany
Federal Supreme Court, Minister Fachin, 23 August 2021), translated in Julian
Arato (ed), ‘International Decisions’
(2023) 117(2)
Journal of International Law
Case No 2016/505092
Central District Court, 8 January 2021), discussed in Vessela Terzieva,
‘State Immunity and Victims’ Rights to
Access to Court, Reparation,
and the Truth’ (2022) 22
International Criminal Law Review
Case No 308/9708/19
(Supreme Court of Ukraine, 14 April 2022),
discussed in Ielyzaveta Badanova, ‘Jurisdictional Immunities v Grave
Crimes: Reflections
on New Developments from Ukraine’,
(Blog Post, 8 September 2022) <
https://www.ejiltalk.org/jurisdictional-immunities-v-grave-crimes-reflections-on-new-developments-from-ukraine/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/8WBY-C8B5
The more general question, however, of whether immunity applies to all sovereign
acts in the forum state has not been directly
Al-Adsani v United Kingdom
(2002) 34 EHRR 273.
Jones v Saudi Arabia
Jones v United Kingdom
) 230 [101];
Bouzari v Bahremani
X v A-G (NZ)
[2017] NZHC 768
Zhang v Zemin
[2010] NSWCA 255
(2010) 79 NSWLR 513
, 534 [121],
Siderman de Blake
[2004] USCA7 448
383 F 3d 620
Cir, 2004), citing
Sampson v Germany
[2001] USCA7 271
250 F 3d 1145
Cir, 2001). Several scholars, by contrast, support this
argument: see, eg, Andrea Bianchi, ‘Denying State Immunity to Violators
Human Rights’ (1994) 46(3)
Austrian Journal of Public and International
195, 222–5; Alexander Orakhelashvili, ‘State Immunity and
Hierarchy of Norms: Why the House of Lords Got It Wrong’
(2008) 18(5)
European Journal of International Law
955, 970; Lorna McGregor,
‘State Immunity and
’ (2006) 55(2)
International
and Comparative Law Quarterly
437, 444. But see Xiaodong Yang, ‘
and State Immunity’
[2006] NZYbkIntLaw 7
New Zealand Yearbook of
International Law
Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
, opened for
signature 10 December
1984, 1465 UNTS 85
(entered into force 26 June 1987) art
[2014] NSWCA 176
Princz v Germany
[1994] USCADC 292
26 F 3d 1166 (DC
Cir, 1994);
Smith v Libya
[1997] USCA2 106
101 F 3d 239
Bouzari v Iran
(2005) 71 OR (3d) 675
, 692 [76] (‘
’). Cf Adam C Belsky, Mark Merva and Naomi Roht-Arriaza,
‘Implied Waiver under the FSIA: A Proposed Exception to Immunity
Violations of Peremptory Norms of International Law’
(1989) 77(2)
California Law Review
) 33 [47], 39 [78].
Bouzari v Iran
) 692 [76].
The UK House of Lords relied on a
similar analysis:
Jones v Saudi Arabia
) 1438 [24] (Lord Bingham).
) 137–8 [84]–[88].
Ibid 138 [89].
See generally Richard Garnett,
Substance and Procedure in Private International Law
(Oxford University
Press, 2012) 115 [4.69].
John Pfeiffer Pty Ltd v
[2000] HCA 36
(2000) 203 CLR 503
, 543–4 [99];
Tolofson v Jensen
[1994] 3 SCR 1022
). Kimberley Trapp and Alex Mills
further note that ‘procedural rules may go to the heart of substantive
justice’: Kimberley
N Trapp and Alex Mills, ‘Smooth Runs the Water
Where the Brook is Deep: The Obscured Complexities of
’ (2012) 1(1)
Cambridge Journal of International and
Comparative Law
Adeline Chong, ‘State
Immunity and Breaches of Fundamental Human Rights’ in Paulus Jurčys,
Poul F Kjaer and Ren
Yatsunami (eds),
Regulatory Hybridization in the
Transnational Sphere
(Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 2013) 223, 240; Mizushima
Tomonori, ‘Denying Foreign State Immunity on the Grounds of the
Unavailability
of Alternative Means’ (2008) 71(5)
Modern Law Review
734, 743–4. Cf
Christopher A Whytock, ‘Foreign State Immunity
and the Right to Court Access’ (2013) 93(6)
Boston University Law
2033, 2082. Compelling foreign relations reasons may still justify
immunity even where no forum for redress exists.
) 142 [98].
Ibid 143 [101]. By contrast, Judge
Yusuf (dissenting) was more receptive to the argument: at 293 [9]–[10],
‘The notion that a rule of
jus cogens can override an immunity in international law has now been widely
discredited’:
Lord Lloyd Jones, ‘Forty Years On: State Immunity and
the State Immunity Act 1978’ (2019) 68(2)
International and Comparative
Law Quarterly
Roger O’Keefe, ‘State
Immunity and Human Rights: Heads and Walls, Hearts and Minds’
(2011) 44(4)
Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law
) § 1605A(2).
‘State Sponsors of
Terrorism’,
US Department of State
(Web Page) <
https://www.state.gov/state-sponsors-of-terrorism/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/8DMQ-HFRF
Order Establishing a List of
Foreign State Supporters of Terrorism
, SOR/2012-170, sch.
) s 2, referring to
, RSC 1985, c C-46, s 83.01(1).
Justice against Sponsors of
Terrorism Act
, Pub L No 114-222, 130 Stat 852.
) § 1605B(b).
September 11 Case
18 USC § 2331(1)(B).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (204 KB)
PDF format (448 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter