URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMelbLRS/2019/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Saunders, C --- "Constitution Transformation" [2019] UMelbLRS 1
CONSTITUTION
TRANSFORMATION
Cheryl Saunders
Melbourne Law School, The University of Melbourne
185 Pelham St Carlton VIC 3053 Australia
c.saunders@unimelb.edu.au
This essay explores the extent to which if at all, the very concept of a
constitution is undergoing change in the conditions of globalisation
characterise the early decades of the 21
century, to the extent
that might be described as transformation. The question is prompted both by
familiar manifestations of the
interdependence of domestic constitutional and
international law and practice and by the interpretation placed on them by some
the literature on global constitutionalism. Some, although by no means all of
the literature and the experience on which it draws
relate to the extent of
transnational influence on the way in which constitutions now are made or
changed: constitution transformation
in the narrow, or more particular,
The essay seeks to answer this question with reference to global
constitutional experience including, critically, experience in Asia,
the largest and most diverse regions of the world, too often omitted from
studies of this kind. To this end the essay considers
whether the concept of a
constitution can be regarded as having been globally shared in any event;
examines the phenomena associated
with globalisation that might suggest a
paradigm change; and considers the arguments that mitigate against change, at
global scale. In exploring these factors, the essay necessarily
considers the extent to which states in different regions of the
world diverge
in their experiences of the internationalisation of constitutional law. The
essay concludes that, on balance, it is
not plausible to argue that the generic
concept of a constitution has changed, with global effect. It acknowledges,
however, that
current conditions of globalisation present a series of challenges
for national constitutions. Responding to them might itself be
regarded as an
exercise in global constitutionalism.
Keywords: constitution transformation; Asian constitutionalism;
globalisation.
Introduction
central question for this essay is whether the very concept of a national
constitution is changing in conditions of globalisation.
In order to capture the
significance of such a shift if, indeed, it is underway, the essay uses the
terminology of transformation.
I acknowledge, but try to avoid, the potential
for confusion with another usage of transformation, also in connection with
constitutions
and constitutionalism, to describe the extent of the change that a
constitution seeks to make to society, the precise nature of which
may vary with
Transformation in this sense assumes the underlying concept of a constitution
but contributes to a categorisation of constitutions
based on purpose. I
distinguish this usage of transformation further, in developing and explaining
the present theme.
If transformation in the sense in which I use the term is occurring, it is
prompted by a range of practical developments associated
with globalisation, on
which theories of global constitutionalism
canvass these developments in due course, but they include both the expansion of
the legal and political (and, perhaps, moral)
authority of spheres of government
above the level of the state and the practical opportunities to introduce global
standards into
national constitutions that have been offered by the
extraordinary spate of constitution-making around the world since the end of
Constitutional
transformation might also be analysed by reference to theories of transnational
legal ordering. For present purposes,
however, the distinction between theories
of global constitutionalism with a bearing on national constitutions and
transnational
legal ordering in its application to constitutions is not
sufficiently significant to be further
The concept of a constitution on which the essay draws involves a close link
with the state for which a constitution is devised and
on which its efficacy
depends. To head off a straw man sometimes brought into play, however: no
constitution is made or designed
External influence is inevitable, although its nature and extent may vary. The
link with the state nevertheless has primacy, for
theoretical, symbolic and
functional purposes, in ways that later parts of the essay explore.
A constitution may take a variety of forms. The now typical core features of
what Martin Loughlin has characterised as a ‘modern’
constitution,
however, began to take shape towards the end of 18
following the revolutions in the United States and France.
It now frames understandings of the
concept of a constitution across the world. I make this claim with diffidence
because, as
of the essay shows, not all even of these core features are
globally shared. At a level of generalisation, it nevertheless is accurate
enough. On this basis, a constitution generally is a written instrument, through
which a deliberate attempt is made to set out a
framework for the government of
a state for the foreseeable future, which is distinguishable from other law and
superior to it. Such
an instrument requires legitimacy, in the eyes of those
subject to it. Legitimacy may derive from several factors, including the
effectiveness of a constitution over time. Critically, however, factors
contributing to legitimacy include the authority for the
constitution, which has
come to be accepted as the people of the state, in some sense and on some basis,
whether assumed in theory,
demonstrated in practice or both.
The concept of a constitution, understood in this generic way, can be
distinguished from at least three other ways of thinking about
constitutions, by
reference to content, purpose or effect.
First, the concept of a constitution does not prescribe particular
unlike, perhaps, the associated concept of
constitutionalism
It follows that trends in the typical subject-matter of constitutions do not,
without more, amount to transformation. It may be
accepted that, after 1989,
constitutions around the world increasingly adopted features of liberal
democracies, in terms of elected
institutions, separation of powers, guarantees
of rights and institutional protection for courts exercising functions of
It may even be
that the content of many constitutions has converged further, around common
forms of recognised rights and a smallish
range of models for government, in
consequence of a process evocatively captured by Günter Frankenberg as the
IKEA approach
to constitutional
transplants.
The significance
and effect of these developments are complex questions that deserve analysis,
using the tools of comparative constitutional
law. They are not directly
relevant for present purposes, however, and are not considered further here.
Secondly, the concept of a constitution is not directly engaged by the
purposes or goals of constitutions. Depending on context, constitutions
by reference to purpose. Cobbling together taxonomies, purpose can be used, for
example, to distinguish between constitutions
that are traditional, transitional
or transformational; this last in the alternative sense to which reference was
A traditional constitution typically is concerned with state building in a form
that provides for the best possible framework for
government, including rights
protection against state institutions, on which the framers of the
Constitution
A transitional
constitution, on one understanding of the term, may be put in place for
instrumental purposes with a view to its progressive
evolution over
A transformational
constitution, by contrast, is directed to broader changes, in society and the
economy, as well as in the governance
of the state, and may place particular
responsibilities on the performance of
The cohesion within
these categories and the distinctions between them are not as marked as a
taxonomy implies, although they can
be useful for comparative purposes. They may
even have an indirect bearing on concepts of a
Constitution
essay shows. Purpose alone, however, at least within this range, does not affect
the concept of a constitution.
Thirdly, for the purposes of this essay the concept of a
Constitution
be distinguished from ways of thinking about constitutions by reference to
compliance and, therefore, effect. This is an old
approach to the categorisation
of constitutions. In an earlier phase, in 1957, Karl Loewenstein classified
constitutions by reference
to compliance as ‘normative’,
‘nominal’ or ‘semantic’, where a normative constitution
is ‘faithfully
observed’ and a semantic constitution effectively is
a constitution in name only.
More recently, Albert Chen has adapted the taxonomies of Loewenstein and
to contemporary
purposes, overlaying degrees of constitutional compliance with measurements of
liberal democratic norms and applying
the results to an analysis of
constitutional systems in East
Chen developed four
categories, ranging from category I, in which liberal democracy and a normative
constitution align, to category
IV, in which authoritarian systems are
associated with semantic or nominal
constitutions.
While there is
considerable variation in the operation of constitutions at the two ends of the
spectrum, Chen’s applied analysis
shows movement between categories over
time and a degree of effectiveness even of constitutional arrangements that fall
category IV. Again, therefore, while both the democratic character of
constitutions and their effectiveness in practice may be critical
distinction in comparative work, they do not necessarily bear directly on the
concept of a constitution, except perhaps
in the most extreme cases.
The question whether the very concept of a constitution is changing is one of
many puzzles associated with globalisation. Asia and
the Pacific offers a
particularly appropriate context in which to look for answers. These are large
and significant regions, home
to more than a quarter of the member states of the
United Nations and of many other largely autonomous polities. They are sites of
extraordinary diversity, in language, religion, culture, historical experience
and governance. Asia and the Pacific have experienced
the current phase of
globalisation somewhat differently to many other parts of the world, including
in the range and depth of regional
integration. Asia and the Pacific
nevertheless are regularly omitted from analyses on which generalisations about
global constitutionalism
are based. If claims about globalisation do not hold
true in Asia and the Pacific they do not reflect genuinely global phenomena
all, significant though they may be in particular parts of the world.
The remainder of the essay proceeds as follows. The next part considers
whether, in any event, there is a concept of a constitution
that is globally
shared, from which divergence might be occurring.
examine the
evidence for and against constitutional transformation, in the sense of a change
in the very nature of a constitution.
A brief conclusion pushes back against
claims of a paradigm change. In doing so, however, I acknowledge that adherence
to the status
quo fails to account for some, still isolated, global experiences.
And I also argue that we now need to acknowledge explicitly what
has always been
an implicit feature of the concept of a constitution: its relevance to the
external face presented by a state towards
the rest of the world.
there ever been a common concept of a
Constitution
Logically, a
critical examination of whether there is a sufficiently common global concept of
a constitution precedes consideration
of whether the concept has changed. It
also is an important issue in its own right, however. Different understandings
that underlie
many terms in frequent use in constitutional law bedevil
comparative research, if they are not recognised and taken into
If the term
‘constitution’ is one of these, it has implications for many
comparative projects, of which this is only
one. In what follows, I ultimately
conclude that, at an appropriate level of generality, the concept of a
constitution is sufficiently
widely shared for the broader inquiry into
transformation to be sustainable. I accept that there are important differences
nevertheless,
which qualify the findings, and which are potentially relevant to
other problems of comparative constitutional law.
The concept of a constitution that is currently assumed emerged from
revolutionary contexts in the United States and France at the
century. It spread to much of the rest of the world in a complex
variety of ways, both voluntary and less voluntary, over the following
centuries. Such a process of diffusion, over time and space, suggests plenty of
opportunity for difference to emerge. It is not
necessary to trace the history
of the idea to establish this point, instructive though such a project would be.
Even the two early
prototypes differed from each other in significant ways. Like
most constitutional phenomena, the idea of a constitution with which
revolutionaries worked built on earlier ideas with a long history, many of which
were shared, although emphases
The revolutionary
context was another common feature of the two events, providing a catalyst for
both constitutions. There were also
key contextual differences between them,
however, which fed into the concepts of a constitution that emerged. For
example, the distinction
between popular sovereignty in the United States
tradition and national sovereignty in the French tradition are variations on the
way of conceiving the role of the people and goes to the source of authority for
constitution.
In similar vein, the understanding of the
Constitution
as fundamental law in the
US, which proved ultimately to be enforceable through ordinary courts, was not
shared in France where,
even now, constitutional control takes a distinctive
These and other
differences in the original concept of a
Constitution
have tended since to
converge to a degree. At the outset, however, they were a source of variation in
the concept as it spread, founding
somewhat different constitutional traditions,
of which significant traces remain.
Even this brief, impressionistic history of the global spread of the concept
of a constitution, suggests the potential for differences
to emerge. Three
catalysts for difference deserve particular attention.
First, the ‘modern’ concept of a constitution did not spread
everywhere. Most obviously, the United Kingdom still has
an uncodified
Constitution
in conditions that might be argued to affect the very concept. The
Constitution
is not fundamental law; and substantial parts of it are not law at
Constitution
is not a deliberate prescription of arrangements for
government, but a consequence of the evolution of arrangements that have been
used over time. The legitimacy of the British
Constitution
historically depends
on its organic character, rather than the authority of a sovereign author,
virtual or otherwise. There is a
resulting ambiguity in the identity of the
constituent power, which is not entirely resolved by identifying Parliament as
sovereign and the people as the political sovereign; a fault line
recently exposed by the dilemma of
These differences in the
concept of a constitution in the UK once led David Feldman to equate
‘constitutionalism’ as
‘a commitment to using distinctively
constitutional modes of argument...and constitutional processes to mediate
disagreements...between
institutions with different interpretations of the
Constitution
prescription may have some resonance in understandings of constitutionalism
elsewhere, it is underpinned by an assumption
that the constitution is not
fundamental law. Such differences of definition and emphasis in the British
understanding of a constitution
have left their mark in other states with
constitutions that fit the modern concept of a constitution more
Secondly, variations in the concept of a constitution may develop as a
response to the context in which a constitution is adopted
and evolves. There
are myriad ways in which this might be so. Continental Europe offers an example.
As a generalisation, the context
that led to the adoption of constitutions in
broadly contemporary form in many western European states, including Germany,
the fragmentation of public authority in feudal Europe, as the
contemporary state emerged; the chaos caused by religious wars; attempts
monarchs to head-off revolution by offering instruments termed constitutions in
which they limited their own power; and the eventual
adoption of constitutional
instruments for which other sources of legitimacy needed to be
This context helps to
explain the emphases in understandings of a constitution in states in this
tradition. Thus, the five characteristics
of constitutionalism identified by
Dieter Grimm include the need for regulation of public power by the
Constitution
to be ‘comprehensive...in the sense that no extra-constitutional bearers
of public power...are
recognised’.
The point is
acceptable enough, but the priority accorded to it in this account of the
concept of a constitution arguably reflects
the European past as well as,
perhaps, present debates about the impact of the European Union. Similarly,
while the distinction on
which Grimm insists, between ‘
constituant
pouvoir constitue
’, is familiar in
constitutional discourse, it receives much less emphasis in constitutional
traditions that have not been confronted
by the contrast between granted
Constitutions and those derived from an exercise of popular sovereignty or have
handled the contrast
in a different
Thirdly, in a related point, the concept of a constitution may vary with the
conditions in which the idea is adapted for use. This
possibility is heightened
where a constitution is adopted for instrumental purposes in polities with
long-established approaches
to governance that differ significantly from those
in the states from which the concept of a constitution originated. Thus
Yeh and Wen-Chen Chang have argued that East Asian states initially
adopted Constitutions with a view to the ‘modernisation’
‘ancient states’, to emulate the path to economic development that
In an example of another kind other states, including Thailand and Tonga,
initially adopted constitutions for the even more basic
instrumental purposes of
deterring western
Of course, over time, the concept of constitutions adopted for such instrumental
reasons may evolve to become closer to what appears
to be the global norm, as
Yeh and Chang argue in relation to East
It is plausible,
nevertheless, that in some states constitutions continue to vie with other norms
and practices in ways that affect
the concept of a constitution itself. Thailand
is an example where, it has been argued, successive written constitutions
no real meaning in Thai culture’, leaving them vulnerable to
repeated abrogation.
circumstances, a written constitution does not embody the most fundamental law
or set of norms and is not complete in its
coverage of the sources of public
power. Rather, there is an underlying ‘cultural constitution’, which
derives its legitimacy
from ‘the long-term experience of the society over
centuries’.
These variations reinforce the need for care in making claims about a global
concept of a constitution. At a sufficient level of generality,
however, the
concept is sufficiently widely shared for the claim to be safe enough. If
anything, in conditions of globalisation,
variations in the concept of a
constitution, originally attributable to historical factors, are converging,
although the possibility
remains that convergence is by no means complete. Some
evidence for convergence comes from the astonishing diffusion of the doctrine
unconstitutional constitutional amendment, despite its original dependence on
theories about constituent power that are not universally
In any event I note in
passing a point that becomes relevant below that, whatever the differences in
emphasis in understandings of
Constitution
, all assume that the legitimacy of
constitutions relies on authority within the state and, usually, authority
derived from the people
of the state.
The next part considers whether this complex concept of a national
constitution is presently undergoing substantial change, in ways
suggested by
some of the literature on global constitutionalism.
case for (a degree of) transformation
globalisation
The principal case for transformation stems from developments at the
international, rather than domestic, level, given theoretical
shape by observers
seeking to make sense of contemporary conditions of global interdependence and
transnational collaboration.
If change is occurring, it affects the touchstones for legitimacy, by adding
a requirement for international approval. To the extent
that international
approval is required from the outset, moreover, it affects the identity of the
constituent power. If, in these
circumstances, a constitution is less responsive
to national conditions, or perceived to be less responsive, it plays less of a
role and may have a more precarious claim to observance as fundamental
law. As a quid pro quo, however, the role of a constitution
may be reimagined as
comprising a network of instruments of a distinctive legal kind, providing an
intermediary between ordinary
domestic and international law, in which
international norms are enshrined and through which they become at least
formally binding
on domestic legal orders.
The struggle to interpret the impact of globalisation on the concept of a
constitution is mirrored in comparable questions about the
globalisation on the institution of the state. With hindsight, these questions
have been live throughout most of the 20
century and into the
, driven by factors that include the erosion of the significance
of territorial borders by, for example, religion and political ideologies;
need for transnational collaboration on a growing range of shared problems; the
establishment and evolution of international
law and institutions; and the
failure of many states to provide basic needs for their people in terms of
security and welfare. Over
the course of this period, questions about the future
of the state peaked at key moments: between the wars; in 1945; in
Despite the intervening
troughs, the questions have remained relevant, shaped by increasing
interdependence. De facto, at least,
the sovereignty of states has been eroded
to a degree, which varies significantly between states, by international law and
New forms of regional integration, through which states pool
sovereignty for mutual advantage, make further inroads still, not least
as Brexit shows, they are hard to unwind.
On the other hand, predictions of the significant decline or even
disappearance of the institution of the
many of which were
prompted by economic and other responses to the end of the cold war, also are
implausible, at least as matters
presently stand. Whatever their faults, states
currently are the largest territorial form with which communities, grouped as
identify. They are the principal form of polity through which
democracy as presently understood is practicable, with all that it
potentially
offers in terms of identifying and serving a common good. States are a critical
precondition for the operation of international
law and international relations.
If there were to be change, research on drivers of the size of states and the
incidence of secession
movements around the world suggest that a move to
smaller, rather than larger, polities is at least as likely, notwithstanding its
challenges for regional and international
arrangements.
In the shortish
term at least, the most likely scenario is the continuation of states with a
degree of authority that can reasonably
be described in terms of sovereignty,
co-existing with other levels of government in relationships that require
careful nurturing
and considerable
Questions about state sovereignty may affect the concept of a constitution as
well. But the implications of globalisation for the
concept of a constitution
also is an issue in its own right. The issue is not new. As the brief discussion
in the earlier part showed,
the initial spread of the concept of a constitution
is attributable to earlier phases of globalisation, including processes of
and colonisation. Neither any longer is permissible at international
In its place is a new, at
least equally deep phase of globalisation, in which some states still are much
more influential than others,
despite formal equality.
Critical to the current phase of globalisation, from the standpoint of
constitutions, is the growth of international law and institutions,
by at least two other phenomena: the horizontal interdependence of states in
terms of economy, environment, health and
security and the rapidity of global
communication through ever-improving technology. At the heart of the
international system is
the United Nations (UN), established in the wake of
world war II, with an overriding authority in the face of threats to global
and security that has been expansively understood, if inconsistently
The creation of the
UN in turn was the institutional catalyst for the international recognition of a
wide and deep range of international
norms including, for present purposes,
international human rights
The vast majority of states became parties to these
instruments,
many of which also have implications for constitutional institutional design, as
exemplified by, for example, protection for independent
courts and free and fair
Domestic application
of international norms is by no means necessarily
guaranteed.
This familiar
weakness of international law has been tempered, however, by the practices of
monism in parts of the world;
the use of Security Council resolutions in ways that sometimes have implications
for domestic law and
constitutions;
the continual
refinement of international monitoring
mechanisms;
and pressure for
domestic compliance from the Bretton Woods institutions and other transnational
financial bodies, through the use
of sanctions by individual states, and/or
through conditions attached to development aid.
In parts of the world, the impact of international forces on national
constitutions has been deepened further by regional arrangements,
some of which
circumvent problems of enforcement that plague the international sphere by
making supra-national norms and values conditions
of membership. The European
Union is the obvious case in point, the impact of which is further reinforced by
its symbiotic relationship
with the Council of Europe and the European
Convention on Human Rights, including the monitoring role of the Venice
Commission.
on European Union
prescribes the values on which it is based and on which
its accession criteria draw, and provides a mechanism for dealing with breach
a member state, difficult though that has proved to
Other arrangements for
regional integration and regional human rights protection in other parts of the
world, including Africa and
Latin America, are different in ambition and,
perhaps, levels of compliance, but have broadly similar implications for the
constitutional
systems of their member states for present
This is not so with
the quite different sub-regional arrangements that presently exist in Asia and
the Pacific; a point to which
I return in the next
Constitution-making
The earlier section shows how international actors and international norms
affect the substance and operation of national constitutions
conditions of globalisation. This section considers constitution-making, as the
point at which national constitutions
are most susceptible to international
influence. The conditions in which a constitution is made lay important
foundations for its
ongoing acceptance as fundamental law. Constitution-making
is not a final determinant of legitimacy, as the success of the constitutions
made during post-war occupation in Germany and Japan shows. For present
purposes, however, understanding of the impact of globalisation
constitution-making is integral to an assessment of whether the concept of a
constitution is undergoing transformation.
In the decades since the end of the cold war, whether by happenstance or
design, there has been extensive external engagement with
constitution-making processes. The entry point for external actors is most
obvious when constitution-making is linked to
the resolution of conflict even
where, as now is the case more often than not, the conflict is intra-, rather
than inter-state. Intra-state
conflicts may have spillover effects, actually or
virtually, engaging neighbouring states and others. Threats to international
and security attract the authority of UN institutions under the UN
UN involvement is by no means confined to cases that can be explained in
these ways, however. From shortly after its inception, but
with gathering
momentum after 1989, a range of UN agencies has offered assistance and support
to states in the global south on democracy-building
including the conduct of
elections and on compliance with international human rights standards. While
constitutional assistance was
initially encompassed by broader UN programs such
as rule of law, by 2009 at the latest the UN engaged in it
explicitly,
as an adjunct to peace building,
human rights advocacy
development
The UN is only one external actor engaged in these activities, moreover. Amongst
myriad others are regional organisations such as
the European Union or the
African Union; intergovernmental organisations of which the Commonwealth or
International IDEA are examples;
international NGOs such as Interpeace; and
individual states, as neighbours, donors of aid, or in some other
These diverse and far-reaching forms of constitutional engagement are a means
by which international norms and standards, a category
with somewhat imprecise
boundaries, may be incorporated into domestic law at the level of the
Constitution
and thus as supreme law. More significantly for present purposes,
they also raise questions about sources of constitutional authority.
is rare, even now, for external forces overtly to prescribe a constitution. The
annexation of a
Constitution
for Bosnia-Herzegovina to the Dayton Peace
Agreement remains an exception in this
External involvement in
some other constitution building comes close to prescription, however or, at
least, exceeds mere influence.
United States involvement in determining the
substance of the
Constitution
of Iraq during and after the occupation is one
The effect of the rules of accession to the European Union on aspiring member
states is another, albeit of a different kind. Security
Council resolutions that
prescribe process or substance for constitution-making in a state emerging from
conflict also fall into
The vast bulk of external involvement is officially consensual, however;
described in terms of ‘assistance’ or support’.
Its de facto
authority comes from uneven power relations and the financial resources that
often accompany constitution-making advice.
Its effect also is underpinned by
recourse to claims of international standards and support from international
actors by advocates
inside a state during a constitution-making process. On one
view, this is no more than the give and take that might be expected and,
needed, in a process of this kind. On the other hand, this dynamic contributes
to the overall picture of the impact of globalisation
on national
constitutions.
Interpretation of the significance of external involvement in national
constitution-making needs also to take account of the limits
that external
actors themselves identify. These are most explicit in the case of the UN, where
key documents consistently describe
constitution-making as a ‘sovereign
process’ and stress the need for ‘national ownership and
leadership’.
are invoked, however. In relation to the Syrian
constitutional process, for
example, the intense involvement of both the UN and other interested states,
including Turkey, Russia
and Iran, presents challenges for an outcome that is
‘nationally owned.’
Analysis is further complicated by the ambiguity of the idea of national
ownership and leadership. In the context of guidance about
the nature and extent
of external involvement in constitution-making, particularly when juxtaposed
with references to the ‘sovereign’
nature of the process,
‘national’ ownership might be understood in contradistinction to
‘foreign’ ownership.
The emphasis on public participation, which
also appears in the guidance notes, suggests another possibility: that national
mandates an inclusive constitution-making process, involving the
‘nation’, practically, as well as virtually. While the
concept of a
constitution ideally calls for a more inclusive constitution-making process,
determination of its nature and extent,
from the top-down, makes it another
internationally derived standard.
Global constitutionalism
In summary, therefore, the case for transformation of the concept of a
constitution depends on the following observations. First,
a degree of
convergence in national constitutions, both through transnational borrowing and
the incorporation of international norms,
each facilitated in a variety of ways
connected with globalisation. Secondly, extensive engagement of external actors
in national
constitution-making projects, affecting both the processes followed
and the substance of the new constitutional arrangements adopted.
In most cases
external involvement is not formally determinative but in many it is influential
nevertheless. Thirdly, while external
influence is significantly less once a
constitution takes effect, there are some mechanisms at both regional and
international levels
through which some of the more egregious aspects of
constitutions in operation can be monitored, although with variable effect.
These various phenomena have fueled that part of the literature on global
constitutionalism that pertains to the nature and function
of national
constitutions. Much of this is complementary to the primary focus of global
constitutionalism, on the constitutionalisation
of levels of government above
the state. From the standpoint of national constitutions, speculation revolves
around two poles. One
questions whether national constitutions have now become
components of a ‘compound constitutional system’, supplemented
international law.
Another asks
whether, in the circumstances, the constituent power is now located in or at
least shared with, the international
If either or both were correct, it would be arguable that transformation of
the concept of a constitution was in train. There would
be work to be done,
also, on the consequences that might follow from such a significant theoretical
and practical change. Before
drawing such conclusions, however, it is necessary
to consider indicators that the concept of a constitution remains broadly as it
was, albeit operating within a globalising environment.
Contraindications
arguments against constitutional transformation, despite the implications of
globalisation, rest on three bases. These can be
characterised in terms of
evidence, belief and effectiveness.
As the earlier part of this essay showed, the case for transformation can be
traced to a series of developments over the past thirty
or so years. One is the
expansion in the strength and depth of international law, particularly
international human rights law but
also, perhaps, international economic law,
reinforced by internationalised dispute resolution
A more specific
development is the spate of constitution-making and constitutional change,
particularly in post-conflict states,
which is influenced by international
actors in a variety of ways. Finally and by no means least, the deepening of
regional integration,
particularly in Europe, has had effects that potentially
bear on the concept of a
constitution.
However significant these factors in relation to many states, they do not
apply everywhere in the ways that can found claims of global
transformation. Not
all states are parties to the same range of international treaties.
International legal norms are not incorporated
directly in or even through the
constitutions of many states or the decisions of national courts. Not all states
have participated
in the spate of constitution-making that has characterised the
century. Of those that have done so, not all have been
exposed to or accepted external involvement. Regional integration takes very
different forms in different parts of the world and has little impact on
constitutions in some areas, if integration exists at all.
In these and other
respects, the evidence on which global constitutionalism is based is patchy
across the world and manifests itself
least obviously in the broad Asian
Any persuasive global
theory about the changing concept of a constitution in conditions of
globalisation must take the experiences
of these states and their constitutions
into account as well.
In any event, with gathering speed in the aftermath of the global financial
crisis, the second decade of 21
century has seen pushback from many
sources against aspects of globalisation that potentially have a bearing on the
concept of a
constitution. Some of this has been all too obvious, as leaders
have harnessed populist fervour through forms of unproductive nationalism
deal with or to distract attention from pressing national and global problems.
The very potential for this to happen, however,
underscores the limits of
globalisation as a constraint on national constitutional systems.
The pushback has had tangible effects, moreover, at least in the short term,
as the following, non-exhaustive, examples show. There
has been a spate of
withdrawals or threatened withdrawals from international or regional
institutions: the United Kingdom from the
European Union; Burundi and the
Philippines from the International Criminal Court. There are significant
instances of non-co-operation
with the requirements of international and
regional institutions, further exposing the legal and political challenges of
enforcement
above the level of the
There is ambiguity about
whether and when many regional and international arrangements prevail over
national constitutions, encapsulated
(and to some extent masked) by theories of
constitutional pluralism.
states, of which Bhutan, Sri Lanka and, arguably, Myanmar are examples, resist
or at least manage external involvement in their
constitution-making processes;
anecdotally, the trend is increasing.
Even where not in retreat, globalisation in forms that have implications for
national constitutions is not moving forward, either.
To take one example: a
proposal for an international constitutional court has effectively stalled,
despite spirited Tunisian
An example of another
kind is the growing resistance to investor-state dispute settlement mechanisms,
in the forms in which they
have been used, which is prompting discussion of
change, at least some of which would favour state authority to a greater
It may be that these and other examples of resistance to aspects of
globalisation are temporary and that the earlier trajectory will
return. The
saga of the move by the United Kingdom to leave the European Union points to
reasons why this might be so: a substantial
proportion of the population favour
continued membership of the Union and disentangling the now deep economic,
social, legal and
political ties has proved remarkably difficult. The emerging
challenges of climate change and population movement, both of which
global action, are likely to make new initiatives for close collaboration
irresistible. The practices of globalisation may
not return in the same form,
however. The current hiatus has provided an opportunity to take stock of the
relations between states
and supra-state levels of government, in order to
harness the potential strengths, and minimise the weaknesses, of
In any event, the geopolitical context for globalisation has changed. The
recalibration of the role of the United States, under President
unlikely to be reversed in a way that restores the status quo ante, originally
built on the assumptions of the ‘end
The enhanced
global role of the People’s Republic of China suggests the reemergence of
a multi-polar world, with inevitable
impact on the operation of UN institutions.
Potentially significant in this regard also is the Chinese position in relation
constitutional systems of others that, ostensibly at least, eschews
‘political’
interference.
A second factor suggesting caution about claims of constitutional
transformation is the beliefs of the principal actors: political
elites within and beyond the state and, with qualifications, the people at
Despite the burgeoning scholarship on global constitutionalism there are few
if any signs that the political elite within states assume
or accept that the
concept of a constitution is changing in ways that would affect the sources of
its legitimacy or the authority
Consideration of two extreme
cases makes the point. Even in the European Union, where conditions have
provided the greatest intellectual
impetus for theories of global
constitutionalism, the actions of decision-makers in member states tend to belie
the claims of scholars,
whether manifested in abandonment of the project of a
Constitution
, the protection of national identity in Article 4 of the
Treaty on European Union
, the utility of the ambiguity introduced by
doctrines associated with constitutional pluralism, or instances of reassertion
of authority
by particular member
Even in states in the
global south that are most exposed to the conditionality of external assistance
the emphasis on, for example,
the ‘centrality of state-society
relations’ as the path to peace and development, in statements such as the
Dili Declaration,
makes assumptions about the constitutional framework within
which those relations occur.
Equally, there are few signs that the people of states accept that the
concept of a constitution is changing. In weighing the strength
observation, however, two caveats are needed. One is that that most people
neither think nor even, necessarily, know about
the constitution unless, at
least, the issues at stake are drawn to their attention. The other is that the
attitudes of many who
are constitutionally aware are likely to have been shaped
to a degree by the internationalisation of civil society and the spread
global knowledge about constitutional possibilities. These realities make it
likely that there will be pressure for incorporation
of what are perceived as
global norms in the course of contestation within the state over a
constitutional project. Insofar as this
pressure is accompanied by claims about
the requirements of constitutional legitimacy, it has implications for the
concept of a constitution
that are still, however, too amorphous to ground
concrete conclusions. It is equally likely that proponents of the incorporation
of global standards accept the concept of a constitution but seek only to
influence its content. Indeed, considerations of effectiveness,
discussed in the
next section, make this the most rational course to pursue.
Finally, under the rubric of belief, international actors also, by and large,
continue to accept the state-centred concept of a constitution.
A constitution
that complies with international expectations is not a general requirement
either for statehood or for membership
of the United Nations, although it may
occasionally be one of a number of factors in recognition of a new state. United
Nations spokespersons
continue to describe constitution-making as a
‘national sovereign process’, despite the ambiguity over the meaning
it being ‘nationally owned and
Even in relation to
Syria, where pressure from outside sources seems almost palpable, both UN
spokespersons and representatives of
foreign states stress the need for a
process that it ‘Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led’.
Whatever the
reality on the ground, the need to formulate the goals of the process in this
way says something about the assumptions
the speakers make.
Effectiveness
One final set of considerations that weigh against change to the concept of a
constitution concerns the effectiveness of constitutions,
in the early phases of
implementation and over time. It is trite that a constitution is merely an empty
symbol unless it has effect
in the state to which it pertains. Ironically, even
the incorporation of international norms and standards in national constitutions
depends on the effectiveness of the constitutions on the ground.
The challenge of effectiveness depends on purpose and substance; on what the
constitution is designed to do. On any view constitutions
seek to perform the
highly delicate task of empowering and constraining powerful state institutions.
Many constitutions are more
ambitious still. Some are associated with democratic
transition after authoritarian or military rule. Constitutions deemed
‘transformative’
seek also to change society. Constitutions made in
the wake of conflict usually are designed with an eye to securing and building
peace. New or substantially amended constitutions may provide major changes from
past practice, in terms of democracy, federalisation,
power-sharing or in myriad
other ways.
Making a constitution effective is a long-term project. Ultimately, in a
democracy, it depends on local actors operating state and
sub-state institutions
responding to expectations of the population at large. To this end, local actors
need an understanding of
constitutional requirements; a sense of ownership of
them; and a commitment to making them work. To some extent these can be secured
through practice, including the process of constitution-making and
constitutional design. They are linked also to the symbolism of
a constitution,
however, which in the right conditions give it a hold on collective imagination.
The generalised but essentially state-centred concept of a constitution
offers both a set of practices that are likely to lay the
implementation and a justification on which the status of the constitution can
be built. Both practice and theory assist
to embed constitutions in national
experience and actively involve both political elites and people on those heady
occasions that
may be described as ‘constitutional
Sometimes the
founding constitutional story is myth; but it can be constructive
It assumes that
constitutions derive their legitimacy and authority from sources within the
state, even if those sources choose to
adopt transnational ideas. It enables
constitutions to respond to more localised conditions, actual and
experiential.
External actors can assist national constitution builders in various ways,
including by offering insight into comparative options
and experiences.
International aid may assist further with the early phases of implementation of
new constitutional arrangements
but, sooner or later, these forms of aid end.
Regional and international constitutional monitoring and enforcement mechanisms
evolved with the processes and practices of globalisation and may have some
effect over time on constitutional compliance with selected
issues. More
domestic courts have become more willing to take international law or
comparative experience into
Factors like these
contribute to the possibility of constitutional transformation over time. As
matters presently stand, however,
they fall a long way short of substituting for
processes of domestic implementation, which draw on the will and capacity of
institutions given impetus, in democracies, by the population at large.
There are famous examples of constitution-making where external pressure has
been decisive for constitutional design. Those often
referenced are the post-war
constitutions of Germany, Japan and the Republic of
While these cases deserve consideration, they can be understood to substantiate
the present point. In all three, local decision-makers
struggled to preserve
enough latitude for local conditions and preferences, on which a future national
constitutional story could
As those examples also
show, the legitimacy of constitutions made in such conditions ultimately depends
heavily on effective implementation
drawing, however creatively, on the
foundations thus laid. More recent cases in which external pressure was intense,
of which Iraq
is an example, have had a less positive
Even where external
influence is more muted, recent emphases on formalised implementation through
constitutional schedules or implementation
authorities might be interpreted as
attempts to compensate for a shortfall in the kind of local ownership that
grounds a more natural
progression from promulgation to
implementation.
Conclusions
balance, despite the extraordinary changes in the global context in which
national constitutions operate, the concept of a constitution
retains its
defining characteristics as a set of institutions, principles and practices that
serve the state and its people and draws
its legitimacy from sources inside the
state. This is not to deny that constitutions are affected by a host of
influences from outside
the state, which undoubtedly is a feature of
contemporary practice. External influence is not new, however, even if in
present conditions
it takes distinctive forms.
If the generic concept of a constitution remains, essentially, unchanged,
retaining its state-oriented character, certain consequences
follow. The concept
of a constitution offers a useful touchstone to guide the appropriate nature and
scope of international involvement.
It also makes it clear that responsibility
and accountability for the standards of governance for which the constitution
a framework ultimately lie with the state, its institutions, its
political actors and its people. External forces can expose problems
for their resolution in a host of ways. There are limits to what they can
achieve, however. Lasting solutions require internal
assumption of
responsibility.
It may be that, as globalisation proceeds, transformation of the concept of a
constitution will occur, perhaps in the directions that
some theories of global
constitutionalism suggest. This seems unlikely, however, without more dramatic
changes in the quality, consistency
and equity of governance at levels above the
state. The degree of difficulty of reform of the international system suggests
any such dynamic will be likely to begin in processes of regional
integration, which also would need revision for this purpose. Such
a development
would be significant but not unlikely to be able to be generalised across the
world as the pattern of regional integration
presently stands.
Two further sets of issues are raised by this inquiry into the concept of a
constitution, which cannot be resolved here but deserve
further reflection.
One comprises a series of loose-ends, linked by aspects of globalisation, but
otherwise unconnected. The first concerns the meaning
and application of the
mantra of ‘national ownership and leadership’ in connection with
constitution-making, generally
and in particular
The potential
inconsistency between two possible meanings of these terms was described
earlier. I have suggested elsewhere that they
could be reconciled, by domestic
acceptance of the need for an appropriately distinctive process for
constitution-making, in recognition
of the significance of the
Even so, there are
unresolved questions about design of such a process that is both distinctive and
effective to which, ultimately,
there may be no generic answers. A second issue
indirectly raised but unresolved by reflection on the concept of a constitution
the implications of a link between a peace agreement that resolves intrastate
conflicts and a constitution designed to give the peace
agreement effect. The
arguments in favour of continuing to treat the latter as a constitution in the
familiar sense remain. There
is a risk however that, in this case, as
constitutional processes take over, the peace agreement is not given full
effect. A solution
might lie in accepting that such constitutions are in a genre
of their own, at least for a transitional period, raising a host of
questions for both theory and practice that deserve more detailed
examination.
A related issue
concerns the characterisation of national constitutions that undoubtedly are
attributable solely to external authorship.
Bosnia-Herzegovina is a prime,
although still rare, example and for that reason can, for the moment, be treated
as an exceptional
Finally, the conditions of globalisation in which constitutions presently
operate point to the enhanced significance of the external
constitutions; of the functions that constitutions perform looking outwards,
rather than inwards. From an external perspective,
a constitution performs
various functions. It distinguishes the state, its people and its territory from
It structures the ways
in which the state participates in the international realm by empowering state
institutions and defining the
scope of their authority. Directly or indirectly,
it controls or provides the means to control entry of others into the territory
of the state, at least in normal circumstances.
Constitutions have always performed these functions. Typically, however,
these aspects of a constitution have been taken for granted
and have attracted
relatively little attention. This may be because, in many states, the exercise
of a still substantial external
sovereignty that states retain has been assumed
to lie within the characteristically opaque purview of the executive
In a world in which so
much that happens within a state is dependent on collaboration with those
outside it, however, this arrangement
is hard to justify and, in at least some
states, has already changed to some
Inquiry into how
constitutions might better structure the exercise of external and well as
internal sovereignty might itself be described
as a dimension of global
constitutionalism. If and when this field develops, it could usefully extend to
the exercise of private,
as well as public, power, to provide a framework for
international borrowing and investment as well, where these have substantial,
including intergenerational, implications.
Pius Langa, 'Transformative
Constitutionalism'
Stellenbosch Law
particularly relevant, addition to a voluminous literature is Takao Suami et al
Global Constitutionalism from European and East Asian Perspectives
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
At least 110 new
Constitutions have been made over this 30 year period; others have been
substantially amended: Central Intelligence
The World Factbook
available at <
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/fields/307.html
See Gregory Shaffer, Tom Ginsburg and Terence C Halliday (eds),
Constitution-Making and Transnational Legal Order,
(Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 2019).
example, in Tom Ginsburg, Terence C Halliday and Gregory Shaffer,
‘Constitution-Making as Transnational Legal Ordering’
in Shaffer,
Ginsburg and Halliday (eds) (n
Martin Loughlin,
Foundations of Public Law
(Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2010)
Dieter Grimm, ‘The
Achievement of Constitutionalism and Its Prospects in a Changed World’ in
Petra Dobner and Martin
Loughlin (eds),
The Twilight of Constitutionalism?
(Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2010) 3,
Although cf David
Feldman, ‘“Which in Your Case You Have Not Got”:
Constitutionalism at Home and Abroad’
Current Legal Problems
Ran Hirschl,
‘The Strategic Foundations of Constitutions’ in Denis J Galligan and
Mila Versteeg (eds),
Social and Political Foundations of Constitutions,
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2013)
Frankenberg, ‘Constitutional Transfer: The IKEA Theory Revisited’
International Journal of Constitutional Law
Jiunn-Rong Yeh and
Wen-Chen Chang, ‘The Changing Landscape of Modern Constitutionalism:
Transitional Perspective’
National Taiwan University Law
Chang also have a developed taxonomy that includes ‘transnational’
constitutions: Jiunn-rong Yeh and Wen-Chen
Chang, ‘The Emergence of
Transnational Constitutionalism: Its Features, Challenges and Solutions’
Penn State International Law Review
Insofar as they apply
this category to national Constitutions in ways that raise the possibility of an
external source of legitimacy
the concept of a constitution is potentially
engaged. I consider transnational constitutions further in Part III,
Yeh and Chang,
‘The Changing Landscape of Modern Constitutionalism’ (n
Ibid. A transitional constitution might also, in some contexts, refer to a
constitution intended to last for only for an interim
period, with obvious
implications for durability and potentially also for legitimacy: Kimana
Zulueta-Fülscher, ‘Interim
Constitutions: Peacekeeping and
Democracy-Building Tools’, (International Institute for Democracy and
Electoral Assistance,
Stockholm, 2015).
); Michaela Hailbronner,
‘Transformative Constitutionalism: Not Only in the Global South’
American Journal of Comparative Law
Karl Loewenstein,
Political Power and the Governmental Process
(University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, 1957)
Sartori, ‘Constitutionalism: A Preliminary Discussion’
American Political Science Review
Albert HY Chen,
‘Constitutions, Constitutional Practice and Constitutionalism in East
Asia’ in Christoph Antons (ed),
Routledge Handbook of Asian Law
(Routledge, London, 2016)
‘Separation of
powers’ is one example, which I have previously explored: Cheryl Saunders,
‘Theoretical Underpinnings
of Separations of Powers’ in Gary
Jacobsohn and Miguel Schor (eds),
Comparative Constitutional Theory
(Edward Elgar, Northampton MA, 2018)
Amongst many works that
make the point, see the complex origins of popular sovereignty and the ideas
associated with it in Daniel
Popular Sovereignty in Early Modern
Constitutional Thought
(Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2016)
Dieter Grimm,
Sovereignty: The Origin and Future of a Political and Legal Concept
(Columbia University Press, New York, 2015) 39–40. Flow-on
implications of the difference include understanding of the relations
people and representatives, generally and in the context of constitutional
[1803] USSC 16
(1 Cranch) 137
(1803); Elisabeth Zoller,
Introduction to Public Law: A Comparative Study
(Martinus Nijhoff,
Leiden, 2007) 220–1;
Constitution
of the French Republic,
R (Miller) v
Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union
[2017] UKSC 5
Most obviously New
Zealand, which also has no overriding constitutional instrument. Many of the
other states in the former British
Commonwealth share some similar attitudes,
however, affecting the scope of the fundamental law, modes of interpretation and
understandings
of sources of
Grimm, ’The
Achievement of Constitutionalism’ (n
Luigi Lacchè,
‘Granted Constitutions. The Theory of
and Constitutional
Experiments in Europe in the Aftermath of the French Revolution’
European Constitutional Law Review
Jiunn-Rong Yeh and
Wen-Chen Chang, ‘The Emergence of East Asian Constitutionalism: Features
in Comparison’
American Journal of Comparative Law
Nidhi Eeoseewong,
‘The Thai Cultural
Constitution
Kyoto Review of South
, available at<
https://kyotoreview.org/issue-3-nations-and-stories/the-thai-cultural-constitution/
Guy Powles, ‘Testing Tradition in Tonga: Approaches to Constitutional
Change’ (2007) 13
Revue Juridique Polynésienne
Yeh and Chang,
‘The Emergence of East Asian Constitutionalism’ (n
Eeoseewong (n
Yaniv Roznai,
Unconstitutional Constitutional Amendments: The Limits of Amendment Powers
(Oxford University Press, Oxford,
The post 1989
phenomenon is well-known. For the earlier periods, see Or Rosenboim,
Emergence of Globalism: Visions of World Order in Britain and the United States,
(Princeton University Press, Princeton,
For example, Kenichi
The End of the Nation State: The Rise of Regional Economies
and Schuster, New York, 1995).
Alberto Alesina and Enrico
The Size of Nations
(MIT Press, Cambridge MA,
Joseph Raz,
‘The Future of State Sovereignty’ (King’s College London
Dickson Poon School of Law, Legal Studies
Research Paper Series
Oona A Hathaway
and Scott J Shapiro,
The Internationalists: How A Radical Plan to Outlaw War
Remade the World
(Simon and Schuster, New York,
Mark Mazower,
Governing the World: The History of an Idea
(Penguin, New York, 2012);
Charter of the United Nations
Samuel Moyn,
Last Utopia: Human Rights in History
(Belknap Press, Cambridge MA, 2010) ch
On motivation, see Oona A
Hathaway, ‘Why Do Countries Commit to Human Rights Treaties?’
Journal of Conflict Resolution
See, for example,
Gregory H Fox, ‘International Law and the Entitlement to Democracy after
Global Governance
Hathaway (n
Both de jure and functional monism may be relevant: on the latter see Melissa A
Waters, ‘Creeping Monism: The Judicial Trend
towards Interpretive
Incorporation of Human Rights Treaties’
Columbia Law Review
Marinus Wiechers,
‘Namibia: The 1982 Constitutional Principles and Their Legal
Significance’
(1989-1990) 15
South African Yearbook of International
Paul Craig, ‘Transnational Constitution-Making: The Contribution of the
Venice Commission on Law and Democracy’, in Shaffer,
Ginsburg and Halliday
Articles 2,
Micha Wiebusch,
Role of Regional Organizations in the Protection of Constitutionalism
(International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance, Stockholm,
Tan Hsien-Li,
‘Regional Organizations’ in Simon Chesterman, Hisashi Owada and Ben
Saul (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of International Law in Asia and the Pacific
(Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2019) 37.
United Nations,
Guidance Note of the Secretary-General: United Nations Assistance to
Constitution-making Processes
(2009) available at <
https://www.un.org/ruleoflaw/files/Guidance_Note_United_Nations_Assistance_to_Constitution-making_Processes_FINAL.pdf
United Nations Peacemaker,
‘Seventh Issue: December 2017’ (2017) available at <
https://peacemaker.un.org/Constitutions/Newsletter
describing constitutional change as ‘pivotal to ensuring peace and
stability’.
Nations OHCHR,
Human Rights and
Constitution
(2018) available at
https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/ConstitutionMaking_EN.pdf
United Nations Development
UNDP Guidance Note on Constitution-Making Support
available at <
https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/democratic-governance/parliamentary_development/GuidanceNote_ConstitutionMakingSupport.html
Cheryl Saunders, ‘International Involvement in Constitution-Making’
in David Landau and Hanna Lerner (eds),
Comparative
Constitution
(Edward Elgar, Northampton MA, 2019)
General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Annex
Zaid Al-Ali,
Struggle for Iraq’s Future: How Corruption, Incompetence and Sectarianism
Have Undermined Democracy
(Yale University Press, New Haven,
For example, UNSC
Resolution 2254 (2015), in relation to
See United Nations (n
)and United Nations Development
Programme (n
But see the statement by
the Secretary-General on the launch of the Syrian Constitutional Committee,
describing it as ‘Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led’: ‘UN Chief
Announces Progress on Committee to Shape Syria’s Political Future’,
, 23 September 2019, available at <
https://news.un.org/en/story/2019/09/1047092
Anne Peters, ‘The Globalization of State Constitutions’ in Janne E
Nijman and André Nollkaemper (eds),
New Perspectives on the Divide
between National and International Law
(Oxford University Press, Oxford,
2007) 251, 257.
Kemmerer, ‘The
Pouvoir Constituant
in Times of Transition: A
Comment on Andrew Arato and Philipp Dann’, available at <
https://ssrn.com/abstract=1147018
David Schneiderman, ‘Global Constitutionalism and International Economic
Law: The Case of International Investment Law’
in Marc Bungenberget al
European Yearbook of International Economic Law 2016
Heidelberg, 2016) 23.
’The Achievement of Constitutionalism’ (n
Hence the more cautious
claims for global constitutionalism in East Asia in Suami et al (n
For example,
European Commission, ‘Commission Takes Hungary to Court for Criminalizing
Activities in Support of Asylum Seekers
and Opens New Infringement for
Non-Provision of Food in Transit Zones’ (Press Release, 25 July 2019)
available at <
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_19_4260
Council of Europe, ‘Implementing ECHR Judgments: Latest Decisions from the
Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers’,
(Press Release, 15
March 2019), available at <
https://search.coe.int/directorate_of_communications/Pages/result_details.aspx?ObjectId=09000016809385cc
Leonardo Pierdominici, ‘The Theory of EU Constitutional Pluralism: A
Crisis in a Crisis’ (2017) 9
Perspectives on Federalism
Laith K Naswarin,
‘Towards the Establishment of an International Constitutional Court’
Vienna Journal on International Constitutional Law
Jane Kelsey,
‘UNCITRAL Working Group III: Promoting Alternatives to
Investor–State Arbitration as ISDS Reform’,
Investment Treaty
, 2 October 2019, available at <
https://www.iisd.org/itn/2019/10/02/uncitral-working-group-iii-promoting-alternatives-to-investor-state-arbitration-as-isds-reform-jane-kelsey/
For example: Richard
A Republican Europe of States: Cosmopolitanism, Intergovernmentalism
and Democracy in the EU
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2019); Suami
et al (eds) (n
Francis Fukuyama,
End of History and the Last Man
(Free Press, New York,
State Council
Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, ‘China and the
World in the New Era’ (2019)
available at
http://english.www.gov.cn/archive/whitepaper/201909/27/content_WS5d8d80f9c6d0bcf8c4c142ef.html
Suami et al (eds) (n
The first three of these
points could also be reformulated as cautious evidence of paradigm change,
however, reflecting the delicate
balance of these issues in the EU. See for
example Elke Cloots, ‘National Identity, Constitutional Identity, and
Sovereignty
in the EU’ (2016) 45
Netherlands Journal of Legal
Dili Declaration;
A New Vision for Peacebuilding and
Statebuilding
, 10 April 2010, available at
http://www.oecd.org/dac/gender-development/45250308.pdf
United Nations (n
United Nations, ‘Special Envoy Hails Formation of Constitutional Committee
as “Sign of Hope for Long-Suffering Syrians”
in Briefing to Security
Council’, SC/13967, 30 September 2019, available at <
https://www.un.org/press/en/2019/sc13967.doc.htm
On a range of possibilities see Melbourne Forum 2017,
Final Report: From Big
Bang to Incrementalism: Choices and Challenges in Constitutional Building,
https://law.unimelb.edu.au/constitutional-transformations/MF/melbourne-forum-2017/interim-report
The phrase was most prominently coined by Bruce Ackerman,
We the People:
Foundations
(Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1993), providing a basis
for an extensive subsequent
literature.
Richard Albert,
Menaka Guruswamy and Nishchal Basnyat (eds),
Founding Moments in
Constitutionalism
(Hart Publishing, London,
Tania Groppi and
Marie-Claire Ponthoreau,
Use of Foreign Precedents by
Constitutional Judges
(Hart Publishing, Oxford, 2013); on experience in
Asia, see Cheryl Saunders, ‘Judicial Engagement’ in Rosalind Dixon
Tom Ginsburg (eds),
Comparative Constitutional Law in Asia
Elgar, Northampton MA, 2014)
Chaihark Hahm and Sung
Making We the People: Democratic Constitutional Founding in Postwar
Japan and South Korea
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
Ibid in relation to
Japan and Korea.
Markus Bockenforde, ‘From Words to Deeds: The Implementation of
Constitutions’ (Democracy Reporting International, 2017)
available at
http://democracy-reporting.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/DRI-Briefing-Paper_Implementation-of-Constitutions_May-2017.pdf
United Nations (n
Cheryl Saunders, ‘Global Constitutionalism: Myth and Reality’ in
Jason NE Varuhas and Shona Wilson Stark (eds),
The Frontiers of Public Law
(Hart Publishing, London, 2020)
(forthcoming).
Anna Dziedzic
and Cheryl Saunders, ‘Constitutional Implementation for Sustainable
Peace’ (Folke Bernadotte Academy Research
Report, 2019), available at
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3442666
Hahm and Kim (n
On external sovereignty see Grimm,
Sovereignty
Membership of
regional organisations often is structured by the Constitutions of member
states. Constitutions made in recent years
typically provide explicitly for the
treaty-making process and, increasingly, for the status of international
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (462 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter