URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JCULawRw/2024/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:06:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Woellner, Robin --- "Updating the Tax Dispute Burden of Proof Provisions - in Light of the Expansion of ATO Pre-Filling" [2024] JCULawRw 5; (2024) 30 James Cook University Law Review 69
Updating the Tax Dispute Burden of Proof Provisions
In Light of the Expansion of ATO Pre-filling
Pre-filling of personal tax returns by the ATO has been a hot topic in
Australia in recent times. In brief, pre-filling involves the
creation of tax
returns fully or partially completed by the revenue authority (in this case the
Australian Taxation Office (‘ATO’))
based on information supplied to
it by third parties such as banks, companies, employers, health funds and a wide
range of other
bodies holding information relevant to a person’s tax
position. However, while much has been written on the topic of
pre-filling,
nothing appears to
have been written about one of the key flow-on effects of pre-filling –
the possible impact which pre-filling
might have on the rationale for imposing
the onus of proof in tax disputes on the taxpayer. This latter issue is the
focus of this
I The Current Burden of Proof Provisions:
Administration Act
The principles underlying the tax administrative provisions currently located
Tax Administration Act 1953
(Cth) – including the crucial
decision to place the onus of proof in taxation disputes on the taxpayer –
have remained
largely unchanged for many years.
Thus, under
ss 14ZZK(b)(i)
(b)(ii) of the
Taxation Administration
(Cth), so far as relevant:
In proceedings for review [by the AAT] of a reviewable objection
(b) the appellant (i.e. the taxpayer) has the burden of proving [on the
balance of probabilities]:
(i) if the taxation decision concerned is an assessment – that the
assessment is excessive or otherwise incorrect and what
the assessment should
have been or
(ii) in any other case – that the taxation
decision concerned should not have been made or should have been made
differently’.
Paragraph 14ZZO(b)(i) and (ii) make analogous provision for appeals to a
court of an ATO objection
As Derrington J observed in
... the rationale for the onus imposed by
(b)(i) is that the facts
relating to [a taxpayer’s] taxable income, including the work that they
have undertaken and the transactions
they have entered into, are peculiarly
within the taxpayer’s knowledge, and they must be taken to know what their
and how it was derived.
Conversely, the Commissioner has limited knowledge of those circumstances. On
that basis, there is no undue harshness in requiring
a taxpayer, who has failed
to lodge a return or whose return is not compliant with the taxation
legislation, to bear the onus of
establishing their true taxable income for each
income year.
Over the years, the courts and tribunals have developed numerous principles
or propositions relating to the burden of proof in tax
disputes. Among the many
propositions found in the case-law
in relation to the tax burden of proof provisions, some key principles include:
• The ATO has no obligation to positively prove that the assessment is
correct, or indeed to prove anything, and the ATO can
rely upon any deficiency
in the taxpayer’s case (the reverse does not apply). Generally, under s
36 (Cth), the taxpayer must positively prove the amount of their
taxable income,
and demonstrate
that this amount is lower than the amount assessed – i.e. they must
demonstrate that the assessment is
excessive’.
• It is generally not sufficient for the taxpayer to simply point to
flaws in the ATO’s case (for example, that certain
amounts are not income)
because this does not prove that the assessment is
• Challenging a default assessment made under s 167 I
(for example, on an asset betterment basis) can impose particularly significant
difficulties for a taxpayer,
because the taxpayer must demonstrate that any unexplained accumulated wealth
was derived from non-income sources. It has been said
that this may be achieved
by an accepted denial of any undisclosed source of income, providing acceptable
evidence of how the taxpayer
spends their time, and demonstrating a reasonable
explanation for any appearance of the possession of assets
As Derrington J acknowledged in
: ‘These principles can
result in a situation where [a] default assessment can be assumed to be
inaccurate in some respects
but, in the absence of the taxpayer establishing
what their actual taxable income was, it must nevertheless
That is, the
burden of proof can create situations where an assessment which is acknowledged
by all parties to be wrong is nevertheless
upheld by the decision-maker simply
because the taxpayer is deemed to be unable to satisfy the burden of proof.
These burden of proof provisions are therefore extremely important because
they impose a heavy probative burden on taxpayers –
indeed, not
infrequently, the allocation of the burden of proof will determine the ultimate
As a result, the burden
of proof can create situations where an assessment which is acknowledged by all
parties to be wrong is nevertheless
upheld by the decision-maker simply because
the taxpayer is deemed to be unable to satisfy the burden of proof. It is
therefore crucial
to revisit the burden of proof provisions and their de facto
operation regularly, in order ensure that despite the passage of time
changes, they are still
appropriate
for the current and
developing contexts.
When they were first introduced – long before computers were in use
– the current burden of proof provisions were clearly
logical and
appropriate – for example, in the dim distant past, some taxpayer records
were held by the ATO on paper cards,
which meant that searching for specific
information or cross-references on a particular taxpayer or taxpayers could be
an onerous,
tedious, time-consuming and potentially frustrating task.
Accordingly, in the past, where the taxpayer generally had more direct
knowledge of (or at least comparatively easy access to) their
tax details, but
the ATO may often have had little or no (easy) access to such information,
imposing the onus of proof on the taxpayer
was arguably logical and
reasonable.
However, times have changed dramatically, and, in the modern computerised era
the roles of ATO and taxpayer have arguably been reversed.
Taxpayers will always
have some knowledge of their tax affairs, but the ATO now has instant access to
massive amounts of digitised
data and to sophisticated computerised search
engines which can provide almost instantaneous and refined cross-referencing to
aspects of a taxpayer’s activities and activities of related
persons. Most taxpayers will not have access to all of this data,
so that the
ATO may often now have more timely, accurate and detailed access to relevant
tax-related data than will the taxpayer.
It may therefore be an appropriate time
to reconsider the relevance and appropriateness of the existing burden of proof
provisions,
in order to ensure that they remain fair and fit for purpose in the
modern world.
II Key Aspects of ATO Pre-filling – An Overview
The Process
As noted, ‘Pre-filling’ or ‘e-tax’ is the process
whereby the ATO inserts details into a taxpayer’s
putative tax return,
based on information which the ATO receives from specified third parties such as
employers, companies, financial
institutions, private health funds, businesses,
government agencies and various other bodies which hold information relating to
taxpayer’s affairs.
As at 2023, the ATO advised that information categories
included categories
• Employee share schemes.
• CGT property transfer.
• Personal Superannuation Contribution Deduction.
• PAYG payment summaries and STP income statements.
• Single Touch Payroll (STP).
• Individual and non-business.
• Employment termination payment.
• Australian annuities and superannuation income stream.
• Superannuation lump sum.
• Business and personal services income.
• Foreign employment.
• Government payments.
• Dividend and interest schedule.
• Dividend income.
• ATO interest.
• ATO interest – recurring data issues.
• Interest income.
• High-certainty interest data.
• Employee share schemes.
• Managed fund distributions.
• Partnership distributions.
• Foreign source investment income.
• Crypto currency disposal.
• Work-related car expenses.
• Share and unit disposals.
• Property transfers.
• Business transactions.
• Taxable payments.
• Contractor payments.
• Government grants.
• Net farm management deposits or repayments.
• Tax offsets.
• Medicare levy surcharge.
• Private health insurance (PHI) policy details.
• Early-stage innovation company.
• Income test related items.
• ATO data.
• Help and other income-contingent loans debts.
• Prior year amounts.
• PAYG instalments.
• Accumulative low rate cap.
• Income averaging for primary producers and special professionals.
• Overdue income tax returns.
• Personal superannuation contribution deductions.
• First home super saver scheme (FHSS).
• Prior year tax return details. and
• Deductions.
Once a return has been ‘pre-filled’ by the ATO, it is sent to the
taxpayer, who is expected to check the pre-filled return
and to notify the
revenue authority whether the taxpayer accepts the return or seeks to make of
any proposed changes.
Scandinavian countries pioneered pre-filling: Denmark in 1988 was the first
country to introduce pre-filled tax returns, followed
by Sweden (1995) and
Norway (1998).
Australia was a relatively late adopter of
pre-filling, which was first mooted for introduction in 1998, but was not
formally introduced
to Australia until 2006/2007, following ‘minor
trials’ in 2004/2005.
Currently, pre-filling is limited to personal taxpayers’ returns,
though the ATO has indicated that it aims to develop more
comprehensive
pre-filling in the future.
Suggested Benefits of Pre-filling
The benefits of pre-filling are argued to
• Greater certainty for taxpayers and revenue
authorities,
with resultant
lower compliance costs for relevant
(in terms of reduced
taxpayers’ personal time in storing and locating records).
• Reduced administration costs for revenue authorities and greater
accuracy in tax returns, with reduced need for ATO tax auditing
and other post
assessment activities, particularly as the amount of pre-fill data expands.
• Improved levels of taxpayer compliance.
• Ultimately, the possible removal of the need for taxpayers to lodge
tax returns,
generating reduced
compliance costs for taxpayers, and – perhaps – an increased respect
for the revenue authority if
pre-filled returns are seen by taxpayers as a
genuine, personalised, and simpler service.
• Helping individuals and businesses understand their tax obligations.
• Serving pre-filled returns on taxpayers may remind taxpayers of their
annual tax obligations to complete (or check) annual
returns carefully and may
also generate greater community confidence in the integrity of the tax system.
However, this may be a two-edged
sword – see below.
• Protecting honest businesses from unfair competition.
• Simplifying the tax collection process and making it easier for
revenue authorities to assess the level of voluntary compliance
and identify
‘problem’ areas.
Suggested Problems with Pre-filling
While pre-filling offers many potential benefits, it may also create some
potential problems,
• Pre-filling imposes administrative costs on those third parties
required to provide information to the government.
• It has been said
a comprehensive pre-fill system also imposes costs on the revenue
viz: it needs to
invest substantial resources, effort and persistence over a considerable period
to establish and maintain a comprehensive
system of pre-filling tax returns.
 Pre-filling assumes that the revenue authority receives accurate,
complete and timely information,
and correctly analyses it using appropriate computer programmes. These are not
always safe assumptions in light of recent experiences
in Australia with
national and international computer-related
including those noted
by Brookes and Dery.
 While receiving an annual pre-filled tax return might remind
taxpayers of their tax obligations (see above), it has been
suggested that on
the other hand, shifting primary responsibility for returns from taxpayers to
the revenue authority may mean that
because taxpayers no longer need to actively
consider their tax affairs, this may result in a reduction in taxpayers’
of responsibility for their tax affairs (including the accuracy of
‘their’ returns and other tax obligations), and result
in taxpayers
actually paying less care and attention to their tax
• A 2008 UK parliamentary report found that pre-filling
‘introduced a feeling of concern among taxpayers’ and reduced
willingness to challenge the government’s calculations’.
• It has been argued that There may be an increased risk of errors with
a pre-fill system.
The Expanding Scope of Pre-filling
Pre-filling in Australia began (relatively)
focussing largely on
the ‘easy’ categories of income and while the categories below may
seem expansive, they are not
comprehensive: the list of required disclosure
items currently concentrates on categories of personal taxpayers’ income.
However, as with other jurisdictions, the categories of information which
must be forwarded to the ATO have expanded (and continue
significantly over time. Thus, in 2023, there were some 47 categories (set out
of required disclosure, as
set above, while the ATO continues to add requirements – for example, in
light of the increase in
people working from home, the ATO announced that it
would be monitoring closely claims for work-related
deductions,
and that from 2023
it had been receiving new data sources on claims by rental investors, including
investment loan data, data on
landlord insurance policies, and income protection
insurance (deductions) and payouts
Indeed, current limitations in the scope of pre-filling are largely a
function of the comparative youth of the ATO programme and the
complexity of the
Australian tax system, and the ATO has stated that it:
continues to expand its data-matching capability to ensure taxpayers
don’t leave out income or inflate deductions this tax time.
It pre-fills
some categories of deductions, and has signalled that it will continue to expand
its pre-filling programme
– and that it is aiming to create a comprehensive programme in
Indeed, Assistant Commissioner Tim Loh stated in June 2023 that taxation:
... isn’t a game of Guess Who, as our sophisticated data-matching
programs provide us with all the clues we need to track down
taxpayers with
incorrect information in their tax return. We will use this information to
identify and educate taxpayers who have
made incorrect claims in their return,
with a longer-term plan to pre-fill as much information as possible in future
It is not immediately clear whether the latter comment means that the ATO
intends to continue limiting pre-fill to personal tax returns
or is intending
eventually to extend the pre-fill programme tother categories of
In terms of possible future developments which the ATO might seek to follow,
a number of Scandinavian countries have adopted full
pre-filling for personal
This issue is discussed briefly below.
Challenging a Pre-fill Amount
The ATO has confirmed that taxpayers are able to challenge or alter
pre-filled data by contacting the
though the burden of proof
will continue to rest on the taxpayer. The ATO has also indicated that while
taxpayers can challenge a
pre-filled amount, the ATO may nevertheless decide to
reject the taxpayer’s figures and instead adopt the pre-fill amount if
ATO has ‘a high level of confidence in the data’ it has received
from other sources, and may ‘in some instances
why they had changed the pre-filled data, and to advise the taxpayer that they
will need to provide sufficient
evidence to support the change, otherwise the
ATO may adjust the return ‘to align with the third party data’.
In fact, the ATO advised that in 2023 it had adjusted over 400,000
individual tax returns before issuing tax assessments, using third
that was available via pre-fill but was omitted from the taxpayer’s
return, and had also adjusted around 180,000
individual taxpayer returns with
discrepancies after a tax assessment had been issued, based on validating
information using third
That is, in terms of Derrington J’s analysis, in this situation the ATO
is inserting much of the data rather than the taxpayer,
and where it has a high
degree of ‘data certainty’ in relation to the information it
receives, takes the view that its
data is superior to the taxpayer’s data,
so that a taxpayer who wants to challenge a pre-filled amount must accompany
request with ‘cogent evidence supporting the requested
example of the shift towards reliance on ATO-generated data rather than
taxpayer-generated data.
The ATO’s approach is understandable, but this
‘second-level’ ATO requirement for ‘cogent evidence’
requirement is an administrative addition, not found in the legislation.
In light of the ATO’s approach, it seems that there is now a de facto
double burden of proof applying in tax matters: in addition
to the legal burden
of proof in
, there is now – semble
– an operational ATO assumption that its pre-filled data is accurate and
that the taxpayer’s
This assumption may not
always be correct, as experience has identified a variety of errors in
pre-filled data (including, for example,
bank accounts established on behalf of
a taxpayer but unknown to them).
In seeking to expand the scope of pre-filling in the future, the ATO has a
range of models it could choose to follow, though each
system is partly shaped
by the nature of the particular country’s tax system, and
Australia’s tax system has a number
of features which would affect the
shape of a comprehensive
(including a
complex tax system – in contrast to the Nordic countries, which tend to
have comparatively simple tax
As noted, in terms of trends/models the ATO could consider applying, in 2008
the OECD Forum on Tax Administration: Taxpayer Services
reported that:
... in Denmark, Norway and Sweden, pre-filled tax return systems have become
quite sophisticated, having evolved to the point where
most personal income
taxpayers were receiving a pre-filled return that was fully completed,
while for many other taxpayers little further action was
required...
’ (emphasis added).
... For each taxpayer, the return discloses known
sources and other
calculated amounts, and provides a preliminary calculation of tax payable.
At the next stage of the pre-fill process, the taxpayer examines the
pre-filled return, adds relevant information and notifies the
revenue authority
of any disputed amounts, and whether the taxpayer accepts (or is deemed to
accept) the pre-filled
As an aside, it is interesting to note that penalties seem to play only a
very minor role in many overseas reporting systems: the
Swedish system does not
apply any specific penalties for non-reporting by third parties, while the
Danish system imposes only a small
daily penalty on
non-reporting.
By contrast, in
Australia, failure to provide information when and in the form required could be
a breach of
Taxation Administration Act 1953
generating potential exposure to substantial penalties.
III The Burden of Proof Provisions in the 21st Century
Whatever the situation may have been in the past, many modern taxpayers,
facing the spectre of the ATO and its serried ranks of supercomputers
a significant disadvantage in attempting to defend themselves. Nevertheless, the
burden of proof currently remains steadfastly
fixed on the taxpayer.
While the ATO has not yet achieved full pre-filling for all taxpayers), as
Assistant Commissioner Tim Loh has made
the ATO is committed to
expanding its pre-filling programme and is working towards that end.
In terms again of Derrington J’s analysis, (above), the more the
balance shifts from reliance in tax returns on taxpayer-generated
reliance on ATO-generated (pre-filled) data, the more this erodes pro tanto the
original rationale (discussed above) for
imposing the burden of proof on
As discussed above, in those early days it was logical to impose on taxpayers
the burden of proving on the balance of probabilities
that (generally) an
assessment disputing the information in their tax return was excessive.
However, as noted, those early days have been replaced by the widespread use
of increasingly powerful and sophisticated ATO computer
systems, which have
dramatically altered the balance. The ATO now receives vast and ever-increasing
amounts of digital data, which
it can process and cross-reference almost
immediately through the use of increasingly sophisticated search
rather than having to
deal with hard copy returns which may require re-keying or other attention.
In addition, it is important to note – again in terms of Derrington
J’s analysis – that the data which the ATO now
obtains, processes
and uses to pre-fill tax returns is increasingly created not by taxpayers, but
by an ever-expanding army of third
The result can be that
under pre-filling, a taxpayer may not see some of ‘their’ tax return
data (with which they may
disagree) until they receive a pre-filled return from
the ATO. That is, more and more data in personal tax returns is being created
and on behalf of the ATO
than by taxpayers and their advisers.
Overall, in a context where more and more data in tax returns is being
pre-filled by the ATO, it seems increasingly illogical to impose
the burden of
proof on taxpayers (who may be asked to deal with data of which they were
unaware or with which they may disagree),
and increasingly logical to transfer
the burden to the ATO.
While pre-filling only applies at present in Australia to personal tax
returns, it would be wise to be alert to and prepared for possible
expansion of pre-filling to other categories of taxpayer. Such an expansion
might be difficult to achieve at present, but
increasingly widespread use of
computerisation for record-keeping and increasingly rapid developments in
technology can be expected
to enable extension of pre-filling to other taxpayer
categories in the future.
In this context, it is useful to recall that only some 30 odd years ago,
pre-filling of any type was not even being considered as
a possibility in
Australia, before rapid developments in technology made the unimagined possible
and increasingly available. In the
same way, further developments in technology
and related fields can be expected over time to rapidly expand future
pre-filling possibilities
to other categories of taxpayer.
IV What Test Should Be Applied To Determine the Appropriate
Allocation of the Burden of Proof?
There are a number of possible approaches which could be applied in order to
determine who should bear the burden of proof in tax
disputes, but the most
logical approach would seem to be to impose the burden of proof on the entity
providing the (bulk or a substantial
part) of the data used in assessing
taxpayers, that is to adopt an approach of contra
proferentem).
As discussed above, this would suggest that since the ATO now provides most
of the data, the burden of proof in relation to individual
taxpayers (who are by
far the largest group of taxpayers and are the source of over 90% of the data
used in tax assessments) should
now be shifted to the ATO.
If this were done, then applying the same approach as in
would suggest that ideally the same outcome should apply to all
categories of taxpayer. This approach is straightforward and clear:
taxpayers are subject to the same burden of proof – there are no
‘special’ rules for trustees, partners or
other categories of
taxpayer. By parity of reasoning, if the burden of proof is transferred from the
taxpayer to the ATO, the same
burden of proof should apply in all cases. That
‘rule’ has operated successfully for a great many years. It also
to be the most logical approach – there seems no reason to change
a successful system.
Naturally, the overriding requirement for any shift of the burden of proof
would be that any proposed shift would be workable in practice.
It is important to note that once the allocation of the burden of proof has
been determined, any necessary rewording of the relevant
provisions in
to accommodate the changes would be relatively straightforward
and simple.
V Possible Future Approaches
Depending on future developments, there are a number of possible scenarios
which might arise. Three possible approaches are discussed
below. though it is
likely that opinions on the preferable system will vary.
Status Quo – Pre-Filling Remains Limited to
Individual Taxpayers
While this would be an option, it seems very unlikely in reality that the ATO
would revert to the ‘old’ system –
pre-filling is far too well
established for the ATO to make a U-turn at this stage and go back to the
pre-computer days. It therefore
it seems far more likely that the existing
principles will continue to apply to individual taxpayers, at least for a
Given that under pre-filling of individual returns, the ATO currently
provides a substantial part of the tax return data, applying
the reasoning above
would suggest that the ATO should bear the burden of proof in relation to
individual taxpayers. Applying the
current approach in
(above) this would then suggest that the burden of proof for
taxpayers should be transferred to the ATO.
This approach would have the advantage of continuity and familiarity and
would therefore be likely to cause least disruption and uncertainty
for both the
ATO and taxpayer advisers.
There might be a question of whether the transfer of the burden should be
delayed until the ATO is actually able to pre-fill non-individual
data. If so,
it might be a consolation to note that that while any delay in modernising the
burden of proof would be unfortunate,
the increasing use of and reliance on
digital record-keeping by all sections of the population and the blinding
acceleration in the
speed and sophistication of technology development suggests
that any such wait should not be over-long.
As always, it would be essential to monitor developments regularly and
closely, in order to identify objectively when the ATO reached
‘tipping point’ which indicates that the burden of proof in relation
to non-individuals should also be transferred
Introduce a
‘Split’/Bifurcated System
If adoption of a unitary model was not possible or acceptable, an alternative
approach might be to introduce a ‘split’
or bifurcated system.
This would apply separate burdens of proof to different categories of
taxpayer, with, for example, the ATO bearing the onus of proof
in relation to
issues involving individual taxpayers, and taxpayers bearing the burden of proof
in other cases.
Such a bifurcated/split approach would be possible, but it would not be
without potential problems. It might, for example, create
issues of demarcation
between individual and other taxpayers (for example, when determining the
category into which a particular
taxpayer might fall – which could be
exacerbated if a multiple split system applied separate burdens for each
sub-category
of taxpayer). It would also ignore the implications discussed above
from ongoing developments in technology, which, in time, will
inevitably solve
difficulties currently facing the ATO in accessing non-individual data.
It would of course be essential to regularly monitor developments to identify
when the ATO reached the appropriate level of data control
to enable it to
pre-fill significant amounts of non-individual data, making it appropriate to
transfer the burden of proof to the
The Preferable Approach
It would seem preferable to apply (or at least prepare to apply) a single
burden of proof test such as that in ss
accommodate future technological developments as they occur. There could be an
issue as to whether the burden of proof
should therefore be transferred to the
ATO now, to recognise the trend towards the increasing impact of technology, or
deferred until
the ATO actually reaches its tipping point, and whether a
‘split’ system, with all its problems, might be introduced
interim measure?
While a single test covering all taxpayers and imposing the burden of proof
for all categories of taxpayer on the ATO would clearly
be the preferable option
in a perfect world, this might not be achievable immediately, as the ATO
apparently does not at present
have the capacity to pre-fill non-individual
However, it seems inevitable that the ATO will develop this ability in the
foreseeable future, and it will be important to ensure
that progress within the
ATO is monitored regularly so that when its tipping point is reached, the
government and ATO can move quickly
to update its administrative processes and
shift the burden of proof.
VI Pre-Filling Expands Beyond Individual Personal
Accepting that technology will continue to advance and refine the ATO’s
data-gathering capabilities, it would – as always
– be essential for
the government and interested bodies to regularly monitor developments, to
identify if and when the ATO’s
data gathering abilities reach the
‘tipping point’ where the ATO is able to access significant amounts
of data in relation
to entities other than
individuals.
When this future point is reached, and the ATO is able to extend pre-filling
to provide significant data in relation to non-individual
taxpayers, the
appropriate allocation of the burden of proof the situation would be quite
straightforward: all taxpayers should then
operate under the ATO pre-filling
system, with the ATO bearing the onus of proof in all cases.
This would essentially mirror the present situation, which has operated
reasonably successfully for many decades and – significantly,
be completely consistent with the rationale (discussed above) for the original
allocation of the burden of proof.
Once it is decided to transfer the burden of proof, the legislative
amendments to
needed to achieve the transfer would
require minimal drafting adjustments. For example, the existing
be amended to read along the lines that:
In proceedings for review by the AAT of a reviewable objection decision:
(b) the ATO has the burden of proving on the balance of probabilities in
relation to all matters in dispute that the assessment concerned
was validly
made and accurately determines the taxpayer’s tax liabilities.
An analogous amendment could be made to
Could It All Be Much Ado About Nothing?
The possible impact of any such changes on averments by the ATO in
prosecutions for prescribed taxation offences and the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) is intriguing.
s 8ZL(1), in a prosecution for a prescribed taxation offence (as
defined), a statement or averment contained in the information submitted
prima facie
evidence of the matter so stated or averred.
Under that provision, if the onus of proof was shifted to the ATO, as has
been suggested above, is it possible that even in
Commissioner could simply rely on a certificate as prima facie evidence of the
particulars stated, thus effectively pushing
the transferred onus back onto the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) (admissible hearsay
in business records) has a (somewhat) similar effect.
The inter-relationship and effect of these provisions would need to be
considered in any amending legislation.
VII Conclusion
As discussed above, with the impact of increasingly computerised
record-keeping and the ongoing development and refinement of increasingly
sophisticated computerisation and other technical advances, the process of
preparing and analysing tax returns has changed dramatically
over (relatively)
recent times, from one where taxpayers (and advisers) created and controlled the
data on their tax affairs and
determined in the first instance which information
they would insert into their tax return to a situation where increasing amounts
of data are created (or at least selected) by the ATO from data provided by
third parties rather than by the taxpayer.
This change undermines the original rationale for imposing the burden of
proof on taxpayers – that they would have better access
to the information
provisions to recognise the new
realities and transfer the burden of proof to
the ATO, applying the contra proferentem principle.
The current position is both illogical and unfair, and if one applies the
same rationale for the original allocation of the burden
of proof to the modern
situation,(ie that the onus should lie on the party contributing the most
significant amount of data) the
argument for transferring the burden of proof to
the ATO is overwhelming – albeit we may need to tread water for a (short?)
time while the ATO expands its pre-filling abilities to non-individuals to an
appropriate level.
The system needs to recognise that the burden of proof provisions have not
kept up with the implications of technological change,
and that individual
taxpayers still bear the burden of proof, even though it is now the ATO which
inserts and validates more and
more data into their tax returns.
It is past time to update the current burden of proof provisions.
Robin Woellner is an Adjunct Professor in the School of Law at
James Cook University and the School of Tax and Business Law at UNSW.
like to thank Emeritus Professor Stephen Graw for his assistance in finalising
this paper for publication.
The list of categories of
required information publications is too lengthy to set out here but see the
list in the text accompanying
n 17; see also ATO ‘Data matching’
https://www.ato.gov.au/about-ato/commitments-and-reporting/information-and-privacy/data-matching.
Thus, s 14ZZO provides that
‘In proceedings on an appeal under section 14ZZ to a court against an ATO
objection decision, the
appellant [i.e. the taxpayer] must prove [on the balance
of probabilities] that: ...’
‘If the taxation decision concerned is an assessment – that the
assessment is excessive or otherwise incorrect and what
the assessment should
have been; or
In any other case – that the taxation decision should not have been
made or should have been made differently.’
FC of T v Ross
[2021] FCA 766
[1936] HCA 77
(1936) 56 CLR 63
FC of T v Ross
There is a useful summary of
relevant principles in
points 1-9 (Derrington J).
However, the courts have held
that it is not necessary for the taxpayer to determine their taxable income to
the exact dollar –
Nguyen v FC of T
[2018] FCA 1420
(2018) 265 FCR 355
they must establish an amount which is ‘more nearly right’:
Trautwein v FC of T
(1936) 56 CLR 88, cited in
(Derrington J)]
Thus, for example, in
(n 3) at [56] Derrington J) stated that the ‘... possibility of Mr
Wang demonstrating errors in the asset betterment methodology
did not advance Mr
Wang’s case as it fell short of what was required to discharge his onus
under s 14ZZK(b)(i) ...’.
The alternative ground – that the
assessment was ‘otherwise incorrect’, is rarely discussed.
FC of T v Dalco
168 CLR 614
Bosanac v FC of T
[2019] HCA 41
(2019) 93 ALJR 1327.
Though it has been said that
the general legal principles relating to assessments under
ITAA 36 are the same: Ross
(above) [22].
FC of T v Ross
, above, (n 3) at
[48], citing
[77]-[79]; Woellner and Zettle (sic)
‘satisfying the Taxpayer’s Burden of Proof in Challenging A Default
Assessment –
The Modern Labours of Sisyphus?’
[2014] JALaw TA
From among very numerous
cases, see, for example,
Confidential v FC of T
[2014] AATA 32
(Forgie DP);
Healey v FC of T (No 2)
[2012] ATC 20-365 [56]-[102];
Healey v FC of T (No 2)
[2012] ATC [14]
Healey v Federal Commissioner
of Taxation
(2012) FCA 269.
That is, they continue to
appropriately balance the ability of the ATO and taxpayers to access relevant
information.
Categories of third parties
required to provide specified information by set times and sources and content
are listed in, for example,
ATO ‘Data matching’,
https://www.ato.gov.au/tax-and-super-professionals/for-tax-professionals/prepare-and-lodge/tax-time/before-you-lodge/data-matching
https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/House/Former_Committees/Tax_and_Revenue/Taxpayerengagement
/Report_1). ATO
data matching usually occurs in the years after pre-filling.
See also ATO ‘Data
matching’, ‘Expanding our data matching:
https://www.ato.gov.au/tax-and-super-professionals/for-tax-professionals/prepare-and-lodge/tax-time/before-you-lodge/data-matching;
While the categories of required information provision may seem extensive, there
are various gaps in the information required to
be provided to the ATO –
including, for example, CGS, FSI and cash income.
In broad outline – the
detailed categories are set out in, for example, the ATO ‘Pre-filling
2023’ Report: see
https://www.ato.gov.au/tax-and-super-professionals/for-tax-professionals/prepare-and-lodge/in-detail/pre-filling-reports/pre-filling-2024.
The ATO draws data from, for
example, the ‘MyDeductions’ app, which collates data on work-related
expenses, interest
and dividend deductions, gifts or donations, the cost of
managing a taxpayer’s tax affairs, sole trader expenses, business
and other deductions. The ATO notes that where the total deduction for items D1
to D15 was less than $300, ‘the ...
Pre-filling report will show details
from the prior year’s tax return, for example from work-related clothing,
laundry and
dry-cleaning expenses, other work-related expenses, and gifts or
Sweden allows taxpayers to
accept a pre-filled return by the internet, phone, SMS or on paper – see:
https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/House/Former_Committees/Tax_and_Revenue/Taxpayerengagement/Report_1.
OECD Forum on Tax
Administration: Taxpayer Services Subgroup – Information Note:
‘Third Party Reporting Arrangements
and pre-filled Tax Returns: The Danish
and Swedish Approaches, 22 January 2008, [9]:
https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/House/Former_Committees/Tax_and_Revenue/Taxpayerengagement
/Report_1 [2.27].
‘Pre-filling
2023’ Treasury.gov.au; see also ibid.
https://www.ato.gov.au/tax-and-super-professionals/for-tax-professionals/prepare-and-lodge/tax-time/before-you-lodge/data-matching;
see also ‘Improving tax compliance – enhanced third party reporting,
pre-filling and data matching’, Australian
Government, Discussion Paper,
February 2014, and OECD, Information Note’: ‘Using Third Party
Information Reports to Assist
Taxpayers Meet Their Return Filing Obligations
– Country Experiences With the Use of Pre-populated Personal Tax Returns,
2006’: https://www.scribd.com/document/354124709/36280368 .
An Early analysis by Chris
Evans and Binh Tran-Nam, ‘Pre-Filled Personal Income Tax Returns: Evidence
from Australia’103
Annual Conference on Taxation171-173,
National Tax Association Proceedings suggested that any reductions tax
compliance costs of
those personal taxpayers who do not use tax agents would not
be significant, while the compliance costs of those who do would be
https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/House/Former_Committees/Tax_and_Revenue/Taxpayerengagement/Report_1/section?id=committees%2freportrep%2f024169%2f25967
Kevin Brookes in
collaboration with Pascale Dery, (2018) Economic Notes, Taxation Series, August
2018 ‘Should the Government
pre-fill Your tax return?’
Ibid, 1-4, see Table 1.
OECD (n 20), Summary.
However, the ATO would need to incur costs in any event for data-matching, post
lodgement checking and audit
and related activities.
Information may be
incomplete because of issues in relation to timing, matching or validation: ATO
‘About pre-filling’,
https://www.ato.gov.au/tax-and-super-professionals/for-tax-professionals/prepare-and-lodge/pre-filling-service/about-pre-filling.
Brookes and Dery (n 26).
Accordingly, Ddawati Ibrahim
and Jeff Pope, speculate that under a pre-fill system ‘There is a
possibility that, without [a
tax return] being issued, taxpayers became more
lackadaisical’; see also: ‘The Viability of a Pre-Filled Income Tax
System for Malaysia’,
The Journal of Contemporary Issues in
Business and Government
(2011) 17(2), 85-101.
As Evans and Bihn Tran-Nam
(n 24) put it, ‘as more and more pre-filling data become available to
e-tax users, and as they come
to trust and use that information more and more,
there may be a danger that the role of the personal taxpayer as a self-assessor
becomes less well-defined’.
Brookes and Dery (n 26),
By comparison, a 2015 OECD
Review found that almost half of the revenue bodies then surveyed applied
pre-filling, and that Estonia,
Finland, Iceland, Lithuania, Norway, Peru,
Portugal, South Africa and Sweden provided full or near-full coverage of
pre-filled information
for personal taxpayers and 11 jurisdictions applying a
‘deemed acceptance’ of the pre-fill return if the taxpayer has
responded within after a set period.
See the list of categories and
details required in: ‘Pre-filling 2009-11’,
https://www.ato.gov.au/tax-and-super-professionals/for-tax
-professionals/prepare-and-lodge/in-detail/pre-filling-reports/pre-filling-2009-2011
In broad outline – the
detailed categories are set out, for example, in the ATO ‘Pre-filling
2023’ Report’:
https://www.ato.gov.au/tax-and-super-professionals/for-tax-professionals/prepare-and-lodge/in-detail/pre-filling-reports/pre-filling-2022-2023.
Josh Needs ‘Use data
prefills or raise a red flag’
Accountants Daily
3 June 2022
citing ATO Assistant Commissioner Tim Loh. See
https://www.accountantsdaily.com.au/tax-compliance/17122-use-data-prefills-or-raise-a-red-flag-ato-warns.
ATO Assistant Commissioner
Tim Loh stated that ‘Around 80% of taxpayers with rental income claimed a
deduction for interest
on their loan, and this is where we’re seeing
mistakes. For example, you can’t refinance an investment property to buy
personal items, like a holiday to Europe or a Tesla, then continue to claim the
interest expenses as a tax deduction’:
https://www.ato.gov.au/media-centre/get-your-rental-right-this-tax-time
From 1 July 2023, the ATO
has been receiving data on income under the Sharing Economy Reporting Regime:
from electronic distribution
platforms providing taxi services, ride-sourcing,
and short-term accommodation; from 1 July 2024, all electronic distribution
are required to provide income data: see Loh (n 38).
See ‘ATO expands data
matching to ensure fair play’:
https://www.ato.gov.au/media-centre/ato-expands-data-matching-to-ensure-fair-play
Jason Kerr suggests adoption
of a ‘hybrid’ model containing elements of both pre-filled returns
and a reduced filing
system: Jason Kerr, ‘Tax Return simplification: risk
key engagement, a return to risk?’ (2012)10(2)
eJournal of Tax
465-82’. See also ATO ‘Data matching’,
‘Expanding our data matching;
https://www.ato.gov.au/tax-and-super-professionals/for-tax-professionals/prepare-and-lodge/tax-time/before-you-lodge/data-matching.
https//www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/House/Former_Committees/Tax_and_Revenue/Taxpayerengagement
See, for example,
https://www.ato.gov.au/individuals-and-families/your-tax-return/how-to-lodge-your-tax-return/lodge-your-tax-return-online-with-mytax/pre-filling-your-online-tax-return
, the ATO introduced an ‘enhanced prefill’ policy,
under which taxpayers cannot change prefilled bank interest unless
can provide evidence as to why the amount should be changed – the ATO
noted that this resulted in a 74% decrease
in compliance activities after
See Needs (n 37) noting
that Loh also warned that taxpayers and advisers should use ATO pre-fills to
avoid the or risk of raising
a ‘red flag’, with failure to wait for
a pre-fill or altering form data running the risk of ‘putting clients
scrutiny’..
Needs (n 37).
Kerr (n 42) suggests a
‘hybrid’ model containing elements pre-filled returns and a reduced
filing system.
More detailed comparisons
with overseas tax systems will be the subject of future papers.
OECD (n 20) [9].
Reporting bodies are listed
in ibid [20]-]21]
In Denmark, reporting on
deductions ‘... obligations typically extend to pension contributions,
union fees, unemployment insurance,
and interest on home mortgages’. Ibid,
In Denmark, for example (cf
Sweden, above), if a taxpayer does not respond within a prescribed period, this
is deemed to constitute
acceptance of the return. The acceptance rate was some
65% in Sweden, and 72% in Denmark.
OECD (n 20) [44]-[46].
See nn 37 and 38.
In 2022-2023, the ATO
reported that some 98.7% of individual tax returns were lodged online: see
Commissioner of Taxation Annual
Report 2022-2023, Table 7.21, p.237.
In this context, it can also
be argued that in a real sense, the ATO ‘creates’ data when it
decides which data it receives
from third parties it will regard as having a
sufficiently ‘high degree of confidence’ to merit inclusion in a
pre-filled return. This decision involves an open-ended value
judgment in a context where the ATO could potentially be subject to
pressures (for example, pressure from a federal government seeking to maximise
revenue returns). This might raise questions
as to whether this is an
appropriate role for the ATO.
Literally ‘against the
It seems unlikely that many
taxpayers would be aware of the burden of proof requirements.
The ‘tipping
point’ would need to be set in advance by the parties and could be, for
example, 51% or any other agreed
percentage – or other discrimen.
Past experience suggests
that the ATO will in the future be able to access data from non-individuals
effectively. Some other countries
seem to be heading in that direction already
– see the text accompanying n 50.
My thanks to Michael
Bersten, who brought these issues to my attention.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (120 KB)
PDF format (464 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter