URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlCrimJustSocDem/2025/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:02:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hwang, Juneseo --- "The Political Economy of the Mobuoy Illegal Dump in Northern Ireland: A Green Criminology Perspective" [2025] IntJlCrimJustSocDem 23; (2025) 14(3) International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy 13
The Political Economy of the Mobuoy Illegal Dump in Northern Ireland: A
Green Criminology Perspective
Juneseo Hwang
Universität Hamburg, Germany
Derry; green criminology; Mobuoy illegal dump;
Northern Ireland; waste crime.
Introduction
discovery of large-scale and long-term illegal waste disposal in the Mobuoy
dumpsite in Derry, Northern Ireland came as a shock
to Irish and international
society. The Mobuoy dumpsite consists of two parts: an authorized
waste-processing site known as the Materials
Recycling Facility, run by City
& Industrial Waste Ltd; and a site of sand and gravel pits owned by Campsie
Sand & Gravel
Ltd. It is now known that after collecting various forms of
industrial and household waste, City & Industrial Waste Ltd illegally
shredded and buried the collected wastes in the sites owned by Campsie Sand
& Gravel Ltd. In 2013, the Northern Ireland Environment
Agency (NIEA)
initially reported that approximately 516,000 tonnes of shredded or liquefied
waste had been illegally deposited or
processed, but as of early 2023, the
figure has tripled to 1.5 million tonnes (Mills 2013; Northern Ireland Assembly
2016). Given
the scale and longevity of illegal dumping, the Mobuoy dumpsite is
known to the local public as the largest illegal dumpsite in Europe.
proximity to the river Faughan, the existence of the illegal Mobuoy dump has
raised serious public concerns over the potential
contamination of groundwater,
which provides drinking water to communities in Derry as well as some in Donegal
across the border.
The site was finally closed in early 2013 and it has taken more than a decade
to deliver justice to the owners of the Mobuoy site,
who were prosecuted for
their involvement in the illegal transfer, disposal and processing of wastes. On
5 June 2013, the Northern
Ireland government commissioned Chris Mills, former
director of the Welsh Environment Agency, to investigate the weaknesses of waste
law and criminal justice system in Northern Ireland. The Mills report critically
reviewed the waste management system in Northern
Ireland and suggested that
waste regulation ‘is not working as intended’ and ‘criminality
is widespread in the
waste industry in Northern Ireland’ (Mills 2013:
There is no doubt that the Mills report was an important document, which
contributed to raising public awareness of the seriousness
of waste crime and
the importance of restructuring the waste system in Northern Ireland. It
provided a comprehensive explanation
of how the waste regulatory framework was
failing to work properly. However, its analysis did not stretch to situating the
illegal dump in a wider context of the political economic structure in
post-Agreement Northern Ireland. In other words, focusing
on preventing criminal
offences that violate statutory environmental law, the report was limited to
addressing the ways in which
environmental harms and risks had been reproduced
in the political economic system (or by the state).
Lynch et al. (2013) argue that this political economic approach to
environmental harms and crime is more apposite and effective than
criminology because pollution is an inevitable part of economic activities in
capitalist societies and the criminalization
of particular behaviours is a
social process that is mediated by socio-political power relations. Therefore,
through a lens of green
criminology, this article analyses the political economy
of the Mobuoy illegal dump and examines the role of the political system
Northern Ireland in reproducing loopholes in the waste management system.
This paper is structured as follows. First, it develops a green criminology
perspective that identifies institutionalized patterns
of ecological
disorganization and emphasizes the criminality between legality and illegality.
From this perspective, it is argued
that the neoliberalization of environmental
governance creates political and economic conditions where criminal groups can
the waste industry easily. Based on semi-structured interviews and
policy analysis, the article presents a political economic analysis
Mobuoy illegal dump and explains why and how the neoliberalization of Northern
Ireland has made the country vulnerable to
large-scale waste crime. Interviews
were conducted with local residents who had knowledge, or were suspicious, of
illegal activities
in the dumpsite. The article then raises two discussion
points, which understand the Mobuoy illegal dump as a systematic failure
Northern Ireland to disrupt the political and economic mechanisms of ecological
disorganization. It concludes that efforts to
prevent and reduce waste crime
should be accompanied by systematic changes in the political organization of the
Environmental Harms and Crime in the Capitalist System
The political economic analysis of environmental harms and crime is best
utilized within the context of the Treadmill of Production
(ToP) theory, which
sees capitalist economic growth as a vicious cycle of profit-making and
technology development from exploiting
labour and nature to causing
‘deeper levels of ecological disorganization than ever before’
(Gould, Pellow and Schnaiberg
2016: 7). The neoliberal state plays a crucial
role in facilitating wealth extractors in their search for profitable
opportunities
at the expense of public health, fair wages for workers and
environmental sustainability, while minimizing its role and colluding
powerful corporations. In analysing global companies in the oil, chemical and
asbestos industries, Ruggiero and South (2013)
argue that transnational
corporations extract natural resources for profit and states allow and support
their actions – which
are environmentally destructive but not criminalized
– for economic growth calculated on the basis of Gross Domestic Product
(GDP). While the state retreats to a small government approach to ‘get out
of the way’ of the free market, environmental
regulations are seen as
obstacles to the free market and the free flow of capital between countries, so
deregulation becomes the
order of the day. However, paradoxically, in the
neoliberal state it is likely that regulations that enable the maximization of
interests have survived or been extended, while
‘anti-business’ laws such as anti-trade union legislation have not
White (2014: 453) claims that ‘the continuing degradation of the
environment today is linked to the dominant regulation and
enforcement framework
itself, one that puts the stress on self-regulation and de-regulation’.
This argument can be substantiated
by a study of the Camorra, an Italian mafia
group that enjoyed loopholes in waste governance and enforcement under the
neoliberal approach to deregulation. As Hibou (2012: 643) argues,
the mafia group established an enterprise that won a governmental
bid with the
lowest costs for waste disposal. Then it simply took ‘advantage of an
extra opportunity to do business’
with an authorized licence under the
system of self-compliance that is ineffective in environmental monitoring and
enforcement. Thus,
tackling environmental harms and crime should involve not
only better environmental policing, but also the reform or transformation
socio-political system to minimize opportunities for perpetrators of
environmental harms and criminal offenders to exploit
nature through both legal
and illicit means.
The ToP theory distinguishes two types of ecological disorganization:
ecological withdrawals (EWs) and additions (EAs). EWs occur
as ‘economic
actors withdraw natural resources to create products that can be sold in the
marketplace’ (Stretesky, Long
and Lynch 2014: 39). Our everyday life is
dependent upon raw materials extracted from ecosystems and other living and
entities. Examples range from fossil fuels to water, minerals and
wood (Lynch et al. 2013). Such EWs cause harms to nature and humans
significantly altering or disrupting ecosystems to such an extent that they
cannot sustain or maintain their resilience. For instance,
the Brazilian
state’s aims to build mega dams to generate hydroelectric power has caused
deforestation and biodiversity loss
in the Amazon rainforests and posed threats
to the survival of Indigenous communities whose lives and spiritual/cultural
depend upon local rivers and ecosystems (van Solinge 2020). However,
because the withdrawals of natural resources are necessary to
commodities, and thus the market economy, ecological withdrawals are lighted
regulated or not viewed as criminal. Stretesky,
Long and Lynch (2014: 42) argue
that ‘because ecological withdrawals are central to production, they will
often not be defined
or treated as criminal even when they are extremely
harmful’. Moreover, within the globalized economy, countries in the Global
South, where environmental regulations and law are weaker but abundant natural
resources are found, have become extremely attractive
sites for the extractivist
practices of multinational corporations (Böhm 2023). Those EWs leave
ecosystems, upon which local
communities depend, polluted, but are managed for
their ‘development’ – that is, exploitation by global (and
economic interests (Lynch, Stretesky and Long 2018). Thus, the
benefits and harms generated by ecological withdrawals are unevenly
distributed,
as is the powerful benefit from ecological withdrawals, while the less powerful
endure costs and damage and/or an unfair
share of the benefits.
The other pillar of ecological disorganization is ecological additions (EAs),
which refer to environmental burdens of capitalist production,
such as waste and
pollution, imposed on communities and nature to such an extent that ecosystems
can lose their capability to recover
(Lynch 2020). These ecological additions
may take the direct forms of environmental contamination by greenhouse gas
emissions by
industries, toxic/hazardous wastes after the production and
consumption of commodities and the disposal of chemical agents such as
pesticides into the air, land and water (South 2014). In addition to EWs, these
EAs have brought compound risks to human health and
ecosystems. Many studies
have shown that toxic and hazardous waste incinerators and landfills are usually
situated in areas where
residents are culturally discriminated against and
socio-economically deprived (Martuzzi, Mitis and Forastiere 2010). These places
include not only rural areas or communities of colour, but also the Global
The transnational transfer of hazardous and
electronic wastes from the Global North to the Global South shows that
environmental risks
primarily caused by manufacturers and consumers in
industrialized countries are often externalized and exported to vulnerable
communities
and ecosystems in the Global South (Cotta 2020). The problem here is
three-dimensional: These communities have suffered from pollution
they have not
caused and often lack the capacity (financial or governance) to
‘cope’ with it. These waste facilities
bear the high possibility of
detrimental, long-term consequences to humans in the forms of air pollution, and
land and groundwater
contamination. Moreover, such wastes pose significant and
highly detrimental risks to both nature and people. Plastic products dumped
oceans and seas have killed coral reefs, which play a pivotal role in
maintaining marine ecosystems and providing shelters to
aquatic species (Lamb et
al. 2018). However, the potentially catastrophic consequences of contamination
by wastes, whether households,
industrial or radioactive, have not been taken
into account by environmental policies designed to regulate or prevent waste
at sea (Häder 2021).
a green criminological perspective, mainstream environmental law established
within the capitalist system creates loopholes whereby
these EAs and EWs cannot
be identified effectively and prevented or punished. Such legislation fails to
tackle the distinction between
legality and illegality that is blurred by harms
and crime. Ruggiero (2013: 421) argues that there is a continuum between legal
illegal harm, in the sense that
mala prohibita
(harms prohibited by
the law) and
(harms bad in themselves) are inextricably
interconnected. As critical criminologists have established, criminalization is
process that is mediated by the power, and thus crimes, of the powerful
– for example, white-collar crime, which can easily
evade state
interventions (Bedford, McGillivray and Walters 2020). In addition,
environmental harms caused by unequal power relations
within the human world,
and between humans and nature, are manifestations of violence against both
humans and nature, meaning the
capitalist system is systematically and
structurally
unjust and unsustainable
(Barry 2021). From this
perspective, even if they are not criminalized, environmentally harmful
activities reveal the failure not
only of a law enforcement community but also
of the political economic system.
The Political Economy of the Mobuoy Illegal Dump
Methodology
For the political economic analysis of the Mobuoy illegal dump, policy
documents, semi-structured interview data, environmental statistics
confidential documents produced from governmental agencies were collected and
analysed. To conduct semi-structured interviews,
potential interviewees were
identified on the basis of their knowledge of the history of the Mobuoy illegal
dump and stratified by
three sectors: government, civil society and expert
groups. Targeted interviewees were then recruited on the basis of their
and knowledge about the Mobuoy illegal dump and their willingness to
participate in the research. Some of the six interviewees are
environmental
campaigners who have monitored the government’s responses to the illegal
All interviews were conducted after the ethical clearances. A set of
documents including the description of the research and a set
of interview
questionnaires were submitted to the researcher’s institution, the School
of History, Anthropology, Philosophy
and Politics at Queen’s University
Belfast. No vulnerable groups (children, the elderly) were included. Research
ethics approval
was finally granted on 29 June 2020. The interviews took place
mostly in 2021 via online platform, due to social distancing rules
COVID-19 pandemic.
The interview data were transcribed and analysed through thematic analysis
coding. Codes drawn from the analysis included ‘participation’,
‘neoliberalization’, ‘governance’, ‘growth’
and ‘government’. These codes were grouped
thematically into two:
‘pro-growth politics’ and ‘environmentally destructive
economy’. To guarantee the
validity of and control the quality of
collected research data, all the factual claims from the interviewees were
cross-checked with
relevant documents, previous studies and media reports.
Meanwhile, civil servants in the NIEA rejected taking part in the research
to their concern about potential impacts on the ongoing criminal
proceedings.
To fill this gap,
confidential documents were obtained through a request made under the
Environmental Information Regulations 2004.
Political Contexts: Pro-Growth Politics in Northern Ireland
To fully understand the whole picture of this Mobuoy scandal, more attention
needs to be paid to how the environment in Northern Ireland
has been sacrificed
to feed a pro-growth agenda pursued by the Northern Ireland government in the
post-Agreement period. The government
has taken the environment into its policy
papers. For instance, in its
Programme for Government 2011–15
(Northern Ireland Executive 2012), one of the policy priorities for the Northern
Ireland Executive was ‘Protecting Our People,
the Environment and Creating
Safer Communities’. However, it was unclear how the government would
protect the environment when
looking at its key commitments. For instance, there
is no mention of stronger environmental regulations. Interviewee C described
Northern Ireland as forgetting the environment because:
Before the Good Friday Agreement, we weren’t allowed to talk about
environmental issues in case it distracted us from dealing
with the conflict.
Since the Good Friday Agreement and peace, we are not allowed to talk about
environmental issues in case it distracts
us from peace efforts. So, for many
years we have a legacy of environmental exploitation that was never given any
media attention
or political attention.
In the same paper, the neoliberal nature of the Northern Ireland governance
system can be found. Foreign direct investment was given
a priority as the
government’s goal was to ‘achieve £1 billion of investment
in the Northern Ireland economy’
(Northern Ireland Executive 2012: 7).
Later, in the Fresh Start Agreement agreed by the Northern Ireland Executive
along with the
British and Irish governments in 2015, the Northern Ireland
Executive set out its commitment to reducing corporation tax up to 12.5%
April 2018 to grow the domestic economy and compete with the Republic of Ireland
for available international capital. This was
significant, according to Horgan
and Gray (2012: 475), as the tax cuts would lead to the Northern Ireland
Executive losing up to
£400 million. Coulter (2019: 130) notes that such
generosity in terms of foreign capital, embraced by both the DUP and Sinn
Féin, would bring about ‘a period not of renewed economic
opportunity in Northern Ireland but rather one of even greater
deprivation’.
can be learned from the analysis of the neoliberal state in Northern Ireland is
that the political class leaves environmental
mal-governance unaddressed, taking
no effective political decisions for ecological sustainability. Interviewee C
I think the idea that we have not just forgotten the environment is amplified
now because we’ve seen a lot of decision-making
in Northern Ireland ...
it’s almost as if the places here have become a ‘
’ to support the fragile political settlement where we have a
forced coalition between the main parties, a mandatory coalition.
And to me I
would describe as
‘carve-up’ politically, ‘carve-up’
economically between different traditions here. But also ‘carve-up’
ecologically as well
. And the conclusion I would come to is that the
insecurities that we feel as immature democracy are reflected in the ways we
beautiful and wonderful natural resources. (emphasis added)
Mainstream political parties in Northern Ireland have sidelined environmental
problems such as air pollution, illegal waste dumping
and environmental
governance reforms.
For example,
the DUP and Sinn Féin, which are at the very opposite ends of the
political spectrum, strategically pursue their
own interests within the
‘siloed’ post-Agreement administrative system, where each ministry
is effectively its own ‘fiefdom’
and there is often little
collective responsibility or coherence within the five-party executive. Years
after the discovery of the
Mobuoy illegal dump, the Department of the
Environment, led by MLA Mark H Durkan from the Social Democratic and Labour
Party, circulated
a discussion document on the independence of the NIEA, which
admitted that:
A higher degree of independence should allow greater flexibility to make the
changes necessary to speed up decisions and actions.
An independent agency, for
example, could become the key and easily identifiable champion for the
protection and improvement of the
Northern Ireland environment as opposed to
just another limb of the Department. (Northern Ireland Department of the
Environment 2015:
The importance and usefulness of an independent environmental watchdog is
well noted by following scholars. Brennan, Dobbs and Gravey
(2019: 84) argue
that even at the time of Stormont’s collapse or political ignorance of
environmental problems, ‘a process
of reform centred on the development of
common frameworks, underpinned by environmental objectives, principles, rights
and enforced via meaningful accountability mechanisms would help
strengthen environmental protection’. An independent environmental
protection agency (EPA) is one of the ‘meaningful accountability
mechanisms’ they suggest. As the Mobuoy illegal dump
exposed severely weak
and ineffective regulations and poor enforcement when it came to deterring waste
crime, governance reforms
including an independent EPA were prioritized by
environmentalists and most political parties (Sinn Féin, Social
and Labour Party, Greens and the Alliance). A call for the
establishment of an independent EPA was made in relation to the Mobuoy
dump again in 2014. In Stormont, MLA Steven Agnew from the Green Party Northern
Ireland argued:
The fact is that illegal dumping, on the scale that it took place at Mobuoy,
could not have occurred
the Department
stopped unauthorised
mineral extraction
... It seems to be
a very political position
an enforcement agency to take, deciding that it will not enforce its regulations
because of economic considerations
... This political decision-making
reinforces the need for an independent environmental protection agency.
(Northern Ireland Assembly
2014: 57–58, emphasis added)
However, the DUP has consistently been resistant to the idea of an
independent EPA. When transforming the Environment and Heritage
Service (EHS),
an agency within the Department of Environment, into the NIEA within the same
department in 2008, the then Environment
Minister, Arlene Foster, said:
Some people will be disappointed by the decision not to make EHS an
independent agency ... I and my party take the role of environmental
too seriously to externalise the organisation ... I am opposed to the setting up
of yet another quango in which unelected
people will take decisions on behalf of
the people in Northern Ireland’. (Northern Ireland Assembly 2008)
After governmental restructuring in 2016, the Department of Environment was
merged with the Department of Agriculture and Rural Development
and became the
Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs. Since then, the new
department has again been led by the
DUP, and the creation of an independent EPA
has been dismissed. Critics saw this change as a rollback of environmental
regulation,
risking the intensified environmental mal-governance and the
incapability of the environmental regulatory body in Northern Ireland.
Eventually, those setbacks are likely to hinder the development of effective and
ambitious environmental policies (Brennan, Purdy
and Hjerp 2017; Hwang 2023).
Together with the organizational change in the government, the DUP’s
stance is viewed as continuing
the resistance against longstanding calls for a
stronger environmental watchdog. Interviewee C said:
On a sort of policy or structural level, we also have immaturity how the
governance structures within the society operates, because
we haven’t had
no independent environmental protection agency. So, decisions tend to be
politicised. We also now have the environmental
portfolio within the
agriculture. Department for Agriculture here is very significant and they have
adopted very pro-growth anti-environmental
agenda called
. And then we have the environmental agency trying to regulate that
and regulate other activities when they answer to politicians.
For any type of
enforcement to take place, good governance would suggest that we need political
separation from politics and enforcement.
Two points can be made regarding this political deadlock. First, the
post-conflict system in Northern Ireland, where one single party
unilaterally block political decisions – for example for the party to go
against the establishment of an independent environmental
protection agency
– has been exploited, especially by the DUP. Second, such a political
system is more likely to reproduce,
rather than resolve, institutionalized
ecological amnesia because even with majority will or cross-party support,
environmental governance
reforms can be ignored while environmental pollution
and injustices, for which a lack of effective regulation and enforcement is
partially responsible, are worsening in Northern Ireland. The Mobuoy illegal
dump exemplifies the kind of large-scale environmental
crime that could
increasingly take place under the sight of the environmental enforcement
Loopholes in the Economic System that Sacrifices the
Environment
According to the Mills report (Mills 2013), the earliest planning
applications for the Mobuoy site were made in 1980 for a council
refuse tip and
in 1993 for opening sand and gravel pits. Since 2003, when waste regulation was
transferred from local councils to
central government, until the closure of the
illegal dumpsite in 2013, more than 30 consultations were held by the NIEA on
over waste disposal and extraction at the site (Mills 2013: 9). Among
many, a critical loophole in the planning system that illegal
waste operators of
the Mobuoy site exploited was the dysfunctional and disastrous consequences of
retrospective planning permission.
It appeared to be the case that the owners of
the Mobuoy site could, on the back of retrospective planning permission, expand
sand and gravel pits without planning permission in advance; instead, they
could apply for permission after the event. It is possible
to speculate that the
owners of the Mobuoy site, and their unidentified partners, could enjoy the
retrospective planning application
process while making profits out of illegal
landfill far longer than expected.
Interviewee A, who had occupied a variety of voluntary roles in community and
environmental organizations based in Derry, directly
linked the Mobuoy crisis to
the shameful ethos and the attitude of the government in dealing with
environmental harms and crime that
continued to grow under its watch:
I’ve seen Mobuoy as something of a much wider problem in waste crime in
that Mobuoy is probably the worst example that comes
across Northern Ireland ...
It is a symptom happening right across Northern Ireland ... I suppose a number
of reasons.
First of all, really poor joined-up government, [and the] lack of
regulation. But worse than that, I believe, is that there is unwillingness
acknowledge that failure within the government ...
So even though they have
Mobuoy has become very controversial subject, still it’s still dealt
within the confines and narratives
of those who want to keep it under control
and keep the public from knowing how bad the problem is with waste crime in
Northern Ireland.
(emphasis added)
If planning is primarily a preventive mechanism that can halt or modify
environmentally harmful development projects and decisions,
enforcement is a
retrospective one that deters or punishes criminal offences against
environmental law and restores and rehabilitates
environmental damage. These two
mechanisms constitute the core parts of environmental protection in Northern
Ireland. In the case
of the Mobuoy illegal dump, it seems that environmental
policies were ill-designed to protect people and nature from organized
environmental
crime. On 22 March 2022, the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) in
the Northern Ireland Assembly published a report that found planning
in Northern
Ireland ‘isn’t simply working’, because it ‘isn’t
doing well on deciding today’s
applications; and doesn’t appear to
be properly enforcing the decisions it made in the past’ (Public Accounts
2022: 16). According to the report, a significant deficit of
transparency, accountability and coherency was observed in the Northern
planning system. On the transparency, the PAC found that a planning process was
not open and inclusive to public participation
and key decisions were made in
the absence of cooperation between key planning actors, including the Department
for Infrastructure,
local councils, statutory consultees and the public. It was
commented that:
The operation of the planning system is one of the worst examples of
silo-working within the public sector ... There is fragmentation
at all levels
– between central and local government, within statutory consultees,
amongst the local councils and even the
Department itself appears to operate in
functional silos. (Public Accounts Committee 2022: 7)
In parallel with failures in the planning system, it appears that weak
environmental enforcement also contributed to the waste crisis
in the Mobuoy
site. According to the Mills report, a total of eighteen enforcement actions
were taken the owners of the Mobuoy site,
but they were not effective in
deterring illegal waste disposal (Mills 2013: 11). The Mobuoy illegal dump
reveals three aspects of
weak environmental enforcement. First, the site
investigation and monitoring appear to be completely ineffective. The Mobuoy
could have been discovered as early as 2008 if the NIEA had acted on the
basis of a growing list of officially logged complaints
the Loughs Agency reported to the NIEA that members of the River Faughan
Anglers’ Association suspected
that waste was being shredded and dumped on
the site, but the NIEA did not respond to it (Mills 2013: 37). Since the
shocking discovery
of its failure to respond to organized criminals in the waste
sector, the NIEA went through restructuring to enhance its capacity
with better
resourced personnel to counter waste crime. For instance, the Environmental
Crime Unit within the Agency recruited more
officers to effectively investigate
crime cases. However, the accountability and transparency of governmental
agencies in the environmental
sector have remained critically low and been a
major point of criticism. As the Criminal Justice Inspectorate Northern Ireland
18) notes, it was not always the case that the ECU’s regulatory
practices fulfilled the general principles of enforcement,
consistency,
accountability, transparency and the polluter pays principle (PPP).
The PPP is one of the basic principles of environmental law. However,
according to the NIEA’s internal report (March 2019),
acquired by one of
the interviewees under the EIR 2004, Part III of the Waste and Contaminated Land
(Northern Ireland) Order (WCLO)
1997, which specifically sets out a legal
framework to implement the PPP, has not been in force for decades. In the
internal report
written by the NIEA in 2019, Part III of the legislation
‘provides a definition of contaminated land and an improved system
identification and remediation of land where contamination is causing
unacceptable risks to human health, the natural environment
property’ (Northern Ireland Environment Agency 2019: 8). Thus, although
the NIEA refused to publicly comment on this
issue in relation to the Mobuoy
site, Part III of the WCLO should have played a crucial role in addressing the
Mobuoy dumpsite, especially
in defining the level of contamination, identifying
the culpability of polluters, and enforcing liability for remediation. However,
as the report further stated, unfortunately ‘the polluter pays principle,
which is integral to Part III, is poorly covered
by other legislative and
regulatory regimes in Northern Ireland’ (Northern Ireland Environment
Agency 2019: 6). Below is a
comment from Interviewee B, a local environmental
campaigner who expressed disappointment about the non-implementation of the very
basic principle to redress environmental harms caused by criminality:
I have learned that the actual polluter who does polluting is such a tedious
process trying to get them to court and make them pay
for the damage caused. And
then I realised that part of the contamination report hasn’t been
implemented. Anyway, there is
no enforcement that makes polluter pay. So as
money isn’t there to clear up the site and the people are not being fined
know that there is going to be a panel there for it, then there is no, you
know they continue with this.
Finally, legal sanctions against waste offences are significantly lower in
Northern Ireland than other parts of the United Kingdom,
meaning that criminals
could continue to operate and still make money despite incurring fines (Criminal
Justice Inspectorate Northern
Ireland 2015). The extent to which the sentencing
system has been weak needs to be answered in a separate study that investigates
court records on waste crime. However, it is still admitted that weak
enforcement has created opportunities for illegal profit-making
businesses in
the Mobuoy site and elsewhere across the country. Interviewee C suggested that
the environmental enforcement community
needs to be better resourced as well as
redesigned to prevent waste criminals from exploiting the border.
The sums of money involved are colossal. The profiteering is a very rich
scene and it’s not difficult even with two lorries
a year to become a
millionaire in relation to evading landfill tax and dumping illegally ... This
is very much a one-way road. We
make the approach and they the institutions act
to enforce whatever legislation has been breached. My experience over the last
years is that few actions are never undertaken by enforcement agencies unless
they are forced to be continued lobbying. Prevention
of illegal dumping is very
difficult as it is financially worth taking the risk by commercial entities.
In Article 4 of the Waste and Contaminated Land (Northern Ireland) Order
1997, penalties are imprisonment up to six months and/or
a fine up to
£20,000. This low sentencing, coupled with lax enforcement, is likely to
create favourable conditions for crime.
A statistical analysis was done based on
the NIEA’s own records, which were downloaded from the Detail Data Portal
by the Northern Ireland Council for Voluntary Action. The result
shows that economic gains from illegal waste dumping were higher
maximum fine among 46 of 56 cases convicted between 2005 and 2016 (Northern
Ireland Environment Agency 2016). For example,
the highest earing offender made
a profit of £4.8 million by illegally disposing of 52,500 tonnes of
commercial and household
waste at 20 Glassagh Road, Derry in
The worst possible scenario
from this situation is that criminals are set free after six months of
imprisonment at most, and can
continue their profit-making business by illegal
dumping, while at the same time destroying the environment and public health,
eroding public trust in government.
Against this backdrop, these criminal groups – like the owners of the
Mobuoy illegal dump – could not only attract waste
producers, from
households to large-scale industries, to their seemingly legal business, but
also boost their activities by receiving
subsidies. Figure 1 illustrates
how the owners of the Mobuoy site and their unidentified partners could enjoy
their illicit business
across the legal and illegal domains.
Figure 1. Legal and illegal dimensions of the Mobuoy
The harm continuum between spanning from legal to illegal activities seems to
be heightened first by the government systematic failure
to monitor corporate
activities, and second the government’s funding of potentially illegal
activities. The Aggregates Levy
is an ‘environmental tax on primary virgin
aggregate (rock, sand and gravel used as bulk fill in construction)’ (HM
2020: 2). As the indiscriminative extraction of aggregates may cause
serious damages to the environment and public health, the United
introduced the aggregates levy mechanism to ‘internalize the environmental
costs of aggregates production in order
to discourage the extraction of virgin
aggregates and to promote the use of recycled and alternative materials’
2011: 1). For Northern Ireland, this new environmental tax appeared
to be a worrisome issue that would not affect only small and
independent quarry
businesses, but also increase illicit flows of aggregates across the Irish
border. The Northern Ireland Assembly
identified the substantial differential in
aggregate price between Northern Ireland and the other parts of the British
Aggregates Levy was introduced with a rate of £1.60 per tonne.
The average cost of the extraction in Northern Ireland was £2.50
for aggregates, which meant the relative Aggregates Levy rate was 60%. By
contrast, the higher average price of aggregates
in Britain suggested that the
same rate only occupied 23% of the production costs (Scottish Government 2020:
65). Geological characteristics
of the Republic of Ireland, which is favourable
to aggregates, and relatively lower transaction costs than the United Kingdom
also identified as potential drivers of negative impacts on the Northern
Ireland economy and the growth of the illicit aggregate
market for tax evasion.
In November 2004, Campsie Sand and Gravel (CS&G), one of the owners of
the Mobuoy dump, applied for the Aggregates Levy Credit
Scheme to compensate the
aggregates. At the time of the scheme being granted, the company – which
later turned out to be a
serious offender against environmental regulations
– did not file an appropriate planning permission. This is the first
that the law enforcement community failed to address. On 28 August
2014, while illegal waste dumping was ongoing, the Department
of Environment
confirmed to the operators of the Mobuoy dump that they had made the necessary
improvements in environmental management
in order to qualify for the tax relief.
Until the Aggregates Levy Credit Scheme was suspended after the European
Commission intervened
following a complaint from the British Aggregates
Association, it seems that neither the Department nor the NIEA was held
accountable
for checking the compliance of the operators with the environmental
standards for tax relief. This was costly: vast amounts of public
funds will now
have to be used to remediate the massive illegal waste dump, not to mention
dealing with the residual environmental
damage to adjacent areas.
Discussion and Conclusion
As long as the whole system is oriented to the maximization of profits and
the minimization of costs for waste disposal, there is
always room for illicit
actors to brand themselves as ‘legitimate’ waste processors. Aside
from the limited scholarly
knowledge and some governmental reports, it is
telling that not only waste crime itself, but also its multiple and negative
on Northern Irish society, are seriously understudied. For example, the
size of financial gains from waste crime are not well known.
Ruffell and Dawson
(2009) note that waste crime results in concerns over public health and
environmental destruction among communities,
but due to the crime being often
perceived as ‘victimless’, waste crime is hard to deter, which may
contribute to its
growth in Northern Ireland. This drawback overlaps with the
lack, if not complete absence, of understanding on the causes, process
consequences of households and businesses involved in such crime and mapping of
crime hotspots.
This article has suggested that the neoliberalization of Northern Ireland is
visible in two ways. First, amidst forming a neoliberal
‘consensus’
in the power-sharing government, the DUP’s stubborn opposition to creating
an independent environmental
protection agency could be attributed to a
political failure to strengthen environmental enforcement and governance. The
data analysed
in this article suggest that if the NIEA could independently
enforce the law to protect the environment, more effective actions could
taken to deal with the Mobuoy illegal dump. Second, public money was used to
finance the Aggregates Levy Credit Scheme for ‘environmentally
clean’ quarry businesses, but no proper monitoring and regulation
occurred. This is not only because of the NIEA’s lack
of accountability
and professionalism, but also due to the neoliberalization of the regulatory
regime to facilitate voluntary compliance
from businesses without state
intervention. Under these economic conditions, the owners of the Mobuoy illegal
dump could benefit
from the scheme and create profits from illegal waste
Two discussion points emerge from the case study of the Mobuoy illegal dump.
First, the study reveals that the political economic
system in Northern Ireland
has been established in a way that is not commensurate with sustainability. The
political system in Northern
Ireland has not been established to be capable of
reducing environmental harms and preventing environmental crime; rather, it has
gone the opposite way. Some legal reforms may contribute to preventing criminal
offences to some extent, but they are less likely
to reduce systematic
environmental governance failures.
In the meantime, such criminality has undermined the rule of law and caused
economic loss and fear in local communities. According
to the Police Service of
Northern Ireland (2012), waste crime particularly involves organized criminal
groups in the country. For
waste regulatory frameworks to function effectively,
not only legal mechanisms but also the political system should be sensitive
and capable of reducing environmental harms.
Second, the Mobuoy illegal dump reveals how environmental concerns have been
overlooked in Northern Ireland’s post-conflict
politics. Although the
country has been viewed as a successful peacebuilding model, environmental
sustainability has been sacrificed
for post-conflict growth and binary politics.
This has led to local communities and ecosystems suffering from the consequences
ecological disorganization, such as water contamination, without proper
remedies. Waste crime is a common issue across the British
Isles, but Northern
Ireland is likely to be most vulnerable to criminality if the status quo
persists. The political economic analysis
of the Mobuoy illegal dump has
revealed loopholes in the environmental management system and political
resistance against environmental
governance reforms that may create favourable
conditions for criminal groups to seek financial gains through environmental
This suggests that the motive for (large-scale) waste crime is
economically driven, but the condition for it may be facilitated not
regulatory failures, but also by a lack of political will or actions to prevent
To date, it appears that the political dimension of environmental crime in
general has been under-studied even in ToP theory, which
adopts a political
economic analysis to green criminology. In that context, this study shows that
it is important to understand how
the political drivers of environmental crime
are associated with economic motives for environmental crime. It also calls for
attention to be paid to the nexus between environmental protection and
peace in order to rebuild a safe and sustainable society after
conflicts. The case of Northern Ireland shows that peace can become
‘elusive’ when local communities are affected
by environmental crime
(Castelos 2023; Hwang 2023).
Society is awakening from the catastrophic waste crime scene. On 16
January 2023, BBC Radio 4 launched a podcast,
traced the history of large-scale illegal dumping in the Mobuoy
On 8 May 2024, after several
delays during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Belfast Magistrates Court is due to
make a judgment on those
involved in large-scale illegal dumping at the Mobuoy
site. Two men already lodged a guilty plea for their violation of several waste
regulations. The sentencing will not be taken as the end of the Mobuoy scandal,
but rather benchmarked as the beginning of a journey
to reform the political
economic system towards sustainability. The Mills report says that
‘criminals will always seek out
where easy money can be made’ (Mills
2013: 2). Unless the state disrupts the political and economic mechanisms of
disorganization, criminality will continue in the grey area between
legality and illegality. Institutional reforms without systematic
changes will
become futile and piecemeal, something that especially the DUP has strongly
advocated to maintain the status quo.
Acknowledgements
I am thankful for constructive feedback from anonymous reviewers and the
journal editor. This research article was produced from my
doctoral thesis,
The Road Not Taken: ‘Triple Transformation’ towards
Sustainable Peace in Northern Ireland
(submitted to the School of History,
Anthropology, Philosophy and Politics, Queen’s University Belfast in
Correspondence:
Dr Juneseo Hwang, Research Associate at the DFG
Humanities Centre for Advanced Studies: "Futures of Sustainability",
Universität
Hamburg, Germany.
juneseo.hwang@uni-hamburg.de
J (2021) Green republicanism and a ‘Just Transition’ from the
Tyranny of economic growth.
Critical Review of International Social and
Political Philosophy
24(5): 725–742.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13698230.2019.1698134
Bedford L, McGillivray L and Walters R (2020) Ecologically unequal exchange,
transnational mining, and resistance: A political ecology
contribution to green
criminology.
Critical Criminology
28: 481–499.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10612-019-09464-6
Böhm ML (2023) The state-corporate crime of extractive industries. In
Goyes DR (ed.)
Green crime in the global south: Essays on southern green
criminology
: 33–67. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan.
Brennan C, Dobbs M and Gravey V (2019) Out of the frying pan, into the fire?
Environmental governance vulnerabilities in post–Brexit
Northern Ireland.
Environmental Law Review
21(2): 84–110.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1461452919843646
Brennan C, Purdy R and Hjerp P (2017) Political, economic and environmental
crisis in Northern Ireland: The true cost of environmental
governance failures
and opportunities for reform.
Northern Ireland Legal Quarterly
https://doi.org/10.53386/nilq.v68i2.31
Castelos MA (2023) Towards a holistic consideration of crimes against nature
committed in times of armed conflict: A critical approach
to the case of Iraq.
International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy
https://doi.org/10.5204/ijcjsd.2707
Cotta B (2020) What goes around, comes around? Access and allocation problems
in Global North–South waste trade.
International Environmental
Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics
20: 255–269.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10784-020-09479-3
Coulter C (2019) Northern Ireland’s elusive peace dividend:
Neoliberalism, austerity and the politics of class.
Capital & Class
43(1): 123–138.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0309816818818309
Criminal Justice Inspectorate Northern Ireland (CJINI) (2015)
A review of
the Northern Ireland Environment Agency’s Environmental Crime Unit
Belfast: CJINI.
Gould KA, Pellow DN and Schnaiberg A (2016)
The treadmill of production:
Injustice & unsustainability in the global economy
. Abington and New
York: Paradigm Publishers.
Häder D (2021) Dumping of toxic waste into oceans. In Häder D,
Helbling EW and Villafañe VE (eds)
Anthropogenic pollution of aquatic
: 353–371. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Hibou B (2012) Economic crime and neoliberal modes of government: The example
of the Mediterranean.
Journal of Social History
45(3): 642–660.
https://doi.org/10.1093/jsh/shr101
HM Treasury (2020)
Review of the Aggregates Levy: Summary of responses to
the discussion paper and government next steps
. London: HM Treasury.
Horgan G and Gray AM (2012) Devolution in Northern Ireland: A lost
opportunity?
Critical Social Policy
32(2): 467–478.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0261018312444422
Hwang J (2023) After Mobuoy: Co-designing environmental governance in
Northern Ireland?
Irish Political Studies
39(1): 24-46.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07907184.2023.2254259
Lamb JB, Willis E, Fiorenza EA, Couch CS, Howard R, Rader DN, True JD, Kelly
LA, Ahmad A, Jompa J and Harvell CD (2018) Plastic waste
associated with disease
on coral reefs.
6374(359): 460–462.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aar3320
Lynch MJ (2020) Green criminology and environmental crime: Criminology that
matters in the age of global ecological collapse.
Journal of White Collar and
Corporate Crime
1(1): 50–61.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2631309X19876930
Lynch MJ, Long MA, Barrett KL and Stretesky PB (2013) Is it a crime to
produce ecological disorganization? Why green criminology and
political economy
matter in the analysis of global ecological harms.
The British Journal of
Criminology
53(6): 997–1016.
https://doi.org/10.1093/bjc/azt051
Lynch MJ, Stretesky PB and Long MA (2018) Green criminology and native
peoples: The treadmill of production and the killing of indigenous
environmental
Theoretical Criminology
22(3): 318–341.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1362480618790982
Martuzzi M, Mitis F and Forastiere F (2010) Inequalities, inequities,
environmental justice in waste management and health.
European Journal of
Public Health
20(1): 21–26.
https://doi.org/10.1093/eurpub/ckp216
Merchante FP (2011) State aids and environmental taxes: The Northern Ireland
exemption to the UK Aggregates Levy.
European Journal of Risk Regulation
2(1): 125–128.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1867299X00000726
Mills C (2013)
A review of waste disposal at the Mobuoy site and the
lessons learnt for the future regulation of the waste industry in Northern
. Northern Ireland Department of Environment.
https://www.daera-ni.gov.uk/publications/review-waste-disposal-mobuoy-site-and-lessons-learnt-future-regulation-waste-industry
Northern Ireland Assembly (2008)
Ministerial statement: environmental
http://archive.niassembly.gov.uk/record/reports2007/080527.htm#4
Northern Ireland Assembly (2014)
Official Report (Hansard) Tuesday 11
March 2014. Volume 93, No. 2
. Belfast: Northern Ireland Assembly.
Northern Ireland Assembly (2016)
AQW 52099/11-16
http://aims.niassembly.gov.uk/questions/writtensearchresults.aspx?&qf=0&qfv=1&ref=AQW%2052099/11-16
Northern Ireland Department of the Environment (2015)
Environmental
governance in Northern Ireland: Discussion document
. Belfast: Department of
the Environment.
Northern Ireland Environment Agency (2016)
Illegal dumps investigated:
Details of illegal dumps investigated by NIEA Environment Crimes Unit
https://data.nicva.org/dataset/illegal–dumps
Northern Ireland Environment Agency (2019)
Assessment to ascertain the
financial, environmental and health risks associated with not having a specific
contaminated land regulatory
regime in Northern Ireland
. Belfast: Northern
Ireland Environment Agency.
Northern Ireland Executive (2012)
Programme for government
. Belfast: Northern Ireland Executive.
Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) (2012)
Strategic problem profile
for environmental crime in Northern Ireland
. Belfast: Police Service of
Northern Ireland.
Public Accounts Committee (2022)
Public Accounts Committee: Planning in
Northern Ireland
NIA 202/17-22.
Belfast: Northern Ireland Assembly.
Ruffell A and Dawson L (2009) Forensic geology in environmental crime:
Illegal waste movement & burial in Northern Ireland.
Environmental
10(3): 208–213.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15275920903140346
Ruggiero V (2013)
The crimes of the economy: A criminological analysis of
economic thought
. London: Routledge.
Ruggiero V and South N (2013) Toxic state-corporate crimes, neo-liberalism
and green criminology: The hazards and legacies of the
oil, chemical and mineral
industries.
International Journal for Crime, Justice and Democracy
https://doi.org/10.5204/ijcjsd.v2i2.115
Scottish Government (2020)
Evidence review and illustrative policy options
for a Scottish Aggregates Levy
. Edinburgh: Scottish Government.
Sewell R (2020)
In the cause of Labour: A history of British trade
. London: Wellread Books.
South N (2014) Green criminology, environmental crime prevention and the gaps
between law, legitimacy and justice.
Revija za Kriminalistiko in
Kriminologijo
65(4): 373–381.
Stretesky PB, Long MA and Lynch MJ (2014)
The treadmill of crime:
Oolitical economy and green criminology
. New York: Routledge.
Van Solinge TB (2020) The Amazon rainforest: A green criminological
perspective. In Brisman A and South N (eds)
Routledge international handbook
of green criminology
: 279–303. London: Routledge.
White R (2014) What is to be done about environmental crime? In Arrigo BA and
Bersot HY (eds)
The Routledge handbook of international crime and justice
: 445–467. London and New York: Routledge.
Interviewee A. Interviewed on 13
January 2021.
Interviewee B. Interviewed on 18
January 2021.
Interviewee C. Interviewed on 12
February 2021.
Questions for the interview
include: 1) self-introduction (in regard to the scope of knowledge on the Mobuoy
illegal dump; 2) any
(perceived) impact of the discovery of the Mobuoy illegal
dump on local communities and the environment in Derry; 3) opinion on a
inquiry into the Mobuoy illegal dump; 4) feedback to procedures and mechanisms
for public participation in Northern Ireland
environmental governance; and
5) feedback on the effectiveness of environmental law enforcement and
monitoring in Northern Ireland.
On 16 February 2021, the
author received a letter from a civil servant from the NIEA, who is responsible
for coordinating the remediation
project of the Mobuoy site. It said, ‘I
have taken advice from our legal advisors on your request for an interview and
trial of the alleged operators has yet to conclude the Agency feels that
it would be inappropriate to comment on the Mobuoy site
at this time.’
In the post-Agreement period,
the Northern Ireland government takes a form of ‘consociation’,
which is based on a mandatory
coalition from Unionist (broadly British) and
Nationalist (broadly Irish) political parties. According to the specific method,
the D’Hondt system, ministerial departments in the Northern Ireland
government are allocated to the political parties that
join the Assembly
Executive. Since 1998, the Department of Environment (now Department of
Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs)
has mostly been occupied by the
It is reported that this case
was convicted by the PSNI in 2015, but the amounts of financial penalties
imposed on illegal dumpers
are not known to the public.
Another, and more recent,
example is the Renewable Heating Incentive (RHI) scandal. The RHI was designed
to subsidize renewable
heating sources, but many frauds, such as heating an
empty farm for subsidy, were involved.
Available at
https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/m001hf1w/episodes/player
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (710 KB)
PDF format (455 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter