URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AdminRw/2010/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:44:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Creyke, Robin; Groves, Matthew --- "Administrative Law Evolution: An Academic Perspective" [2010] AdminRw 5; (2010) 59 Admin Review 20
Administrative law evolution: an academic perspective
Retrospective
Integration
Reduced emphasis on adjudication by courts
Proportionate dispute resolution
Alternative dispute resolution
Access to justice
Information access
Harmonisation
Other steps
Administrative law evolution:
an academic perspective
Professor Robin Creyke and Dr Matthew
The central elements of modern Australian administrative law—a
statutory code for judicial review, an ombudsman, and a general
merits review tribunal—are progressively celebrating their 30th
Other, newer, elements
have also been noting anniversaries: the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Cth) achieved a quarter of a century in 2007; the Australian Human Rights
Commission has been in operation for more than 20 years;
the Privacy
Commissioner enjoyed its 20th anniversary in 2008; and the whistleblower
laws—the ‘new kid on the block’—are
approaching their
first decade. These are important milestones, and they suggest that
administrative law is well established in Australia.
This paper reflects briefly
on what has happened during the past 30 years and considers where these
planks of the administrative
law edifice are likely to be in the next two to
three decades.
Retrospective
Although they have been slow to follow the Commonwealth model, the states and
territories have adopted similar accountability packages.
Each state and
territory has freedom of information
legislation
; each has an ombudsman
or parliamentary commissioner
have anti‑discrimination
; and all except the Northern
Territory have whistleblower protection
While the national privacy
regime protects personal information at all levels of government, each state and
territory except Western
Australia has introduced privacy laws or
guidelines.
Only one other
Council to monitor its administrative
law system, although New South Wales,
Queensland and Victoria have at various times foreshadowed such a
development.
As can be expected in a federal system, there are local differences. For
example, there is no pattern to state and territories privacy
, and there are moves in some
Amalgamation of merit review
tribunals has not occurred everywhere. South Australia and Tasmania have located
their administrative
review jurisdiction in their court
New South Wales has in
effect two amalgamated mega-tribunals in the Consumer Trader and Tenancy
Tribunal and the Administrative Decisions
The Northern Territory
has not yet adopted a multi‑purpose tribunal, and Queensland only
introduced its Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal from the middle of
The Australian Capital
Territory’s Administrative and Civil Tribunal began operating in early
At the same time, these
state and territory bodies differ from the Commonwealth Administrative Appeals
Tribunal in that their jurisdiction
often covers civil as well as administrative
Victoria, the ACT,
Queensland and Tasmania have introduced judicial review legislation, which
simplifies the procedure and codifies
much of the law of judicial
Other jurisdictions have
streamlined the remedies of judicial
These developments reflect a vibrant administrative law system and one that
is valued. Indeed, some jurisdictions have made administrative
law an element of
their political platform. In Victoria, after concerns had been expressed about
excessive government secrecy and
administrative ineptitude in the late 1990s,
the newly elected Bracks Government constitutionally entrenched the judicial
role of the Supreme Court and the independence of the Auditor-General and
the Ombudsman.
In Tasmania,
Premier David Bartlett, in a press release issued on 22 August 2008, and in the
face of a ‘succession of scandals
[that] had undermined public confidence
in government’
, announced
a 10-point plan for ‘strengthening trust in democracy’. The
Government responded to the report of the Joint
Select Committee of the
Tasmanian Parliament by announcing in November 2009 it intends to set up an
Integrity Commission for Tasmania
with investigative
Other foreshadowed moves
are a review of the
Freedom of Information Act
and whistleblower legislation and
increased funding for the offices of the Auditor-General, the Ombudsman and the
Director of Public
Prosecutions.
In summary, therefore, there is in Australia nationally and in the states and
territories a robust system of administrative law. That
system offers redress
when citizens complain that their rights and interests have been thwarted by
government. But vindication of
individual rights is not the only interest being
protected. Administrative justice requires that the courts, tribunals,
investigative
bodies and ombudsman offices, while administering the values of
fairness, rationality, transparency, impartiality and accountability
underpin good administration, also allow for government to operate in an
efficient and effective manner. How well the institutions
balance these elements
is a measure of the effectiveness of administrative justice in
The following are predictions about likely developments in Australian
administrative law; they are based on emerging trends both in
Australia and in
other common law countries.
Integration
There will be increased convergence of the adjudicative arms of government.
Just as tribunals are required to act in a manner summed
up in the legislative
formula ‘fair, just, economical, informal and
, so too are courts
embracing this approach. The New South Wales Supreme Court, for example, is now
required to operate in its civil
(including administrative law) jurisdiction in
a manner that is ‘just, quick and
Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) states, ‘The overriding purpose of this Act
and of rules of court, in their application to civil proceedings, is to
the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the
proceedings’.
Civil Justice Review
the Victorian Law Reform Commission was asked to
consider ‘the promotion of principles of fairness, timeliness,
proportionality,
choice, transparency, quality, efficiency and
accountability’; it recommended ‘changes which will reduce the cost,
and length of civil
Similar reforms
have occurred in the federal
and are being considered
in Western Australia
Queensland.
One impetus for these developments was Lord Woolf’s report in the
United Kingdom in the second half of the 1990s, which recommended
a speedier,
more affordable, and more accessible justice
Underpinning the reforms
is the principle that justice should be tailored to the complexity and value of
the matters involved—what
was later dubbed ‘proportionate
Adoption of this
approach not only encourages courts to be more efficient and less costly but
also favours mechanisms for review
outside the mainstream court system.
The movements towards greater integration are not, however, all in one
direction. The Commonwealth Administrative Appeals Tribunal
has found that,
although it is not a court and does not exercise judicial power, it does operate
in a court-like fashion. As a consequence,
applicants to the AAT are entitled to
rely on client litigation privilege unless there is a clearly expressed
abrogation of the privilege
in the relevant
legislation.
The application, in
practice, of rules of evidence to
, and the applicability
of evidential principles such as estoppel to tribunals, are other manifestations
of this alignment.
At the same time, the High Court has cautioned against transposing the
doctrine of public interest immunity developed in the courts
wholly different inquisitorial decision-making by’ a
This warning signals
that principles developed in the courts should not be ‘cut and
pasted’ but instead should be adopted
for tribunals only if there is good
reason to do so.
Although there has been a discernible coalescence of court and tribunal
practices, differences do remain. In litigation involving
the Tasmanian
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
Federal Court confirmed that the tribunal is not a ‘court of a
State’ in which the judicial power of the Commonwealth
The finding also
confirmed that the
Anti-Discrimination
(Tas) invests the tribunal with state judicial power, but
that power did not authorise the tribunal to hear a matter involving a
Commonwealth agency since that would breach Chapter III of the Commonwealth
Constitution
Similarly, in New South Wales, the divisions of the Administrative Decisions
Tribunal have been prohibited from considering federal
law in a matter since
they were not a ‘court’ for Chapter III
This distinction
between state and federal judicial power is likely to have significance for
tribunals at both the state and the
Commonwealth levels because it will continue
to define what functions may and may not be invested in tribunals.
At issue in these cases was the separation of powers concept, which prohibits
a tribunal exercising the judicial power of the Commonwealth.
But, although
separation of powers defines judicial and executive power and delineates
different territory for each branch of government,
that does not mean that
courts and tribunals are locked in a contest or that each develops in isolation
from the other. Rather, as
Gleeson CJ suggested, the development of a strong
system of tribunals has complemented the judicial review roles of the courts
… relieves the judicial branch of pressure to expand judicial review
beyond its proper constitutional and legal limits. Federal
courts can mark out
and respect the boundaries of judicial review more easily where there is a
satisfactory system of merits review.
This has beneficial consequences for the
relations between the three branches of government, and relations between the
judicial branch
the question in these terms confirms that the earlier concern that tribunals
might detract from the work of the courts has
overstated the position.
Reduced emphasis on adjudication by courts
Despite moves to reduce the cost, length and complexity of hearings in the
civil as well as the administrative arenas, there will
probably be a diminished
emphasis on settlement of disputes by
adjudication.
The inevitable
costs, the forensic hazards of litigation, and the personal toll on complainants
inhibit recourse to courts and, to
a lesser extent, tribunals. Indeed, even at
present it is estimated that some 90 per cent of matters before courts do
not go to hearing.
four out of five matters before the Administrative Appeals Tribunal do not go
ahead following the preliminary conferencing
or alternative dispute resolution
Tribunals are, however, more likely to be relied on for review than courts.
Tribunals’ flexible procedures and their ability
to tailor proceedings to
the needs of applicants, as well as their emphasis on substantive outcomes
rather than technical evidentiary
matters, are more attractive to applicants
than the more formal judicial processes. Equally attractive is the fact that
are able to provide a cheaper, less formal way of resolving
At the same time, there will probably be developments aimed at further
streamlining and improving the tribunal process. It can be
predicted that
tribunals will take a more inquisitorial approach to their task. Established to
operate in a non-adversarial manner,
tribunals have struggled to fulfil this
role. This has been in part because they have not been adequately resourced to
inquiries, but also in part because the oversight by courts steeped in
the adversarial method has depressed tribunal aspirations
The High Court has
sent mixed signals on this. In some cases it has countenanced a passive role on
the part of a tribunal, with the
effect that the tribunal was not obliged to
investigate matters that clearly seemed to warrant
; in other cases,
however, it has accepted that tribunals should take an investigative
The many decisions of
lower courts that support an investigative role illustrate the range of
circumstances that warrant tribunals
adopting a more active part in evidence
collection and the exploration of available legal
The reduced emphasis on adjudication has led to an increased focus on getting
decisions right the first time. This in turn has led
to the publication of a
range of materials designed to equip primary decision makers to better perform
their tasks. There are now
best-practice guides that aim to improve public
administration
, curriculum
guidelines for administrative law
, lessons for good
administration
, definitions of
administrative deficiency
aids to handling difficult
complainants.
reinforced by tools such as performance and compliance auditing, which test the
quality of the initial decision, and the
development of standards such as
certificates of assurance and compliance and performance indicators for
measuring the quantity and
quality of outputs. All this signals an anticipatory,
rather than a reactive, approach to improving decision making in public
administration,
and the initiatives are likely to become more widely
Proportionate dispute resolution
There will be increasing emphasis on proportionate dispute
resolution.
This means that the
most appropriate and cost-effective solution—be it internal or tribunal
review, investigation by the ombudsman
or other investigation agency, or a
negotiated outcome—will be encouraged instead of resort to adjudicative
bodies such as
courts. As the UK White Paper
Transforming Public Services:
complaints, redress and tribunals
put it, what people want to achieve
‘will vary considerably from case to case and person to person’.
Some ‘are looking
… for a legal remedy, like an award of a
disability benefit’, while others ‘might really be seeking something
like an apology or a clear
explanation’.
Adherence to proportionate dispute resolution would require courts to decline
to hear a matter when another more suitable option is
available. This will leave
adjudication by courts as the ‘last resort’.
Section 10(2)(b)(ii) of the Administrative Decisions
(Judicial Review) Act
already provides for the Federal Court or the Federal Magistrates Court to
decline to hear a matter if a more
suitable alternative is available, but the
provision has not been much used. If, as the figures suggest, only some 5 to
of cases are of precedential value, the adjudicative system is
unlikely to suffer from this diversion of disputes to other settlement
mechanisms.
Proportionate dispute resolution is a central feature of the
Justice (Civil Litigation Reforms) Act
2009 (Cth), which came into effect in
January 2010. This Act introduced amendments to make it clear that the
‘overarching purpose’
of the civil practice and procedure provisions
Federal Court of Australia Act
(Cth) is to achieve a
just resolution of disputes according to law, as quickly, inexpensively and
efficiently as possible.
Although these provisions might be seen as a response to so-called
mega-litigation, they are obviously intended to provide an indication
parties of all cases that the costs of any dispute should be proportionate to
the matter in dispute.
Alternative dispute resolution
The focus on proportionate dispute resolution will see alternative dispute
resolution increase in popularity. Model litigant principles
in the major
Australian jurisdictions reinforce this by requiring that alternative methods of
solving disputes about government decisions
be adopted where
These developments are
part of a ‘resolution culture’ that seeks to solve matters at the
earliest possible stage.
Administrative Appeals Tribunal now offers not only conferencing but also
mediation, neutral evaluation, case appraisal and
conciliation.
In this it is not
alone. The ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal, the New South Wales
Administrative Decisions Tribunal, the Victorian
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal and Western Australia’s State Administrative Tribunal all provide
a range of non-adjudicative
mechanisms.
Although it has strong government endorsement, especially at the national
, alternative dispute
resolution is not without its detractors. In an empirical survey of government
agencies in 2002 some 40 per
cent of participants expressed concern about
the drawbacks of alternative dispute resolution. Respondents stated variously
‘can hide bad compromises or good compromises about originally bad
decisions’, that it detracts from the normative role
of courts and
tribunals, and that it could deny the opportunity for exposure of error by
government agencies, allowing officials
to continue to make decisions that might
be unlawful.
interesting to see how these conflicting views are reconciled in future.
There will continue to be growth in ‘soft law’—that is,
those instruments (codes, guidelines, manuals, circulars,
and so on) that have
no legally binding force but are designed to influence official
Soft law has become
the most prevalent form of regulation: in 1997 there were over 30 000
codes, which are but one variety of soft
; the number today
would be considerably greater. To illustrate the impetus for this form of
regulation, in the area of privacy the
federal Privacy Commissioner deliberately
adopted a policy of providing codes or guidelines rather than relying on
adjudication to
‘flesh out’ the Privacy Principles. Another reason,
as the Australian Law Reform Commission noted in its privacy inquiry
Establishing broad outcomes for the handling of personal information, rather
than setting out detailed rules for each particular
technology, is also
consistent with the ‘light-touch’ approach to privacy regulation
that has characterised the Australian
trend reflects the call by government for standards of professionalism and
ethicality exceeding the base-level standards of administrative
law and for
regulation that is more responsive and flexible in relation to the needs of
consumers and users of services.
The growing support for soft law suggests that business and government are
prepared to trade off the certainty and authoritative
effect of legal rules for
less formal regulation, a development that marks a retreat from legislation in
favour of informal rules.
challenges for administrative law are threefold: how to develop standards for
drafting of soft law instruments; how to make decisions
that rely on soft law
rules reviewable; and how to achieve a greater level of consultation with those
affected, so that the rules
better represent the interests and encourage the
cooperation of those they are designed to influence.
Access to justice
A priority of government is improved access to justice. In the administrative
law context this is likely to take a number of forms.
In the first instance,
governments will take steps to ensure, in the words of the federal
Attorney‑General, that ‘our
justice system is practical, cost
efficient and facilitates the timely resolution of
A manifestation
of that practical approach will be the development of a single government portal
that grants entry to the range of
administrative law bodies. This
one‑stop‑shop approach will ensure there is an official who can
identify the problem
and direct the claimant to the most suitable administrative
law agency or body to handle the matter.
Improving access to justice is a central aim of the
Access to Justice
(Civil Litigation Reforms) Act 2009
(Cth). The Act places federal
courts’ case-management powers on a more secure statutory foundation and
confers on federal courts
a wide range of powers to enable them to identify and
resolve matters in dispute at the earliest possible stage. Additionally, the
makes it clear that lawyers have a responsibility to help their clients achieve
these objectives.
The obligation
to assist has also been imposed on the Commonwealth Administrative Appeals
Information access
It has long been recognised that an essential prerequisite for an effective
administrative complaints regime is having access to the
reasons for an adverse
decision. The significance of this right is illustrated by the right’s
inclusion in clause 33 of the
South African
Constitution
as a primary element of
‘just administrative action’. Clause 33 states, ‘Everyone
whose rights have been adversely
affected by administrative action has the right
to be given written reasons’. That right is not so well protected in
Those who are entitled to bring actions under the Administrative
Decisions (Judicial Review) Act or the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
have a right to obtain reasons
and a growing number of individual Acts provide that reasons must be given.
There is, however, no common law right to reasons, the
High Court having
declined to take that step in
Public Service Board of NSW v Osmond
, preferring to leave it to
the legislature to define the circumstances in which reasons are required.
That was more than 20 years ago. In the intervening years the reluctance
to impose a reasons requirement has been eroded on several
fronts. There has
been a consistent pattern of individual statutes providing such a right. The
courts, too, have taken a benign view
of reasons statements by tribunals and
primary decision makers, deferring to their expertise and refusing to be overly
unless a matter omitted
was material to or dispositive of the
There are also signs
of increasing inroads into the ‘no common law right to reasons’
principle. In
Campbelltown City Council v
, the New South Wales
Court of Appeal found that, in the absence of a statutory obligation to provide
reasons, when there is a right
of appeal and the appeal body is exercising a
, as opposed to an
administrative, function a right to reasons will be implied at common law. The
degree to which this will prove
to be the ‘Trojan horse’ for
circumventing the
ruling remains to be seen. While the reasoning
adopted in the
Campbelltown
case might provide an avenue for obtaining
reasons where a right of appeal exists, the desire for reasons will probably be
in cases where there is no right of appeal. In such instances the only
solution might be a direct (and long overdue) reconsideration
Just as the right to reasons is essential to an effective ability to
challenge administrative decisions, so, too, is the broader right
to have access
to information held by government. To that end, governments are currently
focused on streamlining privacy laws, simplifying
freedom of information laws,
and redefining whistleblowing laws. In this context we have seen the
Commonwealth Government abolish
conclusive certificates in federal
legislation
—a move also
proposed for Queensland, Western Australia and
—and a Bill to
simplify the exemptions to rights of
The Commonwealth
Government has also introduced a Bill that will create an FOI Commissioner, who
will provide specialist oversight
of freedom of
information.
New South Wales has
recently taken this step.
creation of a specialist form of supervision for freedom of information
recognises that this part of the administrative law framework
continues to be of
particular concern to both governments and the public.
There will also be separate but related reforms aimed at developing more
robust whistleblower laws following the release of reports
of the Whistling
While They Work project
inquiry of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs.
For Your Information
report the Australian Law Reform Commission has
posited that in future privacy laws must provide a ‘simple, workable
that provides effective solutions and
protections’.
Harmonisation
Harmonisation—brining into accord or agreement—of laws is being
Intergovernmental
cooperative schemes with centralised review bodies have been
, and administrative
law institutions and avenues for review have been aligned between countries to
avoid unnecessary complexity and
The Standing
Committee of Attorneys-General (which includes New Zealand) has agreed ‘to
actively participate in consultation
on the draft treaty on trans-Tasman legal
cooperation’
and the need
for harmonisation of anti‑discrimination
Similarly, the Australian
Law Reform Commission’s privacy report pointed out that, as a result of
the patchwork of laws applying
in Australia, the compliance burden imposed on
businesses and individuals by privacy regulation underlined ‘the pressing
for simplification and harmonisation of law and
Other steps
Reforms are needed in a number of other areas. Federally, the differing
the Administrative
Decisions (Judicial Review) Act and the Judiciary Act often act as a barrier to
litigation; the inefficiency of
servicing the multiple tribunals that exist at
both the Commonwealth and the state and territory levels runs counter to the
for more efficient and effective government; there continues to be a lack
of transparency about the appointments processes for many
tribunals, leading to
a loss of confidence in the tribunals’ output; and there has still not
been a legislative attempt to
develop a more uniform framework of procedures for
tribunals, although the Council of Australasian Tribunals has developed a
Practice Manual for Tribunals
, the second edition of which was published
Administrative justice continues to develop in Australia. This country
pioneered many of the bodies and remedies through which administrative
is effected in common law countries. It is clear, however, that other countries
are now leading the way in areas such as
tailoring responses to
complaints—the proportionate dispute resolution approach—and
single‑door entry for approaches
to government to vindicate grievances.
This is a dynamic area of government. Just as practices and philosophies in
government change,
so must the administrative law framework through which
citizens approach government for vindication of the rights or interests they
seek. The next 30 years will certainly be interesting for the well and
truly ‘alive and kicking’ administrative law area
of Australian
jurisprudence.
Professor Robin Creyke is a
part-time member of the Administrative Review Council;
Dr Matthew Groves is Associate Professor in the
Faculty of Law at
Monash University.
Administrative Decisions
(Judicial Review) Act
(Cth) in 2010; Administrative Appeals
Tribunal & Administrative Review Council in 2006; Commonwealth Ombudsman in
In most jurisdictions the Act
is called the
Freedom of Information Act
. Such statutes were enacted in Victoria
in 1982, in New South Wales in 1989, in South Australia and Tasmania in 1991,
and in Western
Australia in 1992. In 2009 Queensland passed the
Information Act 2009
(updating its initial 1992 legislation). The Northern
Territory equivalent is the
Information Act 2002
The principal legislation is:
Ombudsman Act 1982
Ombudsman Act 1989
(Northern Territory) Act 1980;
Ombudsman Act 1974
Ombudsman Act 2001
Ombudsman Act 1972
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act 1973
Parliamentary Commissioner
Public Service Act
Public Interest Disclosure Act 1994
Protected Disclosures Act 1994
Whistleblowers Protection Act
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
Public Interest
Disclosures Act 2002
Whistleblowers Protection Act 2001
Public Interest Disclosures Act 2003.
(Cth) (for public sector only); NSW:
Protection Act 1998
Health Records and Information Privacy Act 2002
Information Act 2002
Information Standard 42 –
Information Privacy Guidelines,
April 2003,
Information Privacy Act
Information Privacy Principles Instruction
Administrative Instruction, PC012); Tas:
Information Privacy Principles
– Guidelines for Agencies
(1997, reissued, 2000),
Health Complaints
Information Privacy Act 2000
Human Rights Act
(ACT) and the
Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Tasmania is also proposing to introduce such a law. So, too, was Western
Australia, but the change of government might inhibit
that move. The
Commonwealth Government’s response to the report of the National Human
Rights Consultation Committee, submitted
in September 2009, was responded to on
21 April 2010 through the launch of an Australian Human Rights
District Court Act
Magistrates Court (Administrative Appeals Division) Act
These are established
respectively by the
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Act 2001
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(assented to on 26 June 2009).
Australian Capital
Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
See, for example, the 12
March 2008 announcement of the Queensland Attorney-General,
http://statements.cabinet.qld.gov.au/MMS/StatementsDisplaySingle.aspx?id=56995
viewed 27 October 2008, and the
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2009
These are, respectively,
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1989
Judicial Review Act 1991
Judicial Review Act 2000
Administrative Law Act 1978
For example, NSW:
Court Act 1970
Supreme Court Act 1986
General Rules of Procedure I Civil Proceedings
Administrative Law Act 1978
Constitution
(Vic) s 85, Pt V, Div 3, Pt VA.
Matthew Denholm & Imre
Salusinszky (quoting Sir Max Bingham 2008), ‘Kevin Rudd eyes MP ethics
The Weekend Australian
(Western Australia), 24
The Tasmanian
Parliament enacted the
Integrity Commission Act 2009
(Tas) and will
constitute the Integrity Commission in 2010.
The Tasmanian Premier
presented a submission on these matters to a Joint Select Committee of the
Tasmanian Parliament that is inquiring
into ethical conduct in public life.
Details of the Premier’s submission are available at
http://premier.tas.gov.au/hot_topics/strengthening_trust_in_democracy
viewed 27 October 2008.
R Creyke & J McMillan
2000, ‘Administrative justice: the concept emerges’, in
R Creyke & J McMillan (eds),
Administrative Justice—the core
and the fringe
For example,
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Victorian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
The Hon. JJ Spigelman 2000,
Chief Justice of NSW, ‘Opening of Law Term: just, quick and cheap—a
standard for civil justice’,
Address, 31 January, 5.
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Access to Justice (Civil Litigation Reforms) Amendment
(Cth) has a similar intention and uses the terminology of an
‘an overarching purpose’ to describe the procedural provisions
are designed to achieve these objectives.
Victorian Law Reform
Commission 2008,
Civil Justice Review
, VLRC, Melbourne.
Access to Justice (Civil
Litigation Reforms) Amendment Act
Law Reform Commission of
Western Australia 2002,
30th Anniversary Reform Implementation Report
LRCWA, Perth; Law Reform Commission of Western Australia 2009,
Review of the
Civil and Criminal Justice System—10 years on
, by Wayne Martin, Chief
Justice of Western Australia.
See ‘The Queensland
Government’s response to the review of the civil and criminal justice
system in Queensland’,
www.justice.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/26292/Queensland-Government-response-to-the-Review-of-the-civil-and-criminal-justice-system-in-Queensland.pdf.
Lord Woolf 1996,
to Justice: final report
, www.dca.gov.uk/civil/final/contents.htm.
ibid. Ch 1; ‘Current
challenges in judging’, Speech delivered to the 5th Worldwide Common Law
Judiciary Conference, Sydney,
10 April 2003.
Re Farnaby and Military
Rehabilitation and Compensation Commission
[2007] AATA 1792
distinguishing
Capital Investments Pty Ltd v Macquarie Equity Capital Markets Ltd
[2006] NSWSC 530
(2006) 233 ALR 369
N Bedford & R Creyke
Inquisitorial Processes in Australian Tribunals
, Australian
Institute of Judicial Administration, Melbourne, Ch VII.
Applicant VEAL of 2002 v
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2005] HCA 72
Commonwealth v Wood
[2006] FCA 60
(2006) 148 FCR 276
Commonwealth v Tasmanian Discrimination Tribunal
[2008] FCAFC 104
(2008) 169 FCR 85.
Commonwealth v Tasmanian
Discrimination Tribunal
[2008] FCAFC 104
(2008) 169 FCR 85.
Trust Company of
Australian Ltd v Skiwing Pty Ltd
[2006] NSWCA 185
(2006) 66 NSWLR 77
Attorney-General v
2UE Sydney Pty Ltd
[2006] NSWCA 349
(2006) 226 FLR 62.
The Hon. M Gleeson 2006,
‘Outcomes, process and the rule of law’, Speech delivered for the
30th anniversary of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal, Canberra, 2 August.
M Galanter 2006, ‘A
world without trials’,
Journal of Dispute Resolution
J Wade 2001,
‘Don’t waste my time on negotiation and mediation. This dispute
needs a judge’,
Conflict Resolution Quarterly
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal annual reports.
N Bedford & R Creyke
Inquisitorial Processes in Australian Tribunals
, Australian
Institute of Judicial Administration, Melbourne.
See, for example,
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Applicants S134
[2003] HCA 1
(2003) 211 CLR 441
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
Affairs v SGLB
(2004) 78 AJLR 992.
Applicant NAFF of 2002 v
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2005] HCA 30
Applicant VEAL of 2002 v Minister for Immigration
[2005] HCA 72
The matter was directly explored by the Court in
Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship v SZIAI
[2009] HCA 39
(2009) 83 ALJR 1123.
Northern Territory v
[2003] FCA 1384
(2003) 203 ALR 385
SZJBA v Minister for Immigration
W404/01A of 2002 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs
[2003] FCAFC 255:
Hill v Repatriation
[2005] FCAFC 23
(2005) 85 ALD 1
Harris v Secretary, Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations
[2007] FCA 404
(2007) 158 FCR 252.
Best-practice guides:
Australian National Audit Office & Administrative Review Council.
Administrative Review
Council 2004,
Legal Training for Primary Decision Makers: a curriculum
, ARC, Canberra.
Commonwealth Ombudsman 2007,
Lessons for Public Administration: the Ombudsman Investigation of Referred
Immigration Cases (including ten lessons for public administration)
Commonwealth Ombudsman, Canberra. NSW Ombudsman 2006,
Good Conduct and
Administrative Practice
, Guidelines.
Commonwealth Ombudsman 2007,
Fact Sheet 2—administrative deficiency
, Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Project of the Parliamentary
Ombudsmen 2007,
Unreasonable Complainant Conduct: interim practice
UK Secretary of State for
Constitutional Affairs 2004,
Transforming Public Services: complaints,
redress and
, White Paper, CM 6243, HMSO, London.
Ibid. [2.6].
The estimate of precedent
cases is based on a pre-hearing settlement rate of between 80 per cent for
the AAT, for example, and 90
per cent for courts.
The Access to Justice
(Civil Litigation Reforms) Act 2009
(Cth) inserted these objectives in the
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Cth: Model Litigant Policy;
NSW Model Litigant Policy; Qld: Model Litigant Principles, Principle 1; Vic:
Model Litigant Guidelines.
The Hon. R McClelland MP
2008, Commonwealth Attorney-General, Keynote address to the 11th Annual
Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration Tribunals Conference,
Queensland, 6 June, 9.
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Act 1975
ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
ss 31, 33, 35; NSW:
Administrative
Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
; SA: Tas: Vic:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
, Div 5; WA:
Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
The topic has been the focus
of the Commonwealth Attorney-General, the Hon. Robert McClelland: launch of the
National Alternative
Dispute Resolution Advisory Council, Report on alternative
dispute resolution in the civil justice system, Parliament House, Canberra,
November 2009; keynote address to the 11th Annual Australian Institute of
Judicial Administration Tribunals Conference, Surfers
Paradise, 6 June 2008;
keynote address to the National Forum of the Australian Institute of
Administrative Law, Melbourne, 7 August
2008; and address to the 9th National
Mediation Conference, Perth, 10 September 2008.
R Creyke & J McMillan
2002, ‘Executive perceptions of administrative law—an empirical
Australian Journal of Administrative
Commonwealth
Interdepartmental Committee on Quasi-regulation 1997,
Grey-letter Law
Australian Law Reform
Commission 2008, Media briefing no. 2, ALRC Privacy Inquiry, 11 August, 1.
M D’Ascenzo 2008,
‘Effectiveness of administrative law in the Australian Public
, no. 57, 59.
R Baldwin & J Houghton
1986, ‘Circular arguments: the status and legitimacy of administrative
The Hon. R McClelland MP
2008, Commonwealth Attorney-General, Keynote address, 11th Annual Australian
Institute of Judicial Administration
, Queensland, 6
Access to Justice
(Civil Litigation Reforms) Act 2009
(Cth) inserted these objectives in the
Federal Court of Australia Act
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Act 1975
Administrative Decisions
(Judicial Review) Act 1977
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
159 CLR 656.
Minister for Immigration
v Wu Shan Liang
[1996] HCA 6
(1996) 185 CLR 259
Collector of Customs v Pozzolanic
(1993) 43 FCR 280;
Minister for Immigration v Yusuf
(2001) 206 CLR 323,
Guo Wei Rong v Minister for Immigration
(1995) 38 ALD 38
Minister for Immigration v Rajamanikkam
[2002] HCA 32
(2002) 210 CLR
WAEE v Minister for
Immigration
(2003) 75 ALD 630, 641;
Comcare v Mathieson
[2004] FCA 212
(2004) 79 ALD
[2006] NSWCA 284
(2006) 67 NSWLR 372.
That is, determining legal
rights or obligations.
Freedom of Information
(Removal of Conclusive Certificates and Other Measures) Act 2009
These proposals have met
with varying success. The Victorian
Freedom of Information Amendment Bill 2007
which sought to remove conclusive certificates, was defeated in the Legislative
Council. The Western Australian Freedom of Information
Bill, which sought to
remove conclusive certificates and make other reforms to FOI, lapsed when a
state election was called in mid-2008.
Queensland’s
Information Act 2009
s 49 Sch 4 essentially shifts the balance more in
favour of disclosure of information (unless disclosure is found to be against
public interest) and extends FOI to certain government‑owned
corporations. The
Information Privacy Act 2009
introduces a regime for
managing the collection and handling of information by government agencies. It
also provides for individuals
a right to gain access to and seek the amendment
of personal information held by the government and its agencies if that
information
affects the individual seeking access.
Freedom of Information
Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
Information Commissioner
Government Information
(Information Commissioner) Act 2009
This is a research project
involving many government agencies and academics; details are available at
www.griffith.edu.au/centre/slrc/whistleblowing/
The first report of the project is AJ Brown (ed.) 2008,
Whistle Blowing in
the Australian Public Sector
. The report was released by the Hon. J
Faulkner, Special Minister of State, who reiterated the Government’s
commitment to strengthening
whistleblowing legislation.
The committee reported in
February 2009, and the government response was tabled in parliament on 17 March
Australian Law Reform
Commission media release,
Australia Must Rewrite Privacy Laws for the
Information Age
, 11 August 2008.
Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General, Communique, 28 March 2008, 2.6, and 4 November 2009.
For example, the
Commonwealth Administrative Appeals Tribunal is the review body for a number of
Commonwealth–state cooperative
For example, New Zealand and
Australia have a cooperative arrangement in relation to mutual recognition of
professional qualifications,
complaints about which are heard in the AAT or the
Trans‑Tasman Occupations Tribunal in New Zealand.
Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General, Communique, 28 March 2008, 10. In July 2008 Australia and New
Zealand signed the Trans-Tasman
Treaty on Court Proceedings and Regulatory
Enforcement. Legislation to implement the treaty in Australia was passed by the
Parliament on 18 March 2010.
Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General, Summary of decisions, July 2008, 1.
ALRC Privacy Inquiry, Media
release, 11 August 2008, 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (129 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter