URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMonashLRS/2010/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:42:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wilson, E --- "Making the world safe for Holland - De Indis of Hugo Grotius and international law as geo-culture" [2010] UMonashLRS 9
MAKING THE WORLD SAFE FOR HOLLAND:
GROTIUS AND INTERNATIONAL LAW AS GEO-CULTURE
This paper was originally published in Volume 32 of Review,
2010, p. 239.
If the central thesis of
The Savage Republic
, my recently published
study on the relevance of world-systems analysis for the study of international
expressed in a single sentence it would be that Hugo Grotius (1583-1645) wrote
his seminal early text
a systematic intellectual effort to make the world safe for Holland. I very much
understand Grotius’ project in
terms of the conceptual framework of
world-systems analysis; that Holland, or the United Provinces (the UP), as the
nascent hegemon
century, deliberately
strove to re-constitute international public order along lines most consistent
with this hegemony.
The phrase ‘making the world safe for Holland’, therefore, bears a
double meaning. In intrastate terms, it signifies
the re-configuration of the
modern world-system along the lines of the domestic constitutional arrangements
of early Dutch
republicanism.
interstate terms, it marks the first systematic effort to subordinate the
entirety of the early, or mercantilist, modern world-system
to an international
rule of law derived from ‘naturalism’, or natural law (
). Furthermore, my reading of Grotius’ text as the juridical
expression of Dutch hegemony in terms consistent with world-systems
necessarily relies upon the three-tier division of Braudelian TimeSpace. As the
sub-title of my book implies, the political
biography of the author and the
material composition of
constitute the history of ‘the
evenementielle
The broader historical framework of Dutch hegemony corresponds to the history of
‘the conjuncture’ (
histoire conjuncturale
). The over-arching
historical phenomenon of the modern world-system equates to the history of
‘structure’ (
histoire structurale
), the long wave of temporal
flow that is the qualitatively distinct TimeSpace domain of
. By writing all three parallel chronologies and by transversing all
three waves at tactically specific junctures, I produced what
is, hopefully, a
coherent and unified work consistent with Fernand Braudel’s own
admonition.
In fact, the three different time spans which we discern are all
independent: it is not so much time which is the creation of our
own minds, as
the way in which we break it up. These fragments are reunited at the end of all
our labours. The
longue duree
, the conjuncture, the event all fit into
each other neatly and without difficulty for they are all measured on the same
Undertaking an extended critical exegesis of an understudied Grotian text in
terms of world-systems analysis forced me to substantially
reconsider the
relevance of Braudelian historiography. Simultaneously, the re-visitation of
Braudel and the subsequent critical engagement
with TimeSpace forced me to
undertake a parallel critical re-appreciation of world-systems analysis and its
relevance to critical
international legal scholarship. This essay, following my
earlier work in
The Savage Republic
, constitutes not merely a practical
application of world-systems analysis to the early history of international law;
it is also very
much a critical and self-reflexive meditation on current
developments within world-systems analysis and an open ended engagement
possible grounds for ‘strategic alliances’ with other forms of
critical theory, including deconstruction and post-colonialism.
This will be
realized through a translation of the rhetorical stratagems of
‘primitive’ international legal discourse,
posited here as a form of
geo-culture, into the juro-political references and vocabulary of the early
modern world-system. As I will
prove, situating
TimeSpace parameters of the ‘long’ 16
century not only undermines the intelligibility of the functional and
teleological view of international law; it also demonstrates
that understanding
international law as a variant of geo-culture directly assists world-systems
analysis in surmounting two of its
chief methodological problems, determinism
and reductionism.
International Law and Geo-Culture
It does not take long for anyone working with
contemporary world-systems analysis to recognise that the field is undergoing a
fundamental
transition in theory and methodology, one that is of tremendous
relevance for critical legal studies and the history and philosophy
international law. Expressed in the simplest terms, world-systems analysis has
sought to un-encumber itself of the intellectual
legacy of its broadly
neo-Marxist origins; theoretical innovations in other fields—including
History, Philosophy, and Literary
Criticism—have forced world-systems
analysts to confront their intellectual heritage of teleology and functionalism.
world-systems analysis has had a complex and at times contradictory
relationship with historical materialism. Sympathetic critics
of Immanuel
Wallerstein, such as Anthony Giddens, have clearly recognized this, labelling
world-systems analysis as a ‘generalized
critique of endogenous models of
A key part of Wallerstein’s approach depends on the idea that
phenomena of basic importance to capitalism including its class
system—cannot be interpreted in ‘internalist’ terms but have
to be understood in the context of the world economy
as a whole. When
‘capitalism’ is seen to refer to the world capitalist economy, we
see that it does not involve a single
axis of class domination, but two. One is
that of wage-labour and capital. But this dimension has from the early origins
of capitalism
been interwoven with the spatial hierarchy in the
‘international’ division of labour, setting off core from
Accordingly, world-systems analysis is best understood as ‘an
interpretation that strongly emphasizes the regionalization of
political and
economic systems and which, thereby, lays stress upon spatial features of social
organization and
a result, the
very term ‘international’ only has
full meaning with the emergence of nation-states which, because of their
strictly demarcated
character, give a very particular shape to
‘internal’ versus ‘external’
The problem here is obvious and takes two different forms, one for the Marxist
scholar and one for the non-Marxist scholar. For the
former, Wallerstein’s
eclectic materialism effectively bars him from formulating a persuasive, or even
coherent, theory of
state formation. If the ‘State’ is both the
product and the instrument of class forces, then in order for there to be
historical genesis of a ‘modern world-system’ of States within the
century, there would necessarily have existed a
‘class’ that was both global and capitalist which, in the general
view, was simply not the
Marxist, Wallerstein’s efforts depend upon a simplistic crypto-Weberian
‘circulationism’: capitalism equals
exchange for
Wallerstein nor Andre Gunder Frank can demonstrate the existence of a capitalist
global class prior to the nineteenth century.
Instead, they are reduced to
surreptitiously recruiting amorphous worldwide trading networks to perform the
function that would be
undertaken by the (absent) capitalist world class or
For the latter, world-systems analysis is irredeemably reductionist:
‘Wallerstein’s arguments involve an uncomfortable
functionalism and economic reductionism. In these respects [despite the
neo-Weberian overtones] they are certainly closer
to commonly held presumptions
of Marxism.’
[T]he marked tendency of Wallerstein’s standpoint to downplay
the impact of specifically political and military factors upon
processes of
social change in the modern world. States appear as territorial subdivisions
within gross economic sectors of the world
economy, not as organizations able to
mobilize other forms of power other than economic power and with interests other
than economic
In recent years world-systems analysis has offered a spirited rejoinder to
both sets of critique. Against the Marxist, Wallerstein
has repeatedly offered a
robust defence of circulationism as a valid conceptual model for capitalism as
well as providing the more
accurate account of the nature of the early
world-economy.
a more theoretically abstract level, and of much greater importance to
Wallerstein’s more recent work, has been the wholesale
repudiation of the
innate teleology of the classical nineteenth-century theories of state and class
formation that is replicated
by orthodox Marxist scholarship. I am almost
compelled to label this development as ‘the return of Braudel’:
Wallerstein’s
own rediscovery of the enormous potential for social science
provided by Braudel’s post-classical theory of TimeSpace, derived
radically anti-teleological approach to geo-spatiality. Of vital importance was
Wallerstein’s signature notion of the
‘axial division’ of the
world-system. Infused with Braudelian notions of TimeSpace, world-systems
analysis was able to
formulate a thoroughly anti-reductive—in fact, almost
relativistic
—notion of the ontological correspondence between the
plurality of ‘spaces’ and the plurality of cultural systems
social structures. For Wallerstein
Rejecting [the] nineteenth-century view
was a crucial step in the development of world-systems analysis. The classic
liberal-Marxist
view was based on a [teleological] theory of stages of
development that occurred in parallel ways in units of analysis called states
(or societies or social forms). It missed what seemed to us the obvious fact
that capitalism in fact operated in a system in which
modes of compensating labor, ranging from wage labor, which was very widely used
in the richer, more central zones, to various forms
of coerced labor in the
poorer, more peripheral zones (and in many other varieties in between). If one
did one’s analysis state
by state, as was the classical method, it would
be observed that different countries had different modes of compensating labor
analysts could (and did) draw from this the conclusion that one day the
poorer zones might replicate the structure of the richer
zones. What
world-systems analysis suggested was that this differential pattern [axial
division] across the world-economy was exactly
what permitted capitalists to
pursue the endless accumulation of capital and was what in fact made the richer
zones richer. It was
therefore a defining structural element of the system, not
one that was territorial or
Not surprisingly, we have witnessed in recent years a series of widening
bilateral discussions taking place between analysts such
as Wallerstein and
Giovanni Arrighi with their ‘post-‘ or ‘open’ Marxist
counterparts, most notably Etienne
Balibar and David Harvey. Of even greater
importance, however, has been what I might call ‘the epistemological
undertaken by world-systems analysis. As Wallerstein’s own
work makes clear, the axial division of layer creates a globally
‘social space’ in which differential relationships of labor and,
therefore, localizable systems of social value
and cultural meaning, may emerge
and co-exist—separate in space but concurrent in
And this, in
turn, raises the possibility of the radical relativisation of knowledge within
the world-system. Wallerstein’s
own writings evidence this
‘epistemic turn’ through their recent prioritisation of geo-culture,
the generic de-notation
of the manifold, and at times contradictory, ideological
and legitimation apparatuses of the modern
world-system.
very broad terms, Richard Lee has remarked upon world-systems analysis’
evolving concern with what he calls the ‘third
arena’, the
epistemologically unifying domain
[O]f cognition and intentionality, giving
to the long-term cultural domain the same structural centrality that production
and distribution,
the economic, and coercion and decision-making, the political
have long enjoyed. The objective is to connect the ideal and the material
sense that there is a structure of knowledge of historical capitalism (most
basically, the divorce of facts and values) that
shapes what actions are at any
time considered to be legitimate and effective; who it is thought can act and
what it is thought they
can do. Categories get constructed, naturalized, and
essentialized. Not only do we have to re-historicize these continuities, we
to see how they have functioned, especially how [the] unwritten (cheap)
consensus [has operationally prevailed] over (expensive)
coercion in the process
of the accumulation of surplus over the past five
There is clearly a ‘double movement’ at work here:
world-systems analysis moves beyond a reductive materialism and functionalism
through investing geo-culture with an autonomous causality. Conversely, the
modern word-system itself, the primary unit of analysis,
is understood to
constitute a pluralistic society of relativistic
power-knowledge
complexes and structures; as a result, the epistemology of the analyst
‘must be both nomothetic and idiographic, or rather
Lee has elaborated at great length on this point.
The future is determined by
present agency from materials of the past, but its structure remains
unpredictable. The world-systems
perspective radically reinstates history into
the study of social change on a world scale, without however reinventing
history’. Radical because...world-systems analysis repudiates
the premises of nineteenth-century social science. Change of
conjuctures
is embedded in
longue duree
structures (cycles with trends). By positing
a unique, temporally bounded, and spatially delimited (but expanding) social
defined by the axial division of labour as the coherent unit of analysis,
it respects both idiographic particularism and nomothetic
universalism...
Process is the watchword; being is always
If ‘re-historicizing’ is the term that Lee uses to denote
world-systems analysis’ post-Marxist shift from the macro-level
with structure to the micro-level domain of the ‘event’—the
contingent, the immediate, the local—then
I would suggest that what we are
observing here is a tentative engagement with
deconstruction.
Wallerstein has made this move explicit through his new emphasis upon the
centrality of contemporary ‘knowledge movements’,
identifies, somewhat imprecisely, with ‘deconstruction, postmodernism,
postcolonialism, poststructuralism, [and] cultural
Lee has made a similar identification of ‘convergent interests’
between world-system analysis and deconstruction.
The postmodern makes sense
only in relation to the modern—that is, to those processes guaranteeing
the primacy of endless accumulation;
and to the modernist consciousness in the
form of the concepts of progress, chronological historical time, and
representational realism
(where a turning point was reached with the invention
of perspective in the fifteenth century at the beginning of the history of
world-system).
For the world-systems analyst,
‘post-structuralism’
be understood as a foundational ‘turn’ within post-Marxist critical
theory towards a heightened self-reflexivity
grounded upon a privileging of the
textual, the discursive, and the literary as the ‘primary unit of
analysis’. Post-Structuralism’s
self-conscious emphasis upon the
inherent politicisation of all forms of language compels it to focus upon the
historical preconditions
governing the production and ‘policing’ of
discourse. Inverting the teleological impulses of classical nineteenth-century
social theory, post-structuralism advances a theoretical understanding of the
political nature of all speech as an historically embedded
enterprise that both
elides and supersedes the deterministic and reductive logic of
At first glance world-systems
analysis and ‘deconstruction’
would appear to be antinomies, the former asserting the primacy of structure and
the dominance of the center over the periphery as
against the latter’s
anarchic subversion of all totalising systems of meaning. In many ways the
relationship between the two
replicates the inherent tensions between
structuralism and post-structuralism. World-systems analysis, as a form of
historical sociology,
always runs the risk of acting as an essentializing
discourse insofar as it prioritises structure, primarily at the expense of the
event; as Braudel usefully reminds us, nomothetic social science ‘is
virtually horrified by events. Nor is this without reason:
short time is the
most capricious, the most deceptive
However, it is this
self-same ‘structuralism’ that makes world-systems analysis a viable
form of historical sociology
in the first place; indeed, without making the
claim too strongly, it is the systematic translation of the basic precepts of
historiography into the terms of a practical research agenda. And it
is the very ‘neo-Braudelian’ nature of this research
agenda that
points to certain overlapping areas of concern and broad similarities of
approach between the two schools that would
at first evade the attention of the
casual observer, not the least of these a latent anti-essentialism. For
Wallerstein, the ‘meaning’
of every State is exhaustively defined by
its position vis-à-vis every other State within the entirety of the
world-system,
a mutually constitutive process of identity formation. Although
thoroughly integrated, the world-system, precisely because it is
premised upon
the absence of centralizing political structures, is radically de-centralized.
As with deconstruction, world-systems
analysis rejects the totalising logic of a
unified (and unifying) ‘self’ or ‘subject’, preferring
a radically polycentric model of intestate
Hegemony is the antithesis of
the world-system ‘lacks a
central actor in its recounting of
In marked contrast to other
theories that prioritise a particular set of actors, such as the proletariat for
Marxism or the Nation-State
for Realism, world-systems analysis postulates that
all international actors
[J]ust like the long list of structures that one can enumerate, are the
products of a process. They are not primordial atomic elements,
but part of a
systemic mix out of which they emerged and upon which they act. They act freely,
but their freedom is constrained by
their biographies and the social prisons of
which they are a
Wallerstein’s sentiments accord remarkably well with Jacques
Derrida’s post-Sausserean ruminations on
langue et parole
the singular unit of meaning is governed solely by its position within a complex
chain of other signs and
signifiers.
surprisingly, then, we witness recurrent attempts by Wallerstein to personally
engage with deconstruction, or ‘cultural
studies’, a development
that seems to have been occasioned by his realization of the potential in
appropriating relativistic
knowledge structures as contemporary forms of
anti-systemic
Contrary to the views of its critics, Wallerstein writes
The fundamental
intention of cultural studies is not a sort of nihilistic destruction of
knowledge, the total solipsistic relativism
peddled by a few
extremists...[rather, it is to demonstrate the fact that] particularistic canons
have been put forward as universal
norms is a product of the unequal hierarchies
of the modern world system, and has served to sustain those in power in this
The quest for a ‘strategic alliance’ with the new Critical
Theory, in turn, leads Wallerstein to undertake two additional
moves. First, he
shifts his concern to the epistemic problem of Universalism, the meta-narrative
level totalising of Modernity as
a global discursive formation; ‘Among the
specificities of the capitalist world-economy was the development of an original
epistemology which it then used as a key element in maintaining its capacity to
against the legion of apologists for modernity, Wallerstein argues that
‘Universalism is always historically
contingent.’
The contingent, or ‘constructed’, nature of Universalism underpins
Wallerstein’s second move: the entry into dialogue
with the amorphous
discourse known as post-colonialism, which serves as a vital link between
world-systems analysis and
deconstruction.
Post-colonial discourse acts as a transverse mode of critique of an
international order, both public and private, operating within
the historical
traces of European imperialism; expressed in terms of the world-system, this
means the forcible transformation of
the non-European regions into a global
periphery and semi-periphery to the core zone of western Europe.
Post-colonialism provides the discursive space within which I situate my own
deconstructive critique of
. ‘All systems are historic, and
all of history is
systematic’
ergo, world-systems analysis ‘is indeed a grand
narrative.’
World-systems analysis aids the critical legal
providing him or her with a viable form of ‘grand narrative’,
compatible with post-colonialist critique, within which
to embed their
deconstructive work against orthodox, mainstream, or ‘liberal’
accounts of international law. According
to Wallerstein
When we return to
grand narratives, we face two different questions, it seems to me. One is to
assess the world, I would say the world-system,
in which we are living, and the
claims of those in power to be privy to, and implementation of, universal
values. The second is to
consider whether there are such things as universal
values, and if so, when and under what conditions we might come to know
For the analyst, like the post-structuralist, to be against ‘the
concept of timeless [essential] structures does not mean that
(time-bound)
structures do not
Rather, the philosophically savvy analyst, invested with deconstructive insight
and sympathetic to the broad objectives of the post-colonialist
project, must
operate within a zone of highly self-critical philosophical reflexivity and
successfully navigate the rhetorical migrations
between ‘icy
essentialism’ and ‘chaotic
heterogeneity’.
This results in a second ‘double movement’, forcing the analyst to
carefully circumvent a counter-essentialist ‘anti-euro-centric
euro-centrism’. Hence, Wallerstein’s call, following Edward Said,
for the analyst to be ‘non-Orientalist’.
To be non-Orientalist
means to accept the continuing tension between the need to universalise our
perceptions, analyses and statements
of values and the need to defend their
particularist roots against the invasion of the particularist perceptions,
analyses, and statements
of values coming from others who claim that they are
putting forward universals. We are required to universalise our particulars
particularize our universals simultaneously and in a kind of
dialectical exchange
, which allows us to find new syntheses that are then of
course intently called into question. It is not an easy
a ‘game’, and a decidedly post-Marxist one; no
final resolution of antitheses here. The entire basis of the attractiveness
post-colonialism to the critical legal scholar lies precisely in its potential
to deconstruct the entirety of the multiple linkages
between international
law-as-discourse and international law-as-European-imperialism. For
post-colonialism, the western State is
incorrigibly imperialist; ergo, the
historical emergence of international law is synonymous with the wider process
empire-formation.
The crucial point here for the notion of international law as geo-culture is
that empire-formation is not merely an exercise of material
power but equally
one of power-knowledge, deploying its own taxonomy, vocabulary, schema,
nomenclature, and rhetoric.
International law, therefore, is a particularly ripe target of the sort of
deconstructive critique undertaken by both world-systems
analysis and
post-colonialism. International law as a variant of geo-culture is revealed
immediately through critical reconsideration
of the role played by legitimacy
and the various discourses of legitimation in securing what we conventionally
refer to as ‘international
public order’, the juro-political
phenomenon of a hegemonically driven form of interstate relations. As
‘cost efficient’
hegemony ultimately devolves upon the volitional
consent of the manifold sovereigns, the ideological compliance and
socialization’ of the members of the global community
become indispensable to the practical operations of the modern world-system.
uncommonly naked example of this, and of the pronounced functionalism of
international legal discourse, is the work of the liberal
apologist Thomas
Franck, who artfully enfolds functional jurisprudence into normative liberal
governance.
That international ‘law’ is not law in
the positivist sense may be irrefutable but is also irrelevant. Whatever label
attached to it, the normative structure of the international system is perfectly
capable of being studied with a view to generating
a teleological jurisprudence.
Indeed, international law is the
place to study some of the
fundamental teleological issues that arise not only in the international, but
also in the national legal
Franck has identified the four primary indicators of what he identifies as
‘rule legitimacy’
international community as ‘determinacy, symbolic validation, coherence
and adherence to normative
hierarchy.’
As should be clear by
now, what Franck’s sanitized view of international law obviates is
precisely what a critical legal scholar
such as Martti Koskenniemi posits as
essential: asymmetrical relationships of political power. For Franck
The special value to both national and international jurisprudential inquiry
of studying the international system...lies in its unalloyed
noncoercive
state...A teleology that makes legitimacy its hypothetical center
envisages...the possibility of an orderly community
functioning by consent and
validated obligation, rather than by coercion. This is surely the realistic
approach to an international
jurisprudential teleology: one that examines the
objective properties of the global rule system so as to study whether and how it
may advance or perfect itself in accordance with the propensities of those
properties.
For Koskenniemi, however, international law is a ‘process of
articulating political preferences into legal claims that cannot
be detached
from the conditions of political contestation in which they are
In language that is bound to
appeal to the world-systems analyst, Koskenniemi openly identifies international
law with hegemony,
affording what is in effect a re-definition of international
law as the geo-cultural expression of ‘hegemonic contestation’.
By ‘hegemonic
contestation’ I mean the process by which international actors routinely
challenge each other by invoking
legal rules and principles on which they have
projected meanings that support their preferences and counteract those of their
In law, political struggle is waged on what kind of words such as
‘aggression’, ‘self-determination’,
‘self-defense’,
‘terrorist’, or
whose polity will they include, whose they will oppose. To think of this
struggle as
is to understand that the objective of the
contestants is to make their political view of that meaning appear as the total
their preferences seem like the
The diverse and variegated linkages that can be established between
international legal discourse and the political praxis of legitimacy
Koskenniemi to perform a deconstructive critique of the universalist pretensions
of international law that uncannily resemble
Wallerstein’s critique of
universalism as the epistemological foundation of geo-culture.
In political
terms, this is visible in the fact that that there is no representative of the
whole that would not be simultaneously
a representative of some particular.
‘Universal values’, or the ‘international community’,
can only make
themselves known through the mediation by a state, an organization
or a political movement. Likewise, behind every notion of universal
international law there is always some particular view, expressed by some
particular actor in some particular situation. This is
why it is pointless to
ask about the contribution of international law to the global community without
clarifying first
view of international law is meant.
However universal the terms in which international law is invoked, it never
appears as an autonomous
and stable set of demands, over a political actors, as
a way of dressing political claims in a specialised technical idiom in the
conditions of
contestation
The world-systems dimension of international law as hegemonic geo-culture
places it at the centre of the juro-political process of
global governance, the
accumulative structural asymmetries of the liberal world order masquerading
under the universalist ‘neutrality’
and ‘objectivity’ of
the international rule of law. As my exemplar text
makes clear,
the Grotian discourse of international law directly equates to the phenomenon of
Dutch hegemony in each of the three
domains of Braudelian TimeSpace: event,
conjuncture, and structure.
Event, Conjuncture, Structure:
and TimeSpace
It is one of the central, and most revealing, conceits of international law
that its ‘father’, or seminal, figure is also
‘author’ of an entire legal tradition traditionally known as the
‘Grotian Heritage’. This generic term
signifies a set of outstanding
concerns within the governance of international public order, including peaceful
dispute resolution,
multi-lateralism, humanitarian intervention, and universal
human rights—in essence, liberalism as
geo-culture.
notion of the Grotian Heritage as either inherently liberal or pacifistic
constitutes an egregious example of ideological mystification.
Consistent with
his overall purpose of legitimising the Dutch Revolt against Spain (1555-1609)
as a lawful act of national liberation,
Grotius’ central juridical concern
was to re-formulate the late medieval tradition of ‘just war’
bellum iustum
) as a governing principle ideally suited to the legal
contours of the early modern
world-system.
analytical terms, the genesis of the Grotian Heritage is little more than the
authorial superimposition of the interstate constitutional
arrangements of the
nascent Dutch Republic, effected through a systematic conflation of early
international law (
iure gentium
) with Roman civil law (
historical emergence of Grotian discourse proves inextricable from the unique
contours of the hegemonic contestation of the ‘long’
century. Accordingly, the three domains of
TimeSpace—event, conjuncture, structure—will govern my reading of
as the bearer of the signs of the legal text as the medium of
liberal geo-culture: symbolic validation, coherence, determinacy and
The Event: Symbolic Validation
The composition of
(1603-1608) was prompted by the privateering of the Portuguese carrack
Santa Catarina
in the Strait of Malacca on 25 February 1603 by the
Dutch admiral Jacob Heemskerck, Grotius’ own
value of the prize was in excess of three million Dutch
seizure of the carrack itself may have served as the immediate cause of the
formation of the Dutch East Indies Company (the VOC),
the joint-stock
corporation serving the politically useful function of coordinating the smaller,
disparate and less efficient privateering
operations of independent provincial
Dutch traders. Apart from facilitating intrastate formation within the allegedly
incorporation of ‘the Company’ heralded a new phase in Luso-Dutch
interstate rivalry, marking a shift in Dutch naval
tactics from purely defensive
to largely aggressive military and para-military operations. That same year, VOC
captain Steven van
der Hagen was ordered by the Company to suspend purely
mercantile operations and initiate military action against both the Portuguese
and Spanish vessels, and to open diplomatic communiqué with all
indigenous authorities in vital port and coastal regions (Cambay,
Dubhol, Kandy) who might be interested in entering into an anti-Iberian military
alliance. From 1606 until 1609, with the
entry into force of the Twelve-Year
Armistice with Spain, all VOC admirals were expressly instructed by Jan Company
into military alliances and contracts with as many local princes
as possible and to offer military assistance to those who wanted
to drive the
only did the VOC create an entire network of collaborationist local rulers
(‘compradors’) the Company effectively
monopolised the exercise of
all formal Dutch state-action within the Indian Ocean world economy.
Although there is no general consensus concerning the authorial motive for
composition,
is generally interpreted as a legal brief
legitimating the seizure of the
Until recently, the text has been viewed as doubling as an extended reasoned
exercise in moral suasion against the powerful bloc
of Anabaptist and Mennonite
shareholders whose theological pacifism led them to question the legitimacy of
privateering as a means
of furthering otherwise acceptable endless capital
accumulation.
appears more likely that the composition of
was not centred upon
the parochial objective of legitimating privateering per se, but upon the wider
; providing symbolic validation of the United
Province’s shift towards maritime predation as a calculated strategy of a
contestation between two
is precisely because the author was so thoroughly embedded within a singular
event within the contours of the modern world-system
that Grotius’
performance of symbolic, or even ‘mythical’, self-validation may be
so easily perceived.
The mythical fabric of international culture permits
[all] sovereigns to assert international law without defending its national
Self-validation occurs through the manipulation of cultural language,
symbols and history. In this cultural soup, myth can acquire
a flavour of
legitimacy capable of producing psychological obligations in sovereigns.
Symbolic authority can be conferred on international
rules and institutions in
many ways. Rulers may be validated through ritual. Institutions may be validated
through architecture,
transferred authority (like famous leaders) or other
cultural attention. Alternatively, rules and institutions may become
authoritative
because of their pedigrees, their ‘historical origin’
and cultural ‘deep-rootedness’. International Law’s
are in some sense irrelevant; self-validation sanctions the international
Herein, the liberal re-presentation of unequal hierarchies of power as
‘legitimacy’ does indeed serve a functional or
instrumental
Liberal ideology makes political choice look either like
unquestionable ‘natural’ law or logical compulsion. In this sense
mystifies and obfuscates the international order it has established. Both the
anthropological and ideological theories make sense
of international law’s
authority by showing the manner in which sovereigns self-validate international
law. Liberal ideology
provides sovereigns with a self-validating escape from the
need to reason to their acceptance of international law’s authority.
Sovereigns embrace the purported naturalness and coherence of an ethical theory
that is sovereign-centric. In turn, this allows them
the neutrality
of the liberal theory of politics and the liberal theory of adjudication.
Sovereigns thus come to accept the authority
of international law and the rule
of law as a neutral, determinant, and coherent system, when, in fact, it is none
Both the composition of
and the later significance awarded
it as a landmark of international legal discourse are inextricable from the
contemporaneous dual
transformation of the modern world-system: the shift of the
European core zone from Lombardy/Mediterranean to the northwest/Atlantic,
the self-aggrandizing transition of regionally bounded sub-system to the
globally encompassing capitalist
world-economy.
However, ‘new’ intra- and interstate systems were wholly derivative
from an earlier heterogenous system of sovereign
and quasi-sovereign
personalities. The political landscape inhabited by
profoundly alien one by contemporary state-centric standards, with its
exhaustive identification of legal personality with national
agency. By 1500,
Europe consisted of a
multiversum
of competing sovereign forms: the
leagues (the
communes/city-states,
the imperial free-city
Roman Empire,
feudal principalities (for example, the Duchy of Burgundy), and the
‘international’ regulatory and joint-stock trading
companies. All of
these followed a strict logic of non-territoriality and none of which were
easily reconcilable with the modern
requirements of ‘statist’
structure. In this regard, the arguably ‘pre-modern’ nature of the
Grotian text
the faithful reproduction of contemporary international
‘main “source” of the Grotian system is to be found in the
author’s experience of international relations
and his extensive knowledge
of contemporary diplomatic
It is also of decisive importance that all four—the ‘failed’
Iberia and the wholly ‘successful’ UP,
UK, and the
been predominantly maritime powers; ‘the modern world system is,
characteristically and importantly, an oceanic
There appears to be a necessary historical correspondence between successful
naval mastery and effective interstate
prototype of Venice clearly demonstrated, thalassocracy has proven most
competitively cost-efficient and profit maximizing.
The most significant
achievement for each [Nation-State] on the road to hegemony was primacy in
productive efficiency within the World-Economy.
One of the reasons each was able
to achieve this superiority was the fact that it had not invested heavily during
[the pre-hegemonic
period] in creating a large army. However, each had created a
large merchant marine which, in addition to its obvious economic function,
supported the ability of this state to sustain a large naval force. It is indeed
probably the case that a key factor in the ability
of the state that won out in
the struggle to achieve hegemony (won out against its major rival) was the fact
that it had not invested
Philip E. Steinberg has employed the intriguing term of
‘force-fields’ to signify the taxonomic classification of oceanic
space as a material foundation of international public order: ‘the sea was
an area for collecting and projecting social power
but it was not treated as a
space of value (or
) in its own
absence of a (relatively) large army was not only cost-effective (re. Venice),
but it permitted surplus value to be more profitably
re-invested in a blue water
fleet, itself an indispensable military prerequisite to assert hegemonic control
over international transit
routes, the material sinews of the
world-economy.
is significant that
is centred upon a sustained dual discussion
bellum iustum
(‘the just war’) and
(‘the free seas’), the two foundational pillars of
international law. While all of the other early legal scholars tend
to focus on
either one or the other (predominately the former), it is only Grotius who
authors a text that expressly synthesized
the two domains. In a deeper sense,
bellum iustum
mare liberum
actively enter into a highly
symbiotic relationship: the need to protect the freedom of the high seas itself
serves a legitimate
grounds for the just war; lawful warfare is necessary to
preclude Portugal’s imposition of
mare clausum
(‘the closed
seas’). The discursive necessity of subjugating oceanic diversity to
juridical uniformity underlined the
universal transposition of European
bellum iustum
to international order now guaranteed by the
‘true’ hegemon Holland whose status is symbolically validated by its
seizure of the
, therefore, is the textual site of the discursive re-production
of the international political dynamic of a world-system hegemon
committed to
ceaseless capital accumulation and global naval supremacy, the oceans itself
constituting an indispensable geo-spatial
correlative of the world-economy. The
high seas serve as the medium for the successful projection of hegemonic sea
power, the naval
armature policing the politically enabling myriad networks of
the world-economy. Conversely, the high seas act as a conduit for long-reach
maritime commerce and traffic, the economic sinews of the world-system, which
both subsidises and encourages further hegemonic penetration
into various
regional sub-systems. This point was not lost on Grotius.
I know that the
very foundations of... Iberian power lie, not in the Low Countries nor in Spain,
but in the transoceanic regions from
which the said people derive their wealth
and the means to maintain their public largess and their wars. But I also know
have gained for themselves in those distant lands as much hatred as
power, and that the Dutch ought to make use of that hatred if
they wish to see
the war ended. The North must unite with the farthest Orient, in order that the
despotism which has spread to every
quarter of the world may be
overthrown.
With remarkable prescience, Grotius recommends the intentional bankrupting of
the Habsburg world-empire as an integral part of Dutch
hegemonic strategy.
[the] future, [the Spanish] will provide us perforce with similar
alternative which obviously would result in tremendous benefits both for our
state and for our private citizens, or else they
will be obliged to turn from
their attacks upon others in defence of themselves, keeping innumerable ships
for their own protection
in East Indian waters, strengthening their colonies
with fortifications, and (most troublesome of all!) maintaining a suspicious
vigil overall things at one and the same time. The numerous and heavy expenses
thus to be incurred will drain away not only all the
private profits of the
Portuguese, but also the whole of the East Indian revenue accruing to their
state itself, the unwavering enemy
of Dutch liberty. One can readily perceive
how extremely profitable both of these consequences will be for our own state.
For everyone
knows that money constitutes the sinews of war and that, just as it
is of the greatest importance [in war] to supply oneself with
money, so the
precaution of next greatest importance is to prevent the foe from being supplied
with it. Accordingly, if all the produce
and revenue from Philip’s East
Indian possessions can be encumbered with a burden of expense equal to that
already laid upon
certain European possessions of
surely follow that the future management of the war will prove much easier for
us. For no one can doubt that the aid received
from Spain through Italian
transactions is the chief means of prolonging that war, inasmuch as the Dutch
would long since have brought
the affair to a conclusion if their resources had
been matched solely against the revenue derived from another part of the Low
If, then, Spanish revenues fail—and with them, the credit
necessary to procure additional funds—what outcome is to be
expected other
than a military insurrection leading to a great
revolution?
served as the necessary template for the
re-presentation of international juro-political relations through the
world-system’s
medium of hegemonic transition. The internal logic of the
interstate political system discursively governing the outward expression
international legal language can be shown, as praxis, to be one of hegemonic
rivalry and exploitative domination, the instrumental
reason of military
conflict, monopolistic economics, and unlimited capital accumulation. In terms
of discourse, not only does Holland
master the oceans, its mastery is both the
precondition and the result of the Republic’s strict conformity with the
legal requirements
of just war. Simultaneously, the republican UP, as both the
law-making and law-enforcing State, is both practically and rhetorically
committed to the freedom of the seas, a totalising act of symbolic validation
that establishes the identity of the Republic as the
true hegemon in contrast to
the failed hegemony of Iberia.
Conjuncture: Coherence and Determinacy
The establishment of the material conditions
governing the emergence of the statist forms of territoriality and capitalism is
to the world-system as it is to both the Grotian Heritage and to
international law.
Only the modern world-system (the capitalist
world-economy) has evolved a political structure composed of states, each of
which claims
to extensive ‘sovereignty’ in a delimited geographical
area, and which are collectively bound together in an interstate
system. Such a
political structure is in fact the only kind of structure that can guarantee the
persistence of the partially free
market which is the key requirement of a
system based on the ceaseless accumulation of capital. Capitalism and the modern
state-system
were not two separate historical inventions (or conceptions) that
had to be fitted together or articulated with each other. They
were obverse
sides of a single coin. They were both part of a seamless whole. Neither is
imaginable without the other. They were
simultaneously developed, and neither
could continue to exist without the
The internal political logic of this interstate
is, in turn,
governed by the seminal notion of hegemony.
Hegemony is what occurs in a
world-economy, one that has not become a world-empire. The political
superstructure of a world-economy
is not a bureaucratic empire but an interstate
system composed of allegedly sovereign states. And a hegemonic state is not
a strong state, nor even simply the strongest single state within the
interstate system, but a state that is significantly stronger
The last point needs to be re-emphasised; a central tenet of world-systems
analysis is precisely that ‘the emergence of a world
market was dependent
on the pluralistic structure of the European (and, subsequently, the global)
we shift our focus of analysis from the event to the conjuncture, we are able to
detect a parallel shift in the operation of legal
geo-culture from symbolic
validation to coherence and determinacy. By coherence I mean the capacity of
international law to achieve
a degree of self-grounding legitimacy as measured
by its capacity to afford juridical expression to the wider social system within
which it is embedded. In other words, the coherence of international law is the
sign of its virtually ‘organic’ relationship
with the contours of
the international juro-political landscape, law and society co-joined through a
symbiotic process of mutual
self-determination.
Wilhelm G. Grewe has
placed the concept of hegemony at the centre of his magisterial legal history,
The Epochs of International Law
. Grewe folds international law into the
juro-political act of the legitimation of hegemonic interstate relations,
virtually reducing
it to the epiphenomenal. Hegemony is inseparable from the
broader juridical construction of ‘legal order’, the
image of a natural state of order’, exhibiting both
utopian and apologist characteristics.
The totality of diverse legal rules
deserves to be called a legal order if it deals with the totality of facts
needing to be regulated
legally in a manner which corresponds to the specific
intellectual, cultural, social and political situation in question and which
establishes directions for existing in this situation. In other words, the
principal context in which individual legal rules and
institutions are found is
not logical, but
morphological.
Crucially, hegemony is not identical with Empire, which implicitly
presupposes a monist juro-political regime. Rather, hegemony is
founded upon
expressly pluralistic principles, reflected through the alternating
geo-political strategies of ‘domination’
‘influence’ (
), the later, because of its
predominately non-military nature, the more cost efficient of the
The complex
interplay between material and ideological factors parallels, in turn, a
concomitant rivalry among contending conceptions
of international legal order.
‘This order emerges in every age as a result of the struggle of the legal
and political ideas
and positions of the rival powers of that age, in which the
leading power succeeds in making its ideas and positions prevail and
in securing
recognition of their natural
effectiveness.’
The notion of hegemony as cultural
geo-culture—
renders its practical enforcement inextricable from
the wider process of juro-political legitimation.
Hegemony is... something
more and different than domination pure and simple: it is the
power that accrues to a dominant group by virtue of its capacity to lead society
in a direction that not only serves the dominant
group’s interests, but is
also perceived by subordinate groups as serving a more general interest. It is
the inverse of the
notion of ‘power deflation’ used by Talcott
Parsons to designate situations in which governmental control cannot be
through the widespread use or threat of force. If
subordinate groups have confidence in their rulers, systems of domination can be
governed without resorting to force. But if that confidence wanes, they
cannot... When such credibility is lacking, we shall speak
of ‘dominance
The agonistic pluralism of values, in turn, reflects a correlative plurality
of legal personalities.
In sum, an international legal order can only be
assumed to exist if there is a plurality of relatively independent (although not
necessarily equal-ranking) bodies politic which are linked to each other in
political, economic and cultural relationships and which
are not subject to a
superimposed authority having comprehensive law-making jurisdiction and
executive competence. In their mutual
relations these bodies politic must
observe norms which are deemed to be binding on the basis of a legal
consciousness rooted in
religious, cultural and other common
The ‘true’ hegemonic actor, in either statist or non-statist
form, succeeds in achieving recognition as a ‘surrogate
sovereignty’,
the sole agent capable of regulating global governance through its effective
performance of the indispensable ‘anti-anarchical’
There is a necessarily Foucauldian dimension to hegemony, as it exists
only through the successful exertion of material and ideological
against some oppositional force.
By this logic, it stands that no
imperial system could ever be a ‘true’ hegemon; the abolition of all
contending identities
and value systems would itself be identical with the
abolition of power. Hegemony, as the practical expression of international legal
order, requires a relative ‘dis-unification’ of geo-territorial
space(s), logically negating the existence of
. This, in turn,
serves as the juro-political corollary of the economic logic of the capitalist
world-system, which requires a disaggregated
political system: ‘the
imperial framework established political restraints which prevented the
effective growth of capitalism,
set limits on economic growth and sowed the
seeds of stagnation and/or
disintegration.’
From Grewe’s perspective, the sub-text of the ‘Grotian
Moment’—alternatively, the ‘Spanish Epoch’
(1494–1648)
of the ‘long’ sixteenth century
1450–1640)—consists precisely in the ultimate failure of
the Iberian powers to successfully attain ‘true’
hegemonic status,
through either the successful application of military force (
and of ideological legitimation (
). As Wallerstein succinctly
summarises: ‘From the sixteenth century on, the nation-states of western
Europe sought to create
relatively homogenous national societies at the core of
establishment of the balance of power represented] the defeat of an attempt to
create political empires that would match economic
The crucial element missing from Grewe’s account, however, is an adequate
historical methodology; world-systems analysis provides
the necessary
supplement.
The contours of the capitalist world-economy establish the
operational determinacy of historical causation. The determinacy of
world-system, therefore, directly corresponds to the determinacy of legal
geo-culture: the expression of the constitutionality
of the system on a level of
analysis superior to that of the symbolically self-validating acts of the
individual actors (Holland
versus Portugal). In other words, the true legal
identity of each individual actor is determined by its localizable position
the over-arching totality of the structured system. It is necessary to
appreciate the nuanced interactions between the different
levels of analysis at
this ‘two-fold’ conjuncture: the macro-level of the interstate
modern world-system and the comparative
micro-level transformation of the
pre-1500 European world system/sub-system. Prior to the rise of the modern
world-system, Europe,
like the other regional trading blocs of the world (the
Indian Ocean; Ming China; Moghul India) formed a ‘sub-system’
local ‘world’ economy of its
structural transformation of (western) Europe from a sub-system to a
‘true’ or ‘modern’ world-system
was the replication on
the interstate plane of the triumph on the micro-level of an ascendant form of
early/pre-industrial capitalism
over an entrenched feudal order. The
‘core’ of this sub-system was Lombardy, especially the principal
city-states of
Milan, Florence and, most importantly, both Genoa and
to this structural transformation was the shift away from traditional military
and political patterns of ‘territorialism’
to a new configuration of
state-war-market relations.
Central to [the European sub-system] is the
definition of ‘capitalism’ and ‘territorialism’ as
opposite modes
of rule or logic of power. Territorialist rulers identify power
with the extent and populousness of their domains and conceive of
wealth/capital
as a means or a by-product of the ‘endless’ pursuit of territorial
expansion [T-M-T]. Capitalist rulers,
in conflict, identify power with the
extent of their command over scarce resources and consider territorial
acquisition as a means
and a by-product of an ‘endless’ accumulation
of capital [M-T-M]... The differences between the two logics can also be
expressed in terms of the metaphor of the states as ‘containers of
Territorialist rulers tend to increase their power by expanding the size of the
container. Capitalist rulers, in contrast, tend to
increase their power by
piling up wealth within a smaller container only if it is justified by the
requirements of the accumulation
Vital to the transformation of the European world system into the modern
world-system were an inter-locking set of institutional changes
within the core
states of the pre-modern system, initially centred in Venice, ‘the true
prototype of the capitalist state’,
which most successfully co-joined the
‘twinned’ activities of war- and state-making; that is, the
self-sustaining internalisation
of protection
monopolistic capitalism of the oligarchic
compelled Venice to seek a more sustainable cost-benefit alternative to
territoriality. This was achieved through a dogmatic reliance
upon strict
balance of power
considerations,
the Communes effectively thwarting the expansionist ambitions of both the Empire
and the Papacy.
The complimentary reliance upon naval superiority and mercenary troops
underwrote a viable self-sustaining ‘protection-producing
enabling the transformation of organized forms of violence into a long-term
This final point appears even more self-evident when one realizes that the
modern world-system is the practical realization of
the material policing of the
hierarchical divisions between the core and periphery.
The activities of the
more productive nodes [of the world-system] have tended to be geographically
concentrated in a few, relatively
small areas of the world-economy, which we may
collectively call the core zone. The less profitable nodes tend to have their
of economic activity more geographically dispersed, most of these units
being located in a much larger area we may call the peripheral
zone. But while
core and periphery are terms of geographical origin and geographical
consequence, they are not used here primarily
as spatial terms, but rather as
relational terms. A core-periphery relation is the relation between the more
monopolized sectors
of production on the one hand and the more competitive on
the other, and therefore the relation between world capital and world labour;
but it is also a relation between stronger capitalists and weaker capitalists.
The major consequence of integrating the two kinds
of activities is the transfer
of surplus-value from the peripheral sector to the core sector, that is, not
merely from the workers
to the owners but from the owners (or controllers) of
the of the peripheral productive activities to the owners (or controllers)
the core activities, the big
capitalists.
There are three essential components of the modern world-system. Firstly, the
hegemonial interstate system emerged symbiotically with
a global(ising)
capitalist world-economy. On one level this implies the analytical
inseparability of statist and market forms: ‘the
States are...created
institutions reflecting the needs of [trans-national] class forces operating in
On a deeper structural level, capitalism forms the indispensable economic
context for hegemonic contestation; non-capitalist economies,
because of lower
rates of efficiency, prove unable to sustain modern interstate
competition.
Hegemony in the interstate system refers to that situation in
which the ongoing rivalry between the so-called ‘great powers’
unbalanced that one power is truly
inter pares
one power can largely impose its rules and its wishes (at the very least by
effective veto power) in the economic, political,
military, diplomatic and even
cultural arenas. The material base of such power lies in the ability of
enterprises domiciled in that
power to operate more effectively in all three
major economic arenas—agro-industrial production, commerce, and finance.
edge in efficiency of which we are speaking is one so great that these
enterprises can not only outbid enterprises domiciled in other
great powers in
the world market in general, but quite specifically in very many instances
within the home markets of the rival powers
themselves.
Secondly, the political logic of both intra- and interstate actors is
structurally embedded within the operational logic of the entirety
world-system; the correct ‘unit of analysis’ is now understood to be
the totality of the capitalist
world-economy.
Within world-system terms, hegemony refers only to
Situations in which the
[competitive] edge is so significant that allied major powers are de facto
client states and opposed major
powers feel relatively frustrated and highly
defensive vis-à-vis the hegemonic power...[However, there is never] any
when a hegemonic power is omnipotent and capable of doing anything it
wants. Omnipotence does not exist within the interstate
Hegemony, therefore, is not a state of being but rather one end of a fluid
continuum which describes the rivalry relations of great
powers to each
The operational pairing of hegemony with geo-cultural legitimation and the
correlative inter-dependency between hegemony and
dictates that the historically ‘true’ hegemons—the successor
‘commercial republics’ of the UP, UK,
and the USA— be both the
most successful practitioner and advocate of liberalism and free market
economics during its prescribed
period of hegemonic
Hegemonic powers during the period of their hegemony tended
to be advocates of global ‘liberalism’. They came forward
defenders of the principle of the free flow of the factors of production (goods,
capital and labour) throughout the world-economy.
They were hostile in general
to mercantilist restrictions on trade, including the existence of overseas
colonies for the stronger
countries. They extended this liberalism to a
generalized endorsement of liberal parliamentary institutions (and a concurrent
for political change by violent means), political restraints on the
arbitrariness of bureaucratic power, and civil liberties (and
a concurrent open
door for political
When reading
, it is often easy to forget what a
revolutionarily capitalistic text it is. Nowhere is this more evident than
Grotius’ ‘twinning’
of the freedom of the seas (
) with the unconditional right of freedom of trade (
). The text’s taxonomic re-classification of the high seas
as legally free directly facilitates the unlimited expansion of free
summum bonum
of the embryonic capitalist world-economy. Both
liberum commercium
are presented as ‘sign’s
of Holland’s status as successful hegemon, a hegemony legitimated and
governed by natural
We hold that, by the authority of that primary aw of
nations whose essential principles are universal and immutable, it is
permissible
for the Dutch to carry on trade with any nation
whatsoever...Consequently, anyone who abolishes this system of exchange [the
Portugese],
abolishes also the highly prized fellowship in which humanity is
He destroys the opportunities for mutual benefactions. In short, he
does violence to nature herself
...In Seneca’s opinion, the supreme
blessing conferred by nature resides in these facts:
that by means of the
winds she brings together peoples who are scattered in different localities, and
that she distributes the sum
of her gifts throughout the various regions in such
a way as to make reciprocal commerce a necessity for the members of the human
A more ambitious geo-cultural legitimation of the capitalist world-economy
can scarcely be imagined. Even more crucial is the manner
in which the
conjuncture of the world-economy rhetorically enforces the symbolic validation
of inter-state rivalry; for Grotius,
any breach of
liberum commercium
serves as a legal basis of
bellum iustum
, consistent with the overall
normative framework provided by natural
Holland’s hegemonic function in enforcing the freedom of both the high
seas and international trade is the nexus with the
third element of the
conjuncture: the collective emergence of the Nation-States of western Europe as
the self-regulating intra-hegemonic
‘core zone’ of the world-system,
with the remnants of international society being banished to either the
‘semi-periphery’
(Russia; the Ottoman Empire) or the
‘periphery’ (the Americas; the Indian Ocean).
Given slightly
different starting points, the interests of various local groups converged in
northwest Europe, leading to the development
of strong state mechanisms, and
diverged sharply in the peripheral areas leading to very weak ones. Once we get
a difference in the
strength of these state mechanisms, we get the operation of
‘unequal exchange’ which is enforced by the strong states
weak ones, by core states on peripheral
‘Unequal exchange’, of course, receives formal juridical
expression through the ‘lines of amity’ settlements
Westphalian
totality of the Westphalian interstate system constitutes the material basis of
Grewe’s international legal order and the
juro-discursive subject of
international law. Both the world-system and the world-economy emerged in
cognisable form in the mid-16
century, the exact same
period as the ‘classical era’ of international law. The common
historical denominators that link
all of these phenomena are western colonialism
and European global hegemony, that, through legal geo-culture, perform the
task of governing the capitalist world-economy.
Nation-State, the primary signifier of both international law and the Grotian
Heritage, is, itself, an inherently expansionistic
construct, simultaneously the
cause and the effect of the political logic underlying the interstate
system—the discursive object
or ‘field’ of international legal
praxis—that created the functional and ‘rational’ necessity of
military conflict. world-systems analysis labels this interstate
‘eternal recurrence of the same’ as the ‘Long
‘periodic hegemony’.
The inter-state structures are governed by a
longer cyclical process that we may call the hegemonic cycle. Just as capital
accumulation
is maximized in the modern world-system when it operates via the
media of a partially free market...so it is the case that capital
accumulation
is maximized when the inter-state structures veer neither towards the extreme of
world-empire (a single overarching
political structure) nor towards the extreme
of the relative anarchy that derives from a situation in which there are
great powers’ all of somewhat equal overall strength
(military/political/economic/social). The ideal situation in terms of
accumulation for the system as a whole is the existence of a hegemonic power,
strong enough to define the rules of the game
and to see that they are followed
almost all of the time [i.e. structural and relational power]. When rivalry is
replaced by hegemony
as [the] systemic condition, it does not mean that the
hegemonic power can do anything; but it does mean that it can prevent others
from doing things that will significantly alter the rules. The search for
hegemony in the interstate system is analogous to the search
for monopoly in the
world production system. It is a search for advantage never quite totally
Accordingly
Hegemony involves more than core status. It may be defined as
a situation wherein the products of a given core state are produced
efficiently that they are by and large competitive even in the other core
states, and therefore the given core state will be the
primary beneficiary of a
maximally free
world-market.
The ‘liberal’ hegemon, in its historically necessary dual role as
both as ‘surrogate government’ and enforcer
of free trade, or
liberum commercium
, necessarily produces greater long-term benefits to
rival core zone states; the Grotian Heritage serves as the discursive formation
of the trajectory of Dutch hegemony, situated within the juro-political
landscape of the capitalist world-economy. Thus, for Wallerstein,
narrative of the ‘sixteenth century is the story of how Amsterdam picked
up the threads of the dissolving Hapsburg
Empire, creating a framework of smooth
operation for the world-economy that would enable England and France to begin to
strong states, eventually to have strong “national
economies”.’
The contending hegemonies of France and Britain in the
centuries, with
the concomitant universalisation of the Nation-State form, signified the
completion of the transition of the early
modern capitalist world-economy to the
modern world-system, subordinate not to the world government of territorial
empire but to
the historically determined system of decentralized and
self-regulating global governance. Hegemony determines the nature and the
‘meaning’ of both the world-system and the legal geo-culture that
governs it and invests it with juro-political coherence.
Structure: Normative Hierarchy
The central constitutional feature of the early
modern world-system—a decentralized capitalist world-economy that
imperial structures—required a legal geo-culture that was highly
ontological. The geo-cultural landscape of the ‘long’
century in fact constitutes the historical
embodiment of the central tenets of Koskenniemi’s groundbreaking
deconstruction
of international legal theory,
From Apology to
Koskenniemi, international law is understood as an eternal ‘rhetorical
oscillation’, or ‘migration’,
between two contending poles of
legal speech: statist positivism and anti-statist natural law. Modern
international law emerges from
States but, paradoxically, its meaning and
application is not reduced to these same States because of the imminent risk of
and the subsequent weakening of international public order; therefore,
a constant rhetorical movement to natural law is required
in order to maintain
an adequate degree of law-rule compliance by
perpetual migration may be understood as an alteration between
ontological/normative and non-ontological/non-normative forms
reasoning. In the ‘long’ 16
however, such a binary strategy was not viable as all forms of jurisprudence
were naturalist and, therefore, ontological/normative
to some degree. Therefore,
my own works seeks to expand upon the latent deconstructive potential of David
Kennedy’s seminal
article ‘Primitive Legal
Scholarship’.
In Kennedy’s historical taxonomy the Grotian Heritage is classified as one
particular example of primitive legal scholarship
1500–1648).
From a critical theory perspective,
, now unfamiliarly
categorised as a ‘pre-modern’ text, may be re-interpreted as a
textual expression of a newly emergent
form of early modern global governance;
an ‘event’ expressing a ‘conjuncture’ contained within a
‘structure’.
This structure is the
longue duree
of TimeSpace within which
invests the totality of the world-system with a normative hierarchy.
Although Kennedy does not employ the term, primitive legal scholarship is
a juridical example of the wider discursive formation
of Scholasticism.
This method, which was first fully developed in the early 1100s, both in law
and theology, presupposes the absolute authority of certain
books, which are to
be comprehended as containing an integrated and closed body of doctrine; but
paradoxically, it also presupposes
that there may be both gaps and
contradictions within the text: and it sets as its main task the summation of
the text, the closing
of gaps within it, and the resolution of contradictions.
The method is called ‘dialectical’ in the twelfth-century sense
that word, meaning that it seeks the reconciliation of
Primitive legal scholarship replicates all of the central features of
Scholasticism, both in its resolution of analytical and synthetic
approaches and
in its virtual identification of legal with theological discourse. Accordingly,
there is a naturalist-derived collapse
of law into morality.
Unlike traditional scholars, primitive scholars do not distinguish between
legal and moral authority, national and international law,
or the public and
private capacities of sovereigns... The primitives develop elaborate
distinctions between various types of law—civil,
natural, divine, etc.,
but they are differences of form or concreteness, not of binding power...
Similarly, natural law and international
law are not
distinguished.
International public order is invested with a ‘normative
holism’—in James Boyle’s terms, a ‘deep normative
provides international law, as the geo-cultural discourse of such an order, with
an underlying and unifying hierarchy
The primitives do not distinguish municipal law from international law, nor
the law which binds sovereigns in their relations with
their citizens. The
primitive text envisions a single law which binds sovereigns and citizens alike.
Propositions of civil law about
self-defence are easily transposed into
discussions of inter-sovereign relations. Both are governed by the same
moral-legal order.
Although the primitive may suggest that sovereigns and
citizens are bound by different rules (the sovereign may have a higher duty
inquire into the justice of war, for example, than the citizen), he generally
does not differentiate between two spheres of legal
competence and activity...
Such differences as exist seem to flow from differing capacities within a
unified moral-legal
What Kennedy and Boyle fail to mention, however, is that primitive legal
scholars relied upon
distinct, or ‘competing’ forms of
natural law theory. The Italian Humanist Alberico Gentili (1552–1608)
within the Aristotelian tradition, which classified natural law as
, a recurrent or dispositional pattern of
human behaviour (
impetus naturalis
), universally
demonstrated.
For Aristotle and the Civic Humanists of the 15
century, the universe is grounded upon an anthropocentric form of metaphysics,
which we would label as ‘thin’
‘The natural world is a uniform and harmonious creation in which the
constitution of every individual part reflects the structure
of the hole. Man,
as an integral and exalted part of that world, is built to the same
specifications as the
Other primitive scholars operating within the Scholastic tradition, such as
Francisco Vitoria (1480–1546) and Francisco Suarez
(1584–1617),
adopt the theocentric approach of Thomism, grounded upon a ‘thick’
ontological classification of
ius naturale
as a direct emanation of
lex aeterna
: ‘Since all things which are subject to divine
providence are regulated by the Eternal law... it is clear that all things
participate
to some degree in that law, in so far as they derive from it a
certain inclination to those actions and aims which are proper to
we witness here is a ‘weaker’ variant of modern law’s
alteration between the ontological and the non-ontological.
Aristotelianism clearly relies upon the transcendental—that is, the true
‘meaning’ of the profane world is
guaranteed by criteria that are
not wholly empirical—it nevertheless places far less reliance than does
Thomism upon the determinant
operation of the supra-sensory realm (i.e.
‘God’). The Scholastic shift to
lex aeterna
, by contrast,
signifies the transition of
ius naturale
from the Social to the
‘onto-theological’;
is very much a Scholastic text,
which accords well with J.L. Brierly’s declaration that Grotius was
‘above all else a
theologian’.
And Grotius leaves us in no doubt concerning the inherently theological nature
of his text: ‘The act of commanding is a function
of power, and primary
power over all things pertains to
sense that power over his own handiwork pertains to the artificer and power over
their inferiors, to their
superiors.’
Furthermore, the ontological ‘turn’ of Scholasticism facilitates a
wholly derivate and un-critical reliance upon classical
authority, resulting in
the total abnegation of authorial originality, which fits perfectly with
’ almost neurotic obsession with citation.
Primitive Legal Scholarship connects legal authority and doctrinal results in
a direct and unproblematic fashion. Specific authoritative
propositions about
peace, justice or the natural order are linked unproblematically with doctrines.
The doctrines are valid because
the authoritative propositions are valid.
Relatively little energy goes into interpretation—even less into
methodological elaboration
or argument. Typically, if primitives criticize each
other at all, they begin with a statement of their opponent’s doctrinal
position and an assertion that it is wrong. They then elaborate a connection
between some principle or some authority and their preferred
solution, leaving
the reader to dismiss the false view once the true connection has been carefully
Prima facie, this may appear to invalidate a central component of my
’ ‘embeddedness’ within primitive
legal scholarship would seem to preclude the applicability of
Koskenniemi’s
binary model precisely through the apparent absence of
positivism from primitive legal
argue, however, that even within the ‘primitive’
there are discernible traces of the quintessentially modern ‘discursive
oscillation’. The crucial point is that the rhetorical
migration was not
between the meta-level antinomies of positivism and naturalism, but within a
‘micro-’ or ‘restrictive’
oscillation between contending
sub-discourses within naturalism, namely the rhetorical competition between
‘thick’ and
‘thin’ ontology which directly equate to
lex aeterna
and Aristotelian
respectively. In a
sense, there is no ‘true’ Grotian legal ontology; there is only an
alternating ‘thickening’
and ‘thinning’ of ontology, a
rhetorical effect achieved through this discursive oscillation between the
contending poles
or antinomies. I read
as being premised upon
four cardinal antinomies, each signifying ‘micro’-shifts between
‘thick’ and ‘thin’
ontology: these are
Scholasticism/Civic
imperium/dominium
mare liberum/mare
piracy/privateering.
These discursive oscillations between the respective poles inhabit the specific
contours of the world-economy. The 17
constituted a qualitatively distinct phase within the global evolution of the
world-system,
witnessing the ‘fracturing’ of trans-national legal space and the
accompanying birth trauma of the colonialist interstate
system. The rise of an
authentically ‘inter-national’ plane corresponded to a discursive
shift from ‘thick’
towards ‘thin’ ontology,
largely—albeit not completely—supplanting
over the course of the 18
Although Wallerstein has focussed the greater part of his efforts on the late
centuries, the
time-frame when the modern world-system attained the zenith of its development
under the British and the American
hegemonic periods, it is fairly simple to
project some of his most critical theoretical insights backwards into the
centuries, the
conceptually distinct ‘pre-modern’ phase of the
world-economy.
From this perspective, primitive legal scholarship can be
interpreted as a logically necessary juro-political construct discursively
correlative with the practical requirements of an ‘early’ or
‘primitive’ system of global governance, with
the historically
requisite form of geo-culture resulting from the violent transition from
Portuguese/Iberian to Dutch hegemonic
periodicity.
critical deconstruction of
reveals that the foundational
precepts of natural law are best understood as an early variant of Universalism,
the ubiquitous ‘clusters
of rules’, including
mare liberum
liberum commercium
, as expressions of a normative holistic
the world- system that it seeks to determine,
thoroughly heterogenous concern with the
multiversum
of legal identities
and personalities; the State, although clearly present within the text as the
competing hegemons of Holland and
Portugal, merely constitute a singular example
of trans-national juro-political actor whose actions are strictly governed at
times by the
ius naturale
that ontologically descends from the
lex aeternae
. The civic, or ‘positive’, law of the
), while paramount within its own domain, is both
juridically and ontological subordinate to transcendental Universalism. This
anti-statist
‘deconstructive heteronomy’ is, in fact, perfectly
consistent with the heterogenous logic of the early modern world-system
century; the
‘State’, as a relative new-comer to the international arena, was
merely a recent addition to a host of stock
characters. The early modern
world-system and, through it, early modern capitalism, although predicated upon
a single over-arching
division of labour, nevertheless constituted an internally
coherent network of multiple polities, not by happenstance but as ‘obverse
sides of the same
Nothing else better exemplifies how natural law performed the function of
policing normative holism in the 16
centuries that liberalism and universalism have
performed from the 19
Given the particular
configurations of the world-system, natural law, in competition with its main
contemporary ideological rival
proved itself best adapted to express the juro-political imperatives of a
heterogenous modern world-system’s polyarchy of early-state,
and non-state actors. The de facto hegemonic ‘responsibility’ of
global governance devolved upon natural law
as the discursive legitimation of
trans-national order in the absence of a practicable
world-empire/
. Precisely because European/core zone hegemony was
only commencing in the 16
century, the universal
exportation of the Nation-State system had not yet been effected by the time of
the Grotian Heritage. Core
zone hegemons were, in conjunction with a plethora of
non- and pre-State actors, units, territories, and empires (e.g.
‘China’; ‘the East Indies’),
effectively belaying the applicability, or even the relevance, of a realist
Grotius’ discursive continuity with the thick ontology of the
Scholastic variant of primitive legal scholarship is underlined
through his
‘apologetic’ role of legitimating Holland’s position within
the world-economy. Like Kennedy, Grewe
classifies Grotius as the final
representative of a qualitatively distinct early phase of international
law—the Spanish Age—corresponding
to a unique rhetorical deployment
of naturalism.
The most famous name in international law in the Spanish Age
remains that of the Dutchman Hugo Grotius. It is, nevertheless, justified
call this epoch the ‘Spanish’ Age of international law because the
ideas held by the States which fought against Spain
were not only marked by the
colour of this age but also entangled in a polemical dependence on Spanish ideas
and concepts. Grotius’
famous treatise on the Freedom of the Seas [
a classic example of this
relationship.
Herein, ‘the colour of this age’ historically corresponds to the
political logic of hegemonic periodicity prevailing between
(Portugal and Spain) and the United Provinces. Furthermore, the practical medium
of global interaction was the
world-economy; that is, ‘private’ or
‘economic’ entities, such as the incorporated Regulated or
Joint-Stock
companies—most notoriously, the VOC—themselves effected
vital international political transactions and were, therefore,
accredited with
either a partial or a plenary form of legal personality. During the Grotian
Moment, Holland/UP did not globally construct
a single polity (i.e. an
‘empire’), but a multi-polity of both public/political and
private/economic sovereignties and
quasi-sovereignties. The oligarchic Dutch
‘State’ and its juro-political counterpart the VOC, governed, with
levels of effectiveness, a plurality of trade-networks, international
commercial entities, and military outposts, with all of the
most vital of
‘characterising’ statist functions, such as war-making and
treaty-signing, being actively shared between
them. The rhetorical contours of
the allegedly ‘modern’, and ‘progressive’, Grotian
Heritage corresponding
perfectly to the inherent, and irreducible, pluralism of
the early modern world-system; far from serving as the harbinger of some
governance’,
Grotius is the tireless advocate of virtually all of the most
‘illiberal’ characteristics of sixteenth-century global
governance,
most notably the (quasi-) sovereignty of trans-national trading corporations;
the radical privatisation of international
political authority and legal
personality; the quasi-statist functionality of organised crime; and the
furtherance of the colonialist
dispossession of Indigenous
Conclusion: Ontology as Governance
The translation of
conceptual framework of world-systems analysis yields valuable insights for both
the analyst and the critical legal scholar.
Not only does the Grotian text bear
all four of Franck’s ‘signs’ of international law, but it also
clearly illustrates
how these signs double as the signifiers within TimeSpace of
a localizable process of hegemonic contestation. The tactical requirements
this hegemonic contestation, in turn, explain the author’s turn towards
the ontology of naturalism as the only viable discursive
basis of the
‘rule legitimacy’ that the hegemonic modern world-system required.
Additionally, this helps us resolve one
of the outstanding issues in Grotian
scholarship. The author’s underlying continuity with primitive legal
scholarship is deductively
inferred from the text’s two signature
characteristics: the attribution of a normative, or holistic, order to
interstate relations,
and the constitutional re-formulation of this order in
strict accordance with the operation of the early modern world-system, a global
social system based upon ‘extensive commodity chains of production that
cross multiple political
boundaries’.
systematically expresses the meta-normative
‘language’ of primitive international law as both textual and
material praxis,
thereby legitimising the structural power of Dutch hegemony.
Simply put, the text ‘translates’ the operational requirements
the world-system (practice) into the discursive terms of a highly ontological
form of naturalist jurisprudence (theory).
Kennedy has claimed that he
‘cannot think of another legal discipline’ besides international law
‘in which the
basic organising ideas of the liberal state are so visible
in the doctrinal
structure.’
World-systems analysis demonstrates why this must necessarily be the case; both
naturalism and its secular twentieth-century successor,
liberalism, form a
central pillar of geo-culture, the ideological legitimation apparatus of the
interstate system that simultaneously
doubles as the operational domain of
international law. It is precisely this ‘lingering presence’ of an
ontologically
grounded rule legitimacy that continues to ‘haunt’
mainstream international legal theory and practice. Thus, when a progressive
scholar legal scholar such as Philip Allott proclaims that international law
possesses a ‘three-fold social
he is not only invoking the deep normative holism of natural law, he is also
unconsciously evoking Wallerstein’s notion of
geo-culture. For the
analyst, ‘liberalism’ signifies national self-determination,
developmentalism, the universality
of moral and cultural values, the objective
nature of science and technology (i.e., an intelligible world-order),
progressivism,
and democratic
governance.
Through a series of precise mimetic substitutions—science for
, universalism for
ius naturale
—liberalism, as
contemporary geo-culture, is able to re-present itself as both the historical
successor to and philosophical
surrogate of naturalism. Thus, in Allott’s
In international law, there is really only one problem, what to do
religious sense which would be to explain its existence in terms of the divine
origin of nature [
lex aeternae
], but in a secular system. The question
raised by natural law is whether it can be said that a legal system, such as
international
law, should conform to some general underlying pattern or
principle, or whether it must be said that the rules of international law
justify themselves in their own terms and in terms of their end-purposes being
useful to, and accepted by,
The vital link here is, of course, provided by the concept of governance, the
‘command mechanism of a social system and its
actions that endeavor to
provide security, prosperity, coherence, order and continuity to the
Operationally, governance proves inextricable from
legitimacy,
voluntary obedience of the actors in a system to consensus-generated,
inter-subjective
Although not necessarily supported by ‘any legal or constitutional
authority’, legitimacy exists wherever some sort of
governance system
predictably and effectively guarantees the completion of those tasks ‘that
have to be performed to sustain
the routinized arrangements of prevailing order
and that may or my not be performed by
government.’
Finally, governance is the mode of political control ideally suited to the
practical requirements of the radically heterogenous world-system.
capitalist world-economy requires global governance precisely because the
preconditions for global government, or ‘empire’,
absent—an absence that is the outcome of strict historical necessity. For
both the analyst and the international lawyer
What we need is a conceptualisation that enables us to penetrate and
understand government-like events that occur in the world of
states even in the
absence of government...Global governance is governing without sovereign
authority, relationships that transcend
virtual frontiers. Global governance is
doing internationally what governments do at
The naturalist ontology of the Grotian Heritage bequeaths us a system of
global governance that, through deconstructive critique,
stands revealed as
being as ontological and as anti-positivist as the primitive legal scholarship
from which it descended. As James
N. Rosenau has observed
ontology—and the paradigms that flow from it—should recast the
relevance of territoriality, treat the temporal
dimensions of governance as no
less important than the spatial dimensions, posit as normal shifts of authority
to sub-national, trans-national,
and nongovernmental levels, and highlight the
porosity of boundaries at all levels of
governance.
In short, Rosenau’s ontology of global governance is identical to the
metaphysical foundation of contemporary geo-culture. The
modern world-system, no
less than the geo-culture that legitimises it, is a prisoner of its own
universalist ontology. This is the
domain not only of world-systems analysis but
of deconstruction as well.
Senior Lecturer,
Public International Law, Monash University, Melbourne. The author would like to
thank Ms. Shing Khoo for her valuable
assistance in preparing this text for
publication.
The Savage Republic: De Indis of Hugo Grotius, Republicanism, and
Dutch Hegemony in the Early Modern world-system (C.1600-1619)
Martinus Nijhoff,
‘Concerning the Indies’, but more commonly known as
, ‘Commentary on the Law of Prize and Booty.’ For a full
length discussion concerning the problematic title of the text,
see Eric Wilson,
‘On Heterogeneity and the Naming of
The Journal of the Philosophy of International Law
(2006), 121-41,
This is, of course, the privilege of the hegemon. ‘The most that can be
said about a hegemonic power is that it will seek to
construct an international
order in some form, presumably along lines that are compatible with its own
international objectives and
domestic structures.’ John G. Ruggie,
“Multilateralism Matters”, in id (ed.)
Multilateralism
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1993), 1-25 at
See Wilson,
The Savage Republic
, chapters four through six, 189-391,
Biographical excursus in fact proved indispensable to the finished work, despite
my original intent to the contrary. ‘Traditional
History is concerned with
the short time span of biography, of the event. It is not the sort of time which
is of any interest to
economic or social historians.’ Fernand Braudel,
‘Toward a Historical Economics’, in id,
The University of Chicago Press, 1980), 83-90 at
Braudel, ‘History and the Social Sciences’, in id,
The Nation-State and Violence. Volume Two of a Contemporary Critique
of Historical Materialism
(Cambridge: Polity Press, 1985),
170. Emphasis in the
my own treatment of world-system analysis’ treatment of the
‘problem’ of State and class formation, see Wilson,
makes this same point, although in less hostile terms. For him,
Wallerstein’s circulationism puts him closer to Weber
than to Marx in
offering an ‘essentializing’ definition of capitalism, which is
understood as ‘the sale of product
in a market for profit’ rather
than as the master-sign of a particular configuration of the totality of
social/class forces.
classic neo-Marxist expression of this view, see Theda Skocpol,
‘Wallerstein’s World-Capitalist System: a Theoretical
and Historical
American Journal of Sociology
, 82/5, (1977),
Giddens, 167. See R.W Connell on this point: ‘Wallerstein repeatedly
speaks of struggle and practice, but it is hard to
them in his more
general formulations.’ Cited in Giddens, fn. 22 at
Immanuel Wallerstein,
World-Systems Analysis: an Introduction
Duke University Press,
Immanuel Wallerstein,
The Uncertainties of Knowledge
(Philadelphia:
Temple University Press, 2004),
important to note that world-system’s continuing focus upon labor, a
central component of its broadly neo-Marxist heritage,
allows it to continue to
operate as a coherent ‘meta-narrative’ while simultaneously escaping
the double trap of teleology
and determinism through its Braudelian emphasis
upon geo-spatial localisation/pluralism. Therefore, Wallerstein is able to
the otherwise difficult problem of ‘the grand
narrative’ with no serious risk of philosophical incoherence; for a fuller
discussion, see below. Once again, the ‘return of Braudel’ proves
Immanuel Wallerstein,
Unthinking Social Science; the Limits of the
Nineteenth-Century
Paradigm, 2
edn (Philadelphia:
Temple University Press, 2001), 7-22; Immanuel Wallerstein,
(New York: New Press, 1995), 1, 49 and
Richard Lee, personal communication with the author. The ‘past five
centuries’, of course, is the Braudelian
longue duree
‘long wave’, of the macro-unit level of analysis, the Modern
world-system
term is derived from the work of Michel Foucault. See Michel Foucault,
Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972-1977
by Colin Gordon (Brighton: The Harvester Press,
Wallerstein,
Uncertainties
Lee, ‘Structures of Knowledge’, in Terence K. Hopkins and Immanuel
Wallerstein (eds.),
The Age of Transition: Trajectory of the World-System,
2005 (London: Zed Books, 1996), 178-206 at
The Savage Republic
, chapter two, 57-135,
Wallerstein,
Uncertainties
A highly unsatisfactory and frequently misleading term that I employ as a
generic de-notation of what might be clumsily referred
to as ‘post-Marxist
French critical
An observation that has been made supremely well by Wallerstein’s own
part-time open Marxist collaborator Etienne Balibar on
Marxism’s failure
to self-reflexively understand itself as an ideological construction. For
Balibar, ideology ‘points
to the element in which philosophy itself is
formed, not just as something “unthought” within it, but as a
relation to
social interests and intellectual difference itself, a relation
forever irreducible to a simple opposition between reason and
unreason...However,
the most flagrant of Marxism’s shortcomings has been
precisely the blind spot which is its own ideological functioning, its
idealization of the “meaning of history”, and its own transformation
into a secular mass, party and State religion
have represented for it.’
Etienne Balibar,
The Philosophy of Marx
, Trans. Chris Turner (Verso:
London, 1995),
this paper I eschew all attempts to define this term with precision. Wallerstein
appears to be deploying the collected writings
of Jacques Derrida as a generic
term for post-Marxist, or ‘New, Critical Theory’ in general. See fn.
Cited in Immanuel Wallerstein,
European Universalism: the Rhetoric of Power
(The Free Press: New York, 2006) at
Terence K. Hopkins and Immanuel Wallerstein, ‘Capitalism and the
Incorporation of New Zones into the World-Economy’,
Supp. (1978),
Europe and the Peoples Without History
(Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1997),
Wallerstein,
World-Systems Analysis
The Savage Republic
Wallerstein,
European Universalism
Wallerstein,
Uncertainties
Wallerstein,
European Universalism
Wallerstein,
Uncertainties
The Savage Republic
Wallerstein,
European Universalism
Wallerstein,
World-Systems Analysis
‘post-structuralism’, ‘critical legal scholarship’
eludes precise definition. I a using the term
here in a rather simple sense,
indicating the professional legal scholar who is employing the categories of
Critical Theory in elucidating
the nature, object, and purpose of international
Wallerstein,
European Universalism
Wallerstein,
World-Systems Analysis
surprisingly, the overriding political goal of
post-colonialism—emancipation—necessarily imposes strict limits to
the degree of its direct engagement with
deconstruction.
Wallerstein,
European Universalism
, 48-9. Emphasis added. For
Wallerstein’s critical engagement with Edward Said’s
Orientalism
, see ibid,
standard contemporary account of this argument, see Anthony Anghie,
Imperialism, Sovereignty and the Making of International Law
(Cambridge:
Cambridge University Pres,
Franck, ‘Legitimacy in the International System’, in Martti
Koskenniemi (ed.),
International Law
(New York: New York University
Press, 1992), 157-211 at
‘The legitimacy of a rule, or of a rule-making or rule-applying
institution, is a function of the perception of those in the
community concerned
that the rule, or the institution, has come into being endowed with legitimacy:
that is, in accordance with the
right process.’ Ibid.
Martti Koskenniemi, ‘International
Law and Hegemony: A Reconfiguration’, Cambridge Review of International
Affairs, 17(2),
2004, 197-218 at 198-99.
The Savage Republic
, chapter one, 17-56,
chapter six, 349-91,
Gary Ulmen, ‘Towards a New World Order: Introduction to Carl
Schmitt’s The Land Appropriation of a New World’,
(1996), 3-27 at
Described in Hugo Grotius,
[De Indis] De Iure Pradae Commentarius. Comentary
on the Law of Prize and Booty
, trans. Gwladys L. Williams and Walter H.
Zeydel (Wildy & Sons: London, 1964), 306–17. See also C. G. Roelofsen,
and State Practice of His Day’,
(1989), 3–46,
, and Martine van Ittersum, ‘Hugo Grotius
in Context: Van Heemkerck’s Capture of the Santa Catarina and its
Justification
in De Jure Praedae (1604-1606)’,
Asian Journal of the
Social Sciences
, 31/3 (2003), 511-48 at 514–20 and
was condemned as ‘a good and just’ prize by the
Dutch Admiralty Court on 9 September, 1604. J.H.W. Verzijl,
The Law of the
Maritime Prize
(Part IX–C of
International Law in Historical
Perspective
(Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1992), 10. See Van Ittersum,
‘Hugo Grotius in Context’,
See Wilson,
The Savage Republic
, chapter five, 261-347,
Neils Steensgaard,
Carracks, Caravans and Companies: The Structural Crisis in
the European-Asian Trade in the Early 17
(Denmark: Studentlitteratur, 1973),
Van Ittersum has usefully discussed the multi-faceted juro-political nature of
the text, which unevenly combines elements of both
legal memorandum and
political pamphlet.
De Jure Praedae
cannot be called a legal brief in the
technical sense of the word-it is half theory, half apology—the manuscript
does exemplify
the classical principles of forensic rhetoric formulated by
Cicero and Quintilian. Its representation of events always serves to
Dutch trade and privateering in the East Indies.
Van Ittersum, ‘Hugo
Grotius in Context’, 513–4. It has been conclusively shown that
was never actually submitted in the pleadings concerning the
Santa Catarina
. C. G. Roelofsen, ‘Some Remarks on the
“Sources” of the Grotian System of International Law’,
Netherlands International Law Review
, 30 (1983), 73–80,
This interpretation has been powerfully critiqued by Martine van Ittersum,
Profit and Principle: Hugo Grotius, Natural Rights Theories and the Rise of
Dutch Power in the East Indies (1595–1615)
(Leiden: Brill, 2006),
From the perspective of the VOC, the Admiralty verdict of lawful prize
had settled all the legal aspects of the case. They realized, however, that
it would take more than a verdict to win widespread political
support for their
cause, both domestically and internationally. They needed Grotius to advertise
Portuguese iniquity to an audience
that was not privy to Amsterdam courtrooms or
the assembly hall of the Estates of Holland—potential allies like the
France and England, for example, and the Estates of Utrecht,
Overijisel, Gelderland, Friesland and Groningen.
Van Ittersum, ‘Hugo
Grotius in Context’,
Purvis, ‘Critical Legal Studies in Public International Law’,
Harvard Journal of International
Law, 32/1 (1991), 81-127 at
merely cynically ‘assert’?
See Shirley V. Scott, ‘International Law as Ideology: Theorizing the
Relationship between International Law and
International Politics’,
European Journal of International
Law, 5/3 (1994), 313–25,
On the spatial demarcations of world economies and world systems, see Fernand
The Perspective of the World
(vol. iii of
Civilization and
Capitalism 15
) (New York: Harper & Row,
Publishers, 1984), 21–45.
We may deduce that a world-economy is a sum of individualized areas, economic
and non-economic, which it brings together; that it
generally represents a very
large surface area (in theory the largest coherent zone at a given period, in a
given part of the globe);
and that it usually goes beyond the boundaries of
other great historical divisions.
The Sovereign State and its Competitors: An Analysis of Systems
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994),
Ibid. 118–20 and
Roelofsen, ‘Grotius and State Practice of His Day’, 16 and
Roelofsen, ‘Some Remarks on the “Sources” of the Grotian
System of International Law’, 79.
In essence,
it is an indispensable prerequisite for hegemony that the hegemonic State be the
single most successful in both manipulating
and regulating the global capitalist
economy. In other words, in addition to being the most militarily powerful, the
hegemon must
necessarily be, in both absolute and relative terms, the most
successful free-market nation. The historical ‘paradox’
was that both Portugal and Spain militarily succeeded in establishing the
material parameters of the world-system but failed
to achieve the requisite
degree of systemic capitalist transformation, both nationally and
George Modelski and William R.Thompson,
Seapower in Global Politics,
(London: Macmillan Press, 1988), 4.
Parker, ‘Europe and the Wider World, 1500–1750: the Military
Balance’, in James D. Tracy (ed.),
The Political Economy of Merchant
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), 161–95,
Immanuel Wallerstein, ‘The Inter-State Structure of the Modern
world-system’, in Steve Smith, Ken Booth and Marysia Zalewski
International Theory: Positivism and Beyond
(Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1996), 87-109 at 99. ‘The great technological
“revolution” between the
fifteenth and eighteenth centuries were
artillery, printing and ocean navigation... Only the third—ocean
navigation—eventually
led to an imbalance, or “asymmetry”
between different parts of the globe.’
Fernand Braudel,
Structures of Everyday Life: the Limits of the Possible
Civilization and Capitalism 15-18
(New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1981), 385.
Intriguingly, Otto
Hintze has argued that national reliance upon maritime forces, or
‘Navalism’, facilitates State development
through pre-empting the
emergence of Absolutism.
A military system whose centre of gravity is in sea power will influence the
organization of the State in its own peculiar way, different
from the way of the
Continental military system [that incorporated the ‘failed’ hegemons
of Iberia and, arguably, France].
Land forces are a kind of organization that
permeates the whole body of the State and gives it a military cast. Sea power is
a ‘mailed fist’ reaching out into the world; it is not suitable
for use against some ‘enemy within’... Land
forces have stood since
the beginning in more or less intimate alliance with the propertied classes;
they still carry something of
a feudal tradition in them. Sea power lacks all
feudal vestiges. To an eminent degree it serves the interests of trade and
Its place is with the modern forces in life, simply by virtue of the
vital importance that technology and capital have in its development.
is allied with progressive forces, whereas land forces are tied to conservative
tendencies.
Otto Hintze, ‘Military Organization and the Organization of
the State’, in id.,
The Historical Essays of Otto Hintze
, ed. Felix
Gilbert (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975), 180-215 at
The Social Construction of the Ocean
(Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2001),
Wallerstein, ‘The Inter-State Structure of the Modern-World System’,
In each case [of hegemonic transition], the sea(/air)-power defeated the
land-based power. In each case, the power committed to maintaining
structure of a capitalist world-economy won out against the power that was
pushing in the direction of transforming the
system into a world-empire [i.e.,
territorialism]. In each case the thirty years’ war itself was the
decisive factor in achieving
the necessary marked superiority in productive
efficiency within the World-Economy as a whole and in particular relative to the
rival [Portugal/Venice; Holland/Portugal-Spain; England/France;
USA/Germany-Japan]. In each case, the war itself increased enormously
military strength of the putative hegemonic power. And in each case, the drive
to achieve hegemonic status had been a very long
process, stretching over many
decades at least. The end of each thirty years’ war marked a significant
stage in the contraction
of the inter-state system: the Treaty of Westphalia,
the Concert of Europe [Utrecht; Vienna], and the United Nations. Each time,
hegemonic power sought to create an order in the system that would guarantee its
economic advantage over the long
The Savage Republic
, chapter four, 189-261,
, 345. For the ramifications of this ‘Infidel
alliance’, see Wilson,
The Savage Republic
, chapter eight, 467-512,
Given the context of the Dutch Revolt, presumably this refers to Flanders, the
Netherlands, and
349–50. See also, ibid.
Purvis, ‘Critical Legal Studies in Public International Law’,
Arrighi, ‘The Three Hegemonies of Historical Capitalism’,
, 13/3 (1990), 365–408 at
War & Change in World Politics
(Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1981),
The Epochs of International Law
(New York: Walter de Gruyter,
[My] starting point was the history of modern international law, and [my]
endeavour not so much the systematic presentation of that
history as its
morphological division, its periodisation, and the development of a system of
typological concepts. This task has
been seriously neglected in the study of
international law up to the present day [1943] in contrast to the situation in
which those
who study politics and constitutions find themselves...By contrast,
the establishment of typological concepts in international law
is still so
underdeveloped that, when one speaks of ‘classical international
law’, one can by no means be certain of
being properly understood.
See Eric Wilson, ‘ “Much Wailing and Gnashing of Teeth”: On
the Loneliest Superpower and the Flailing of Impotent
University Law Review
, 29/2 (2003), 410–16,
Grewe, 275. ‘Historically, every approach in the past to a world society
has been the product of the ascendancy of a single
power.’ Edward H. Carr,
The Twenty Year’s Crisis 1919–1939: An Introduction to the Study
of International Relations
(London: Macmillan, 1954),
Arrighi and Beverly J. Silver, ‘Introduction’, in id. (eds),
Chaos and Governance in the Modern World System
(Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 1999), 1–36 at
The Epochs of International Law
The political and international legal programmes of the modern European
States were all, however, expressions of ideologies of national
expansion. The
stronger the leading position of the particular predominant power, the more that
State marked the spiritual vision
of the age, the more its ideas and concepts
prevailed, the more it conferred general and absolute validity on expressions of
nationalist expansionist ideology.’
Kenneth M. Waltz,
A Theory of International Politics
Addison-Wesley, 1979),
exists only when fixed in definite relations of domination.’ Michel
Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison
, trans. Alan
Sheridan (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1979),
Immanuel Wallerstein,
The Capitalist World-Economy
(Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1979),
The Epochs of International Law
Immanuel Wallerstein,
The Modern World-System I: Capitalist Agriculture and
the Origins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century
York: Academic Press, 1974),
‘sub-world’ system does not have to be truly global, merely
‘larger than any juridically-defined unit.’
Wallerstein,
Modern world-system I
, 15. The European world system, however, was unique
among all of the various sub-systems of the world in being subject to an
unlimited expansionism. See Robert Bartlett,
The Making of Europe:
Conquest, Colonization and Cultural Change 950–1350
(Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1993), 5–23 and
William H. McNeill,
The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed Force, and
Society Since A.D. 1000
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982),
; Edwin S. Hunt and James M. Murray,
A History of
Business in Medieval Europe, 1200–1550
(Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1999),
See Giddens,
Giovanni Arrighi, ‘The Three Hegemonies of Historical Capitalism’,
, 13/3 (1990), 365–408 at
The Savage Republic
, chapter seven,
‘If there has ever been a state whose executive met the Communist
Manifesto’s standard of the capitalist state (‘but
a committee for
mapping the common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie’) it was fifteenth
century Venice.’ Ibid. 373. For
Braudel, ‘to say central zone or
capitalism is to talk about the same reality.’ Braudel,
The Perspective
of the World
Grewe, 19–22; Herbert Butterfield, ‘The Balance of Power’, in
Herbert Butterfield and Martin Wight (eds),
Diplomatic Investigations: Essays
in the Theory of International Politics
(London: George Allen & Unwin,
1966), 132-48 at 133–8; J.S. Watson,
The Evolution of International
Society: A Comparative Historical Analysis
(New York: Routledge, 1992),
‘The balance of power among the emerging dynastic states of Western Europe
was instrumental in preventing the logic of territorialism
from nipping in the
bud the rise of capitalist logic within the European system of rule.’
Arrighi, ‘The Three Hegemonies
of Historical Capitalism’,
Ibid. 374: Enough “ money circulated in the richer Italian towns to make
it possible for citizens to tax themselves and use
the proceeds to buy the
services of armed strangers [mercenaries]. Then, simply by spending their pay,
the hired soldiers put these
monies back into circulation. Thereby, they
intensified the market exchanges that allowed such towns to commercialise armed
in the first place. The emergent system thus tended to become
self-sustaining”.
Wallerstein, ‘The Inter-State Structure of the Modern-World System’,
Immanuel Wallerstein,
The Politics of the World-Economy: the State, the
Movement, the Civilizations
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984),
38–9. ‘The earlier winners in the struggle for world leadership owed
a significant proportion of their success
to their ability to obtain credit
inexpensively, to sustain relatively large debts, and generally to leverage the
initially limited
basis of their wealth to meet their staggering military
expenses.’ Karen A. Rassler and William R. Thompson,
State-Making: the Shaping of the Global Powers
(Boston: Unwin Hyman, 1989),
Wallerstein,
Modern World-System
Otherwise, the hegemon would constitute an
Wallerstein,
The Politics of the World-Economy
‘Hegemony...refers to that short interval in which there is a
simultaneous
advantage in all three economic domains’ of the
agro-industrial, commercial, and financial/banking.’ Ibid.
, 218. Emphases added. For a full length discussion, see
The Savage Republic
, chapter four, 189-260,
Immanuel Wallerstein,
The Capitalist World-Economy
(Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1979),
The Savage Republic
Wallerstein, ‘The Inter-State Structure of the Modern-World System’,
Wallerstein,
The Modern world-system II: Mercantilism and the Consolidation
of the European World-Economy, 1600-1750
(New York: Academic Pres, 1980),
Wallerstein,
The Modern world-system I
Koskenniemi,
From Apology to Utopia: The Structures of International Legal
(Helsinki: Lakimieslitton Kustannus,
show that an international law exists, with some degree of reality, the modern
lawyer needs to show that the law is simultaneously
normative and
concrete—that it binds a State regardless of that State’s behavior,
will or interest but that its consent
can nevertheless be verified by reference
to actual State behavior, will or interest.
Kennedy, ‘Primitive Legal Scholarship’,
Harvard International Law
, 27/1 (1986),
Koskenniemi,
From Apology to
Harold J. Berman,
Law and Revolution: The Formation of the Western Legal
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1983), 131. See ibid.
Kennedy, ‘Primitive Legal Scholarship’,
James Boyle, ‘Ideals and Things: International Legal Scholarship and the
Prison-House of Language’, in Martti Koskenniemi
International
(New York: New York University, 1992), 121-53. Here, of course,
‘deep’ signifies
‘ontology’.
Kenedy, ‘Primitive Legal Scolarship’,
Pagden, ‘The Preservation of Order: The School of Salamanca and the
’, in F. W. Hodcroft et al. (eds.),
Mediaeval and
Renaissance Studies on Spain and Portugal in Honor of P.E. Russell
Society for the Study of Medieval Language and Literature, 1981), 155-66 at
The Savage Republic
, chapters three and four, 137-260,
Pagden, ‘The Preservation of Order’, 157; Jeanine Quillet,
‘Community, Counsel and Representation’, in J.
H. Burns (ed.),
The Cambridge History of Medieval Political Thought c.350–c.1450
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), 520–72 at
The Law of Nations: An Introduction to the International Law of
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995), 19. For an earlier expression of
these views, see Eric Wilson, ‘
Mare Liberum
: A Grotian Reading of the North Sea Continental Shelf Cases’,
Monash University Law Review
, 28/2 (2002), 299-326,
Or, Providence, the master-signifier of universal
Grotius, 8.
Kennedy, ‘Primitive Legal Scholarship’,
. On this very point, See David Kennedy,
International
Legal Structures
(Baden-Baden: Nomos Verlags-geschellschaft, 1987), 203, for
his discussion of Grotius and Selden.
In their self-assured tone and in their moral and political certainties,
these debates seem archaic and antiquated, even quaint. They
seem to belong to a
different form of society, a barter society of rural yeomen, a society in which
free individuals encountered
each other in simple, human interactions: in short,
the world ideologically portrayed in the great contractarian social theories
the Renaissance and Enlightenment. Our moral and intellectual interest is
stirred by these debates, though their archaism makes
our practical relationship
to their ideas, at best one of
The Savage Republic
, chapters five and
Ibid. chapter
A. Hanson, ‘The European “Renovation” and the Luso-Atlantic
Economy, 1560–1715’,
, IV/4 (1983), 475–530 at
This was finalized in Vattel’s ‘proto-positivist’ doctrine of
ius voluntarium
. Arthur Nussbaum,
A Concise History of the Law of
(New York: The Macmillan Company, 1962), 156–64; Grewe,
See Wilson,
The Savage Republic
, chapter four, 189-260,
Although space does not permit an extended discussion, it is interesting to note
that the two pioneering nation-states of the ‘Scientific
Revolution’, a pivotal event in geo-culture of the Modern world-system,
were the first two successful hegemons, the United
Provinces and the United
Kingdom. One must wonder whether the epistemological prejudices of both
primitive legal scholarship and
early modern Science constituted a unified
geo-cultural phenomenon.
Wallerstein, ‘The Inter-State Structure of the Modern-World System’,
The Savage Republic
, chapters three and four, 137-260,
A surreptitiously selective edited version of C. XI of
published separately in 1609. For discussion, see Wilson,
See, for example, Richard Falk, ‘The Grotian Quest’, in Falk et al
The Future of the International Legal Order. Volume One: Trends and
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969), 36-42,
See Wilson,
The Savage Republic
, chapter eight, 467-512,
Wallerstein, ‘The Inter-State Structure of the Modern world-system’,
Kennedy, ‘International Legal Education’,
Harvard International
Law Journal
, 26/2 (1985), 361-84 at
‘(1) Law carries the structures and systems of society through time, (2)
Law inserts the common interest of society into the
behavior of society-members,
and (3) Law establishes possible futures for society, in accordance with
society’s themes, values
and purposes.’ Philip Allott, ‘The
Concept of International Law’, in Michael Byers (ed.),
The Role of Law
in International Politics: Essays in International Relations and International
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 69-89 at
Wallerstein,
After Liberalism
Allott, ‘Language, Method and the Nature of International Law’,
British Yearbook of International Law
, 45 (1971), 79-135 at
N. Rosenau,
Along the Domestic-Foreign Frontier: Explaining Governance in a
Turbulent World
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), at
Anne-Marie Slaughter, ‘Governing the Global Economy Through Government
Networks’, in Michael Byers (ed.),
The Role of Law in International
Politics International Relations and International Law
(Oxford: Oxford
University Press), 177-206 at
James N. Rosenau, ‘Governance, Order and Change in World Politics’,
in James N. Rosenau and Ernst-Otto Czempiel (eds.),
Governance Without
Government: Order and Change in World Politics
(Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1992), 1-29 at
S. Finkelstein, ‘What is Global Governance?’,
, 1 (1995), 367-72 at 368 and
N. Rosenau, ‘Toward an Ontology for Global Governance’, in Martin
Hewson and Timothy J. Sinclair (eds.),
Approaches to Global Governance
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 1999), 287-301 at
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (307 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter