URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrivLawPRpr/2006/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:30:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Burton, Kelley --- "Erosion at the Beach: Privacy Rights not just Sand" [2006] PrivLawPRpr 3; (2006) 11(8) Privacy Law and Policy Reporter 216
Erosion At The Beach: Privacy Rights Not Just Sand
Erosion at the Beach: Privacy Rights not just
Kelley Burton
In August 2005, the Australian Standing Committee of Attorneys-General (SCAG)
released a Discussion Paper entitled
Unauthorised Photographs on the Internet
and Ancillary Privacy Issues
and called for public submissions.
One of the instances causing concern was the covert photography of hundreds of
children at South Bank Parklands (an artificial beach
setting) in Queensland and
the subsequent publication of the photographs on a website.
though the photographs did not contain images of the children’s private
parts or doing private acts (for example, showering,
toileting or changing
clothes), it caused community outrage because the photographs were taken without
consent of the parents of
the children and were placed on a website where a
larger audience could view the photographs. Not only would a larger audience be
able to view the photographs, but arguably a different type of audience to what
the parents would have intended, for example, paedophiles
and paraphiliacs.
There were no links on this website to pornographic sites, but the producer shut
the website down as a result of
the media attention.
The erosion of
referred to in the Discussion Paper
was topless women being photographed on a
Sydney beach. This photographer was caught under a provision relating to
offensive conduct.
There are no laws in Australia that prevent a
person from taking a photograph of another person at the beach without the other
consent or from disseminating the photograph on the internet.
This issue is very relevant to adult victims as well as minors. Canadian
have suggested that women and children are usually the victims.
recent media statement by Linda Lavarch, Queensland Attorney-General and
Minister for Justice, indicates that the new law reforms
will protect adults and
minors from being covertly filmed in private places, for example, changing rooms
and toilets. It suggests
that privacy rights will not be protected in public
places such as the beach. This article focuses on the rights of topless female
bathers, irrespective of age.
Reasonable Expectation of Privacy
Justice Lowe in the High Court of Australia defined public place in
as a place where “at the time in question members of
the public may, because they are members of the public, go to the place
With this definition in mind, can it be argued that
there is no reasonable expectation of privacy at the beach simply because it
a public place? Calvert and Brown assert that there can be no reasonable
expectation of privacy at the beach because it is a public
setting where people
gaze at other people wearing skimpy swimsuits as a favourite
This argument is supported by the New Zealand Law Commission, which indicated
that the New Zealand voyeurism offence proposals do
not protect members of the
community who bathe topless at a public beach because they cannot have a
reasonable expectation of privacy.
The New Zealand voyeurism offence proposals
have been put forward in the Crimes (Intimate Covert Filming) Amendment Bill
they target the covert making, publishing or possessing an intimate
visual recording without the consent of the person recorded.
The first reading
of this New Zealand Bill occurred in May 2005 and it was referred to the New
Zealand Government Administration
Committee for examination. The Bill applies
when a person intentionally or recklessly records another person who is naked or
exposed, partially exposed or clad solely in undergarments their genitals,
pubic area, buttocks or female breasts.
They also apply when the
person is engaged in intimate sexual, showering, toileting or other personal
bodily activity that involves
dressing or undressing.
A person may
be justified in possessing an intimate visual recording if they have a
reasonable excuse. Publishing, importing and
exporting an intimate visual
recording is justified if it is done to exercise or perform powers, duties or
functions under any enactment.
Numerous people are legally permitted to publish
intimate visual recordings, for example, police, Customs officers, New Zealand
Intelligence officers and employees, Department of Corrections
officers, lawyers or agents giving advice about an intimate visual
recording or
giving advice or making representations for any civil or criminal proceedings,
and the subject of an intimate visual
At the time of
writing, the second reading of the Bill had not taken place.
Similarly, the privacy rights of topless bathers at public beaches are not
protected in Canada. The Canadian Bill C-2: An Act to Amend
the Criminal Code
(Protection of Children and other Vulnerable Persons) and the Canada Evidence
Act provides for a voyeurism offence
to surreptitiously observe or visual record
a person and in circumstances that give rise to a reasonable expectation of
It covers places where a person can be reasonably be expected to be
nude or exposing genital organs, anal region or breasts or to
be engaged in
explicit sexual activity. The purpose of the recording could be for sexual
gratification, commercial profit, harassment
or another purpose. The Canadian
proposal also includes publishing or possessing a voyeuristic recording.
Notably, it contains two
exemptions, they are when police officers are
judicially authorised to conduct surveillance and where it serves the public
The second reading of the Bill in the Senate occurred in June 2005.
Similarly, a topless bather in the United Kingdom would not be protected by
the voyeurism offence, which came into force in May 2004,
because one of its key
elements is a reasonable expectation of privacy. The voyeurism offence prohibits
a person from observing,
recording, operating equipment for another person to
observe, installing equipment or adapting a structure to observe or enable
person to observe, the private acts of another person without their
consent for the purpose of sexual gratification.
A private act
requires the person to be in a place where there is a reasonable expectation of
person’s genitals, buttocks or breasts
be exposed or covered only by underwear, or that the person is using a toilet or
a sexual act not usually done in public.
The Australian SCAG Discussion Paper suggests creating a voyeurism offence
similar to the United Kingdom, New Zealand, and Canadian
approaches. If
Australia follows any of these approaches, the privacy rights of topless bathers
at a public beach will not be protected.
Should Australia recognise that there
is a reasonable expectation of privacy in public places? The legend of Lady
Godiva and Peeping
Tom recognised that privacy rights could be protected in
public places. In that legend, Lady Godiva rode naked through the town on
horseback in accordance with the Lord’s promise that he would reduce the
taxes. Peeping Tom looked at Lady Godiva as she rode
through the town and he was
blinded for his disloyalty. Arguably, privacy rights in a public places is not
an all or nothing concept,
but involves a question of degree.
public beaches are more secluded and less crowded than others. It is possible to
be on public beach without anyone else in
sight or without anyone paying
Reasonable people are able to make an assessment of how
public a beach is by taking into consideration the time of the day, weather
conditions, how secluded the beach is, whether the beach is near buildings and
whether they can see anyone else in sight. After making
such an assessment,
perhaps it could be concluded that a topless bather at a public beach has
impliedly consented to other members
of the public observing them because they
have chosen not to wear a top in a public place, but should it be inferred that
the topless
bather has surrendered all of their privacy rights? Should another
member of the public be entitled to photograph them and disseminate
photograph on the internet?
Dissemination of a Permanent Record
Some have suggested that taking a photograph of a topless sunbather would
simply be making a record of something that any member of
the public was free to
However, McClurg argues that just because a person has exposed
their body at the beach does not mean they are willing to expose
their body to
“other audiences or in other contexts”.
A photograph is very different to an observation because it is a more
permanent record that may be viewed on subsequent occasions.
(photograph) paints a thousand words as compared to a naked eye that is likely
to miss details in a transitory observation.
The advances in
technology enable the photographer to quickly disseminate the photograph to a
much wider audience and arguably a
different type of audience than was present
at the beach. Objectively, the harm (humiliation, embarrassment, anger,
violation, anxiety,
exploitation and invasion of privacy) to a topless bather
associated with the dissemination of the photograph on the internet is
greater than the simply observing a topless bather at the beach. Harm is a
forward-looking notion that “involves the impairment
of a person’s
opportunities to engage in worthwhile activities and relationships, and to
pursue valuable, self-chosen, goals”.
The harm principle, as
espoused by philosophers such as John Stuart Mill and Joel
should be used to justify criminal law reforms in
Australia to protect privacy rights and prevent members of the public from
unauthorised photographs of topless bathers at the beach and
disseminating them on the internet. The criminal law reforms should
not impose a
total ban on photography at beaches in Australia as this would erode liberalism
and prevent people from taking scenic
photographs of the sand and waves. Perhaps
the criminal laws could be drafted so that it is an offence to take a photograph
topless bather at a public beach as the primary object unless you have
their consent, or in the case of minors, the consent of the
person who has care
of the child. Obtaining the consent of the primary subjects in a photograph and
respecting privacy are at the
very least social rules.
Social Rules at the Beach
As a result of the inadequate criminal laws in Australia and the inadequacy
of the approaches in the United Kingdom, New Zealand and
Canada, topless bathers
must hope that members of the public abide by unspoken social rules relating to
“personal space in
public spaces, civil inattention and limitations on
The Naturist Photo Special Interest Group provides
free beach etiquette, some of which is relevant to the unauthorised taking of
photographs or making of film, for example:
“Gawking, or staring at nude sunbathers, is impolite. It is always rude
to stare at others, but it is especially so when you
use binoculars or a camera
to look at nude people...Leave nothing but footprints, take only memories...Many
folks come to the beach
to enjoy nature and do not want to be disturbed. It is
OK to be friendly, but if someone doesn’t seem to respond, please respect
their right to privacy.”
Similarly, the Federation of Canadian Naturists provide behavioural
guidelines and some of these are extracted below.
“Gawking is impolite. It is OK to look but always rude to stare
(particularly with binoculars or through a camera)...Get the
permission of
subjects before taking pictures...Respect the privacy of others. Many people
come to enjoy nature and don’t want
to be disturbed. It is good to be
friendly, but take your cues from their response and body
Perhaps the majority of the public are likely to abide by these unspoken
social rules, but there are bound to be members of the public
who will breach
The privacy rights of topless bathers at a public beach are being eroded
because the criminal laws in Australia have not kept up with
the pace of
technology to prevent people from taking photographs of topless bathers and
disseminating them on the internet. There
are social norms to protect the
members of the public.
These social norms should feed into the proposed criminal
law reforms and until the tide has turned, the main options for topless
this summer may be to slip on a shirt in support of the slip slop slap
or use a tanning salon.
Kelley Burton is Associate Lecturer, School of Law, Queensland University
of Technology (QUT) and a PhD candidate at QUT.
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General, ‘Unauthorised
Photographs on the Internet and Ancillary Privacy Issues’ (2005)
http://www.ag.gov.au/agd/WWW/agdhome.nsf/0/86D0F0FBE6DE7B85CA25705700050C1F?OpenDocument
available on 25 August 2005.
‘Parents warned over online beach photos’,
27 January 2005 .
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General, ‘Unauthorised
Photographs on the Internet and Ancillary Privacy Issues’ (2005)
http://www.ag.gov.au/agd/WWW/agdhome.nsf/0/86D0F0FBE6DE7B85CA25705700050C1F?OpenDocument
available on 25 August 2005 at [12].
Summary Offences Act 1988
Department of Justice Canada, ‘Voyeurism as a Criminal
Offence: A Consultation Paper’ (2002)
http://canada.justice.gc.ca/en/cons/voy/toc.html
available on 25
August 2005.
[1958] ALR 724.
[1958] ALR 724
Justin Brown Clay Calvert, ‘Video Voyeurism, Privacy, and
the Internet: Exposing Peeping Toms in Cyberspace’
Arts and Entertainment Law Journal
Crimes (Intimate Covert Filming) Amendment Bill 2005, s
Crimes (Intimate Covert Filming) Amendment Bill 2005, s
Crimes (Intimate Covert Filming) Amendment Bill 2005, s
Sexual Offences Act 2003 (UK), s 67(1)-(5).
Elizabeth Paton-Simpson, ‘Privacy and the Reasonable
Paranoid: The Protection of Privacy in Public Places’
University of Toronto Law Journal
McClurg, ‘Bringing Privacy Law Out of the Closet: A Tort
Theory of Liability for Intrusions in Public Places’ (1995)
989 at 990.
McClurg, ‘Bringing Privacy Law Out of the Closet: A Tort
Theory of Liability for Intrusions in Public Places’ (1995)
989 at 1042.
GR Sullivan and AP Simester,
Criminal Law Theory and
(2nd ed, 2003) at 10.
Elizabeth Paton-Simpson, ‘Privacy and the Reasonable
Paranoid: The Protection of Privacy in Public Places’
University of Toronto Law Journal
Naturist Photo Special Interest Group, (1997)
Steven S Sparks
http://www.sss.org/naturist/page2.html
available on 25 August 2005.
Federation of Canadian Naturists, (1997-2004)
http://www.fcn.ca/FCNFAQ.html#18
available on 25 August 2005.
Queensland Cancer Fund, (2000)
Slip Slop Slap,
http://www.qldcancer.com.au/Cancer_Info_and_Services/PED/SkinCancer.html
available on 25 August 2005.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter