URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlLegHist/2005/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:33:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Biber, Katherine --- "Murdering Holiness: The Trials of Franz Creffield and George Mitchell" [2005] AUJlLegHist 6; (2005) 9(1) Australian Journal of Legal History 131
Murdering Holiness: The Trials Of Franz Creffield And George Mitchell
BOOK REVIEWS
Murdering Holiness: The Trials of Franz Creffield and
George Mitchell
JIM PHILLIPS AND ROSEMARY GARTNER. UBC PRESS, 2003
Murdering Holiness
tells the extraordinary story of religious
fundamentalism in Oregon and Washington at the turn of the last century, and the
that was conducted in its name. It is a meticulous work of social
history that follows the career of Franz Creffield, a Holy Roller
aspirations to godship, and his small band of devoted followers.
examines with a fine eye for detail the lives, legal proceedings
and crimes conducted by and against Creffield and his sect.
At the centre of the book is Creffield’s death – he was killed in
the street by George Mitchell, whose two sisters were
devoted to Creffield
– and Mitchell’s strange trial that followed. But many other
fascinating episodes precede the killing,
and only a churlish reviewer would
give away the astonishing series of events that followed Creffield’s
death. (Readers who
prefer to maintain the suspense are advised not to flick
through the last pages of the illustrated plates until the twist is
At the peak of his influence, Creffield and one of his followers were tarred
and feathered by a vigilante group, and told to leave
town under threat of
public hanging from a tree. Later, the entire group was found to be suffering
from religious ‘mania’
and confined for a time to the asylum.
Creffield committed adultery with one of his disciples, for which he was tried,
and imprisoned.
Murdering Holiness
is a book about law, justice
and vigilantism, explored through this saga of religious fervour, madness and
The authors practice in the disciplines of criminology, law, history and
sociology. They state that one of the aims of the book is
to use this case study
to explore broader themes. Citing Natalie Zemon Davis, who wrote the story of
Martin Guerre’s disappearance
and return, they see an unusual story as
having the power to ‘uncover motivations and values that are lost in the
the everyday’.
The book is
also about the rule of law, ‘often referred to as the American
religion’, and its manipulation and suspension
in the service of
‘the greater social good’, even where that greater good includes the
suppression of religious difference.
Furthermore, the book is about ‘ordinary people’, ‘people who
strove both to remake or repair, according to their
own visions, the world in
which they lived’.
Murdering Holiness
is, at its heart, about strong belief. It studies
the people who hold tightly to their beliefs, and the people who –
their own beliefs – wish to loosen the grip. The book examines
religion and its repression. The authors write, ‘the Creffield
exemplifies both the relative ease with which those who stand outside the
mainstream of religious belief could be attacked,
literally and figuratively,
and the fragility of the constitutional protection of religious
conscience’.
This story has powerful
resonance today, where religious zeal is conflated with anti-social behaviour,
arousing an all-consuming
panic about the improper extremes to which belief
might lead its adherents.
Necessary to this study is an analysis of gender; in particular, the
relationship between femininity and ‘religious excitement’.
story notes that religion was, at the time, one of the few public activities in
which women could legitimately participate.
It draws a distinction that was
observed in newspaper accounts between two kinds of women: ‘weak
women’, who could be
induced by religion into ‘delusion and
folly’, or led into a ‘state of mind where there is more frenzy than
and ‘Seattle womanhood’, which was bearer of much of
the community’s hostility to Creffield’s
The women who followed Creffield were marked by ‘madness’, and
the book explores the history of mental illness as a medical,
legal and communal
instrument of social control. Particularly fascinating is the material about
insanity as a community-based responsibility,
requiring communal decisions and
invoking communal status, sanction and care. Proceedings were instituted against
members of the
sect when they were found to have burned their clothes, killed
animals and destroyed property. They were found to be suffering from
‘mania’, ‘chronic mania’ and ‘religious
excitement’ and committed to an insane asylum. The asylum
institution through which the community managed deviance. This was despite the
otherwise ‘calm’ and ‘rational’
behaviour of
Creffield’s group on subjects other than religion. At the time, other
individuals were sent to asylums for religious
mania, but Creffield’s was
the only group that was targetted in its entirety. The authors speculate that
one reason for the
group being targetted was that its members were predominantly
women, those women defied male authority, and they refused to conform
established gender roles.
Much was made of the clothing, hair and appearance of his followers. They
went about the streets ‘barefoot, with the women also
bare-headed and
wearing their hair unkempt and
unbraided’.
One 16 year old girl, during
proceedings under which she would be taken into institutional care and
protection, explained the sect’s
manner of dress:
When the world is restored to its original condition of innocence we will be
as were Adam and Eve, and there will be no use of clothing
or raiment of any
kind. Then the world will once more be innocent and God will dwell with us here
on earth and we shall be like him.
The authors write that the women ‘committed gross violations of codes
of moral and economic behaviour, acting far outside the
bounds of convention and
They destroyed property, they
refused to work, and had ‘strange attitudes to material
The book constitutes a compelling meditation on law and morality. Creffield
was the subject of a complaint from the husband of one
of his followers,
alleging ‘improper relations of a most revolting
He was tried for adultery and
convicted. The local press was delighted. One described the defendant as
‘the lecher Creffield,
self-styled Elijah II, bogus prophet of God,
religious hypnotist, imposter and all round dangerous individual’; another
that ‘in vileness, diabolism and all-round deviltry, Creffield is
unmatched’.
At George Mitchell’s trial for the murder of Creffield, his defence was
based on what the author’s term ‘unwritten
law’, under which
masculine violence was justified in the defence of the sexual morality of women.
Mitchell argued that Creffield
had destroyed his sisters’ reputations and
innocence, and would only be stopped in death. In this part of the book, the
critique law’s relationship with – and reliance upon –
morality. They acknowledge law’s power as theatre,
spectacle and genre,
recognising that law sets limits on how legal stories can be told.
For Mitchell’s defence to succeed, he had to demonstrate that
vigilantism, or law’s suspension, must itself be lawful
if justice is to
prevail. Where law fails, family and virtue must be protected through
extra-legal means. Mitchell exhibited a kind
of Victorian manhood, a form of
‘proper’ masculinity that punished the seducers of women.
Contemporary media representations
of Mitchell’s masculinity were bound up
in arguments about the protection of the working classes from predators like
The prosecution relied on the rule of law. It took a firm stand
against vigilantism, taking a position that was cast as middle-class
respectable. The media had the most powerful role in creating the language in
which the crime was talked about, and sustained
a discourse in which law only
acquired its status as law when it acted in the name of popular morality.
The book contains a fascinating history of various vigilante practices, from
‘crime control’ vigilantes, who operated
in a parallel system of law
enforcement, to ‘white cap’ vigilantes, who purported to enforce
moral codes that were not
entrenched within legal institutions. ‘White
caps’ targetted moral transgressors: wife and child beaters, adulterors,
the lazy and the religiously aberrant. They engaged in whipping, tarring and
feathering, beatings and mock hangings. Creffield and
another man were tarred
and feathered, and the whole group was expelled from the town. The vigilantes
were not masked, they acted
in public places, and behaved with ‘solemnity
and restraint, and no excessive force was
They claimed that their
actions were not violation but
‘discipline’.
Against such
compelling demonstrations of public outrage, the legal positivists were fighting
a long-lost cause.
Murdering Holiness
is an impressive work of painstaking research. It
combs local newspapers, court records, photographs and archives. The authors
together many characters, weaving a complex web of stories, relationships
and episodes. Throughout, they locate their narrative in
a wider socio-cultural
context, explaining broader trends and practices. Where the archives run out,
they engage in measured speculation,
taking care to establish the grounds for
their conclusions. At the end, they place this story in a wider picture still,
writing ‘Immigrant
Franz Creffield’s version of the American dream
was an unusual one, but he pursued it with passion, great fortitude, and some
It is a credit to the
passion of the authors that they conclude what is often a study of repression,
fear and misery by remembering
the humanity at the heart of this book.
Katherine Biber
Macquarie University
Jim Phillips and Rosemary Gartner,
Murdering Holiness: The Trials of Franz Creffield and George Mitchell
(2003) 241.
Ibid 242-3.
Ibid 241-2.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (133 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter