URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntTBLawRw/2004/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Koch, Cornelia --- "The Doctrine of Supremacy of European Community Law as a Condition Precedent for the Doctrine of Direct Effect" [2004] IntTBLawRw 8; (2004) 9 International Trade and Business Law Review 201
The Doctrine of Supremacy of European Community Law as a Condition Precedent for the Doctrine of Direct Effect
Introduction
The doctrine of direct effect of Community law
The doctrine of supremacy of Community Law
Supremacy as a condition precedent for direct effect
In the absence of supremacy Community law would apply unevenly in the member states
The European Court of Justice assumed the existence of the supremacy principle when creating the principle for direct effect
The Doctrine of Supremacy of European Community Law as
a Condition Precedent for the Doctrine of Direct Effect
Cornelia Koch
Introduction
Many scholars acknowledge that the principles of supremacy and direct effect
of European Community law are the vital foundations of
Community law as a
supranational legal system.
Moreover, the European Court of Justice
has described the two concepts as ‘the essential characteristics of the
Community legal
It is therefore surprising that so far
little attention has been given to the question whether and if so how the two
concepts are
related. This paper endeavours to shed light on this question. It
proposes that one aspect of the relationship between the two doctrines
the doctrine of supremacy is a condition precedent
for the doctrine
of direct effect.
Given the significance of the two principles it is interesting to note that
both have been judicially created by the European Court
of Justice and are not
laid down in the treaties founding the European Community. Direct effect and
supremacy determine the status
of Community law in relation to member state law.
In a nutshell, direct effect of Community law means that citizens are able to
their rights deriving from Community law in member state courts. The
doctrine of supremacy of Community law ensures that where Community
member state law are incompatible, the former will prevail.
In order to demonstrate that supremacy is a condition precedent for direct
effect, an analysis of the two doctrines will be conducted
in the first part of
this paper. This will include their creation by the European Court of Justice,
their scope of operation and
a discussion of the relevant case law.
Subsequently, the interrelationship
between the two concepts will be examined. It will be shown that it was not
coincidental that the European Court of Justice pronounced
the principles of
direct effect and supremacy in two consecutive years, but that the two concepts
are logically connected. The doctrine
of supremacy is a condition precedent for
the doctrine of direct effect.
The doctrine of direct effect of Community
Ordinary international treaties
can only have an effect in the
domestic legal order of a contracting state if the signatory performs some act
to introduce the treaty
contents into its legal order.
The process
of turning treaty law into domestic law is either achieved by adoption or
transformation. Adoption means that the treaty
provisions as such are declared
operative in the municipal order, while in the case of transformation treaty law
is transformed into
domestic law. The former occurs in countries that take a
monist approach to international law. They regard international law as part
their national legal system. The second approach is taken in dualist countries
where international law is categorised as separate
from the domestic legal
order. In both cases citizens of signatories cannot rely on treaty provisions in
proceedings in national
courts unless the treaty was first introduced into the
domestic legal system.
In the European Community the situation is different because the European
Court of Justice has created the doctrine of direct effect
of Community law
according to which provisions of Community law are capable of producing legal
effects in the member states, in the
sense of conferring rights and imposing
obligations upon individuals which are enforceable in national courts.
The doctrine was created in the
Van Gend en Loos
which Hartley regards as ‘one of the most important judgments ever
handed down by the European Court’.
In this case the following
question was referred to the Court:
whether Article 12 of the EEC Treaty has direct application within the territory
of a member state, in other words, whether nationals
of such a State can, on the
basis of the Article in question, lay claim to individual rights which the
courts must protect.
The claimant in the national
proceedings was a Dutch company which had imported an aqueous emulsion of
ureaformaldehyde, a product
used in the manufacture of glue, from Germany. When
the EEC Treaty came into force on 1 January 1958 the product’s
classification
under Dutch law attracted an import duty of 3%. On 1 March 1960
the Dutch authorities reclassified the product allegedly on the basis
findings about the product’s composition. Under the new classification the
product attracted an import duty of 8%.
Van Gend en Loos
argued that this
imposition of higher customs duties was contrary to Article 12 EEC Treaty which
provided as follows:
member states shall refrain from introducing between themselves any new customs
duties on imports or exports or any charges having
equivalent effect, and from
increasing those which they already apply in their trade with each other.
It must be noted that the provision was addressed to the
member states and did not expressly grant any rights to individuals to import
goods free from any duty imposed after the establishment of the EC; nor did it
state explicitly that any such duty would be invalid.
The European Court was
faced with a situation where a Dutch company sought to invoke Community law in
proceedings against the Dutch
customs authorities in a Dutch tribunal. It had to
decide whether Community law gave direct protection to individuals in national
Contrary to Advocate General Romer,
the European Court took the
view that a provision is not prevented from having direct effect merely because
it is addressed to member
states and does not expressly confer rights on private
individuals.
It stated that whether provisions of the EEC Treaty
were capable of producing direct effect depended on the ‘spirit, the
scheme and the wording of those provisions’.
Court pointed out that the EEC Treaty amounted to more than a set of mutual
obligations between the contracting states because
its objective was to
establish a Common Market of direct concern to the private citizen. In contrast
to ordinary treaties, the EEC
Treaty set up a Community which constituted:
a new legal order of international law for the benefit of which the states have
limited their sovereign rights, albeit within limited
fields, and the subjects
of which comprise not only member states but also their nationals. Independently
of the legislation of member
states, Community law therefore not only imposes
obligations on individuals but is also intended to confer upon them rights which
become part of their legal heritage. These rights arise not only where they are
expressly granted by the Treaty, but also by reason
of obligations which the
Treaty imposes in a clearly defined way upon individuals as well as upon the
member states and upon the
institutions of the Community.
With regard to the general scheme and wording of Article
12 the Court observed that it contained a ‘clear and unconditional
prohibition’ which was ‘not a positive but a negative
obligation’ in that it required member states to refrain
from introducing
new customs duties and from increasing existing ones. This obligation was not
qualified by any reservation and its
implementation was not conditional upon any
legislative measure to be enacted under national law. Therefore, the Court
that ‘the very nature of this prohibition makes it ideally
adapted to produce direct effects in the legal relationship between
states and their subjects’ in the sense of ‘creating individual
rights which national courts must protect’.
These rights
were, according to the Court, a necessary counterpart or corollary of the
obligation imposed by Article 12 on the member
states. As a result, where member
states introduced or increased customs duties contrary to Article 12, any
interested individual
might challenge such duties before the competent national
courts, which were required to give effect to the Treaty.
In the subsequent case of
the Court explained
the full implications of the concept of direct effect. It stated:
[Direct effect] means that rules of Community law must be fully and uniformly
applied in all the member states from the date of their
entry into force and for
so long as they continue in force. These provisions are therefore a direct
source of rights and duties for
all those affected thereby, whether member
states or individuals, who are parties to legal relationships under Community
consequence also concerns any national court whose task it is as an
organ of a member state to protect, in a case within its jurisdiction,
rights conferred upon individuals by Community law.
Toth argues that the doctrine of direct effect, as
formulated in the above decisions and refined in a number of subsequent cases,
is one of the two essential foundations of Community law as a supranational
legal system, supremacy of Community law being the second.
According to Toth it
is of such great importance because:
It enables legal provisions of an extraneous, ie Community origin
automatically to penetrate into and form an integral part of national
It ensures the full and uniform application of Community law in all the
member states.
It makes the individual a subject of Community law alongside the member
states by creating substantive rights and obligations for
him or her.
It increases the legal protection of individuals by ensuring them access to
the national courts and remedies in matters governed by
Community law.
It prevents the application of conflicting national measures to
individuals.
This analysis is very useful as it shows clearly that the doctrine of direct
effect is part of the basis on which the Community legal
system is built. Had
the European Court of Justice not created this doctrine, the European Community
would most likely have remained
an organisation consisting of European states
similar to other international alliances. By creating the doctrine of direct
the Court of Justice paved the way for a fast and effective European
integration and harmonisation of the laws. This has allowed
the Community to
grow into a closely connected union of European states within only 50 years.
Giving Community citizens the possibility
to enforce Community law in their
domestic courts was a very effective tool to force member states to comply with
Community law and
to do so in an expedient manner as the Court recognised in
Van Gend en Loos
. It stated that ‘the vigilance of individuals
interested in protecting their rights creates an effective control … to
the diligence of the Commission and the member states’.
Only a considerably small number of EC Treaty provisions have without any
doubt been intended to create a direct relationship between
Community law and
the individual
or call expressly upon national authorities,
including courts, to cooperate with the Community institutions in the
application and
enforcement of Community law
The determination
whether a Treaty provision has direct effect is therefore mainly a matter of
Treaty interpretation. This task falls
within the exclusive jurisdiction of the
European Court of Justice
whose decision on the matter must be
regarded as definitive.
The judgment of the Court establishing
direct effect has retroactive application in the sense that the provision to
which it relates
must be regarded as having produced direct effects from the
time of its coming into force. The Court may restrict this retroactive
only in exceptional circumstances.
Van Gend en Loos
the test for direct effect was determined as
The wording of [a provision of Community law] contains a clear and unconditional
prohibition which is not a positive but a negative
obligation. This obligation,
moreover, is not qualified by any reservation on the part of states which would
make its implementation
conditional upon a positive legislative measure enacted
under national law.
This formula suggests that only
provisions imposing a negative obligation can have direct effect. However, the
Court decided in subsequent
cases that a clear and unconditional provision could
be directly effective whether or not it involved a negative or a positive
obligation,
provided it did not require the taking of any measure either by the
institutions of the Community or by the member states.
to produce direct effect a provision of the EC Treaty must fulfil three
requirements: it has to be sufficiently clear
and precise, not subject to any
reservation or condition and not require the intervention of any further act on
the part of either
the Community institutions or the member states.
The early cases on direct effect dealt with the protection of private
individuals against measures of member states or their institutions.
called vertical direct effect.
The European Court of Justice
extended the doctrine of direct effect to operate also between private
individuals. In that case a
provision is said to have horizontal direct
In addition to Treaty articles the European Court of Justice has held that
all of the binding acts of the Community institutions or
any particular
provision of such acts can produce direct effect if they satisfy the criteria
which the Court established in respect
of the EC Treaty. This comprises
Community regulations, directives and decisions.
Furthermore, the
Court decided that international treaties concluded by the Community with third
parties can also produce direct
A distinction must be made between the concepts of direct effect and direct
applicability. While the EC Treaty is silent on the former
term, it contains the
latter in Article 249 (ex Article 189) EC Treaty which reads:
A regulation shall have general application. It shall be binding in its entirety
and directly applicable in all member states.
this wording the question arises whether ‘directly applicable’ has
the same meaning as ‘directly effective’.
Unfortunately, the
European Court of Justice has never clarified this point and uses the two terms
interchangeably.
If they were indeed the same, a crucial problem
would arise: it would be certain that the intention of the framers of the
was that only regulations should have direct effect, as they did not
make a provision similar to Article 249 (ex Article 189) for
any other type of
Community instrument. Therefore, the doctrine of direct effect as created by the
European Court of Justice would
be clearly inconsistent with the Treaties.
Although the Court does not seem to pay much attention to the problem, legal
writers have
found a solution to it and defined direct applicability differently
from direct effect.
The following distinction is widely accepted in
the literature today:
a Community norm is
directly applicable
if it is incorporated into the legal systems of the member states upon its
enactment by the relevant Community authorities. That means
that in order to
become part of the domestic law of the member states no further act of
incorporation on behalf of the states is
needed. Accordingly, all regulations
are directly applicable. On the other hand, a provision of Community law is
directly effective
if it fulfils the
Van Gend en Loos
Therefore, the fact that a regulation is directly applicable does not
automatically make it directly effective. Community regulations
directly effective if their wording is clear and precise, they are unconditional
and no further act on behalf of the Community
institutions or member states is
necessary for their coming into force. If they fulfil these criteria they can be
invoked vertically
or horizontally.
In summary, the principle that Community law has direct effect is a creation
of the European Court of Justice as the Treaties are
silent on the issue. If a
legal provision is directly effective it grants individuals rights which must be
upheld by the national
The doctrine of direct effect can
relate to Treaty articles, regulations, directives, decisions and provisions of
international agreements
to which the Community is a party. A provision of
Community law is directly effective if it is sufficiently clear and precise,
unconditional
and leaves no room for the exercise of discretion in the
implementation by the member states or Community institutions.
Direct effect must be distinguished from direct applicability. The latter
concerns the way in which a regulation comes into operation
within the member
states while the former describes the effects of a Community provision in the
national legal systems
it has come into operation therein.
The doctrine of supremacy of Community
The extended application by the Court of Justice of the principle of direct
effect, together with the wide scope of the EC Treaty,
covering a number of
areas normally reserved to national law alone, have led inevitably to a
situation of conflict between national
and EC law.
This conflict
arises frequently where a directly effective provision of Community law is
incompatible with the internal laws of a
member State. The EC Treaty is silent
on the question of priorities between Community law and national law. In
ordinary international
law the constitutional rules of a country determine
whether international agreements can take precedence over national law.
The constitutions of the EU member states have very different rules
relating to this area.
The European Court of Justice has developed
its own priority rule, the
doctrine of supremacy of Community law.
For Toth this doctrine
is, besides the doctrine of direct effect, the second of the ‘two
essential foundations of Community
law as a supranational legal
The Court made first mention of the principle of supremacy of Community law
as an biter dictum in
Van Gend en Loos
where it stipulated
that ‘the Community constitutes a new legal order in international law,
for whose benefit the states have
limited their sovereign rights, albeit within
limited fields, and the subjects of which comprise not only the member states
their nationals.’
One year later
the leading case on supremacy of Community law, was
decided. The Court stated that supremacy of Community law was a general
or doctrine which followed from the very nature of Community law. Mr
Costa was a shareholder of Edisonvolta, a firm which had been
affected by the
nationalisation of the production and distribution of electric energy. In
accordance with its nationalisation law,
the Italian government had transferred
the property of all electricity undertakings to the state owned electricity
company (ENEL).
Mr Costa, having refused to pay an electricity bill issued to
him, was summoned before a Court in Milan. In his defence, he submitted
nationalisation law was contrary to a number of EC Treaty provisions. The matter
was referred for preliminary opinion to
the Italian Constitutional Court and
simultaneously to the European Court of Justice. The former was of the view
that, as the EC
Treaty had been ratified by an ordinary law, the provisions of a
later conflicting law (the nationalisation legislation) took precedence
Treaty. As foreshadowed in
Van Gend en Loos
the European
Court of Justice was of the opposite opinion:
By contrast with ordinary international treaties, the EEC Treaty has created its
own legal system which, on the entry into force
of the Treaty, became an
integral part of the legal systems of the member states and which their courts
are bound to apply.
By creating a Community of unlimited duration, having its own institutions, its
own personality, its own legal capacity and capacity
of representation on the
international plane and, more particularly, real powers stemming from a
limitation of sovereignty or a transfer
of powers from the states to the
Community, the member states have limited their sovereign rights, albeit within
limited fields,
and have thus created a body of law which binds both their
nationals and themselves.
The integration into the laws of each member State of provisions which derive
from the Community, and more generally the terms and
the spirit of the Treaty,
make it impossible for the states, as a corollary, to accord precedence to a
unilateral and subsequent
measure over a legal system accepted by them on a
basis of reciprocity. The executive force of Community law cannot vary from one
State to another in deference to subsequent domestic laws, without jeopardising
the attainment of the objectives of the Treaty set
out in Article 5(2) [now
Article 10(2)]
and giving rise to the discrimination prohibited by
Article 7 [now Article 12].
The obligations undertaken under the Treaty establishing the Community would not
be unconditional, but merely contingent, if they
could be called in question by
subsequent legislative acts of the signatories. […]
It follows from all these observations that the law stemming from the Treaty, an
independent source of law, could not, because of
its special and original
nature, be overridden by domestic legal provisions, however framed, without
being deprived of its character
as Community law and without the legal basis of
the Community itself being called into question.
The transfer by the states from their domestic legal systems to the Community
legal system of the rights and obligations arising
under the Treaty carries with
it a permanent limitation of their sovereign rights, against which a subsequent
unilateral act incompatible
with the concept of the Community cannot
The quotation demonstrates that the European Court of Justice derives the
supremacy of Community law from the following factors: the
special and original
nature of the EC Treaty as an independent source of law and of the whole legal
system created by it; the acceptance
of that legal system by all the member
states on the basis of reciprocity; the consequent permanent limitation of
national sovereignty
or a transfer of powers to the Community; the threat which
incompatible unilateral national measures would present to the uniform
application, integrity and ultimately to the very survival of Community
In subsequent cases the European Court of Justice confirmed the doctrine of
supremacy and explained its full scope.
Internationale
Handelsgesellschaft
dealt with a conflict between a Community
regulation and fundamental rights guaranteed by the German constitution. The
claimant claimed
the regulation infringed the principles of freedom of action,
disposition, economic liberty and of proportionality which are enshrined
Articles 2(1) and 14 of the German
Constitution
. In the plaintiff’s
submission, the regulation should be nullified because in German law any
ordinary law that is in breach
of the constitution is invalid. The European
Court disagreed. In the strongest terms it ruled that the legality of a
Community act
cannot be judged in the light of national law:
Recourse to the legal rules or concepts of national law in order to judge the
validity of measures adopted by the institutions of
the Community would have an
adverse effect on the uniformity and efficacy of Community law. The validity of
such measures can only
be judged in the light of Community law. In fact, the law
stemming from the Treaty, an independent source of law, cannot, because
very nature, be overridden by rules of national law, however framed, without
being deprived of its character as Community
law and without the legal basis of
the Community itself being called in question. Therefore, the validity of a
Community measure
or its effect within a member State cannot be affected by
allegations that it runs counter to either fundamental rights as formulated
the constitution of that State or the principles of a national constitutional
It must be noted that the Court, while
upholding supremacy ‘at all costs’, acknowledged the importance of
fundamental
rights and it went on to say that respect for such rights was one of
the principal aims of the Community and as such part of the
Community’s
own, albeit unwritten, law.
The case of
raised two issues relating to
supremacy: first, whether a domestic law should take precedence over Community
law because it was later
in time and, secondly, challenging the ruling in
Internationale Handelsgesellschaft
whether Community law
should prevail over principles of national constitutional law. The facts of the
case were as follows: Simmenthal
imported beef from France to Italy and had to
pay a fee for a public health inspection according to an Italian law passed in
It was submitted that this law was contrary to the EC Treaty and two
Community regulations passed in 1964 and 1968. The Italian authorities
their defence, first, that the Italian law had to prevail because it was later
in time and, secondly, that, even if the
national law conflicted with Community
law, the Italian courts nevertheless had to apply it until such time as it had
been declared
unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court. The second
submission was based on the principle that, according to Italian constitutional
law, only the Constitutional Court (
Corte Costituzionale
) has the power
to determine the constitutionality of Italian laws and declare an
unconstitutional law invalid.
The European Court held, first, that it was the duty of a national court to
give full effect to the Community provisions and not to
apply any conflicting
provisions of national legislation even if they had been adopted subsequently.
Secondly, the Court determined
that a lower court should not wait for the
national law to be set aside by a constitutional court or the legislature of a
State. With regard to the first issue the Court said:
[I]n accordance with the principles of precedence of Community law, the
relationship between provisions of the Treaty and directly
applicable measures
of the institutions on the one hand and the national law of the member states on
the other is such that those
provisions and measures not only by their entry
into force render automatically
inapplicable any conflicting provision of current national law but – in so
far as they are an integral part of, and take precedence
in, the legal order
applicable in the territory of each of the member states – also preclude
the valid adoption of new national
legislative measures to the extent to which
they would be incompatible with Community provisions.
Indeed any recognition that national legislative measures which encroach upon
the field within which the Community exercises its
legislative power or which
are otherwise incompatible with the provisions of Community law had any legal
effect would amount to a
corresponding denial of the effectiveness of
obligations undertaken unconditionally and irrevocably by member states pursuant
the Treaty and would thus imperil the very foundations of the
It follows from the foregoing that every national court must, in a case within
its jurisdiction, apply Community law in its entirety
and protect rights which
the latter confers on individuals and must accordingly set aside any provision
of national law which may
conflict with it, whether prior or subsequent to the
Community rule.
On the second issue the Court
[A] national court which is called upon, within the limits of its
to give full
effect to those provisions, if necessary refusing of its own motion to apply any
conflicting provision of national legislation,
even if adopted subsequently, and
it is not necessary for the court to request or await the prior setting aside of
such provision
by legislative or other constitutional means.
The European Court explicitly said that the conflicting national law was
inapplicable
. Therefore, although a national court
has to apply Community law, the domestic law remains in existence. In an earlier
case the Court
had found that this situation might create an ‘ambiguous
state of affairs’ which would affect people who sought to rely
Community law.61 Therefore, in the interest of legal certainty, the Court
imposed a positive obligation on member states to repeal
conflicting national
legislation.
The principle of supremacy of Community law applies not only to domestic
member state law, but also to obligations undertaken by states
towards third
countries. The
concerned a challenge to an
international road transport agreement to which the Community was a party. The
Court held that once the
Community, in implementing a common policy, lays down
common rules, member states no longer have the right, individually or
collectively,
to enter into contracts with non-member states which impose
obligations affecting these common rules. Where the Community concludes
in pursuance of a common policy, this excludes the possibility of a concurrent
authority on the part of the member states.
This means that where a state attempts to exercise concurrent authority it
will be overridden to the extent that it conflicts with
Community law. The only
exception to this rule is where a member state is under an obligation stemming
from an international agreement
which the member state has entered into before
it became a party to the relevant Community Treaty.
In summary, a provision of Community law always prevails over national law.
This rule cannot be found in any of the Treaties but has
been proclaimed with
great emphasis by the European Court. It applies irrespective of the nature of
the Community provision, whether
founding Treaty, Community act or agreement
with a non-member State, and the nature of the national provision, be it the
constitution,
a statute or subordinate legislation. It also applies irrespective
of whether the Community provision came into force before or after
the national
provision: in all cases the national provision must give way to Community law.
Supremacy as a condition precedent for direct
The proposition that supremacy is a condition precedent for direct effect is
based on two findings: first, in the absence of supremacy
the creation of the
doctrine of direct effect would have resulted in an uneven application of
Community law in the member states.
This would have been an unacceptable result
for the European Community as it would have threatened the Community legal
its entirety. Secondly, the European Court of Justice did not create
the principles of direct effect and supremacy in isolation,
but assumed the
existence of the supremacy doctrine when creating the principle of direct effect
Van Gend en Loos
The two findings will be discussed in
In the absence of supremacy Community law would apply
unevenly in the member states
Direct effect of a Community provision would be futile if it was not accorded
a higher status than national law in a domestic court.
If a member state court
would have to apply the domestic law of its country in preference to Community
law an individual litigant
would not be protected by the Community provision
notwithstanding its direct effect. The principle of direct effect would
lack any practical significance.
This argument does, however, not necessarily provide a justification for the
creation of a supremacy rule in Community law because
the constitutions of the
member states have always contained supremacy rules dealing with the status of
international law in their
domestic legal systems. The crucial question is
therefore whether the creation of a
priority rule was required
or whether the domestic supremacy provisions would have been sufficient to
render Community law supreme
over national law, thus ensuring that litigants
could rely on directly effective Community law in national courts. An analysis
the constitutional supremacy rules of the members states reveals that these
are not uniform.
Some member states take a monist approach to
international law,
while others have dualist systems.
In order to answer the question whether a priority rule in Community law was
required, the concepts of monism and dualism must be
examined in more detail. In
a monist state, international treaties are considered to be part of the domestic
legal order. Treaty
provisions become part of that order by an ‘act of
adoption’ in which they are declared operative within the state. The
purest form of monism prevails where treaties are directly applicable in
national law and have a higher status than national law,
including subsequent
domestic legislation and even the constitutional rules of the country. In a
dualist state, on the other hand,
treaties are not regarded as forming part of
the domestic law but as part of a different legal order. Therefore, an
transformation’ of treaty law into national law is necessary
for the treaty rules to become operative in the domestic legal
system. The act
of transformation is some action by the authorities of the state which can have
various forms, for example, a parliamentary
statute, another legislative
instrument, such as a regulation of an administrative body, or an action or
decision of a court or tribunal.
Because in a dualist system a treaty does not
directly become domestic law, but is transformed into domestic law by a domestic
treaty law will never come into direct conflict with domestic law. If a
conflict between the new law which implements the treaty
and the law that
regulated the relevant area of law before the treaty implementation arises, it
will be resolved according to the
national rules relating to priority between
domestic laws. Therefore, in a dualist state international law can never be
supreme over
national law. In a monist system, on the other hand, directly
applicable treaty law can be conflicting with domestic law and which
prevails depends on the national priority rules between international and
national law.
At the time when the European Court of Justice created the doctrine of direct
four of the six member states took a monist approach to
international law, while the other two had dualist systems.
constitutions of the Netherlands, France, Belgium and Luxembourg created a
monist structure and gave supremacy to international
treaties which were
directly effective. Therefore, directly effective provisions of Community law
would have been supreme in these
countries independently of whether a Community
doctrine of supremacy existed. In contrast, in the dualist member states Italy
Germany international treaties did not have a superior status in comparison
to national law. Therefore, national legislation passed
later in time than
Community rules would have prevailed over Community law in those countries under
the doctrine of implied repeal.
As a result of these varying approaches to international law, a case
concerning European Community law would have a different outcome
depending on
whether it was heard in a monist or a dualist state, if no Community rule about
supremacy existed. For example, the
plaintiff in
Van Gend en Loos
the case in which the European Court created the doctrine of direct
effect, would have been successful in a Dutch, but not in an Italian
Dutch court which asked the ECJ for a preliminary ruling relied on a
constitution which establishes a truly monist approach
to international law.
Article 93 of the Dutch constitution provides:
Provisions of treaties and of resolutions by international institutions, which
may be binding on all persons by virtue of their contents
shall become binding
after they have been published.
Article 94 reads as follows:
Statutory regulations in force within the Kingdom shall not be applicable if
such application is in conflict with provisions of treaties
that are binding on
all persons or of resolutions by international institutions.
Therefore, those international provisions which bind not only
the state, but also citizens, are directly applicable in the Netherlands
take precedence over national legislation and even the constitution.
In order to decide a case where the claimant relied on the direct effect
of Article 12 EEC Treaty the Dutch court only needed to find
out whether that
article was ‘binding on all persons by virtue of its contents,’ in
other words directly effective. Once
the European Court of Justice had
positively decided this point it was obvious for the Dutch court that Article 12
EEC Treaty would
take precedence over the Dutch customs legislation under
Article 94 of the Dutch constitution. Therefore, the claimant would have
able to rely on Article 12 without the aid of a Community doctrine of supremacy.
A claimant in the same situation in Italy, however, would not have been able
to rely on Article 12. Although the European Court declared
the provision
directly effective, an Italian court would nevertheless have been under a
constitutional obligation to apply the Italian
customs legislation in preference
to Community law under the doctrine of implied repeal. This view was confirmed
by the Italian Constitutional
Court in its preliminary ruling in
Therefore, in the absence of a Community doctrine of
supremacy, the claimant’s rights would not have been protected although
the Treaty article relied on had direct effect.
The analysis demonstrates that, because some member states take a monist and
others a dualist approach to international law, directly
effective Community law
would have been applied unevenly in the different member states had the doctrine
of supremacy of Community
law not existed. A uniform application of Community
law in all the states is, however, essential to promote the functioning of
law as a supranational legal order. Steiner and Woods go so far as to
claim that, if Community law would not apply uniformly throughout
the Community,
that would not only weaken the effect of Community law, but it would undermine
solidarity among the member states
and ultimately threaten the existence of the
Community itself.
It was thus compelling for the European Court of Justice to create the
doctrine of supremacy of Community law in order to safeguard
this uniform
application and arguably even the continued existence of the Community.
In summary, in a Community where some member states follow a monist and
others a dualist approach the doctrine of direct effect alone
would not have
practical significance in all of the member states and would even promote an
uneven application of Community law.
Therefore, the doctrine of supremacy is a
condition precedent for the doctrine of direct effect.
This conclusion is further supported by the considerations advanced in the
following part.
The European Court of Justice assumed the existence
of the supremacy principle when creating the principle for direct
When the doctrine of direct effect was created, the European Court of Justice
already recognised the crucial connection between the
former doctrine and the
supremacy principle. This is revealed by an in-depth analysis of the
where the European Court of Justice assumed the
existence of supremacy of Community law, although it did not expressly enunciate
it. Two arguments support this conclusion: first, the case contains a clear
obiter dictum
forceful opinion, explaining in detail that the creation of the doctrine
direct effect would undermine the uniform application of Community law in the
member states.
Despite the strength of his argument and the obvious
threat that an uneven application of Community law poses, the Court did not
mention the issue in its judgment. A logical explanation for this omission is
that it did not endeavour to create the doctrine
of direct effect in isolation,
but in conjunction with the doctrine of supremacy as a condition precedent.
obiter dictum
on which the first argument is based reads as
[T]he Community constitutes a new legal order of international law for the
benefit of which
the states have limited their sovereign rights
By emphasising that the member states had limited
their sovereign rights in this new legal order, the Court laid the foundation
the principle of supremacy of Community law. One year later, it explained in
Costa v ENEL
that, as a consequence of this limitation, member state law
could not override Community law. It even used identical wording when
illustrating the legal basis of the supremacy principle.
An analysis of the Advocate General’s opinion must be conducted to
outline the second argument. Advocate General Romer suggested
that the Court
should not declare Article 12 EEC Treaty directly effective and not create a
doctrine of direct effect. One of his
arguments against the creation was that
the doctrine of direct effect would lead to the following undesirable result:
Community law
would not apply equally in all the member states because some of
them had a monist, while others had a dualist approach to international
After demonstrating that the constitutional rules relating to the supremacy of
international law differed in the member states,
he went on to say:
[I]t is in my opinion doubtful whether the authors [of the Treaty], when dealing
with a provision of such importance as customs law,
intended to produce the
consequences of an uneven development of the law involved in the principle of
direct application, consequences
which do not accord with an essential aim of
the Community.
According to the Advocate
General’s reasoning, citizens in the monist countries could rely on
Community law in the national
courts, while citizens could not do so in the
dualist countries, if the Court created a doctrine of direct effect. Obviously
Advocate General did not presuppose a general doctrine of supremacy of
Community law complementing the principle of direct effect.
In the absence of
supremacy, his argument against direct effect is very compelling because, as has
been shown above, the uniform
application of Community law in all the member
states is essential for its function as a supranational legal order.
Considering the strength of Advocate General Romer’s argument, it is
surprising that the European Court of Justice did not even
mention his concern
in its judgment, although it must have realised that the situation described by
the Advocate General had to be
avoided at all cost. It is highly unlikely that
the European Court would have jeopardised the equal application of Community law
in all of the member states by creating the doctrine of direct effect. Obviously
it did not see the danger of unequal application
of laws arise. That can only be
explained if the European Court of Justice assumed the existence of supremacy of
Community law when
creating the doctrine of direct effect.
A statement made by the Court in the subsequent case of
supports this conclusion:
[Direct effect] means that rules of Community law must be fully and uniformly
applied in all the member states from the date of their
entry into force and for
so long as they continue in force.
As has been shown, direct
effect only means that Community rules are uniformly applied in all the member
states, if it is coupled
with supremacy.
That leaves the question why, if the European Court of Justice assumed the
existence of the doctrine of supremacy of Community law
Van Gend en
it did not explicitly enunciate the principle in that
case, but waited another year instead.
The answer to this question
relates probably to the nature of a reference for a preliminary ruling under
Article 234 (ex Article
177) EC Treaty.
Van Gend en Loos
was a reference
for such a preliminary ruling. In this type of proceeding the Court usually
merely answers the questions put to it
by the national court.
Dutch court had only asked whether Article 12 EEC Treaty had direct effect, but
not whether it was supreme over national law.
One year later the Court had the opportunity to address the supremacy issue
comprehensively in
Costa v ENEL
The referring court asked
whether certain pieces of Italian legislation infringed certain Treaty articles.
The Italian government
submitted that the reference for a preliminary ruling was
‘absolutely inadmissible’ because the Italian judge should
applied Italian law in priority over Community law under the Italian
constitution.91 The European Court of Justice took the
opportunity to state
clearly and comprehensively that Community law was supreme over national
In conclusion, it has been shown that the principles of direct effect and
supremacy of Community law, the two essential characteristics
of the Community
legal order, are closely related. It was not a coincidence that the European
Court of Justice enunciated the two
principles in two consecutive years. Without
supremacy there would be an uneven application of directly effective Community
the member states and in dualist systems citizens would not be assisted
by directly effective provisions in national courts. The
European Court of
Justice recognised the vital connection between the two concepts already in
Van Gend en Loos
. Although it did not explicitly pronounce the supremacy
principle in that case, it proceeded on the assumption that Community law
supreme over national law. Because direct effect cannot exist without supremacy,
the doctrine of supremacy of Community law is
a condition precedent for the
doctrine of direct effect.
* The author is a Lecturer in Law at The University of Adelaide and a PhD
candidate at The University of Queensland. An earlier draft
of this paper was
delivered to the 2002 PhD Colloquium at the TC Beirne School of Law at The
University of Queensland. The author
would like to thank the attendees of the
Colloquium for their comments and Garrick Professor Gabriël Moens for his
stimulating
comments and suggestions throughout the completion process.
For example, Ulrich Everling, , note 1 at 1206; AG Toth,
Encyclopaedia of European Community Law
, vol 1, Institutional Law, Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1990 at 168; Trevor C Hartley,
The Foundations of European
Community Law
, 4th edn, Oxford University Press, New York, 1998 at 191.
Opinion 1/91,
Draft agreement between the Community, on the one hand,
and the countries of the European Free Trade Association, on the other, relating
to the creation of the European Economic Area
[1991] ECR I-6079
The term ‘condition precedent’ is usually used in contract law.
Concise Australian Legal Dictionary
defines a condition precedent as
‘a stipulation that must be fulfilled before one of the parties becomes
subject to a contractual
obligation’; Peter E Nygh and Peter Butt (eds),
Concise Australian Legal Dictionary
, 2nd edn, Butterworths, Sydney, 1998
at 85. In this paper the term is used in a different, public law, sense to mean
that one principle
has to be present before another can have legal effect. It is
argued that, unless a provision of Community law is supreme over domestic
it cannot have direct effect.
The ECJ uses the terms ‘ordinary international law’ or
‘ordinary international treaties’ to distinguish
other international
agreements and rules from the funding treaties of the European Communities and
Community law. It takes this course
because it regards the European Community as
a special supranational organisation which differs from ‘ordinary’
international
organisations’ because it is of unlimited duration, has its
own institutions, personality, legal capacity and capacity of representation
the international plane and also real powers stemming from a limitation of
sovereignty or a transfer of powers from the states
to the Community; case 6/64,
Costa v ENEL
[1964] ECR 585
at 593. In this article the term will be
used in the same way.
From the perspective of international law this statement is incorrect
because all international treaties should be directly applicable
and supreme
over national law in all signatory countries to an international agreement from
the time when the agreement is signed
or enters into force. However, the
domestic law of every country contains constitutional rules which deal with the
status of international
law in their domestic legal system. It is these rules
which determine how international law can take effect in national law.
JA Winter, ‘Direct applicability and direct effect, two distinct and
different concepts in Community law’
(1972) 9 CMLRev 425
Trevor C Hartley, note 2 at 189–90; for a comprehensive analysis of the
monist and dualist doctrines see John
H Jackson, ‘Status of treaties in
domestic legal systems: a policy analysis’ (1992) 86
Am Jo Int L
AG Toth, note 2 at 166.
Case 26/62,
NV Algemene Transport- en Expeditie Onderneming van Gend
& Loos v Netherlands Inland Revenue Administration
[1963] ECR 1.
Trevor C Hartley, note 2 at 191.
Under Article 234 (ex Article 177) EC Treaty the European Court of Justice
has jurisdiction to give preliminary rulings concerning
the interpretation of
Community provisions including the EC Treaty. Where a question concerning the
interpretation of such a provision
is raised before a court of a member state,
that court can, if it considers that a decision of the question is necessary to
it to give judgment, request the Court of Justice to give a ruling
thereon. For a comprehensive discussion of the procedure under
Article 234 (ex
Article 177) see, for example, Paul Craig and Gráinne de Búrca,
Law, Text, Cases and, Materials
, 3rd edn, Oxford University Press, New York,
2003 at 432–38.
Case 26/62,
NV Algemene Transport- en Expeditie Onderneming van Gend
& Loos v Netherlands Inland Revenue Administration
[1963] ECR 1
Article 12 EEC Treaty was replaced by a new provision in the Treaty of
Case 26/62,
NV Algemene Transport- en Expeditie Onderneming van Gend
& Loos v Netherlands Inland Revenue Administration
, Opinion of the
Advocate General,
[1963] ECR 1
at 20-2, 24. Under Article 222 (ex Article 166)
EC Treaty the European Court of Justice has eight Advocates General who are
of the Court. It is their duty to assist the Court by advising on the
factual situation and the legal solution to a dispute with
complete impartiality
and independence. Each case coming before the court is assigned to an Advocate
General who follows closely
the progress of the case. Once the written procedure
is completed, the Advocate General presents to the court his/her view on whether
any preparatory inquiry is necessary and whether the case should be dealt with
by a Chamber or by the Full Court. Subsequently, the
Advocate General is present
at the hearing of the case and is entitled to put questions to witnesses and
parties. Some weeks after
the hearing the Advocate General delivers his written
Opinion to the Court. He/She analyses the facts and legal aspects of the case
detail, and proposes his/her solution to the problem. The Court is not bound by
the Advocate General’s view, but the judges
take it into account in the
course of their deliberations and follow it in a majority of cases. The Opinion
of the Advocate General
is reported with the judgment. See Paul Craig and
Gráinne de Búrca, note 11 at 88, 93–96.
Case 26/62,
NV Algemene Transport- en Expeditie Onderneming van Gend
& Loos v Netherlands Inland Revenue Administration
[1963] ECR 1
this view was confirmed in case 43/75, Defrenne v Sabena,
[1976] ECR 455
Case 26/62,
NV Algemene Transport- en Expeditie Onderneming van Gend
& Loos v Netherlands Inland Revenue Administration
[1963] ECR 1
Case 106/77,
Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v Simmenthal
[1978] EUECJ R-106/77
[1978] ECR 629.
In the last part of this paper it will be argued that direct effect only
ensures the uniformapplication of Community law in the
member states if it is
coupled with supremacy.
AG Toth, note 2 at 168.
Case 26/62,
NV Algemene Transport- en Expeditie Onderneming van Gend
& Loos v Netherlands
Inland Revenue Administration
[1963] ECR 1
See Articles 81 (ex Article 85), 82 (ex 86), 244 (ex 187), 249 (ex 189),
254 (ex 191) and 256 (ex 192) EC Treaty.
See Articles 84 (ex Article 88), 234 (ex 177), 244 (ex 187), 256 (ex 192)
EC Treaty; Articles 26 and 27 EEC Statute.
For example, Case 2/74,
, Opinion of the Advocate General,
[1974] ECR 631
For example, Case 41/74,
Van Duyn v Home Office
, Opinion of the
Advocate General,
[1974] ECR 1337
For example Case 43/75,
Defrenne v Sabena
[1976] ECR 455
480–81 as interpreted and applied in Case 61/79,
Denkavit Italiana
[1980] ECR 1205
at 1223–34 and in Joined Cases 66, 127, 128/79, Salumi,
[1980] ECR 1237.
Case 26/62,
NV Algemene Transport- en Expeditie Onderneming van Gend
& Loos v Netherlands Inland Revenue Administration
[1963] ECR 1
Case 57/65,
Lütticke v Hauptzollamt Saarlouis
[1966] ECR 205
at 210; see also Case 28/67,
Firma Molkerei-Zentrale Westfalen v Hauptzollamt
[1968] ECR 143
AG Toth, note 2, 1990 at 173; Trevor C Hartley, note 2 at 191.
Gabriël Moens and David Flint,
Business Law of the European
, DataLegal Publications, Brisbane, 1993 at 283.
Gabriël Moens and David Flint, note 32 at 283; AG Toth, note 2 at
Regulations, directives and decisions are those legislative Community
instruments which are binding on the member states and not
recommendatory. Regulations and directives are general rules, while decisions
are addressed to particular addressees. Under
Article 249 (ex Article 189) EC
Treaty regulations are directly applicable in all member states. Directives, on
the other hand, are
only binding as to the result to be achieved, but it is in
the member states’ discretion how to achieve it.
Trevor C Hartley, note 2 at 216f; Toth A G, note 2 at 173ff; Pescatore
Pierre, ‘The doctrine of “Direct Effect”:
an infant disease of
Community law’
at 171ff; Josephine Steiner and
Lorna Woods, Textbook on EC Law, (5th edn, Blackstone Press, London, 1996) at
. 35 There is no similar provision in the ECSC Treaty for general decisions
(equivalent to EC Treaty regulations). 36 Trevor C Hartley,
note 2 at 197;
Josephine Steiner and Lorna Woods, note 35 at 38; Pierre Pescatore, note 35 fn
The first one to make this distinction was JA Winter, note 7.
See for example AG Toth, note 2 at 160–61, 166; Gabriël Moens
and David Flint, note 32 at
; Josephine Steiner and Lorna Woods, note 35 at 38; D Lasok and KPELasok,
Lasok and Bridge, Law and Institutions of the European
Union, (6th edn,
Butterworths, London, 1994) at 294–45.
Trevor C Hartley, note 2 at 187.
Josephine Steiner and Lorna Woods, note 35 at 65.
See explanation in note 6.
For example, Articles 93–94 of the Dutch constitution accord
supremacy to all forms of international law, whether prior or
subsequent to
domestic law; Article 55 of the French constitution provides that treaties and
agreements duly ratified ‘have
authority superior to that of laws’;
Article 24 of the German constitution provides that the state ‘may
transfer sovereign
powers’ to intergovernmental institutions; according to
Article 11 of the Italian constitution the state ‘consents, on
of reciprocity with other States, to limitations of sovereignty necessary for an
arrangement which may ensure peace and
justice between the nations’. The
principle of reciprocity means in this context that if one party to an agreement
its obligations, the other contracting parties may regard themselves as
entitled to be relieved of theirs. The UK takes a dualist
approach to
international law, which means that Treaties have to be transformed into
national law before they become part of the
UK legal system. Furthermore, it
does not have a written constitution. Therefore, it must provide for priorities
in the statute that
incorporates the international Treaty. This statute has the
same status as any other national statute and will as such be vulnerable
lex posterior derogat priori
whereby any inconsistency between
an earlier and a later statute is resolved in favour of the latter. The later
statute is impliedly
deemed to have repealed the earlier one (see
Street Estates Ltd v Minister of Health (Ellen Street Estates Ltd v Minister of
(1934) 1 KB 590).
With regard to Community law that would mean that
any provision of a UK statute passed subsequent to the statute incorporating EC
law (the European Communities Act 1972 ) which was inconsistent with Community
law would take priority. Translations of constitutions
taken from Josephine
Steiner and Lorna Woods, note 35 at 65–66.
The doctrine is also referred to as primacy or precedence of Community
Toth AG, note 2 at 168.
Case 26/62,
NV Algemene Transport- en Expeditie Onderneming van Gend
& Loos v Netherland
Inland Revenue Administration
[1963] ECR 1.
Costa v ENEL
[1964] ECR 585.
Case 26/62,
NV Algemene Transport- en Expeditie Onderneming van Gend
& Loos v Netherlands
Inland Revenue Administration
[1963] ECR 1.
Article 10(2) EC Treaty reads: [Member States] shall abstain from any
measure which could jeopardise the attainment of the objectives
of this Treaty.
Article 12 EC Treaty reads: Within the scope of application of this
Treaty, and without prejudice to any special provisions contained
therein, any
discrimination on grounds of nationality shall be prohibited.
Costa v ENEL
[1964] ECR 585
AG Toth, note 2 at 502; Steiner Josephine and Woods Lorna, note 35 at 69.
Case 11/70,
Internationale Handelsgesellschaft v Einfuhr- und
Vorratsstelle für Getreide &
Futtermittel
[1970] EUECJ R-11/70
[1970] ECR 1125.
Case 106/77,
Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v Simmenthal SpA
[1978] EUECJ R-106/77
[1978] ECR 629.
Case 11/70,
Internationale Handelsgesellschaft v Einfuhr- und
Vorratsstelle für Getreide
Futtermittel
[1970] EUECJ R-11/70
[1970] ECR 1125.
Case 106/77,
Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v Simmenthal
[1978] EUECJ R-106/77
[1978] ECR 629
, at 644. 60
. 61 Case 167/73,
Commission v
[1974] ECR 359
, at 372–73. 63 Case
Commission of the European Communities v Council of the European
Communities.
European Agreement on Road Transport (ERTA)
[1971] ECR 263.
Case 158/91,
, [1993] ECR I–4287 at 4307.
Case 26/62,
NV Algemene Transport- en Expeditie Onderneming van Gend
& Loos v Netherlands Inland Revenue Administration
[1963] ECR 1.
The only exception that could be anticipated is where no national rule
exists in an area that is regulated by Community law. However,
this situation
would only arise very rarely.
See above fn 43.
For example, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, France, Belgium; see John H
Jackson, note 7 at 320. 70 For example Germany, Italy and
the United Kingdom,
see John H Jackson, note 7 at 320. 71 For a thorough analysis of the status of
international treaties in national
legal systems see
John H Jackson, note 7. 72 In 1963, case 26/62,
NV Algemene Transport- en
Expeditie Onderneming van Gend & Loos v Netherlands Inland Revenue
Administration
[1963] ECR 1
73 In 1963 the European Community only had six
Member States: France, Germany, Italy, Belgium, Luxemburg and the Netherlands.
The doctrine of implied repeal lays down the rule that any inconsistency
between an earlier and a later statute is resolved in favour
of the latter, see
Case 26/62,
NV Algemene Transport- en Expeditie Onderneming van Gend
& Loos v Netherlands Inland Revenue Administration
[1963] ECR 1.
John H Jackson, note 7 at 320.
Costa v Enel e soc Edisonvolta
, 7 March 1964, n 14.
Josephine Steiner and Lorna Woods, note 35 at 66.
Case 26/62,
NV Algemene Transport- en Expeditie Onderneming van Gend
& Loos v Netherland
Inland Revenue Administration
[1963] ECR 1.
Advocate General Romer’s argument corresponded to the first part of
the analysis conducted under the previous heading. He
examined the legal systems
of the six member states and pointed out how directly effective Community law
would apply in each state.
He came to the conclusion that Community law would
apply unevenly in the states if the doctrine of direct effect was created.
Case 26/62, NV
Algemene Transport- en Expeditie Onderneming van Gend
& Loos v Netherlands Inland Revenue Administration
[1963] ECR 1
Emphasis added.
Costa v ENEL
[1964] ECR 585
at 593 the Court said:
‘By creating a Community of unlimited duration, having its own
institutions, its own personality, its
own legal capacity and capacity of
representation on the international plane and, more particularly, real powers
stemming from a
limitation of sovereignty or a transfer of powers from the
States to the Community,
the member states have limited their sovereign
, albeit within limited fields, and have thus created a body of law
which binds both their nationals and themselves’ [emphasis
Case 26/62,
NV Algemene Transport- en Expeditie Onderneming van Gend
& Loos v Netherlands Inland Revenue Administration
, Opinion of the
Advocate General,
[1963] ECR 1
at 23–24; Advocate General Romer concluded
that Belgium had a dualist system. The Belgian courts have taken the opposite
see John H Jackson, note 7 at 320.
Case 26/62,
NV Algemene Transport- en Expeditie Onderneming van Gend
& Loos v Netherlands Inland Revenue Administration
, Opinion of the
Advocate General,
[1963] ECR 1
at 24; Although the Advocate General uses the
term ‘direct application’ it is clear from the context that he means
effect.’ As stated above, regrettably the European Court of
Justice does not make a clear distinction, but uses the two expressions
interchangeably.
Case 106/77,
Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v Simmenthal
[1978] EUECJ R-106/77
[1978] ECR 629
. 87 Case 26/62, NV Algemene Transport- en Expeditie Onderneming van Gend
& Loos v Netherlands Inland Revenue Administration,
[1963] ECR 1.
Costa v ENEL
[1964] ECR 585.
Josephine Steiner and Lorna Woods, Textbook on EC Law, (7th edn,
Blackstone Press,
London, 2000) 487; Paul Craig and Gráinne de Búrca, note 11 at 432;
Trevor C Hartley, note 2 at 289–90; Andrew Evans,
A Textbook on EU Law,
(Hart Publishing, Oxford, 1998) at 138–39.
Costa v ENEL
[1964] ECR 585.
This view had been confirmed by the Italian Constitutional Court in its
Costa v ENEL
Costa v Enel e soc Edisonvolta
1964, n 14.
Costa v ENEL
[1964] ECR 585
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (141 KB)
PDF format (124 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter