URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle --- "Chapter 10 - Enduring Powers of Attorney" [2011] SydUPLawBk 12; in O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle (eds), "Capacity and the Law" (Sydney University Press, 2011)
10. 1. Introduction
10. 2. What is an enduring power of attorney?
10. 3. Capacity to make enduring powers of attorney and to revoke them – the legal tests
10. 3. 1. The common law tests – used in New South Wales, South Australia, Western Australia and the Northern Territory
10. 3. 2. Queensland and Tasmania
10. 3. 3. Victoria
10. 3. 4. Australian Capital Territory
10. 4. Assessing capacity to make and revoke enduring powers of attorney
10. 4. 1 The generic aspects of capacity assessment
10. 4. 2 The application of the specific tests to the assessment of capacity
10. 5. Appointing attorneys under enduring powers of attorney
10. 5. 1. Who may be appointed?
10. 5. 2. Appointment procedures
10. 6. Responsibilities of attorneys appointed under enduring powers of attorney
10. 6. 1. Obligations of enduring attorneys
10. 6. 2. Administrative powers and responsibilities of enduring attorneys
10. 7. Legislative limitations on things that attorneys can do under enduring powers of attorney
10. 7. 1. The giving of gifts
10. 7. 2. The giving of benefits to themselves and others by attorneys
10. 8. Registration of enduring powers of attorney
10. 9. Recognition of enduring powers of attorney made elsewhere in Australia
10. 10. Effect on enduring powers of attorney of guardianship tribunals and courts making administration orders
10. 10. 1. New South Wales
10. 10. 2. Queensland
10. 10. 3. South Australia
10. 10. 4. Tasmania
10. 10. 5. Victoria
10. 10. 6. Western Australia
10. 10. 7. Australian Capital Territory
10. 10. 8. Northern Territory
10. 11. Role of guardianship tribunals and courts in reviewing the making and operation and effect of enduring powers of attorney
10. 11. 1. New South Wales
10. 11. 2. Queensland
10. 11. 3. South Australia
10. 11. 4. Tasmania
10. 11. 5. Victoria
10. 11. 6. Western Australia
10. 11. 7. Australian Capital Territory
10. 11. 8. Northern Territory
Chapter 10 – Enduring Powers of Attorney
10. 1. Introduction
In 1925 in Tasmania a woman gave her nephew a power of attorney to empower
him to manage her affairs “if and whenever and so
long as I shall be
incapacitated by illness from attending to business”. Three months later
the woman was certified insane
and hospitalised. The nephew managed the
woman’s estate and financial affairs until she died in 1928. Nicholls CJ
the nephew did not have any authority to manage his aunt’s
financial affairs while she was
He relied upon an English
court of Appeal case in which it was stated that the authority of an attorney
ended when the person who
gave them power of attorney became
It probably was the case that many powers of attorney were made where the
capacity of the person to make a power of attorney was in
doubt and that the
power of attorney continued to be exercised by the attorney even though the
appointor had clearly lost capacity.
Nevertheless, it was not until the 1980s
that legislation was enacted to provide for enduring powers of attorney which a
person could
make if they wanted their attorney to continue to manage their
financial affairs after they lost the capacity to manage them themselves
revoke the power of attorney.
Since the 1980s many enduring powers of attorney have been made by adults
with a diagnosis of dementia and others in anticipation
of them losing their
capacity to manage their financial affairs. While most of these enduring powers
of attorney will have been made
while the person was still capable and most
attorneys will have carried out their responsibilities as an attorney both
competently
and ethically, some will have been made when the maker was already
incapable and some attorneys will have acted contrary to the interests
person who appointed them. Also, many attorneys do not know what their
responsibilities as attorneys are.
These matters have been addressed in legislation that has been revised or
enacted since 1998. With the exception of South Australia
and the Northern
Territory, State guardianship tribunals and ACAT in the Australian Capital
Territory have been given the task of
reviewing the making and the operation of
enduring powers of attorney. They have also been given the power to revoke or
vary enduring
powers of attorney and to call attorneys to account. In South
Australia and the Northern Territory this supervisory role is held
Supreme Court.
This chapter deals with the capacity of adults to make powers of attorney,
aspects of the responsibilities of attorneys when acting
as attorneys for
incapable people and the role of the guardianship tribunals and the Supreme
Courts in reviewing the making of enduring
powers of attorney and the carrying
out of their functions by attorneys appointed under enduring powers of attorney.
10. 2. What is an enduring power of
An enduring power of attorney is a form of agency through which a competent
adult appoints another person or the relevant Public or
State Trustee or a
trustee corporation as their agent to do certain things of a financial nature
that the maker of the power of attorney
has a legal right to do themselves. Like
all agents, an attorney under an enduring power of attorney has no more powers
to act than
the person who appointed them. However, they are given the power by
legislation to continue to act as their appointor’s attorney
their appointor has lost their capacity either to appoint or rescind their
appointment of an attorney.
10. 3. Capacity to make enduring powers of attorney
and to revoke them – the legal tests
For the purposes of this chapter it is assumed that the tests for capacity to
make enduring powers of attorney are the same as the
tests for capacity to
revoke them.
10. 3. 1. The common law tests
– used in New South Wales, South Australia, Western Australia and the
Northern Territory
In New South Wales, South Australia, Western Australia and the Northern
Territory the test for capacity to make an enduring power
of attorney is found
in the cases set out below.
In Queensland, and following it in Tasmania, Victoria and the Australian
Capital Territory, the test for the capacity to make an enduring
attorney is found in the powers of attorney legislation.
The starting point for the common law is its presumption that an adult has
the mental capacity to enter any legal transaction or make
any legal document
such as a will or a power of attorney. However, where the question of mental
capacity is relevant, the statement
of Dixon CJ, Kitto and Taylor JJ in
Gibbons v Wright
sets out the general principle. They said:
[T]he mental capacity required by the law in respect of any instrument is
relative to the particular transaction which is being effected
by means of the
instrument, and may be described as the capacity to understand the nature of
that transaction when it is
The approach of the High Court judges in
Gibbons v Wright
acknowledges
that many of us will not know the nature and effect of most legal documents
unless those matters are explained to us.
Ranclaud v Cabban
set out some of the specific matters that a maker of an enduring power of
attorney had to understand in order to be capable
of making a valid enduring
power of attorney. He noted that enduing powers of attorney permit the attorney
to exercise any function
which the maker of the power of attorney may lawfully
authorise an attorney to do and that when considering whether a person was
capable of making an enduring power of attorney it was necessary to be sure that
they understood not only that they were authorising
someone to look after their
affairs but also the sort of things the attorney could do without further
reference to them.
In a 2005 case also involving an elderly person making numerous enduring
powers of attorney, the then Queensland Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal
Ranclaud v Cabban
was a case in which a 79 year old woman made
six enduring powers of attorney in favour, alternatively, of two different
persons over
a 8 ½ month period. Young J was concerned that because the
woman had executed so many powers of attorney in such a short time
she did not
appear to have the ability to weigh up alternatives, make decisions and give
instructions which were likely to remain
constant for any
The Queensland Tribunal applied
Ranclaud v Cabban
and, after making
its findings of fact, was satisfied that Mr CEJ did not have the capacity to
make or revoke enduring powers of
attorney since a certain
In England the test for capacity to make an enduring power of attorney has
been summed up into four points. The maker must understand
the nature and effect
of an enduring power of attorney they are making. This means that they must
appreciate that:
1. the attorney will be able to assume complete authority over the maker's
affairs (or all those covered by the enduring power of
2. the attorney will in general be able to do anything with the maker's
property which they could have done,
3. the attorney’s authority will continue if the maker becomes mentally
incapable, and
4. in the event that they become mentally incapable, the power will be
effectively irrevocable.
In 2007 in Queensland, following an unreported Supreme Court decision, the
then Guardianship and Administration Tribunal accepted
expert medical opinion
that for most members of the community enduring powers of attorney were both
more unfamiliar and more complex
Consequently, the Tribunal
considered that a higher level of cognitive ability and therefore a higher
standard of capacity would
be required for making an enduring power of attorney
than for making a will.
In 2008, in a case involving an enduring power of attorney sworn in the
Australian embassy in Lebanon, but conforming with the requirements
Instruments Act 1958
, Forrest J of the Supreme Court of
Victoria adopted the suggestion made by the authors of
Mental Capacity -
Powers of Attorney and Advance Health
that to apply
Young J’s approach in
, the following
matters, at least, needed to be considered:
1. the nature and extent of the assets to be managed (at least in a broad
2. the decisions likely to be made on the donor’s behalf; and
3. the ability of the attorney to carry out the tasks
Forrest J then continued by noting that if the test in
was applied, the question would be; did the maker of the enduring
power of attorney understand its purport when they signed (executed)
However, if the
Ranclaud v Cabban
test were to be applied, the maker of
the enduring power of attorney would have to have had “a more intricate
understanding”
of the consequences of the enduring power of attorney, and
in particular the actions that could be taken by the enduring attorney
relation to, in the case Forrest J was deciding, the companies and the trust
properties that the maker of the enduring power of
attorney owned or
controlled.
Forrest J took the view that the
Ranclaud v Cabban
test should be
accepted. He considered it was consistent with the English case referred to
, in requiring
more than just an appreciation of the purport of a power of attorney and not
inconsistent with
Gibbons v Wright
. He went on to note that each enduring
power of attorney should be examined in accordance with its accompanying
circumstances. In
the circumstances of the case he was deciding this meant that
it had to be proved that the maker of the enduring power of attorney
he made the enduring power of attorney, that he was giving the enduring attorney
control over trust properties in a real,
if not a legal, sense. While the maker
of the enduring power of attorney did not have to understand all the intricate
parts of the
transactions that the enduring attorney was about to enter into, it
had to be proved, given the significant assets involved, that
he understood at
the time he made the enduring power of attorney that his enduring attorney would
have the ability to transfer the
shareholdings and the directorship of the trust
companies to others (including himself) and to effect the sale of the properties
which were the subject of the trust deed at a price determined by the enduring
In the 2010 case,
Szozda v Szozda
, Barrett J of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales followed the Australian and English authorities set out
He accepted suggestions
in submissions that the degree of understanding required of a maker of an
enduring power of attorney will
vary with the extent and complexity of the
maker’s affairs. So that it is likely that a finding of lack of capacity
readily be made in relation to a person with a great deal of property
of various kinds and who has interests in many businesses than
in relation to a
person with objectively identical characteristics in relation to mental capacity
but who has, say, only a house,
its contents and a bank
Barrett J was at pains to differentiate between the capacity needed to make a
will and that required to make an enduring power of
attorney which gave the
attorney general and consequently wide powers. He noted that will-makers must
have the capacity to appreciate
what their property is, to recognise the persons
who have a moral claim to the estate and to exercise a balanced judgment as to
claims. These were not matters that makers of enduring powers of attorney,
which give the attorney general powers, have to put their
minds to. What they
were doing was giving a “complete and lasting delegation” to the
attorney. He continued:
That concept of empowering another person to act generally in relation to
one’s affairs raises two basic questions. First,
is it to my benefit and
in my interests to allow another person to have control over the whole of my
affairs so that they can act
in those affairs in any way in which I could myself
act – but with no duty to seek my permission in advance or to tell me
the event, so that they can, if they so decide, do things in my affairs
that I would myself wish to do (such as pay my bills and
make sure that cheques
arriving in the post are put safely into the bank) and also things that I would
not choose to do and would
not wish to see done – sell my treasured stamp
collection; stop the monthly allowance I pay to my grandson; exercise my power
as appointor under the family trust and thereby change the children and
grandchildren who are to be income beneficiaries; instruct
my financial adviser
to sell all my blue chip shares and to buy instead collateralised debt
obligations in New York; have my dog
put down; sell my house; buy a place for me
in a nursing home? Second, is it to my benefit and in my interests that all
these things
– indeed, everything that I can myself lawfully do –
can be done by the particular person who is to be my attorney? Is
that person
someone who is trustworthy and sufficiently responsible and wise to deal
prudently with my affairs and to judge when
to seek assistance and advice? The
decision is one in which considerations of surrender of personal independence
and considerations
of trust and confidence play an overwhelmingly predominant
role: am I satisfied that I want someone else to be in a position to dictate
what happens at all levels of my affairs and in relation to each and every item
of my property and that the particular person concerned
will act justly and
wisely in making decisions?
In this case three adult children of Mrs Szozda’s late son
sought a declaration that the enduring and general power of attorney
she made on
28 September 2006, when she was 95 years of age, was invalid. They sought other
orders as well. Mrs Szozda’s daughter,
through a cross-claim, sought a
declaration that the September 2006 power of attorney was valid and a
declaration that each of the
2004 powers of attorney and the March 2006 power of
attorney made by Mrs Szozda had been revoked and were no longer effective. After
a consideration of the evidence of the lay witnesses and the medical evidence,
Barrett J made a series of findings of fact relating
to Mrs Szozda’s
capacity at the relevant times. He then continued:
The overall conclusion is therefore fourfold: first, that nothing in the
evidence shows that Mrs Szozda was informed, on 28 September
2006, of the full
meaning and significance of the power of attorney she was about to sign; second,
that Mrs Szozda’s statements
and conduct in the presence of the solicitors
on that day suggesting comprehension and acceptance do not establish
understanding
by her of the nature, implications and far-reaching ramifications
of the power of attorney document she was signing and the several
attorneys were authorised to do; third, that Mrs Szozda’s cognitive
incapacity on 28 September 2006 was such that
she could not have understood the
nature, implications and far-reaching ramifications of the appointment under the
general and enduring
power of attorney document she signed or the range of
circumstances, affecting herself and her property, in which the attorney would
be empowered to act; and, fourth, that, according to the applicable general law
principles, Mrs Szozda did not possess, on 28 September
2006, the capacity
necessary to enable her to grant a general power of attorney in the form of the
document she signed on that
Consequently, Barrett J held that the enduring power of attorney Mrs Szozda
made on 28 September 2006 was invalid. He also made a
number of subsequent
It should be noted that in New South Wales the person who witnessed the maker
signing the enduring power of attorney, must be a prescribed
witness and is
usually a solicitor. Also, they must certify that they explained the effect of
the enduring power of attorney to the
maker who appeared to understand that
However, as
shows, such certification, even when conscientiously made, is not
necessarily proof that that the maker did understand the effect
of the enduring
power of attorney they were about to
10. 3. 1. 1. Standard and burden of proof of capacity to make an enduring
power of attorney
Forrest J also dealt with the question of the standard and burden of proof of
capacity to make an enduring power of attorney in the
Principle Focus Pty Ltd
stated that, for the purpose of determining capacity, he could see no reason to
distinguish between the burden (and standard)
of proof required to prove
testamentary capacity and the burden (and standard) of proof required to prove
the capacity to execute
(an enduring) power of attorney. Consequently, he
applied the approach taken by the Victorian Court of Appeal in
to the matter.
effect of his decision is that where the evidence in a case, taken as a whole,
is sufficient to throw a doubt upon the competency
of the maker of the enduring
power of attorney, then the court (or tribunal) must decide against the validity
of the enduring power
of attorney unless it is satisfied affirmatively that the
maker was of sound mind, memory and understanding when they made i.e. signed
otherwise executed it.
10. 3. 2. Queensland and Tasmania
In Queensland the
Powers of Attorney Act
specifically
retains the presumption of
However, it also
states that an adult may make an enduring power of attorney only if they
understand the nature and effect of such
a power of attorney. Furthermore, it
states that understanding the nature and effect of an enduring power of attorney
includes understanding
the following matters:
1. that in the power of attorney the maker may specify or limit the power to
be given to an attorney and instruct an attorney about
the exercise of the
2. when the power of attorney begins,
3. that once the power of attorney begins, the attorney will have full
control over, the (financial) matters included in the enduring
attorney, subject to terms or information in the power of attorney about how it
is to be exercising,
4. that they may revoke the enduring power of attorney at any time they are
capable of making an enduring power of attorney giving
the same powers to the
5. that the power of attorney continues if they, the maker, becomes a person
who has impaired capacity, and
6. that at any time they are not capable of revoking the enduring power of
attorney, they are unable to effectively oversee its use
In Tasmania the maker of an enduring power of attorney must understand the
nature and effect of the document and that understanding
includes understanding
the matters as set out above for
Queensland.
10. 3. 3. Victoria
In Victoria the legislation relating to enduring powers of attorney is found
Instruments Act
. They were inserted in
in 2003 and follow the Queensland provisions closely but not
identically. The
Instruments Act 1958
states that an adult may make
an enduring power of attorney only if they understand the nature and effect of
such a power of attorney.
Furthermore, it states that understanding the nature
and effect of an enduring power of attorney includes understanding the following
1. that, in the power of attorney, the maker may specify conditions or
limitations on, or instructions about, the exercise of the
powers given to the
2. when the power of attorney is exercisable,
3. that once the power of attorney is exercisable, the attorney has the same
powers as the maker had (when they were not under a
legal incapacity) to do
anything for which the power of attorney is given subject to any limitations or
restrictions on exercising
the powers included in it,
4. that the maker may revoke the enduring power of attorney at any time they
are capable of making an enduring power of attorney,
5. that the power the attorney continues even if the maker subsequently
ceases to have legal capacity, and
6. that at any time that the maker is not capable of revoking the enduring
power of attorney, they are unable to oversee effectively
the use of the power
of attorney.
It should be noted that in
Ghosn v Principle Focus Pty Ltd
Forrest J of the Supreme Court of Victoria set down the tests for capacity to
make an enduring power of attorney and for
determining standard and onus of
proof issues, the question of whether the powers of attorney under consideration
did or did not
conform with the provisions of the
Instruments Act 1958
was not argued.
The witnesses to the enduring power of attorney must each sign a certificate
stating that at the time the maker made the power of
attorney they appeared to
the witness to have the capacity to make the power of
10. 3. 4. Australian Capital
Powers of Attorney Act
restates the presumption
of capacity so that an adult making an enduring power of attorney is taken to
understand the nature and
effect of making the power of attorney, in the absence
of evidence to the contrary.
Again following the Queensland model closely but not identically, the Australian
Capital Territory
states that understanding the nature and effect of
making an enduring power of attorney includes understanding each of the
1. that, in the power of attorney, the maker may state or limit the powers
to be given to an attorney,
2. that, in the power of attorney, the maker may instruct the attorney about
the exercise of the powers given them,
3. when the powers given under the power of attorney can be exercised by the
4. that, if the powers under a power of attorney can be exercised by the
attorney, then the attorney has the power to make decisions
in relation to, and
will have full control over, the matter covered by the power of attorney,
subject to terms or information about
exercising the powers, that are included
in the power of attorney,
5. that the maker may revoke the power of attorney at any time they are
capable of making the power of attorney,
6. that the power of attorney continues even if the maker becomes a person
with impaired decision-making capacity, and
7. that, at any time the maker is not capable of revoking the power of
attorney, they cannot effectively oversee the use of the
10. 4. Assessing capacity to make and revoke
enduring powers of attorney
While the common law tests for making and revoking enduring powers of
attorney are used in New South Wales, South Australia, Western
Australia and the
Northern Territory, specific but different statutory tests for capacity are used
in the other three States and
the Northern Territory. Consequently, this section
will deal first with the generic baseline approach to assessment that applies
all jurisdictions and then will discuss the application of the specific tests to
the assessment of capacity.
It is important to note before embarking on any challenge to capacity that
the presumption that an adult has the capacity to make
an enduring power of
attorney can be rebutted by satisfactory evidence. However, the onus is that of
proving positively that the
maker lacked capacity at the time they made the
enduring power of attorney and that onus lies with the person challenging the
of the power of
10. 4. 1 The generic aspects of capacity
When a clinician is asked to assess capacity to appoint an attorney under an
enduring power of attorney, it is helpful to place the
specific assessment of
capacity in the context of an estimation of the person’s overall mental
function and health status.
A global assessment of the person’s mental
state and cognitive function should be made as well as an assessment of the
executive and functions of judgment, reasoning and planning which are
relevant to decision making.
Additionally, a task common to all assessments is to ensure that the maker of
the enduring power of attorney is making the appointment
freely and voluntarily
and is not being unduly influenced or “schooled” to make an
appointment.
As has been noted
elsewhere, dementia may affect a person’s appraisal of
Therefore, when
undertaking assessments of people who wish to make an enduring power of
attorney, it is important to undertake the
interview in private.
Furthermore, regardless of the functions of the attorney (the
“what” of the appointment), the rationale for appointing
particular person as attorney should be assessed (the “who” of the
appointment). In doing so, it is important to ascertain
the following:
1. has the person made any appointments of attorneys under enduring powers of
attorney previously?
2. if so, how frequently have there been changes (i.e. revocations and new
appointments)?
3. is this appointment in keeping with previous appointments (e.g. has
someone else been consistently appointed as the attorney under
an enduring power
of attorney in the past)?
4. what is the history of the relationship between the person and the
appointee and has there been any radical change in that relationship
with the onset or course of dementia?
5. why has the person been selected for appointment as the attorney under the
enduring power of attorney?
10. 4. 2 The application of the specific tests to
the assessment of capacity
When assessing understanding of the following specific tests it is essential
that the person is able to repeat, in their own words,
their understanding of
the test after it has been explained to them. As previously stated, in New South
Wales, South Australia, Western
Australia and the Northern Territory the test
for capacity to make an enduring power of attorney is found in the following
outlined 10. 3. 1 above:
(i) Dixon CJ, Kitto and Taylor JJ in
Gibbons v Wright
which outlined
the principle of understanding the nature and effect of the instrument when
(ii) Ranclaud v Cabban
Young J which emphasised the need for the donor
to understood not only that they were authorising someone to look after their
but also the sort of things the attorney could do without further
reference to them;
(iii) Ghosn v Principle Focus Pty
in which Forrest J of
the Supreme Court explains and adopts the approach taken by Young J in
Ranclaud v Cabban
In New South Wales, the functions given under a power of attorney relate to
financial matters. Accordingly, the donor must understand
that the “sort
of things” the attorney can do without reference to them include selling
their house and operating their
bank account. This is specified in
So accordingly,
the person might be asked, in addition to explaining why they chose a particular
person: “Can you please tell
me the sort of things your attorney can do
without consulting you?”
In Queensland, Tasmania, Victoria and the Australian Capital Territory,
the test for the capacity to
make an enduring power of attorney is found in the powers of attorney
legislation, which specifies that
the donor must understand:
(i) that they can state, specify or limit the powers to be given;
(ii) when the power of attorney begins;
(iii) that once the power of attorney begins, the attorney will have the
power to make, and will have full control over the functions
given to them;
(iv) that they may revoke the enduring power of attorney at any time they are
capable of doing so;
(v) that the power of attorney continues if they become impaired, and that at
any time they are not capable of revoking the enduring
power of attorney, they
are unable to effectively oversee its use by the attorney.
As stated in Chapter 9, when assessing a person’s capacity to appoint
an attorney under an enduring power of attorney
in Queensland and
the Australian Capital Territory, the clinician must be mindful of whether the
person is appointing a decision-maker
for either financial or personal
decisions or both sets of decisions.
The principles for assessment of capacity to appoint an attorney under an
enduring power of attorney apply equally to the assessment
of capacity to
revoke. The “who” of assessment applies particularly in regards to
revocation. It is important therefore
to enquire why the donor no longer feels
that the appointee is appropriate. This is because unfounded paranoid ideation
and suspiciousness
often underlie such changes in the case of dementia.
10. 5. Appointing attorneys under enduring powers of
10. 5. 1. Who may be appointed?
Only adult men and women may be appointed enduring attorneys, however not
only adults but also Public Trustees and trustee companies,
and in all States
except Victoria and in the Northern Territory but not the Australian Capital
Territory, any company may be appointed
attorney under enduring powers of
attorney (hereafter enduring attorneys).
In Victoria an enduring attorney must be at least 18 years old which creates
the assumption that only natural persons who are adults
may be appointed
enduring attorneys in that
In Queensland and the
Australian Capital Territory corporations that are neither the Public Trustee
nor a trustee company cannot
be appointed enduring
10. 5. 2. Appointment procedures
The legislation of each State and Territory sets out procedures for a capable
adult to appoint an enduring
It is not intended to
discuss those procedures here as helpful information is available on the
websites of guardianship tribunal
or public guardian or advocate of each State
and the Australian Capital Territory.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that in New South Wales, Queensland, South
Australia, Victoria, Western Australia, the Australian
Capital Territory and the
Northern Territory an enduring power of attorney does not come into effect until
it is accepted and signed
by the attorney or at least one of them. If more than
one attorney is appointed, each attorney may carry out their role under the
enduring power of attorney only when they have accepted and signed it. If
attorneys are given different functions under the power
of attorney, they will
be able to carry out the particular functions assigned to them if they have
accepted their appointment. However,
if there are joint attorneys with the same
functions, the safer position is that the power of attorney is not capable of
being operated
until all joint enduring attorneys have accepted it. If only some
of the functions given attorneys require joint attorneys then all
of them would
have to have accepted their role before that part of the power of attorney could
be operated.
In Tasmania an
enduring power of attorney is not legally effective until it is registered by
the Recorder of Titles.
10. 6. Responsibilities of attorneys appointed under
enduring powers of attorney
When the maker of an enduring power of attorney loses capacity to understand
the nature and effect of the power of attorney they have
made, this is usually,
but not always, permanent state of affairs. Consequently, the enduring attorney
they have appointed becomes
the effective manager of and decision-maker about
their financial affairs from that time on. While the initial relationship
the maker and the enduring attorney is one of principal and agent, once
the principal loses their capacity to remove the agent, the
obligations of the enduring attorney come much more into play. Because of the
greatly increased numbers of enduring powers
of attorney being made and coming
into effect, it is important that enduring attorneys and everyone else
understand the ethical responsibilities,
some of which are now set out in
legislation, enduring attorneys have to the person who appointed them. These
matters are set out
in the greatest detail in the
Powers of Attorney Act
. It is suggested that they apply to enduring attorneys
appointed in the other Australian State and the two Territories to the same
extent, unless modified by legislation.
It should be noted that it has long been established, and recently confirmed,
that, notwithstanding the width of a power of attorney;
attorneys have a duty
and obligation to obey the instructions of the maker even when they are given
after the power of attorney has
been granted and even if given orally. Acting
contrary to those instructions is a breach of trust by the attorney. This was
established
in the High Court of Admiralty in England in 1858 in a case in which
an attorney sold a ship contrary to instructions not in the
power of attorney
The judge, Dr
Lushington, said:
general rule, the grantee of a power
of attorney is
bound to follow
the directions and
the grantor, as, for instance, with respect to the power of attorney
to sell stock
the grantee must exercise
to the orders of
the grantor. I conceive that to use
attorney contrary to the known wishes and directions of the
grantor, is a breach of
This approach was adopted in Victoria in 1983 and 2002 and 2004 in New South
Tadgell J of the Supreme Court of Victoria stated:
It is not the law that an attorney given power by instrument under seal may, so
long as the instrument remains unrevoked, exercise
the power it confers in
disregard of any subsequent orders of his principal conveyed to him…
Subject to any contrary sense
of the instrument there always resides in the
donor the right later to instruct the donee not to act on the power, or to act
in a stated way.
That the effect of a power of attorney, even if
given under seal, may be modified by parol is made clear by the decision of
The Margaret Mitchell
the authority of which has so far as I am aware
In the 2002 New South Wales
Berecry M adopted
Margaret Mitchell
approach and went on to quote from Thomas J in a New
Zealand case:
The powers of attorney are specifically directed at the management of the
principal’s affairs: it is not open to attorneys
to either obtain an
advantage for themselves or to act in a way which is contrary to the interests
of their principals.
In the case of enduring powers of attorney, the maker may give binding
instructions only when they are still capable. Instructions
by an incapable
maker need not be followed and must not be followed if they would place the
attorney in breach of their obligation
to apply the general principles and to
act with reasonable diligence. This is referred to below at 10. 6. 1. 1. and 10.
While attorneys are required to consider the maker’s views and
wishes, they have to ensure their proper care and protection.
It is suggested
that this means that when the maker states views and wishes when they are not
capable, enduring attorneys should
not act on those views and wishes if to do so
would not be in best interests of the maker.
10. 6. 1. Obligations of enduring
10. 6. 1. 1. To apply the general principles relating to incapable people
set out in the legislation
In Queensland, the Australian Capital Territory the powers of attorney
legislation sets out general principles that are relevant to
enduring powers of
attorney for financial matters. These include encouraging self- reliance, giving
the now incapable maker the necessary
support and information to participate in
the making of financial decisions affecting their lives, applying substituted
so that the enduring attorney makes financial decisions that take into
account what they consider would be the maker’s views
on the matter and
exercises the powers given in a way that is appropriate to the maker’s
needs and circumstances.
Even though they are under no statutory obligation to do so, it is suggested
that enduring attorneys elsewhere in Australia should
apply the general
principles that apply in Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory when it
is appropriate and practicable
10. 6. 1. 2. To act honestly and with reasonable diligence
Enduring attorneys must exercise the powers given them according to the terms
of the power of attorney and honestly and with reasonable
diligence to protect
the interests of the maker. The Queensland provision creates a criminal offence
as well as a right in the maker
to seek compensation for losses caused by the
enduring attorney’s failure to exercise their powers honestly and with due
In South Australia and Western Australia the legislation requires an enduring
attorney to exercise their powers with reasonable diligence
to protect the
interests of the maker and makes them liable to the maker for any loss caused by
their failure to do so.
In Tasmania an enduring attorney is taken to be a trustee of the property and
affairs of the maker according to the terms of the power
of attorney and must
exercise their powers to protect the interests of the
While enduring attorneys have no statutory duty to act honestly or with
reasonable diligence in New South Wales, Victoria, the Australian
Territory and the Northern Territory, it is suggested that these are some of the
essential obligations that apply to enduring
attorneys and that enduring
attorneys could be found liable in the courts for any provable loss caused by
their failure to exercise
their powers honestly and with due diligence.
10. 6. 1. 3. To exercise their powers according to the terms of the power
of attorney
While most enduring attorneys will have the full extent of the powers that a
maker may give to an attorney under an enduring power
of attorney, the terms of
some powers of attorney may limit the attorney’s
In those circumstances
the enduring attorney must act according to the terms of the power of attorney.
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
is specific about these
In Tasmania there are
different forms for enduring powers of attorney one conferring the particular
powers set out in the form on
the attorney and the other conferring on the
enduring attorney the power to do all the things the maker may lawfully
authorise an
attorney to do.
South Australia, the form provides the maker with the same choices as the
separate forms do in
It is suggested that in the States and Territories where the matter is not
dealt with in the legislation, that makers may give all
the powers they can give
at law to enduring attorneys simply by saying so. Similarly, they can confine
the powers that they give
to enduring attorneys by setting out the powers they
wish to give the attorney in the power of attorney document. There are at least
two difficulties with giving only limited powers in an enduring power of
attorney. First, questions of the extent of the powers given
are likely to
arise. Second, an enduring attorney is likely to need more powers than a maker
may think necessary. The time when this
will become apparent is after the maker
has lost capacity and cannot give the required, or all, powers to the attorney.
Legislation may limit what enduring attorneys may do. This will be seen below
10. 6. 1. 4. To avoid conflict transactions
Again in Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory the powers of
attorney legislation imposes an obligation of enduring attorneys
not to enter
into a transaction that does or may result in conflict between that transaction
and the enduring attorney’s duty
towards the maker, unless the maker
authorises the transaction. The legislation describes what is and what is not a
conflict transaction.
Again it is suggested that, in the States and Territories where this matter
is not dealt with in the legislation, the obligation to
avoid entering into
conflict transactions arises out of an enduring guardian’s general duty to
the person who appointed them.
10. 6. 1. 5. Not to resign after the maker has lost capacity
In Queensland an enduring attorney may not resign while the maker is
incapable, and thus legally unable to make a new enduring power
of attorney,
without the leave of QCAT or the Supreme
In South Australia the
leave of the Supreme Court is
In Victoria the leave
of VCAT is required.
Australia if an enduring attorney wishes to resign when the maker is incapable,
the process is to apply to WASAT to be
removed and replaced as an
In the Australian
Capital Territory the leave of ACAT is
In the Northern
Territory an enduring attorney, once appointed, may not resign without the leave
of the Supreme Court.
Sometimes an enduring attorney may wish or need to resign because of poor
health. On other occasions the level of conflict between
family members may lead
the enduring attorney to wish to
In many cases if the
attorney under an enduring power of attorney has to resign, it will appropriate
to apply to the relevant tribunal
or court for the appointment of an
administrator and, in some cases, a
In New South Wales and Western Australia there is no provision for an
enduring attorney to resign after the maker has lost capacity.
However, in New
South Wales an attorney or other interested persons may apply to either the
Guardianship Tribunal or the Supreme
Court to be removed and replaced as an
In Western Australia,
an attorney or a person who in the opinion of WASAT has a proper interest in the
matter may apply to the Tribunal
for an order substituting the
It is suggested that
making such an application is the appropriate course for an enduring attorney
who wishes to or needs to resign.
In Tasmania the matter is dealt with by the single attorney or joint
attorneys appointing the Public Trustee to replace them. This
is achieved when
the Public Trustee accepts the appointment and the appointment document is
registered by the Recorder of
10. 6. 2. Administrative powers and
responsibilities of enduring attorneys
10. 6. 2. 1. Power to execute documents
The legislation in Queensland, Victoria and the Northern Territory provides,
and it is suggested that elsewhere in Australia it is
implied, that enduring
attorneys may execute any document in order to carry out their functions as
enduring attorneys.
10. 6. 2. 2. Record keeping and keeping the maker’s property
In Queensland, Victoria, Western Australia and the Australian Capital
Territory the powers of attorney legislation imposes an obligation
on enduring
attorneys requiring them to keep and preserve accurate records and accounts of
all dealings and transactions made under
the power of
In addition in
Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory enduring attorneys must keep
their property separate from the maker’s
property unless it is jointly
owned property.
While there is
no statutory obligation to take these actions elsewhere in Australia, it is
suggested that it is wise and in the interests
of both maker and enduring
attorney that such records are made and kept and that the maker’s property
is kept separate from
that of the enduring attorney.
The obligation to keep the maker’s property separate from that of the
enduring attorney is not always understood as demonstrated
in a 2006 case from
Queensland.
The maker, RWM, had
a brain injury acquired at birth. As an adult he appointed three family members
as his enduring attorneys. RWM
received a disability support pension and a
mobility allowance as well as a small and varying wage from his employer. He
had no savings. A family member used his automatic teller
machine card to access
RWM’s account. The evidence showed that RWM’s pension was regarded
as part of his family’s
income and was used accordingly and not
necessarily for RWM’s sole
The Tribunal concluded
that it was necessary that a pattern of saving be established for RWM so that he
had funds available to meet
expenditure in the future. The family members who
looked after him were on pensions and because of their age could not be expected
to look after him for the rest of his
QCAT’s predecessor
tribunal did not revoke the enduring power of attorney but appointed the Public
Trustee as administrator
of RWM’s estate for a year to ensure that a
savings scheme was established for him. The tribunal stated that, in the period
of the Public Trustee’s appointment, [the person who accessed RWM’s
bank account] “should be given as much opportunity
as is appropriate to
manage RWM’s day-to-day financial
10. 6. 2. 3. Right to information
In the Australian Capital Territory an enduring attorney has a right to all
the information that the maker would have been entitled
to when they had
capacity and a person who has custody or control of the information must
disclose it to the enduring attorney on
The Queensland
provisions are the same except that the information that must be disclosed is
that which is necessary to make informed
decisions about anything the enduring
attorney is authorised to
Enduring attorneys need access to information in order to carry out their
obligation to act with reasonable diligence to protect the
interests of the
maker by, for example, paying their gas and electricity bills and attending to
other mundane but essential matters.
The existence of privacy legislation, which
was not intended to operate to preclude the substitute decision-makers of
incapable people
carrying out the roles they were appointed to carry out, is
often used elsewhere in Australia as an excuse for service providers
not to provide such information.
Nevertheless, where enduring attorneys are given information to help them to
make their decisions and carry out their functions, they
should keep it
confidential and divulge it to others only when that is necessary in the
interests of the maker of the power of attorney.
This is specifically provided
for in Queensland.
10. 7. Legislative limitations on things that
attorneys can do under enduring powers of attorney
One of the most commonly arising problems with enduring powers of attorney
was that of enduring guardians giving substantial gifts
to themselves and others
and otherwise either dissipating the now incapable maker’s estate or
transferring it to themselves
and others. In order to put an end to this and to
clarify the responsibilities of enduring attorneys in this regard, most of the
recently enacted powers of attorney legislation in Australia addresses at least
aspects of this issue. Otherwise the matter is dealt
with by common law. This
will be seen below at 10. 7. 2.
10. 7. 1. The giving of gifts
10. 7. 1. 1. New South Wales
Powers of Attorney Act
the most commonly used
form of enduring power of attorney is the “prescribed power of
attorney”. It may also be used
as a general or normal power of attorney
which is not intended to and will not operate if the maker loses capacity.
However, a prescribed
power of attorney does not authorise an attorney to give a
gift of any of the maker’s property whatsoever to any other person
the power of attorney document itself expressly authorises the giving of the
This provision amends the common law by setting out the extent of the
authority of enduring attorneys to give gifts on behalf of the
maker of the
enduring power of attorney. It allows enduring attorneys to give appropriate
gifts, on behalf of a maker who has lost
capacity, to members of the
maker’s family and other person’s or organisations the maker was
accustomed to making gifts
to or could be anticipated to wish to give gifts to,
for example new members of the family through birth, marriage or other
arrangements.
Consequently, the
provides that if the
“prescribed expression” is included in a prescribed power of
attorney then the enduring attorney
can give reasonable gifts to certain people.
The prescribed expression is:
I authorise my attorney to give reasonable gifts as provided by
section 11(2)
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
If the prescribed expression is included in the power of attorney, then the
enduring attorney may give a gift:
1. to a relative or close friend of the maker,
2. of a seasonal nature or because of a special event such as a birth or
marriage, or
3. in the form of a donation of the nature that the maker used to make when
they had capacity, or
4. that they might reasonably be expected to make.
However, the value of the gift must not be more than what is reasonable
having regard to all the circumstances particularly the maker’s
circumstances and the size of their
10. 7. 1. 2. Queensland and Tasmania
The Queensland and Tasmanian provisions are that unless there is a contrary
intention expressed in the enduring power of attorney,
the limits on the
attorney giving of gifts of the maker’s property are the same as in the
New South Wales
set out above in 10. 7. 1. 1. Gifts in the form of
seasonal or special occasion gifts may be given to relations and close friends
of the maker. Enduring attorneys may give gifts to themselves or to a charity
with which they have a
connection.
“relation” and “close friend” are defined in Queensland
but not Tasmania.
10. 7. 1. 3. Australian Capital Territory
As in New South Wales, an enduring attorney appointed or recognised in the
Australian Capital Territory may not make gifts of the
maker’s property
unless specifically authorised to do
If the enduring power of
attorney contains a general authorisation to make gifts, the attorney is limited
to making gifts on behalf
of the maker only to relatives or close friends of the
maker, including the attorney if they fit either of those categories, or to
to a charity with which the attorney has a
connection.
These gifts are
limited to gifts for a celebration such as a birthday, Easter or Hanukah or an
event such as a birth, marriage or
graduation.
The gift must be one
that it is reasonable that the maker might reasonably be expected to give and no
more than reasonable particularly
given the maker’s financial
circumstances and the size of their
10. 7. 1. 4. South Australia, Victoria, Western Australia and Northern
There are no provisions in the South Australian, Victorian, Western
Australian and Northern Territory legislation dealing with the
giving of gifts.
Consequently, there is doubt as to whether enduring attorneys in the three
States can give gifts from the maker’s
property to themselves and others.
It is much clearer that enduring attorneys appointed or recognised in the
Northern Territory cannot
give gifts of an incapable maker’s property to
themselves or members of the maker’s family without specific authority
being provided in the enduring power of
This matter is
returned to below at 10. 7. 2.
10. 7. 2. The giving of benefits to themselves
and others by attorneys
The common law in relation to powers of attorney was largely determined when
powers of attorney were mostly used for business purposes
and often gave
detailed authorities to the attorney to act as agent for the maker and before
enduring powers of attorney were legislated
for. In 1893 the Privy Council noted
in an appeal from Canada that:
[It was not] disputed that powers of attorney are to be construed strictly -
that is to say, that where an act purporting to be done
under a power of
attorney is challenged as being in excess of the authority conferred by the
power, it is necessary to shew that
on a fair construction of the whole
instrument the authority in question is to be found within the four corners of
the instrument,
either in express terms or by necessary
implication.
In a 1947 decision of the High Court, Dixon J pointed out that:
Prima facie, a power [of attorney], however widely its general words may be
expressed, should not be construed as authorizing the
attorney to deal with the
property of his principal for the attorney's own benefit. Something more
specific and quite unambiguous
is needed to justify such an interpretation. "The
primary object of a power of attorney is to enable the attorney to act in the
of his principal's affairs. An attorney cannot, in the absence of a
clear power so to do, make presents to himself or to others of
his principal's
Consequently, following the common law in New South Wales, as with gifts and
as set out in 10. 7. 1. 1 above, the
Powers of Attorney Act
precludes an enduring attorney from conferring a benefit on themselves
or others unless the enduring power of attorney document itself
authorises the conferral of the
If the enduring power
of attorney contains the prescribed expression to authorise the enduring
attorney to confer benefits on themselves
or other named persons to meet their
reasonable living expenses, the effect of that expression is that the enduring
attorney may
meet the expenses they or the other named persons incurred for
housing, food, education, transportation, medical care or medication.
benefit must be reasonable having regard to all the circumstances and, in
particular, the maker’s financial circumstances
and the size of their
In Queensland an enduring attorney may provide, from the maker’s
estate, for the needs of a person completely or mainly dependant
of the maker
without the maker having to include the power to do so in their enduring power
of attorney. What the enduring attorney
may provide must be no more than what is
reasonable having regard to all the circumstances, in particular, the
maker’s financial
circumstances. However, the maker can express an
intention to provide more in the enduring power of
In Tasmania the matter is dealt with on a case by case basis. The
Guardianship and Administration Board may, on the application of
an attorney or
of its own motion and after a hearing, authorise the enduring attorney to make a
gift of any of the maker’s
property to any person approved by the Board
and for any purpose approved by the
In the Australian Capital Territory, an enduring power of attorney must
expressly authorise the payment of reasonable living expenses
for a named
person. Such an authorisation will allow only for the payment of reasonable
costs of housing, food, education, transportation,
medical care and medication.
When working out what are the reasonable costs of these matters and without
limiting what must be considered,
the maker’s financial circumstances and
the size of their estate must be considered. However, the maker can authorise
for greater
expense in the enduring power of
Similarly, an enduring power of attorney must expressly provide from the
needs of a person dependant on the maker to be provided the
estate. Again, what may be provided must not be more than what is reasonable
considering all the circumstances, in
particular, the maker’s financial
circumstances. However, the maker can authorise for greater expense in the
enduring power
As already noted in 10. 7. 1. 4 above, there are no provisions in the South
Australian, Victorian, Western Australian and Northern
Territory legislation
empowering an enduring attorney to give a benefit to themselves or others from
the maker’s property.
Consequently, it is suggested that the better and
safer view is that, unless the enduring power of attorney specifically provides
for that to be done or the authority to do so can “be found within the
four corners of the instrument … by necessary
implication”, enduring
attorneys in those States and the Northern Territory cannot give benefits to
themselves or others.
It could be argued in South Australia, Victoria and Western Australia that as
it is an enduring attorney’s obligation to exercise
their powers with
reasonable diligence to protect the (social and emotional) interests of the
maker, this may justify them giving
gifts in the way legislated for in New South
Wales, Queensland and Tasmania, despite the limits on their powers referred to
discussion of the common law, just set out, where the enduring power of
attorney contains no express
The argument would be
that the reasonable diligence provisions justify a “necessary
implication”. This argument is not
available in relation to enduring
attorneys appointed or recognised in the Northern Territory because the
Powers of Attorney Act 1980
does not contain any reasonable
diligence provisions.
In South Australia and the Northern Territory the Supreme Court and in
Western Australia, WASAT, has the power to make an order “revoking
varying the terms” of an enduring power of attorney. It could be argued
that this language would allow those Courts or WASAT
to add a term to an
enduring power of attorney allowing attorneys to give benefits to themselves and
others from the property of
the now incapable maker of the enduring power of
In Victoria VCAT
has the power to “vary the effect of an enduring power of
language may be wide enough to allow VCAT to add such a term to an enduring
power of attorney in appropriate circumstances.
10. 8. Registration of enduring powers of attorney
In Tasmania and the Northern Territory enduring powers of attorney must be
registered before they may be exercised by the enduring
10. 9. Recognition of enduring powers of attorney
made elsewhere in Australia
All the Australian States and the two Territories, except South Australia,
recognise enduring powers of attorney
made elsewhere in Australia and
allow them to be exercised in relation to either real or personal property
within their boundaries.
Tasmania and the Northern Territory an enduring power of attorney must be
registered before it may be
10. 10. Effect on enduring powers of attorney of
guardianship tribunals and courts making administration orders
Guardianship tribunals will not revoke an enduring power of attorney and
appoint an administrator where there is no issue about the
capacity when they made the enduring power of attorney. This is because the
maintenance of the enduring power of attorney
is seen as a less restrictive
alternative than an administration order. Consequently in a 2010 case, WASAT
refused to make an administration
order where there was no real objection to the
way the enduring attorneys were managing the now incapable person’s
and when the evidence of the incapable person wanting to revoke her
power of attorney arose only from a time when there was doubt
that she had
10. 10. 1. New South Wales
In New South Wales if the Guardianship Tribunal, Supreme Court or Mental
Health Review Tribunal makes a financial management (administration)
effect is to suspend the enduring power of attorney during the currency of the
It should also be
noted that when either the Guardianship Tribunal or Supreme Court conducts a
review of either the making or the
operation and effect of an enduring power of
attorney, it may decide to treat the review as an application for an
administration
order and make such an
10. 10. 2. Queensland
In Queensland if QCAT makes an administration order knowing that the person
for whose estate it has made the order had previously
made an enduring power of
attorney that was in effect, the attorney may exercise the power only to the
extent that the Tribunal
authorises.
administrator becomes aware of the existence of an enduring power of attorney
applicable to the person whose estate they are
managing, they must advise QCAT
and their administration is suspended pending a review of their appointment by
10. 10. 3. South Australia
In South Australia if the estate of the maker of an enduring power of
attorney is placed under administration under the
Mental Health Act
(SA) or the
Aged and Infirm Persons' Property Act
the enduring attorney is accountable to the administrator as if they were the
maker of the power of attorney. The administrator
may vary or revoke the power
of attorney as if they were the (still capable)
10. 10. 4. Tasmania
In Tasmania the Guardianship and Administration Board may not make an
administration order in relation to the estate of a person who
has made an
enduring power of attorney so long as the enduring power of attorney is in
force. There are two exceptions. First, the
Board may make an administration
order in relation to any part of the maker's estate that is not subject to the
enduring power of
attorney. Second, in an emergency the Board may make an
administration order appointing the Public Trustee as administrator for up
days. Such an order takes precedence over any enduring power of
However, the Board
may, after a review initiated by itself or others, revoke an enduring power of
attorney and appoint an administrator
for the maker’s
This matter is dealt
with below at 10. 11. 4. 2.
10. 10. 5. Victoria
In Victoria if VCAT makes an administration order for the maker of an
enduring power of attorney, the attorney may exercise power
under the enduring
power of attorney only to the extent authorised by
10. 10. 6. Western Australia
In Western Australia if WASAT makes an administration order in relation to
the estate of the maker of an enduring power of attorney,
it has a number of
options. WASAT may revoke or vary the power of attorney. Because WASAT may make
limited forms of administration
orders, it may revoke or vary the enduring power
of attorney to remove any inconsistency between it and the administration order.
However, where WASAT makes an administration order, the enduring attorney is
accountable to the administrator as if the administrator
were the maker of the
power and the administrator has the same power to vary or revoke the power of
attorney as the maker had when
of full legal capacity.
10. 10. 7. Australian Capital
In the Australian Capital Territory, ACAT may revoke the enduring power of
attorney when making an administration
10. 10. 8. Northern Territory
In the Northern Territory when the Supreme Court makes an administration
(protection) order, any enduring power of attorney is revoked
to the extent to
which it authorizes the enduring attorney to deal with property the subject of
the protection order.
10. 11. Role of guardianship tribunals and courts in
reviewing the making and operation and effect of enduring powers of attorney
While most enduring attorneys carry out their responsibilities appropriately
and generously, some do not.
Some take advantage of their position, others have difficulty carrying out their
functions effectively and sometimes problems arise
that attorneys need
assistance to resolve. Consequently, guardianship tribunals and sometimes
Supreme Courts have substantial powers
to review the making as well as the
operation and effect of enduring powers of attorney. Applications to these
tribunals and courts
to exercise of these powers will often be linked with
applications to make an administration order. There are some examples of this
below, particularly from Queensland and Western Australia in 10. 11. 2. 2 and
10. 11. 6. 2.
A 2005 Queensland case shows some of the more common ways an enduring
attorney fails to carry out their
responsibilities.
elderly woman appointed her son and her daughter as her joint attorneys under an
enduring power of attorney. Her son had
been assisting her with her financial
affairs for more than a decade and she had become increasingly dependant on him.
2002 she revoked this power of attorney and appointed her son as her
sole enduring attorney. This power of attorney authorised her
son, as his
mother’s attorney, to enter conflict transactions, contract with himself
and his relatives, conduct business and
make and receive fees for professional
services carried out by him for her.
Immediately afterwards, he began the process of selling his mother’s
unit, her only significant asset. On the day of settlement
the son acknowledged
a debt to his mother which his mother immediately forgave him. She also gave him
another substantial gift of
money straight out.
The then Guardianship and Administration Tribunal found that the elderly
woman did not have the capacity to make the 2002 power of
attorney. The Tribunal
revoked that power of attorney. It also ordered that the joint attorneys were no
longer authorised to act
under the 1997 power of attorney as it had been
overtaken by the Tribunal making an administration order. The Tribunal made the
administration
order because it found that the son had:
1. unjustifiably refused to pay his mother’s nursing home fees allowing
arrears to accumulate,
2. failed to pay his mother’s pharmacy accounts despite reminders from
the pharmacy,
3. failed to pay his mother’s fees to a plastic surgeon, for surgery
carried out.
Furthermore the Tribunal found that the evidence given in relation to the
gift transaction was inadequate to rebut the presumption
of undue influence
which exists under the
Attorney Act 1998
or in equity, because of the fiduciary
relationship that existed between the son and his mother as her enduring
The Tribunal
considered that these matters constituted maladministration of the elderly
woman’s estate and appointed the Public
Trustee as the administrator of
her estate.
10. 11. 1. New South Wales
In the 2010 case,
Szozdz v Szozda
, Barrett J of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales, noting that the question of the mental capacity of a maker of
an enduring power
of attorney could arise in a range of legal proceedings before
the Supreme Court, held that the
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
did not create an exclusive code for the Court and the Guardianship Tribunal to
deal with that issue. Consequently the Supreme Court
retained its established
However, it is
suggested that if the purpose of the application to the Court is simply to
review an enduring power of attorney, the
proper course is to make the
application under the provisions of the
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
10. 11. 1. 1. Who may apply for and be party to a review?
In New South Wales both the Guardianship Tribunal and the Supreme Court have
the discretion decide whether or not to review either
the making or the
operation and effect of an enduring power of attorney when an application is
made to them by any of the following
“interested persons”:
1. an enduring attorney,
2. the maker of the enduring power of attorney to be reviewed,
3. a guardian or enduring guardian of the maker, or
4. any other person who, in the opinion of the Tribunal or Court, has a
proper interest in the proceedings or a genuine concern for
the welfare of the
In addition to the applicant, each of the following is a party to such an
application:
1. any other attorneys under the enduring power of attorney,
2. the maker of the enduring power of attorney to be reviewed, and
3. any other person that the Tribunal or Court joins as a
10. 11. 1. 2. Declarations of incapacity and invalidity
The Tribunal or Court may make either or both of the following orders about
the making of the enduring power of attorney:
1. an order declaring that the maker did or did not have mental capacity to
make a valid power of attorney at the time they made the
enduring power of
attorney being reviewed, and
2. an order declaring that the power of attorney is invalid (either in whole
or in part) if the Tribunal or Court was satisfied that:
(a) the maker did not have the capacity necessary to make the
enduring power of attorney,
(b) the enduring power of attorney did not comply with the other
requirements of the
Powers of Attorney Act
(c) the enduring power of attorney is invalid for any other
reason, for example, the maker was induced to make it by dishonesty or
If the review is about the operation and effect of an enduring power of
attorney, the Tribunal or Court may make one or more of the
following orders if
it is satisfied that either it would be in the best interests of the maker to do
so or it would better reflect
the wishes of the maker:
1. an order varying a term of, or a power conferred by, the power of
2. an order removing an attorney from office,
3. an order appointing a substitute attorney to replace an attorney who has
been removed from office or who otherwise vacates the
4. an order reinstating a power of attorney that has lapsed by reason of any
vacancy in the office of an attorney and appointing a
substitute attorney to
replace the attorney who vacated office,
5. an order directing or requiring any one or more of the following:
(a) that an attorney furnish accounts and other information to the
Tribunal or Court or to a person nominated by the Tribunal or
(b) that an attorney lodge with the Tribunal or Court a copy of
all records and accounts kept by the attorney of dealings and transactions
by the attorney under the
(c) that those records and accounts be audited by an auditor
appointed by the Tribunal or Court and that a copy of the report of
the auditor
be furnished to the Tribunal or Court,
(d) that the attorney submit a plan of financial management to the
Tribunal or Court for approval,
(f) an order revoking all or part of the power of attorney, or
(g) such other orders as the Tribunal or Court thinks
Although he decided the case on the ground that Mrs Szozda lacked the mental
capacity to make the relevant enduring power of attorney
, Barrett J also noted that
Powers of Attorney Act
is relevant to the scope of the authority given to an
attorney under an enduring power of attorney. He noted that while
define or describe the extent or quality of mental capacity required for the
creation of a valid power of attorney, it removes
from the scope of the
authority given by the power of attorney the attorney’s power to do acts,
as attorney, the nature of
which were beyond the maker’s understanding
because of the extent of their mental incapacity at the time of the creation of
the power of attorney.
suggested that both the Tribunal and the Court could use
to limit the scope
of the powers of an attorney could exercise under an enduring power of attorney
on the grounds that the nature
of some acts were beyond the maker’s
understanding of because of the extent of the maker’s mental incapacity at
they made the power of attorney.
The term “such other orders as the Tribunal or Court thinks fit”
can include an order declaring that the maker of the
enduring power of attorney
lacked or lacks capacity because of mental incapacity at a specified time or
during a specified period
or for the time being. If such an order is made, any
revocation of the enduring power of attorney made during a time covered by the
order is ineffective.
the order is that the maker lacks capacity through mental incapacity for the
time being, the effect is, for the purposes of the
operation of the power of
attorney, that the maker lacks such capacity for any period specified in the
order or until further order
of the Tribunal or Court making
As has been noted at 10. 10. 1 above, when either the Guardianship Tribunal
or Supreme Court conducts a review of either the making
or the operation and
effect of an enduring power of attorney, it may decide to treat the review as an
application for an administration
order and make such an
10. 11. 1. 3. Advice or directions
An enduring attorney may apply for advice or direction by the Tribunal or
Court on any matter relating to the scope of the attorney’s
appointment or
the exercise of any function by the attorney under the power of attorney. When
determining any such application, the
Tribunal or Court may decide to:
1. approve or disapprove of any act proposed to be done by the attorney,
2. give such advice or direction as it considers appropriate, or
3. vary the effect of the enduring power of attorney or make any other order
(set out above) it could make if it was dealing with
an application to review
the enduring power of
10. 11. 2. Queensland
10. 11. 2. 1. Who may apply for and be party to a review?
In Queensland both QCAT and the Supreme Court have the power to deal with
applications for a declaration, order, direction, recommendation
or advice about
something in, or related to, an enduring power of
The following may
make such applications about an enduring power of attorney:
1. the maker of the enduring power of attorney,
2. a member of the maker’s
3. an attorney under the enduring power of attorney,
4. the Adult Guardian or Public Trustee, or
5. a person the Tribunal or Court considers an interested
10. 11. 2. 2. Declarations of incapacity and invalidity
QCAT or the Court may make a declaration about a person’s capacity at
the time they made the enduring power of attorney or at
any other relevant
QCAT or the Court may also decide on the validity of an enduring power of
attorney and may declare it invalid if satisfied that:
1. the maker did not have the capacity necessary to make it,
2. the enduring power of attorney does not comply with the other requirements
Powers of Attorney Act
3. the enduring power of attorney is invalid for another reason, for example,
the maker was induced to make it by dishonesty or undue
Nevertheless, if QCAT or the Court declares the document invalid, it may, at
the same time, appoint one or more attorneys for the
maker in effect making a
new enduring power of
As an alternative
it may, at the hearing about the maker’s capacity to make the enduring
power of attorney, also deal with
an application that the maker also did not
have the capacity to revoke the enduring power of attorney subsequently and in
appoint an administrator and guardian for the incapable
10. 11. 2. 3. Advice or directions
In relation to these applications, the powers of QCAT and the Court extend to
giving directions or advice or making recommendations,
order or declarations
1. the interpretation of the terms of, or another issue involving an enduring
power of attorney or advance health directive, or
2. the exercise of an enduring attorney’s power or another issue
involving their power.
10. 11. 2. 4. The Tribunal or Court’s other powers when reviewing
the making, operation and effect of an enduring power of attorney
If QCAT or the Court considers it in the best interests of the maker, it may,
authorise an enduring attorney, either generally or
in a specific case, to
undertake a transaction that they were not otherwise authorised to
QCAT or the Court may, on its own initiative or on the application of the
maker or an interested person order that:
1. the enduring attorney files with it, and serves on the applicant, a
summary of receipts and expenditure or more detailed accounts
of dealings and
transactions under the power of attorney for a specified period,
2. the accounts be audited by an auditor appointed by QCAT ot the Court and
that a copy of the auditor’s report be given to
it and the applicant,
3. the enduring attorney present a plan of management for
10. 11. 3. South Australia
In South Australia the Supreme Court, but not the Guardianship Board, has the
It will deal with
applications from any person who, in its opinion, has a proper interest in the
matter for orders 1, 2, 3 and 4
below. The enduring attorney may apply for
orders 3, 4 and 5 while the Court may make the orders set out in 1 to 6 below
when dealing
with any of these applications. The Court may, by order:
1. require an enduring attorney (or former one) to file in the Court and
serve on the applicant a copy of all records and accounts
kept by the enduring
attorney of dealings and transactions made by the enduring guardian when
exercising the enduring power of attorney,
2. require that such records and accounts to be audited by an auditor
appointed by the Court and that a copy of the report of the
auditor to be given
to the Court and the applicant,
3. revoke or vary the terms of the enduring power of attorney,
4. appoint a substitute enduring
5. give advice and direction as to matters connected with the exercise of the
enduring power of attorney or the meaning of its terms,
6. make such other order (declaratory or otherwise) as to the exercise of the
enduring power of attorney, or the construction of its
terms, as the Court
thinks fit.
10. 11. 4. Tasmania
10. 11. 4. 1. Who may apply for and be party to a review?
In Tasmania the Guardianship and Administration Board may hold a hearing
to review an enduring power of attorney of its own motion
or on application by
the enduring attorney, by or on behalf of a maker or by any other person who the
Board believes has a proper
interest in the
While the Supreme Court does not have this jurisdiction, the Board may seek the
Court’s advice by referring a special case
to it for its opinion. Also the
Board’s decisions under the
Powers of Attorney Act
may be appealed to the Supreme
10. 11. 4. 2. Orders the Board may make on review including declarations
of incapacity and invalidity
After conducting the review the Board may, by order:
1. vary a term of, or a power conferred by, the
enduring power of attorney,
2. appoint a substitute enduring attorney,
3. appoint an administrator of the estate of
the maker of the enduring power of attorney,
4. declare that the maker did or did not have
mental capacity to make a valid enduring power of attorney,
5. revoke the enduring power of attorney and,
if the donor is over the age of 18 years and the Board thinks fit, appoint an
administrator
of his or her estate,
6. make such other order as to the exercise of
the power, or the construction of its terms, as it thinks fit, or
7. declare that the enduring power of attorney is invalid if it is satisfied
(a) the maker did not have the mental
capacity to make it,
(b) it does not comply with the other
requirements of the
Powers of Attorney Act
(c) it is invalid because the maker was
induced to make it by dishonesty or undue influence or invalid for any other
When there is an urgent
need to do so, the Board may suspend the operation of an enduring power of
attorney and, on doing so, the
Board may also:
1. appoint the Public Trustee or any other
person as a substitute attorney, and
2. make such other orders, and give such other
directions, as to the exercise of the power as it thinks
10. 11. 4. 3. Advice or directions and the exercise of other
An enduring attorney may apply for advice or direction by the Board on any
matter relating to the scope of their appointment or the
exercise of any power
by the enduring attorney under the enduring power of attorney. Such applications
can be made formally or informally
to the Board. The Board may require notice to
be given or may exercise its powers without a hearing.
The Board may then exercise a wide range of powers. It may:
1. approve or disapprove
of any act proposed to be done by the attorney,
2. give such advice or direction as it
considers appropriate, and
3. vary the effect of the enduring power of
attorney, or
4. make any other order that it could have made on an application to review
the enduring power of attorney.
The Board also has power, of its own motion, to
direct, or offer advice to, an enduring attorney in respect of any matter
under the power of attorney.
It also may, of its own motion and without a
1. require an attorney to lodge with it a copy of all records and accounts
kept by the enduring attorney of dealings and transactions
made by them under
the enduring power of attorney,
2. require those records and accounts to be
audited by an auditor appointed by it and require a copy of the report of the
to be given to it, or
3. require the enduring attorney to submit a
plan of financial management to the
10. 11. 5. Victoria
In Victoria VCAT may deal with any matter or question relating to:
1. the scope of an attorney's powers under an enduring power of attorney,
2. the exercise of any power by an attorney under an enduring power of
attorney or
3. any other thing in or related to the enduring power of attorney part of
Instruments Act
VCAT may make a declaration, order, direction or recommendation about these
matters as a result of an
application.
10. 11. 5. 1. Who may apply for and be party to a review?
The following may apply to VCAT:
1. an attorney under the enduring power of attorney,
2. the maker of the enduring power of attorney,
3. the Public Advocate, or
4. another person whom VCAT is satisfied has a special interest in the
affairs of the maker.
The maker, any enduring attorney and the Public Advocate are entitled to
notice of the application, the hearing and any order made
together with anyone
in the following list that VCAT directs notice be given to:
1. the nearest relative of the maker,
2. the primary carer (if any) of the maker,
3. any guardian of the maker,
4. any person appointed as alternative guardian of the maker,
5. any administrator of the estate of the maker, and
6. any person whom VCAT is satisfied has a special interest in the affairs of
10. 11. 5. 2. Declaration of invalidity
VCAT does not have a direct power to make a declaration of incapacity in
relation to the making of an enduring power of attorney,
but it can make any
declaration it considers necessary in relation to an enduring power of
Also, it has the
power to revoke an enduring power of attorney and may do so if it is satisfied
that it is in the maker’s best
interests to do so and that the maker
currently lacks the capacity to make an enduring power of
However, VCAT may, on its own initiative or on application declare an
enduring power of attorney to be invalid if it is satisfied that:
1. the maker lacked capacity at the time the enduring power of attorney was
2. it does not comply with the requirements of the
Instruments Act
3. it is invalid for another reason, for example, the maker was induced to
make it by dishonesty or undue influence.
Any enduring power of attorney declared to be invalid is void from the
10. 11. 5. 3. Advisory opinions, directions and other powers
VCAT may give an advisory opinion on any matter relating to an enduring power
of attorney that is referred to it by
application.
In addition VCAT, on its own initiative or on an application may:
1. make a declaration or make recommendations or give any directions it
considers necessary in relation to an enduring power of attorney,
2. vary the effect of an enduring power of attorney,
3. suspend for a specified period an enduring power of attorney, either
generally or in respect of a specific matter,
4. make any order it considers necessary in relation to an enduring power of
attorney, and
5. may give directions to an attorney under an enduring power of attorney in
respect of any matter.
VCAT, on its own initiative or on an application, may also order that:
1. an enduring attorney lodges with it accounts or other documents relating
to the exercise of the power of attorney for a specified
2. the accounts be examined or audited by a person appointed by it and that a
copy of the person's report be given to it and the
10. 11. 6. Western Australia
In Western Australia, under the
Guardianship and Administration Act
, WASAT may, when application is made to it, make certain orders
in relation to enduring powers of
not affect the Supreme Court’s inherent
However, WASAT
takes the view that it was given a general supervisory jurisdiction over
enduring powers of attorney that it may exercise
even after the maker of the
power of attorney has died.
10. 11. 6. 1. Who may apply for the intervention of the Tribunal?
Anyone who, in the opinion of WASAT, has a proper interest in the matter may
apply to WASAT for the limited kinds of orders listed
below. When dealing with
an application, WASAT may hear only the applicant’s case making an order
(make an ex parte order)
or give directions as to who shall be given notice of
the application and who shall be entitled to be heard before WASAT makes its
10. 11. 6. 2. Orders the Tribunal can make
The orders that WASAT may make are limited in nature. They do not include the
power to make declarations as to the capacity of a maker
of an enduring power of
attorney or as to the validity of an enduring power of attorney. The orders that
WASAT may make on the application
of a person with a proper interest, including
an enduring attorney, are orders:
1. requiring the enduring attorney to file with it, and serve on the
applicant, a copy of all records and accounts kept by the enduring
attorney of
dealings and transactions made by the enduring attorney in connection with the
2. requiring such records and accounts be audited by an auditor appointed by
it and requiring a copy of the report of the auditor
to be given to it and the
applicant for the order, or
3. revoking or varying the terms of an enduring power of attorney, appointing
a substitute enduring attorney or confirming that a
person appointed to be the
substitute enduring attorney has become the enduring
In addition to the orders just listed, ensuring attorneys may apply to WASAT
for directions as to matters connected with the exercise
of the power of
attorney or the construction of its
Even though the orders WASAT may make are limited in nature, applications to
it to intervene in enduring powers of attorney are often
linked with other
applications, particularly applications for administration orders, so that WASAT
hearing the applications together
can make a range of orders to meet the now
incapable current person’s
10. 11. 7. Australian Capital
In the Australian Capital Territory, ACAT is empowered to make a number of
orders in relation to enduring powers of attorney or their
makers when the
maker has lost capacity (has impaired decision-making capacity). ACAT may make
these orders when an application is
made to it, but it may act on its own
initiative when it is hearing a matter under the
Guardianship and Management
of Property Act
The Supreme Court
may deal with applications about the powers of an enduring attorney while the
Public Trustee and the Public Advocate
10. 11. 7. 1. Who may apply for and be party to a review?
The following may make applications ACAT, as interested persons, in relation
to enduring powers of attorney but usually only when
the maker of the power of
attorney has impaired decision-making capacity:
1. the enduring attorney,
2. the maker,
3. a relative of the
4. the Public Advocate,
5. the Public Trustee,
6. the maker’s guardian,
7. the manager (administrator) of the maker’s estate, or
8. any other person, with the leave of the
In addition ACAT may conduct a review of its own initiative.
10. 11. 7. 2. Declaration of incapacity
On application, ACAT may declare whether the maker of an enduring power of
attorney has decision-making capacity or impaired decision-making
10. 11. 7. 3. Advice, directions or other orders
When dealing with an application at a time when the maker of an enduring
power of attorney has impaired decision-making capacity,
ACAT may, by order:
1. give a direction, not inconsistent with
Attorney Act
or the enduring power of attorney, that the enduring attorney
do or not do a stated act,
2. direct the enduring attorney to produce stated books, accounts or other
records of transactions carried out by the attorney for
3. revoke the enduring power of attorney, or part of it or
4. make a declaration about the interpretation or effect of the enduring
power of attorney.
If ACAT revokes the enduring power of attorney, it may appoint either a
guardian or administrator (manager) for the estate of the
Also when the maker of the power of attorney has impaired decision-making
capacity and ACAT is satisfied that it is in the interests
of the maker to
remove the attorney, it may remove an attorney under the enduring power of
10. 11. 7. 4. Access to the maker of an enduring power of attorney who has
impaired decision-making capacity
When the maker of an enduring power of attorney has impaired decision-making
capacity, the Public Advocate is entitled to reasonable
Also, ACAT may grant an
interested person, as defined in 10. 11.7. 1 above access to the maker, with or
without conditions, if it
is satisfied that an enduring attorney has denied the
person access to the maker and it is reasonable to allow the
10. 11. 8. Northern Territory
In the Northern Territory, the Supreme Court has the power to deal with
enduring powers of attorney at any time after the maker of
the enduring power
has become legally incapacitated. The Public Trustee or any other person who (in
the Court’s opinion) has
an interest in any property which may be dealt
with by the maker of an enduring power may apply to the Supreme Court for any of
following orders – an order:
1. requiring the enduring attorney to file in the Court and serve on the
applicant a true and accurate record of any transaction entered
into by the
enduring attorney charging or otherwise disposing of, whether for valuable
consideration or otherwise, any of the assets
of the maker,
2. requiring such records as referred to in the order to be audited by an
auditor appointed by the Court, and requiring a copy of
the report of that
auditor to be given to the Court and the applicant , or
3. revoking or varying the terms of the enduring power of attorney in such
manner as the Supreme Court thinks fit, including appointing
the Public Trustee
or another person as a substitute enduring
In re Coleman
Drew v Nunn
[1879] UKLawRpKQB 48
(1879) 4 QBD
[1954] HCA 17
(1954) 91 CLR 423
NSW (1988) Conv R 55-385.
[2005 QGAAT
Ibid. [26].
, 316. See also
[2000] Ch 343
in the Court of
Appeal in which it acknowledged that the four points were “a sound
indication” of what the maker must
understand to make a valid enduring
power of attorney, see
[2001] Ch 609
Adult Guardian (In Re
Enduring Power of Attorney of Vera Hagger) v Vera Hagger, Declan James Barry and
Albert Craig Ray
(Unreported Supreme Court of Queensland,
1083 of 2001).
[2007] QGAAT 6
[34], a case in which the Tribunal found the maker lacked the required capacity
when she made the challenged enduring power of attorney.
[2005] QGAAT 46.
The Tribunal followed the same approach
, but found the maker capable of making the enduring power of attorney
and the presumption of capacity not rebutted. See also
Sydney, Federation Press,
NSW (1988) Conv R
Ghosn v Principle Focus
[2008] VSC 574
Ghosn v Principle Focus
[2008] VSC 574
Szozda v Szozda
[2010] NSWSC 804.
Ibid. [28]-[30].
Ibid. [34].
Ibid. [120].
Powers of Attorney
The term “prescribed witness” is
Szozda v Szozda
[2010] NSWSC 804
[2008] VSC 574.
[2004] VSCA 235.
Ibid. [49].
Powers of Attorney
, Schedule 1
A footnote to
the section in the Act states: “If there is a reasonable likelihood of
doubt, it is advisable for the witness
to make a written record of the evidence
as a result of which the witness considered that the [maker] understood those
Powers of Attorney
Instruments Act
s 118. A footnote to s 118 is in the same terms as the
footnote set out in (footnote 10).
[2008] VSC 574.
Ibid. s 125A.
Powers of Attorney
Re Caldwell
[2005] QGAAT 29.
Collier, B and others,
Mental Capacity: Powers of Attorney and Advanced Health Directives, Sydney, The
Federation Press, 2005, 52.
Peisah C. Brodaty H, Quadrio
C, “Family conflict in dementia: prodigal sons & black sheep”
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry
(2006) 21(5):485-492.
[1954] HCA 17
[1954] HCA 17
NSW (1988) Conv R
[2008] VSC 574.
Ibid NSW (1988) Conv R
Powers of Attorney
Instruments Act
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
, Schedule 1
Instruments Act
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney and Agency Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Instruments
ss 119 and 123-125A,
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney and Agency Act
Instruments Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 104(2)(b)
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney
The Margaret Mitchell
(1858) 166 ER 1174.
Ibid. 1184. Also quoted in
Dynayski v Grant
[2004] NSWSC 1187
Watson v Watson
[2002] NSWSC 919
Dynayski v Grant
[2004] NSWSC 1187
(1983) 12 Aust Crim Rep 1,
Watson v Watson
[2002] NSWSC 919
Powell v Thompson
[1990] NZHC 3429
[1991] 1 NZLR 597
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
(ACT) Schedule 1
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney and
Guardianship and Administration
ss 107(1)(a).
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney and
Schedule 1.
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act
For examples of conflict transactions, see
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney and
Instruments Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
ss 107(1)(c)
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
For an example see,
[2006] QGAAT 88
For an example QCAT’s
predecessor tribunal granting leave to an attorney to resign, appointing an
administrator but dismissing
an application for a guardianship order see,
[2003] QGAAT 22.
See also Re
[2006] QGAAT 91.
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act
Instruments Act
Powers of Attorney Act
As an example of such
implication see,
Powers of Attorney and Agency Act
Powers of Attorney
Instruments Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
ss 107(1)(b).
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act
[2006] QGAAT
Ibid. [34].
Ibid. [40].
Ibid. [42].
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
and Schedule 3
cl 1. The term “close friend” of a maker means another individual
who has a close personal relationship
with the maker and a personal interest in
their welfare. The term “relative” of the maker means; a
mother, father, wife,
husband, daughter, son, step-daughter, step-son, sister,
brother, half-sister, half-brother or grandchild of the maker. If the maker
party to a domestic relationship within the meaning of the
Property (Relationships) Act 1984
, any person who
is a relative of the kind just set out, of either party to the relationship, is
a relative for the purpose of the
gift-giving provision.
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act
In Queensland a
“relation” of the maker is their spouse, a person related to the
maker by blood, marriage or adoption
or because of a de facto relationship,
foster relationship or a relationship arising because of a legal arrangement;
such as a court
order for custody or a trust arrangement between trustee and
beneficiary. A “relation” is also a person on whom the
completely or mainly dependent, a person who is completely or mainly dependent
on the maker or a person who is a member
of the same household as the maker. A
“close friend” of the maker, means another person who has a close
personal relationship
with the maker and a personal interest in their welfare.
Powers of Attorney Act
schedule 3.
Powers of Attorney Act
and (2)(a). In
the Australian Capital Territory a “relative” is a person related to
the maker by blood, affinity or adoption.
A “close friend”, of the
maker, means someone who has a close personal relationship with the maker and a
personal interest
in their welfare.
s 39(2)(a).
Powers of Attorney
as to the recognition in the Northern Territory
enduring powers of attorney made interstate.
Bryant v La Banque du
[1893] UKLawRpAC 5
[1893] AC 170
Tobin v Broadbent
(1947) 75 CLR 378
, 401. The sentence quoted by Dixon J is from Russell J in
Reckitt v Barnett Pembroke and Slater Ltd
(1928) 2 KB 244
, 268 a judgment
approved in the House of Lords in
Reckitt v Barnett Pembroke and Slater
(1929) AC 176
, at 183 (Lord Hailsham LC) and 195 (Lord Warrington). See
Wong v Wong
[2008] NSWSC 330
Powers of Attorney
Ibid. schedule 3, items 2
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney and
nstruments Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
s107(1)(a).
Powers of Attorney and
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
s 109(1)(c).
Instruments Act
s 125Z(1)(b).
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Instruments Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney Act
. Section 7 of the Northern Territory
allows for the registration in the Northern Territory of an enduring power of
attorney made interstate regardless of when it was
executed interstate. This
does not countermand the requirement of registration enduring powers of attorney
in the Northern Territory
of powers of attorney to be used there wherever they
were originally executed elsewhere in Australia or when. While an enduring power
of attorney registered elsewhere in Australia may be taken to be registered in
Tasmania, it is a safer practise to obtain registration
of that power of
attorney in Tasmania. It is normal practise for powers of attorney to be
registered before they may be used to effect
dealings in land. See
Attorney Act
Protected Estates
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Powers of Attorney and
It is assumed that by necessary
implication that an administration order made by the Guardianship Board would
have the same effect
or at least would take precedence over the power of
attorney while the administration order was in effect.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Powers of Attorney
Instruments Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
For a case in which the Tribunal
considered that the enduring power of attorney was not operating to protect the
interests of the
maker and consequently appointed an administrator and then
revoked the enduring power of attorney see,
[2006] WASAT
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
Powers of Attorney
Aged and Infirm Person’s
Property Act
For an example of a
tribunal being satisfied that the management of the maker’s finances by
her joint enduring attorneys was
appropriate and that it was appropriate for
them to continue to act despite the concerns of other relatives, see
[2006] QGAAT 75..
Ibid. [103]-[105].
Ibid. [106] and
of Attorney Act
Ibid. [107] and
Szozda v Szozda
[2010] NSWSC 804
[16] and [19].
Powers of Attorney
For an example of a
direction to lodge accounts and other records see,
[2009] NSWGT 6.
For a case in which an applicant for a review of the operation of an enduring
power of attorney further appealed their concerns
to the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal, see
IS v Public Guardian & Ors
[2009] NSWADTAP 24.
Szozda v Szozda
[2010] NSWSC 804
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship Act
Powers of Attorney
notes that the inherent
parens patriae jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is not affected by this
legislation.
For the purposes of these
applications, the maker’s family consists of the following: the
maker’s spouse, each of their
children who is 18 years or more (including
a stepchild, an adopted child, and a person for whom the maker was foster-parent
or guardian
when the person was a child), each of the maker’s parents
(including a step-parent, adoptive parent, foster-parent and guardian).
is none of the above, then each of the maker’s siblings who is 18 years or
more (including a step-sibling, adopted
sibling, and foster-sibling). See
s 110(3)(f)
(4). QCAT or the Court may join parties to these applications and allow
interested persons to take part. See
For examples
[2005] QGAAT 30
[2005] QGAAT 46
[2008] QGAAT 45.
See for example,
[2003] QGAAT 15
[2005] QGAAT 59
examples see,
[2005] QGAAT 30
[2007] QGAAT
As noted in 10. 6. 1. 5.
above, an enduring attorney may not renounce their role under an enduring power
of attorney during the time
the maker is incapable without the permission of the
Supreme Court.
Powers of Attorney and
Powers of Attorney
description of the Board conducting a review of the appointment of an attorney
under an enduring power of attorney see,
KB and RB v Guardianship and
Administration Board
[2007] TASSC 45.
Instruments Act
Ibid. s 125V(2).
Ibid. s 125W(2) and (3).
In s 125W(3) the terms “administrator”, “guardian”,
“nearest relative”
and “primary carer” have the same
meanings as they have in the
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Vic) – see s 125W(4).
Instruments Act
s125Z(1)(a).
Ibid. ss 125Q and
Ibid. s 125Y(1).
Ibid. s 125Y(2).
Ibid. s125ZA
Ibid. s 125Z.
Ibid. s 125ZB.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
[2008] WASAT 29
[2010] WASAT 91.
For an example see,
[2010] 91 in which the audit was ordered after the death of the maker
of the enduring power of attorney.
For an example see,
[2006] WASAT 245
, 44 SR (WA) 104.
Powers of Attorney
A relative of the maker
is a person related by blood, affinity or adoption to the maker
or a domestic partner of the maker. See
Powers of Attorney Act
(ACT) Dictionary. The meaning of “domestic partner” is set out in
Legislation Act
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
If the Tribunal asks the
Public Trustee to assist it by examining and reporting on books, accounts or
other records of transactions
carried out by the enduring attorney, the Public
Trustee must assist. See
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991
Ibid. s 84(2).
Ibid. s 84(3) and
Powers of Attorney
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (778 KB)
PDF format (214 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter