URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle --- "Chapter 1 - Capacity" [2011] SydUPLawBk 3; in O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle (eds), "Capacity and the Law" (Sydney University Press, 2011)
1.1. Introduction
1.2. What is capacity?
1.3. What sort of disorders compromise capacity?
1.4. How do we test capacity?
1.4.1. The general principles of assessment
1.5. Capacity to give instructions
1.6. What matters relating to capacity and the law that are dealt with in the rest of the book?
Chapter 1 – Capacity
1.1. Introduction
The field of capacity and decision- making is a truly
“medico-legal” field, representing an interface between the legal
and medical disciplines. Much major decision- making involves execution of legal
documents and is regulated by the common law and
legislation. It requires the
involvement of legal professionals, while the relationship between decision-
making and health and well-being
often necessitates the involvement of health
care professionals.
Good practice for health care professionals working in this area requires a
careful balance between the sometimes-competing medical
and ethical principles
of promoting autonomy (the individual’s right to self-determination and
independence) and beneficence
(the need for the clinician to act for the benefit
of the patient).
Ultimately the
goal is to ensure that decisions are not made by patients or clients without
capacity, while facilitating where possible,
the participation of impaired
clients in important and meaningful processes from which they might otherwise
have been excluded. Lawyers
and doctors alike need to be conscious of the need
of cognitively impaired people to have a sense of purpose and involvement in
own affairs as much as possible and for as long as possible and to
maximise their participation or sense of involvement.
This requires both an understanding of the law which underpins
decision–making as well as the kind of conditions which afflict
impair their ability to make decisions.
1.2. What is capacity?
Capacity is the ability to make decisions.
“capacity” has been used synonymously with competence, although some
have sought to distinguish competence as
being a legal determination, and
capacity a health care professional’s determination
Although the accepted legal standards that define capacity and competency
vary, operational definitions of the cognitive elements
of capacity usually
comprise combinations of the following abilities:
1. To understand the specific situation, relevant facts or basic information
2. To evaluate reasonable implications or consequences of making choices
3. To use reasoned processes to weigh the risks and benefits of the choices
4. To communicate relatively consistent or stable choices
There is general consensus that capacity is not a unitary concept but rather
refers to specific decisions, tasks or
Capacity is therefore task or domain-specific, that is, peculiar to the
particular type of decision made. Thus, the capacity task
is different for
entering into a contract; executing a power of attorney, will or deed;
appointing an enduring guardian or an attorney
under a power of attorney; or
consenting to treatment, divorce or marriage. This has been acknowledged in
Australia in
Gibbons v Wright
when a unanimous High Court said:
[T]he mental capacity required by law in respect of any instrument is relative
to the particular transaction which is being effected
by means of the
instrument, and may be described as the capacity to understand the nature of the
transaction when it is explained.
Thus, capacity cannot be extrapolated from one capacity task to another. For
example, a person’s capacity to write a will cannot
be inferred from their
capacity to consent to medical treatment. The concept of global capacity,
whereby a person is deemed capable
or incapable of making all decisions, has
been rejected. Consequently, it is inappropriate to state that a person
“lacks capacity”,
without further reference to the type of
Capacity is also issue-specific. As suggested in
Gibbons v Wright
One cannot consider soundness of mind in the air, so to speak, but only in
relation to the facts and the subject-matter of the particular
This suggests that even within a particular type of decision or
task category, capacity may vary. Within a single domain or capacity
is a spectrum or hierarchy of decisions from simple (e.g. having a blood test)
to complex (e.g. carotid artery surgery)
and accordingly, people may be capable
of making simple decisions but not more complex ones. Further, the greater the
and conflict within the decision-maker’s environment (the
‘situation-specific’ nature of capacity),
the higher the level of cognitive function or emotional stability/mental
health necessary in order to be considered capable when
making decisions which
involve others. This might include, for example, the weighing up of potential
beneficiaries in a will or potential
appointees as attorneys under (enduring)
powers of attorney or as enduring guardians or recipients of a gift, or whether
or accept a proposal to marry.
Accordingly, a person with dementia may have the capacity to make a simple
will, for example leaving a single asset such as their
house to their spouse,
but may not have capacity to make a complex will, for example dividing a complex
estate involving a share
and real estate portfolio amongst multiple, conflicting
beneficiaries with fractional
Also, in any discussion about incapacity, it must be appreciated that there
is, in the common law, a presumption of capacity in relation
to anyone 18 years
That presumption is
sometimes confirmed in
legislation.
The presumption may
be rebutted by evidence to the contrary. Consequently, incapacity is not
“status” or diagnosis
Incapacity cannot be
assumed because of a diagnosis of mental disorder, such as dementia or
schizophrenia. Rather, the question of
whether or not a person has capacity is
assessed in the context of the person’s cognitive abilities in relation to
the decision.
A person with mild dementia may therefore have enough insight,
memory and reasoning to know they need help and accept it in the
community services but not have enough reasoning to decide on the pros and cons
of a carotid endarterectomy to relieve plaque
formation in the carotid artery. A
useful formula in this context might be:
Capacity = brain reserve/decision
Put another way, this means that the bigger the decision, the more brain
reserve or intellectual ability one needs to have capacity.
Freedom is maximized when a person is allowed to make the decisions they are
capable of making.
1.3. What sort of disorders compromise
Any disorder causing acute or chronic impairment of cognitive function might
potentially compromise capacity. Such disorders include:
1. Intellectual disability
2. Cognitive impairment, either associated with
a. head injury;
b. neurodegenerative diseases such as dementia (e.g. Alzheimer’s
disease, vascular dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies); or
c. delirium which is a transient reversible perturbation of cognitive
function due to medical illness.
3. Mental illness such as schizophrenia, depression, bipolar disorder,
usually in their acute phases.
The capacity of a person with any of these disorders can vary according to
the nature, severity and fluctuation of their condition
and the person’s
medication or treatment. Throughout this book we will address the nature of many
of these disorders as they
affect different types of capacity.
1.4. How do we test capacity?
Capacity must be tested in relation to the decision at hand and at the
specific time the decision has to be made. Sometimes it is
contemporaneously when the decision is being made. Sometimes it is assessed
retrospectively to check the validity of a past
decision. The question the
health professionals must ask themselves is: Does X (or did X) have capacity to
make a decision about
Y? The answer to this question is determined by the
cognitive ability of X to understand and appreciate the context of and the
they are making; not the actual outcome of the choice. A bad outcome
or “bad decision” does not imply
incapacity,
“good decision” imply capacity.
Importantly, the person must be aware of the “what and who” of
the decision. The “what” of the decision refers
person’s understanding of the decision. For example, do they understand
what a will is, or what an (enduring) guardian
or an (enduring) attorney does?
The “who” of the decision refers to the appointee – capacity
often involves giving
appointments to other people – making them decision-
makers or giving them certain powers or bequests. The choice of the appointee
must be rationally considered, and preferably, in the case of those with
neurodegenerative disease such as dementia, consistent with
choices made prior
to the onset of the disease (or if inconsistent, the inconsistency must be a
manifestation of rational choice
and not of influence from others). A person
must understand the implications of making changes to previously established
of appointments or legal documents.
However, as Debelle J warned in
Dalle-Molle by his next friend Public
Trustee v Manos
, there is a limit on how much weight can be given to the
lack of rationality of a decision is assessing whether or not a person had
capacity to make the decision. He said:
[O]ne of the neuro-psychologists called to give evidence, pointed out, a person
suffering a mental or intellectual impairment may
be capable of making a
decision but that decision may have no logical or reasonable base. In my view,
that last comment sounds a
salutary warning that the barrier as to what
constitutes a rational decision should not be raised too
In order to assess capacity, the health care professional must be equipped
with the following:
1. The legal tests that define capacity in the area in question (e.g. the
legal definition of will-making capacity or capacity to
appoint a power of
2. Information about the person’s health status and cognitive
functioning and, if possible, an opportunity for the health care
professional to
test the person’s cognitive functioning;
3. The history of family relationships and the “emotional and
psychological milieu”
the person – including history of any family conflict
4. The pattern of decision making in relation to the decision or document in
question (e.g. pattern of previous wills or appointments
of attorneys under
powers of attorney)
1.4.1. The general principles of assessment
There are no scientific tests for capacity, but rather an application of
clinical assessment of the individual person (and/or the
evidence relating to
the person’s health and psychological status) applied to the legal tests
relevant to the decision at hand.
A general outline for an assessment of
capacity would include the following:
1. Introduction:
a. expertise or CV annexure,
b. questions asked/ legal tests used,
c. acknowledgement of having read any expert code,
d. evidence upon which opinion is based,
e. circumstances of assessment if contemporaneous
2. Personal history and family relationships,
3. Medical and psychiatric history,
4. Diagnosis including issue of cognitive impairment and severity,
5. Specific answers to the relevant legal tests,
6. Conclusion
7. References
While this is a general guideline we will address report writing throughout
this book with reference to specific capacity tasks.
1.5. Capacity to give instructions
One of the most fundamental tasks of solicitors is to take instructions from
their clients. Nevertheless, clients must have the capacity
to give those
instructions. Consequently, and not disregarding the presumption of capacity,
when a solicitor interviewing a client
realises that the client has questionable
capacity, the solicitor must then determine whether or not the client can indeed
give instructions.
What is required for capacity to give instructions in relation to litigation
was considered in
Dalle-Molle by his next friend Public Trustee v
In that case Debelle
J noted the following matters:
1. the person must have the capacity not only to give
sufficient instructions to prosecute or defend the action but also the capacity
to give sufficient instructions to compromise the
proceedings;
2. the term “sufficient instructions” in Rule 5 of the Supreme
Court Rules (of the South Australian Supreme Court) signifies
that the person is
able, once an appropriate explanation has been given to them, to understand the
essential elements of the action
and is able then to decide whether to proceed
with the litigation or, if it is a question of agreeing to a compromise (a
settlement)
of the proceedings, to decide whether or not to compromise (settle
3. the person’s understanding must be in relation to the facts and the
subject-matter of the particular case. Legal proceedings
have a spectrum of
complexity. They can extend from the most simple issues through a range of
complexity to quite involved and complex
litigation;
4. The person’s level of understanding must be greater than the mental
capacity to understand in broad terms what is involved
in the decision to
prosecute, defend or settle the proceedings, they must be able to understand the
nature of the litigation, its
purpose, its possible outcomes, and the risks
having to pay costs if they are unsuccessful in the
In a case regularly referred to in relation to the test for capacity to make
an enduring power of attorney,
Ranclaud v Cabban
, Young J noted in
relation to giving instructions:
It must also be realised that being able to understand what a solicitor is and
what one is doing when one is retaining a solicitor
is not the whole of the
matters which must be considered when working out whether a person is capable of
retaining a solicitor. A
solicitor is not the alter ego of a litigant. Doubtless
it is possible for a person who is sui juris and well aware of the commercial
risks involved to give a solicitor a retainer which just says “achieve
result X by whatever means you think sufficient with
no regard as to
cost”. Generally speaking, however, a person retains a solicitor to
advise one and one reserves to oneself
the ultimate power of making decisions
after receiving the solicitor’s
1.6. What matters relating to capacity and the law
that are dealt with in the rest of the book?
As has already been indicated, the law in Australia requires that anyone who
enters into a contract or other transaction, or executes
a document like a deed
conveying their land to someone else, or a will or an enduring power of
attorney, should have the mental capacity
to understand the nature and effect of
that transaction or document. However, the starting point is that everyone who
has reached
the age of majority, namely 18 years, is presumed to have the
capacity to enter into contracts or other transactions. If they, or
acting on their behalf, assert they lacked capacity when they entered the
transaction or executed the document, they must
prove their lack of capacity.
Similarly, if another party asserts that the person lacked capacity, they must
prove that the person
While these matters are clear, there are many factors that are relevant to
the question of whether a person had the capacity to enter
into a transaction or
execute a document. When it comes to entering or leaving interpersonal
relationships, considerations including
indicators and patterns of influence,
the vulnerability of cognitively impaired person to influence and the assessment
of the capacity
to form and cease interpersonal relationships apply. They
matters are dealt with in Chapter 2.
When it comes to contracts and gifts made during lifetime, a number of other
considerations apply including the obligation to pay
for necessaries. Undue
influence, unconscionability and the defence non est factum can be relevant.
These matters are dealt with
in Chapter 3.
Chapter 4 deals in detail with the capacity to make a will and the pressures
that may be applied to the will-maker. It also deals
with the considerations
relevant to having a will set aside because the will- maker did not have
will-making capacity.
Those three
chapters deal with the circumstances which may lead to a transaction an
incapable person entered or a document they signed
being set aside.
The next group of chapters briefly trace the history of and then the current
law in Australia relating to the appointment of by tribunals
of guardians for
incapable people who need a guardian as their substitute decision-makers for
personal matters or administrators
(financial managers) to manage their property
and financial affairs and to make substitute decisions for them in relation to
Chapter 5 traces the development in England of the common law relating to the
guardianship and the administration of the estates of
people with
decision-making disabilities, the introduction of that law into Australia and
its further development here as a result
of legislation and court decisions. It
also considers the transition of the system from a Supreme Court based system to
based system.
Chapter 6 deals with the bodies in each State and Territory that have
have to consider
before making such orders. Chapter 7 deals with the functions, powers, duties
and responsibilities of those appointed
as guardians. Chapter 8 deals with the
powers of the tribunals and courts empowered to appoint administrators
(financial managers)
and the roles and functions of the administrators so
The next two chapters deal with the legislation recently enacted to allow
people to appoint their own substitute decision-makers to
act for them if they
lose capacity. This legislation allows the appointment of enduring guardians or
their equivalents to make substitute
personal decisions and attorneys under
enduring powers of attorney to make substitute financial decisions and to mange
affairs. Versions of this legislation have been enacted in most States
and Territories in Australia. Chapter 9 deals with enduring
guardianship while
Chapter 10 deals with enduring powers of attorney.
More and more people are making advance directives in which they set out how
they wish to be treated when they reach certain levels
of functioning but cannot
make decisions for themselves at that time. Because these tend to deal mainly
with questions of medical
treatment, they are dealt with in the final section of
That section of the book deals with substitute consent to medical treatment
and related matters. Chapter 11 deals with the development
of the law relating
to people unable to give a valid consent to their own treatment. Chapter 12 sets
out the law relating to substitute
consent to medical treatment in Australia.
Chapter 13 deals with advance directives while Chapter 14 deals with
decision-making at
the end of life. Chapter 15 deals the sterilization of people
unable to give a valid consent to their own treatment. Chapter 16 deals
law relating to those unable to give a valid consent to their own treatment
being involved in clinical trials and gaining
access to medical treatments that
are still in their experimental later stages.
Katona C. Chiu, E, Adelman,
S.Baloyannis, S., Camus, V., Firmino, H., Gove, D., Ghebrehiwet, T., Graham, N.,
Icelli, I., Ihl, R.
Kalasic, A., Leszek, L., Kim, S., de M. Lima, C. Peisah, C.,
Tataru, N., Warner J. (2009). World Psychiatric Association Section
Psychiatry Consensus Conference on Ethics and Capacity in old people with mental
International Journal Geriatric Psychiatry,
24(12): 1319-24.
Kim SYH Karlawish JHT, Caine
E.D. (2002) Current state of research on decision-making competence of
cognitively impaired elderly
American Journal Geriatric
10:151-165.
.Determining the competency of Alzheimer patients to consent to treatment
and research.
Dis Assoc Disord.
1994;8 Suppl 4:5-18.
.Psychiatric issues in retrospective challenges of testamentary
J Geriatr Psychiatry.
2005 Jan;20(1):63-9
.Comparison of standards for assessing patients' capacities to make
treatment decisions.
Psychiatry.
1995 Jul;152(7):1033-7
.Determining the competency of Alzheimer patients to consent to treatment
and research.
Dis Assoc Disord.
1994;8 Suppl 4:5-18.
Marson D.C (2001) Loss of
competency in Alzheimer’s disease: conceptual and psychometric approaches
International Journal of Law and Psychiatry
24: 267-283.
Hill-Fotouhi
.The MacCAT-T: a clinical tool to assess patients' capacities to make
treatment decisions.
1997 Nov;48(11):1415-9
.Comparison of standards for assessing patients' capacities to make
treatment decisions.
Psychiatry.
1995 Jul;152(7):1033-7
.Psychiatric issues in retrospective challenges of testamentary
J Geriatr Psychiatry.
2005 Jan;20(1):63-9
Kim et al (2002) ibid
Verma S. Silberfeld M. 1997
Approaches to capacity and competency: the Canadian view
J Law Psychiatry.
1997 Winter;20(1):35-46
Sullivan, K.,
Neuropsychological assessment of mental capacity.
Neuropsychol
2004 Sep;14(3):131-42.
Woods B Pratt R
in dementia: ethical and legal issues in relation to people with dementia
Aging Ment Health
. 2005; 9(5):423-9.
Darzins, P, Molloy DW,
Strang D. (Ed)
Who can decide? The six step capacity assessment process
(2000) Memory Australia Press, Adelaide, p6
[1954] HCA 17
(1954) 91 CLR 423
[1954] HCA 17
Ibid. 438, quoting Hodson LJ
In the Estate of Park Decd Park v Park
[1954] P 112
, 136. See also
Dalle-Molle by his next friend Public Trustee v Manos
[2004] SASC
Shulman K.I., Peisah C.,
Jacoby R, Heinik J, Finkel S. (2009). Contemporaneous assessment of testamentary
capacity A consensus report
from the IPA Task Force on testamentary capacity and
undue influence.
International Psychogeriatrics, 21(3),
Shulman, K.I., Cohen, C.A.,
Kirsh, F.C., Hull, I.M., Champine, P.R. (2007) Assessment of testamentary
capacity and vulnerability
to undue influence.
American Journal of
164:722-727
Shulman K.I., Peisah C.,
Jacoby R, Heinik J, Finkel S. (2009). Contemporaneous assessment of testamentary
capacity A consensus report
from the IPA Task Force on testamentary capacity and
undue influence.
International Psychogeriatrics, 21(3),
For some recent judicial
confirmations of this see,
Dalle-Molle by his next friend Public Trustee v
[2004] SASC 102
88 SASR 193
SA v Manonai
[2008] WASCA 168
L v Human Rights and Equal Opportuinty Commission
[2006] FCA 114
Lawrance v Federal Magistrate Driver
[2005] FCA 394
For example see,
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Qld) Sch 1 cl 1
. The capacity of people with a 'mental disability' to make a health care
2000; 30(2):295-306
Darzins, P, Molloy DW,
Strang D. (Ed)
Who can decide? The six step capacity assessment process
(2000) Memory Australia Press, Adelaide, p6
[2004] SASC 102
Lane v Candura
376 NE 2d 1232
(1978) and Goldblatt, AD
“Commentary: No more jurisdiction over Jehovah”
Med. & Ethics
, 191 in which it was said:
A competent patient's refusal to consent even to life-saving medical treatment
should be assessed only with regard to its internal
consistency. If a legally
competent individual's refusal accurately describes its consequences and the
consequences of accepting
the treatment, the refusal is itself competent. To
conclude that a refusal is incompetent and can be overruled if it does not seem
"rational" to the attending physician …is to return to paternalism, a
principle discarded since the earliest of the termination
of life-sustaining
treatment cases. Without consent, medical touchings (except emergency care given
to save the life of an incompetent
patient) are batteries, both crimes against
the state and a tort against the battered
K., Cohen, CA., Kirsh F.C., Hull, I.M., Champine, P.R. Assessment of
testamentary capacity and vulnerability to undue influence
American Journal
of Psychiatry
2007; 164(5): p724.
[2004] SASC 102.
Ibid. [21].
Ibid. [22].
Ibid. [23].
Ibid. [26].
(1988) NSW ConvR 55-385
Dalle-Molle by his next
friend Public Trustee v Manos
[2004] SASC 102
88 SASR 193
Masterman-Lister v Brutton & Co
[2002] EWCA Civ 1889.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (153 KB)
PDF format (77 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter