URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/HRD/2007/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:01:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Taylor, Luke --- "Piercing the Vacuum" [2007] HRightsDef 24; (2007) 16(3) Human Rights Defender 13
Rights in Action? The justiciability of Economic, Social and Cultural rights in Australia
Interdependence of rights
Justiciability of rights
Overcoming the conceptual barrier: International experiences
The Australian context
in Action? The justiciability of
Economic, Social and Cultural rights in Australia
Julia Mansour
At present, Australia has two state-based legislative bills of rights: the
Human Rights Act 2004
(ACT) (ACT Charter of Rights) and the
Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
(Vic) (Victorian Charter).
Although the inclusion of economic, social and cultural rights (ESCR) was
considered by the committees
drafting both charters,
the resulting
legislation has, for the most part, been confined to the protection of civil and
political rights (CPR). This article
provides an overview of some of the reasons
supporting the inclusion of ESCR as Australia moves incrementally towards a
national legislative rights protection.
Interdependence of rights
The historical reasons for distinctions between the two categories of rights
are relatively well documented. Since the Cold War period,
Western commentators
have voiced fears that support for ESCR to the exclusion of CPR has been too
easily justified by repressive
governments who claim that their primary
obligations to their citizenry are effectively met by the provision of services
shelter and education, rather than by mechanisms protecting rights such
as freedom of speech and association.
This distinction has arguably
had the potential to be further exploited by reference to the formulations of
state party obligations
International Covenant on Civil and Political
(ICCPR), which obliges states to ‘respect and
the rights within the covenant, while the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
calls upon states to realise rights progressively by undertaking steps to the
‘maximum of [their] available resources’.
However, if
such fears were ever legitimate, a State’s use of such a justification
today would be unlikely to be taken seriously
within the international
community, since international jurisprudence over the past 30 years has moved
away from the standpoint that
rights can be regarded as existing in separate
categories and towards the theory that all rights must be regarded as
complementary
and interdependent.
While rights jurisprudence has evolved significantly since the development of
the standards governing the implementation of state
party obligations in the
ICCPR and ICESCR in the1960s, it is necessary to acknowledge that lingering
distinctions have nevertheless
remained regarding the interpretation and
implementation of the two classes of rights. Traditionally, the guarantee of a
as freedom of speech has been thought to require legislative protection
and an obligation to refrain from acting in a manner which
offends the right. In
contrast, the provision of housing or a healthy environment ‘to the
maximum of…available resources’
necessarily requires a particular
allocation of funding by government. The rigidity of this distinction (which
overlooks the fact
that the implementation and enforcement of CPR also requires
the allocation of financial resources
) means that ESCR tends to
attract the criticism that they are difficult and costly to implement, and that
to do so would require
burdensome constraints on government spending.
An argument against the implementation distinction, however, is that many CPR
remain ‘paper’ rights unless parallel or
supporting rights are
simultaneously enforced. Indeed, a State’s practical ability to protect
CPR will be significantly blunted
without considering the concomitant impact of
ESCR. In support of this argument, the Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights’
General Comment Number 3
provides that:
While great emphasis has sometimes been placed on the difference between the
formulations used in this provision and that contained
in the equivalent article
2 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(‘ICCPR’), it is not always recognized
that there are also
significant similarities. In particular, while the Covenant provides for
progressive realization and acknowledges
the constraints due to the limits of
available resources, it also imposes various obligations which are of immediate
To take an Australian example, the Victorian
Charter codifies a right for both minority groups and Indigenous peoples to
enjoy their
own culture. As is the case with most of the provisions in the
Victorian Charter, these articles find their basis in article 27 of
which provides:
In those States in which ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities exist,
persons belonging to such minorities shall not be denied
the right, in community
with the other members of their group, to enjoy their own culture, to profess
and practise their own religion,
or to use their own language.
However, as long as a substantial number of Indigenous people in
this country do not have access to an adequate standard of primary
health care
(a right protected by article 12 of the ICESCR), any article that aims to
protect Indigenous culture must ultimately
ring hollow. Further, given the
spiritual and economic importance of land to the vitality of Indigenous culture
in Australia, true
protection of Indigenous peoples’ ability to enjoy
their culture is meaningless in the absence of a right protecting the
environment.
Nor is it possible to realistically view protection of
environmental quality as part of a longer term strategy to be achieved
‘progressively’
if one is serious about protecting culture. For
Indigenous Australians living in the Torres Strait, for example, rising sea
as a result of global warming will put the entire viability of cultural
life at risk unless immediate action is taken.
Justiciability of rights
A further related argument in support of a continuing distinction between
ESCR and CPR has been that even if a system of rights protection
would be more
robust by viewing rights as interdependent, the particular financial commitment
required by ESCR means that they are
not capable of the same sort of judicial
remedy as CPR. In particular, it has been argued that the conferral of power on
the judiciary
to enforce ESCR ‘against’ the wishes of the executive
arm of government sits uncomfortably with a legal system predicated
on a strict
separation of powers because it encroaches on the executive’s prerogative
to control policy implementation.
However, even if our governmental system does require that such powers lie
exclusively within the executive branch of government,
any system of rights
protection in Australia will be substantially weakened if it cannot ensure, at a
minimum, that such a governmental
prerogative is not exercised in a way that
substantially interferes with the human rights of Australian citizens. Further,
argue that even on a conceptual level, the exercise of judicial power
within a legal framework that protects ESCR is not necessarily
anathema to the
separation of powers. Indeed, the judiciary providing an additional check on the
reach of the executive power of
government is actually consistent with a
separation of powers framework, even if the standard by which they hold them
accountable
is a new, human-rights based one.
Importantly, it should be remembered that Australia is not the first legal
system that has contemplated the domestic protection of
ESCR. An examination of
some of the international experiences with the enactment of various rights
protection mechanisms provides
a further illustration of how some of the
conceptual objections to the inclusion of ESCR protection have been resolved.
Overcoming the conceptual barrier: International
experiences
In 1996 South Africa enacted a new
Constitution
which entrenched the majority
of rights contained within the ICCPR and the ICESCR. Under the
Constitution
are justiciable in the South African Constitutional Court. In the lead-up to the
adoption of the
Constitution
, a number of arguments made in public discourse
echoed the concerns of those outlined above: essentially, that adjudication on
of public or government policy should not be brought within the realm of
the courts because of financial constraints and separation
of powers concerns.
However, as Professor Sandra Liebenberg has argued, the implementation of ESCR
in South Africa has been extremely
successful. Over time, the Court has been
able to develop significant jurisprudence distinguishing between the positive
and negative
duties imposed by ESCR, holding that, as a minimum standard, courts
may make orders preventing any proposed executive or governmental
policies that
would improperly interfere with the exercise of such rights.
While the South African
Constitution
may be the most recent and prominent
example of ESCR being made constitutionally justiciable, decisions in a number
of other jurisdictions
have also realised the possibility of judicial protection
of ESCR. Since the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms
came into force in 1953, the European Court
of Human Rights has considered litigation on a range of matters relating to
ESCR, including
discrimination in educational languages, housing rights and the
right to a healthy environment.
Such cases have also been considered in jurisdictions with common law
traditions more akin to the Australian system. India, for example,
has developed
a rich tradition of ESCR-based litigation following the judgment in
Fertilizer Corporation Kamgar Union v Union of India
1981, which acknowledged that rules of standing could be liberalised to allow
for submissions regarding a wide range of rights
protection. Indian case law has
also been an important influence on the development of housing rights protection
for citizens subject
to forced evictions in Bangladesh.
and Argentina
have also been able to
litigate for protection of ESCR as diverse as rights to health care, water and
The Australian context
In many ways, such international experiences may seem remote from the
Australian legal system, where rights protection has developed
piecemeal and incremental fashion. Given the lack of a national legislative or
constitutional mechanism protecting ESCR
in Australia, it is arguably spurious
to discuss at length the methods by which such rights could be litigated, let
alone legislated
However, insofar as the non-justiciability of ESCR continues to pose a
conceptual barrier to the development of such mechanisms under
Australian law,
it is worth noting that a starting point for such a discussion might be the
development of a new standard of ‘reasonableness’,
similar to that
currently used by the judiciary when scrutinising ministerial decisions in the
administrative context. Effectively,
this might mean that if executive power was
exercised in a way that unreasonably interfered with the exercise of ESCR, such
would be able to be struck down by courts as ‘not for a proper
purpose’ or ‘outside the scope of ministerial power’.
Such a development would be a modest one, in that it would limit the power
that rights potentially have to create substantially new
remedies or
governmental obligations. Indeed, the initial purpose of rights in such a system
might merely be to safeguard citizens
against manifest overreaches of
ministerial power. However, by gradually developing an aspect of Australian law
that already accepts
judicial scrutiny of executive decisions, it may be
possible over time for the courts to formulate a more complete ESCR
jurisprudence
in Australia in a way that does not ‘fracture the
skeleton’ of our current legal system.
Considering both the growing international trend to view rights as
necessarily interdependent and also the variety of states that
have now given
some form of judicial expression to ESCR, it seems clear that Australia would be
undertaking no ‘bold new experiment’
by legislating for ESCR
protection. Further, while the Australian common law has evolved in distinct and
often separate ways from
that of other jurisdictions, it would be patently
untrue to say that our governmental system is so fundamentally unique that the
largely successful experience of other states in protecting ESCR cannot be
brought to bear on the Australian situation.
Of course, it is important to acknowledge that appropriate forms of
legislative protection for both CPR and ESCR in Australia will
take time to
develop. In order to ensure their acceptance and success, these protections will
also inevitably need to be informed
by the traditions of the Australia’s
own legal system. However, such concessions are consistent with - not contrary
idea that carefully developed ESCR protection will enhance any rights
culture that we hope to lay the foundations for as we move
towards national
rights protection in Australia.
Julia Mansour
is a student at the Faculty of Law, University of New South
Wales. She is a student intern at the Australian Human Rights Centre,
editor of the Australian Indigenous Law Review.
1 ACT Bill of Rights Consultative Committee,
Towards an ACT
Human Rights
(2003) 95; Human Rights Consultation Committee,
Responsibilities and Respect
2 Malcolm Langford and Bret Thiele, ‘Introduction: The Road to a
Remedy’ in John Squires, Malcolm Langford and Bret Thiele
Road to a Remedy: Current Issues in the Litigation of Economic Social and
Cultural Rights
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
, opened for
signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS 171
(entered into force 23 March 1971), art
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
opened for signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS 3
(entered into force 3 January
1976), art 2.
5 For example, when considering how best to protect against racial
discrimination (prohibited by art 2 of the ICCPR), it is clear
that any serious
commitment to do so would not only involve enacting legislation setting out
prohibitions on racist conduct, but
also a commitment to educational programs
stressing the value and benefits of multiculturalism. It would also necessitate
the devotion
of financial resources to programs that ensure cultural protection
and vitality of minority group cultures.
6 Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
General Comment No 3
The Nature of States parties’ Obligations
, UN Doc E/1991/23 (1990).
7 Donna Green, ‘What are the legal dimensions to climate change in the
Torres Strait?’ (Paper submitted at the
Greenhouse 2007
Conference,
Sydney Hilton Hotel, 2-5 October 2007) 1.
8 Sandra Liebenberg, ‘Beyond Civil and Political Rights: Protecting
Social, Economic and Cultural Rights under Bills of Rights
- The South African
Experience’, (Paper presented at the Protecting Human Rights Conference,
Centre for Comparative Constitutional
Studies, Melbourne University, 25
September 2007) 5.
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
, opened for signature 4 November 1950, CETS No.:5 (entered into
force 3 September 1953).
10 Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions,
Litigating Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights
(2003) 129.
Fertilizer Corporation Kamgar Union v Union of India
Ain o Salish Kendra (ASK) v Government and Bangladesh & Ors
(1999) 19 BLD 488.
Eldridge v British Columbia (Attorney General)
[1997] 3 SCR
Mariela Viceconte v Ministry of Health and Social Welfare
31.777/96 (1998).
15 Such a model would extend the power given to the judiciary by the charters
of rights currently in operation in Victoria and the
ACT, which only confer upon
courts the jurisdiction to declare that legislative provisions are incompatible
with the rights contained
within the charter.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (39.3 KB)
PDF format (246 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter