URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2008/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:20:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Berkefeld, Sharon --- "Insuring Against Terrorist Attacks" [2008] MqJlBLaw 10; (2008) 5 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 229
Insuring Against Terrorist Attacks
I September 11, 2001
A The Events
B The Fallout
C Insurance, Litigation and the World Trade Centre
II Terrorism Insurance Prior to September 11, 2001
III The Fallout of 9/11 in the USA
A The Effect on the Insurance Industry
IV The Government Introduces Terrorism Insurance - TRIA
A What TRIA means for Business
B What TRIA means for Individuals
C The TRIA means for the Insurance Industry
D The Markets reaction to TRIA
V. The Policy Debate in the U.S.
A Interpreting the Issues
VI What Happened in Australia?
VII The Response around the Globe
A The U.K Program, Pool Re
B The Spanish Program - Consorico de compensation de ‘Serguros
C The French Program – GAREAT
D The Israeli Program
VIII Insurance for the Beijing Games
IX Conclusions
Insuring Against Terrorist Attacks
SHARON BERKEFELD
I September 11, 2001
The events of September 11, 2001 are widely acknowledged as ‘events
that changed our lives and world forever’. Our world
was to change not
because of any new threat but because an old threat was to re-emerge into our
lives, having reinvented itself,
and remodelled itself in such a way that was
unforeseen and unquantified by the men and women who lead our nations.
Terrorism is not a new threat but the nature of this new breed of terrorist
is, as they have evolved into something so horrific and
so bent on hatred and
destruction that they are simply unable to tolerate any of the previous
boundaries of humanity that were considered
by the generations of terrorists
before them.
“Before Al Qaeda, never before had there existed a terrorist organisation
that possessed the ruthless ideological intent to
cause maximum loss; the
trained personnel and logistical capability to launch spectacular suicide
attacks against western interests;
and the patience in undertaking surveillance
to identify and exploit defensive weakness.”
Overshadowing this was the blatant disregard for human life that had not
previously existed in terrorism groups such as the IRA who
had shown the
capability to exploit opportunities to launch attacks on the British mainland
such as the bombing of London and the
Lockerbie Air crash but were simply unable
to maximise casualties in human loss and to prevent this issued vague telephone
in which details of the attacks were given to authorities by the
terrorists.
“For Al Qaeda, martyrdom missions are the standard means of prosecuting
the Jihad. There are no moral constraints on Al Qaeda
attack; no concerns for
the lives neither of the operatives, nor for the number of their victims, some
of whom may well be Muslims.
The robotic calculated rationality of Al Qaeda
decision-making allows attack decisions to be optimized, like moves on a chess
without the emotional interference of moral concerns over human
These people, these practices and these events that they caused have
rewritten insurance industries policy, government legislation
and business
practice around the globe and changed all of our lives forever.
A The Events
Much has been written and we’ve all seen the footage of that horrible
day when four airliners were hijacked as they left their
respective airports of
Boston, Massachusetts, Newark, New Jersey and Washington, DC bound for their
respective destinations unbeknown
to anyone on board that there were 4 or 5
hijackers of middle-eastern appearance about to brandish their own insane
destruction on
the world. These hijackers with ‘military precision’
took over these planes killing the crew and gaining “control
amounted to four guided missiles, brimming with tens of thousands of gallons of
At 8.46 am, the first plane, an American Airlines flight 11, that had
originated in Boston and was bound for Los Angeles slammed into
the North Tower
of the World Trade Centre in Lower Manhattan. Seventeen minutes later while the
world watched their television screens,
at 9.03am a United Airlines flight 175
also from Boston bound to Los Angeles crashed into the south tower of the World
Trade Centre.
At 9.43am, a third hijacked plane American Airlines flight 77 from
Washington to San Francisco slammed into the Pentagon. Meanwhile
passengers on the last hijacked plane, United Airlines flight 93 from Newark to
Los Angeles, prevented the hijackers from overtaking
the plane and instead
caused the plane to crash into a paddock in an area south of Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania at 10.10.am This action
prevented the plane from reaching its
target destination which was believed to be the ‘White House’.
At 10.05am having suffered considerable damage to its structure and engulfed
in flames the South Tower of the World Trade Centre collapsed
as did the North
Tower at 10.23 am killing all of the people trapped inside the building and
almost all of the 400 fire-fighters
and police officers attempting to save their
lives. The collapse of the North and South Towers caused the fire to spread, and
combined with the force of the impact of both buildings collapsing caused
significant damage to surrounding buildings and shrapnel
to rain down on a wide
area of Manhattan.
“A dense cloud of acrid, black smoke shrouded much of lower Manhattan,
plunging in into a toxic darkness. A thick coating of
fine grey ash and
pulverized concrete settled over much of the area, infiltrating thousands of
equipment.”
The greatest tragedy in the history of the world to date had been man made only
to be outdone in recent years by the events of hurricane
Katrina in New Orleans.
The tally of losses is best described by Robert P. Hartwig, Senior Vice
President & Chief Economist of the Insurance Institute
who was also an eye
witness to the events of September 11 as;
“Within a span of less than 100 minutes, more than 3,000 people had been
killed and 2,500 injured. Two of the world’s
tallest buildings had
collapsed and 16 square acres of some of the most valuable real estate on earth
- 26 percent of all the office
space in Lower Manhattan (31 million square feet)
- had been reduced to rubble. Moreover the Pentagon had sustained serious damage
and four large commercial aircraft had been lost”.
The cost in human tragedy alone is as
WTC Victims (workers and visitors) 2666
WTC hijacked jets (incl. 10 hijackers) 157
Pentagon victims on the ground 125
Pentagon hijacked jet (incl. 5 hijackers) 64
Pennsylvania jet crash (incl. 4 hijackers)
B The Fallout
September 11, 2001 produced insurance losses estimated at $32.5 billion
calculated in 2001 dollars; the cost in human life was as
detailed above an
estimated 3056 people who came from
different countries around the
globe; the injuries were estimated at 2250
This insurance loss
affected nearly 150 insurers
most significant effect being on the European Reinsurers who absorbed two thirds
of the insurance cost of 9/11.
According to the Insurance Institute the estimated effects on the various
insurance lines was as follow;
Business Interruption Insurance – $11 billion or 27%
Liability Claims – $10 billion or 25%
Property claims for buildings other than the WTC and including motor
vehicles – $6 billion or 15%
Property claim for the WTC buildings 1 and 2 - $3.5 billion or 9%
Aviation Liability - $3.5 billion or 9%
Life insurance Claims - $2.7 billion or 7 %
Workers Compensation - $2 billion or 5%
Event cancellation claims - $1 billion or 2%
Hull claims for the loss of the 4 commercial aircraft – 500 million or
The event, according to Researchers in Risk Management, Ermann Michel-Kerjan
and Burkhard Pedell
demonstrated
the possibility for highly correlated risk at different levels.
“First, multiple lines were affected instantaneously by 9/11 such that
commercial property, business interruption, workers
compensation, life, health,
disability, aircraft hull and general liability lines each suffered catastrophic
Secondly, there is now a well-recognised possibility for several catastrophic
attacks to occur simultaneously in different densely
populated or industrialised
locations. Hence, this event confronted the insurance and the reinsurance
industries with an entirely
In addition to the estimated insurance loss there is also a total estimate
economic loss of $83 billion in New York City
This includes damage and
injuries to those who were not insured, underinsured, businesses faced with
insurability or retentions and
coinsurance provisions. It also includes loss of
business income and tax revenue, and additional costs involved in dealing with
disaster like the cleanup costs. Finally there was the effect of other
losses including the community where it was estimated 125,000
people lost their
jobs in the fourth quarter of 2001. This number was to improve but by 2003 this
loss would still be 57,000.
The government contributed $20 billion in aid to New York while charity aid
gave 1.5 billion.
C Insurance, Litigation and the World Trade
of April 2001 the Board of Commissioners of the Port
Authority of New York who had previously built the World Trade Centre (WTC)
had since managed it as a public resource awarded Silverstein Properties and the
mall owner, Westfield’s America a 99 year
lease on the
The new owners acquired
along with the assets an insurance policy for the complex that included a clause
that in the event of a terrorist
attack that the partnership could collect on
the insured value of the property, and be released from their obligations under
99 year lease.
The lease deal did not close until the 24
of July 2001 just 6
weeks before the attacks on the WTC. By December 2003 the Port Authority had
agreed to return all of the $125
million in equity paid by the consortium to
purchase the complex back.
Silverstein Properties took action in addition to receiving this money against
its first party property insurers for the destruction
of the complex. These
insurers of which there were 25 providing multi-layered insurance coverage at
this stage were only bound by
an interim policy (i.e. binders). This multi
layered insurance program provided for a total ‘per occurrence’
indemnity of US$ 3.5468 billion. The crucial issue before the courts
would be whether the events of 9/11 constituted one or two occurrences
therefore whether the insurers had to pay $3.5468 cap on the buildings once or
The court battles were set in 3 stages. The first court battle ended in May
2004 and found that 15 of the insurers were bound by a
specimen property
insurance form (now known as the WilProp) that had been issued by
Silverstein’s Consortium Broker –
Willis. This form stipulated a
maximum or ‘aggregate’ limit of indemnity which the insurers must
pay for damage caused
by a ‘single occurrence’. The advantage of
this clause was that it limited both the insurers’ exposure to loss
also the insured excess to one payment. The WilProp form defined the word
occurrence as;
“Occurrence shall mean all losses or damages that are attributable
directly or indirectly to one cause or to one series of
similar causes. All such
losses will be added together and the total amount of the losses will be treated
as one occurrence irrespective
of the period of time or area over which losses
The outcome saw the court find that there had only been one occurrence and
therefore limited the indemnity for the insurers to one
The second round of court battles which ended on the 6
2004 was decided with reference to the New York’s common law as the other
party Travelers Insurance, the lead underwriters
of the nine other insurers,
had rejected the Wilprop Form and offered its own specimen insurance form in
which it omitted to define
the word ‘occurrence’.
The jury in this case found that in fact two aircrafts had impacted into the
twin towers, resulting in two fires and two building
collapses and that these
were two separate occurrences, which meant these insurers were liable to pay the
maximum limit of their
The third phase of the WTC litigation was the appraisal of the WTC’s
value as at 9/11. The appraisal involved an ‘arbitration
process whereby the appraisers for the Silverstein parties and the insurers
negotiated the value of the loss before a
The lesson from the WTC litigation was “that all parties to an
insurance contract should endeavour to secure contractual certainty
II Terrorism Insurance Prior to September 11,
Dating back to the 18
property casualty
insurance provided protection for “all names peril”. This meant that
insurance coverage was provided
for items specifically listed on insurance
policies. During the 1930’s this changed from being cover for all
“named peril”
to covering “all peril” except those
specifically excluded from policies such as “acts of war”. The
of war risk has been found in virtually all nonlife insurance
contracts since the 19
century and reflects the realisation that
the resultant damage is fundamentally
uninsurable.
Property and casualty insurance premiums prior to 9/11 were either
‘silent’ with regard to terrorism insurance or included
‘unnamed peril’
all standard ‘all risk commercial policies’ and in ‘home
owners’ policies as ‘general property or
casualty policies’
which covered damage to property and its contents. It many instances it was
provided effectively free of
or listed as an inclusion
in the policy at a relatively inexpensive rate of insurance.
The market for this type of insurance (property and casualty policies
including acts of terrorism) prior to 9/11 could be generally
described as
liquid and readily available at highly competitive
This was even
considering the previous terrorist attack on the World Trade Centre in 1993 and
the Oklahoma City Bombings in 1995.
It is fair to say that “never before
had it been perceived as a political risk by underwriters, nor been priced by
as a genuine catastrophic
III The Fallout of 9/11 in the USA
The greatest impact of all was felt in the US insurance market although the
effect of 9/11 rippled around the globe. It is important
to remember that it was
the European reinsurers who footed the bill for two thirds of the $32.5 billion
insurance bill.
A The Effect on the Insurance Industry
Insurers and reinsurers post 9/11 were quick to assure the market of their
ability to cover the costs of these attacks. They were
quick also to dismiss the
actions as an “Act of War” which would have meant that the insurers
and reinsurers were not
liable for these costs under their insurance contracts.
The view held by many was that had the insurers attempted to claim the act
‘act of war’ that it would not have stood up to a court challenge.
Hence in the aftermath of Sept 11, primary insurers found themselves
significant exposure to terrorism insurance risk within existing portfolios;
limited possibilities of obtaining reinsurance to prevent losses from future
attacks as the reinsurer were more able to exit the market;
the continued uncertainty and possibility of future attacks; and
the inability to determine the potential size of these attacks or their
Faced with these issues, insurers determined that “terrorism was an
uninsurable risk” and followed reinsurers from the
market for terrorism
insurance. For the reinsures leaving the market was much easier as unlike
primary insurers, reinsurers are not
governed by legislation and form part of
global market for funds regulated by contract law which typically have contract
of 1 to 2 years which generally have expiry / renewal date in either
July or January.
In comparison the primary insurance market in the USA is one of the most
highly regulated in the country and is individually regulated
in each State. In
October 2001, the Insurance Industry Office (ISO) on behalf of the industry
filed requests in every State office
to exclude terrorism coverage from all
commercial insurance policies. In early 2002, this had been permitted by 45
states the only
exception being workers compensation coverage. Thus by
August 2002 most insurance firms had fled the
The few insurers that
did provide cover to clients did so at extraordinarily high prices. For example
Chicago Airport prior to 9/11
carried $750 million of terrorism insurance at an
annual cost of $125,000, after 9/11 their insurer would only offer them $150,000
million of cover at an annual cost of
$6.9million.
By September 2002
very few businesses across the US had terrorism insurance.
As the insurers left the market the fundamental risk of any future terrorist
attacks fell on the people would have been the subject
of the attack, the
businesses and their employees, lenders, suppliers, and customers.
The impact on business and the economy is well documented. Lenders and
investors stopped lending money as the cost of these loans
and interest rates
did not historically factor in the risk that asset that they had lent money on
could be destroyed by an act of
terrorism and they like their client would loose
their money as there was no insurance available. As lender were exceedingly
uncomfortable
with this increased exposure they stopped lending money especially
in high risk areas or projects they judged to be high risk thus
delaying many projects. The airline industry already in trouble and now facing
ruin successfully partitioned Congress
and the Bush Government for a Federal
payout of $5 million in cash grants, $10 million in loan guarantees and
established an open
ended tax payers fund to compensate and pay claims against
victims and their families killed in the tragedy, but more significantly
reimburse the airlines for increased costs of their insurance
The market for stand-alone terrorism insurance grew. Prior to 9/11 this had
been a market of last resort mainly used by companies
wishing to invest in high
risk terrorist countries such as Columbia, Sri Lanka and Algeria. Lloyds and AIG
typically providing cover.
9/11, demand for this type of cover substantially increased as companies were
able to charge high rates for this product that
was fuelled by high demand and
this allowed new players to provide insurance to this
In the 12 months after
9/11 the US market contributed to more than 50% of all the worlds’
stand-alone insurance policies.
The introduction by the US government of TRIA saw the competition in the market
increase and overall rates declined by 40-50% with
the exception of location hot
spots or high risk terrorist strike areas. Stand Alone insurance has continued
to develop along side
TRIA providing an alternative to the governments
IV The Government Introduces Terrorism Insurance
In November 2002 after much debate the Government provided and today still
continues to provide a temporary solution through
The Terrorism Risk
Insurance Act 2002
(TRIA). This is a public/private risk sharing
partnership, whereby the Federal Government and the insurance industry share in
losses that result from a terrorist attack according to a specific
The initial package was
for a two year period but was extended after much debate in 2005 for a further
two years until December 2007.
Currently a Bill is before Congress to extend the
legislation for a further 10 years, although opposition to this proposal is
from the Bush Administration who will only offer a 2 or 3 year extension
and has objected to many of the
TRIA is considered successful as it enabled a market for terrorism insurance
to develop with the federal backstop effectively limiting
the insurers’
losses, and greatly simplifying the underwriting
The intension that it
gave insurance companies time to assess their exposure to terrorism losses and
learn how to price and underwrite
these policies was also
Since its introduction
there have been a number of modifications and there are even more muted in the
current Bill before Congress.
The legislation requires all property and casualty insurers to make terrorism
coverage available to all commercial policy holders
on the same terms and
conditions as if offered in their non-TRIA
If the insured rejects
the offer then the insurer may then reinstate a terrorism exclusion clause. A
business that does not purchase
TRIA or any other kind of terrorism insurance
will not be covered for damage caused in a terrorist attack. The “make
provision applies to commercial lines of property and casualty
insurance. Insurers can offer this option to individuals if they choose.
The specific provisions of the legislation are;
TRIA covers insured losses for terror attacks on commercial lines of
insurance which include property, casualty and business interruption.
must result in aggregated property and casualty insurance currently of $100,000
million though the initial trigger is
$5 million. To trigger this payment of
federal funds the attack must be certified by the U.S. Secretary of State in
concurrence with
the Attorney General and the Secretary of the
as an “act of
terrorism”.
Insurers do
not pay the Federal Government for this reinsurance, they are effectively
provided with this reinsurance for free.
Not all acts of terrorism are covered by TRIA. Specifically excluded are
terrorist attacks involving biological, chemical, and radiological
weapons of mass destruction (NCBR) Primary insurers are able to include these
risks under standard insurance policy but
it is not a requirement of TRIA. The
current Bill before Congress recommends the inclusion of these as acts of
but it is being
heavily debated and is opposed by the Bush Administration and the insurance
TRIA defines an ‘act of terrorism’ currently as being an
“act committed by individuals acting on behalf of foreign
interests who
are part of an effort to influence policy or conduct in the United
It does not
include domestic terrorism so events such as Oklahoma City bombings of 1995
which prior to 9/11 was the most damaging
terrorist attack in the
The 2007 Bill recommends
that this distinction be removed.
TRIA requires that each participating insurer be responsible for paying out
a certain amount in claims – a deductible- before
Federal assistance
becomes available.
deductibles rose from 15% of the direct commercial property and casualty
premiums earned in 2005 to 17.5% in 2006 and are currently
which according to research
by Dowling and Partners can be quite significant. For losses above the company
deductible, the federal
government will as of 2007 cover 85%. There is no
further expectation that this will change under current
The aggregate insurance industry retention is currently $27.5
having risen from $15
billion in 2005. (24) Under the current proposal it is set to remain unchanged.
Losses covered by the program are capped at $100
(though the current
Bill recommends reducing this to $50 billion which is opposed by the Bush
Administration).
This means that
if the insurance loss in any year exceeds $100 billion then Treasury determines
how these additional losses are to
be spread between itself and across the
insurance industry.
Lines of insurance currently excluded from the program are: life, health and
personal property (auto and home), other less known items
include; assumed
reinsurance, federal crop, mortgage guaranty, financial guaranty, medical
malpractice, flood insurance.
The current Bill recommends the inclusion of ‘group life insurance’
under TRIA insurances that must be made available
by insurers. This is being
opposed by the Bush
Administration.
The Government costs after a terrorist event are partially recouped by the
U.S. Treasury through a mandatory policy surcharge levied
against insurers who
can in turn levy it against all property and casualty insurance policies whether
or not the insured purchased
terrorism insurance or
A What TRIA means for Business
Businesses who take up the terrorism option under commercial policies are
covered for loss and damage caused in the event of a terrorist
Businesses that refuse this option remain uninsured and live in the hope that if
they are affected by a terrorist attack
that the government will bail them out.
Alternatively they can choose to make different arrangements with their insurers
which include
CAT Bond or stand alone policies.
Under TRIA damages caused by domestic attack, a formal declaration of war, or
an attack using nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological
weapons are not
Business interruption insurance depends on the individual policy arrangements
as to waiting periods and time covered. Business interruption
losses associated
with acts of civil authority are limited to the physical loss or damage arising
from the peril. Loss of business
income associated with fear of travelling to
certain areas, or the closure of areas by authorities are not
The business community addressed concerns that TRIA revolved around the
exclusions of domestic, nuclear, biological, chemical and
radiological terrorism
and the interplay between terrorism and acts of war. These issues are currently
being considered by Congress
as part of the decision to renew TRIA post Dec
Other concerns addressed
pricing and the new policy language of the legislation but these fears appear to
have dispelled over time.
Businesses Alternatives to TRIA - Catastrophic Bonds (CAT Bonds)
CAT Bonds are the private market answer to providing funding for catastrophic
risk like terrorism. They function by transferring some
of the risk and costs of
these events to capital markets away from the insurance/reinsurance industry.
These securities take the
form of bonds which pay investors a premium interest
rate to accept the risk of non payment (losing the entire principal invested)
the event of a catastrophic event which is defined in either physical terms such
as a hurricane or earthquakes of certain magnitudes
or by industry-wide or
insurer- specified losses.
A key issue to the structure of CAT Bonds is the definition of the trigger
event which releases the issuer’s obligation to repay.
Ironically in the
aftermath of cyclone Katrina CAT bond investors were limited from payment of
these bonds by the wording of these
‘trigger conditions’- including
the wind speed being too low; the barometric pressure too high; and the
aggregation of
the loss incurred being less than that required to trigger a
payment. Consequently the insurers that issued the CAT Bond were left
policy holders themselves, demonstrating what some suggest is the inability of
these bonds to function like reinsurance and
cushion the insurers from the
financial blow.
CAT Bonds have
not been the successful alternative to either TRIA or Stand Alone insurance that
many forecasted as;
they are too expensive by comparison to other options,
the triggers play an important role in whether you have insurance or
market watchers suggest that they are inappropriate as an alternative
insurance as they create a situation where parties fail to take
responsibility
for their actions or mitigate their responsibilities believing that capital
markets will protect them,
investors don’t like them and argue that to purchase them you must
have “faith over
experience”,
there is a chance that a terrorist group through many layers of deceit may
be the actual holder of the
this is the notion of
“moral hazard”
investment managers fear repercussions on their reputation if these bonds
were in fact to be called upon for payment and their clients
investing in these unusual and newly developed
investors questioned why they should enter a market that watched the
reinsurers leave,
the market is new and investors and rating agencies are unable to agree on
investment models that accurately reflect the risk to the
Proponents suggest that market awareness will improve their viability.
The Business Alternative to TRIA - Stand Alone Insurance.
The stand-alone terrorism insurance market is seen as a market of last resort
provided when adequate cover is unable to be obtained
from property risk
insurers. The US is by far the largest buyer of world wide stand alone premiums
contributing to 50% of the market
post the introduction of
The market like the
general insurance market gradually dropped its price after its initial knee jerk
reaction to 9/11.
A report by AON Crisis Management in March 2006 suggests that the market
continues to rise as prices fall, and as brokers and insures
continue to
redefine the products available including; the increased use of captive
insurers, self insured retentions, hybrid programmes
and other risk management
tools. AON also expects that the market will grow in the future as the perceived
risk of terrorism attacks
increase; the impact of a court decision in the US
that found that banks do have a right to require borrowers to have terrorism
on securities; and the possibility that the US government will not
renew TRIA beyond 2007.
B What TRIA means for Individuals
Individuals are coved independently from TRIA under their homeowners’
insurance policies, standard renters’ policies,
and co-op owner policies
as they all cover damage to property and personal possessions resulting from
fire, explosion or smoke which
are all consequences of a terrorist act. Specific
terrorism insurance must be taken out to cover damage to common areas used by
and condominium
Motor vehicles
with comprehensive insurance policies have terrorism insurance included. If the
car is leased or financed as a condition
of the loan or lease it is now a
requirement to have cover for
Life/health/disability insurance policies may include terrorism coverage for
death, injury or sickness but only by inclusion between
Life insurance policies do not contain terrorism exclusion clauses and
proceeds are paid to beneficiaries upon the death of a person
after a terrorist
Attacks by terrorists using nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological
means are excluded in these policies, as are acts of war.
Attacks by domestic terrorists are included in these policies as they are
written in terms of the damage caused from fire or smoke.
Workers compensation is a line of compulsory insurance and covers employees
injured or killed on the job and therefore it automatically
includes coverage
for acts of terrorism and by law can not be
C The TRIA means for the Insurance
Although the insurance industry lobbied heavily for government intervention
and the introduction of TRIA the industry has raised concern
raised include TRIA legislates that insurers’ participate in the program
and requires them to carry more
risk than they had done
previously.
Other concerns
include that deductibles are too high, though as time has passed and no attacks
have occurred insurers have been able
to build up these reserves and
consequently this issue seem less of a
There were also
concerns raised about the volume of new legislation that went with TRIA as in
addition to the new Federal Law as
insurance in the US is regulated on a state
by state basis all the states enacted their own piece of legislation as well
occasion conflicted with TRIA. (E.g.
Time and experience has
either rectified or improved these concerns.
The insurance industry survives on its ability to spread risk across a wide
pool over a short time frame and functions best under
conditions where
individual exposures are independent of each other; losses are accidental or
unintentional so that the insured cannot
affect the probability that the loss
will occur; losses are generally predictable; insurance markets are competitive;
and price is
able to be determined from statistical extrapolation of future
losses from a large number of individual risk
Terrorism risk fails
to meet these criteria and in addition presents other challenges for the
insurance industry. Namely;
The potential for extremely large losses across a number of insurance lines.
The increasing number of fundamentalist type groups that exist in the world
and the new breed of terrorists.
Difficulties in pricing the cover due to a number of issues including the
infrequency of attacks; the severity of outcomes; the different
risks across
different industries and locations; as well as the secrecy of information which
in many cases is controlled by the government.
Determining the risk of future terrorist events is difficult to estimate as
the decision as to when and where terrorists might attack
is determined
partially by protective measures that are taken by those at risk and by
governments to enhance security generally and
partially the governments foreign
policy decisions.
The existence of interdependencies; that is, the security of one part of the
system may be dependant on another part hundreds of miles
away. For example
security lapses in Boston’s Logan airport allowed the terrorist to board
the planes that crashed into the
These issues have fuelled much of the debate as to whether terrorism should
be a function of the insurance industry and therefore
the private sector or
whether terrorism is an issue solely of national security.
D The Markets reaction to TRIA
The initial take up rate of TRIA insurance was much lower than expected. The
reasons for this were;
High cost of
the initial price
of coverage for firms was significantly high. TRIA does not price the cost of
this insurance and leaves it to the
insurers to determine. For large firms the
cost of taking terrorism insurance was typically estimated at 20% of the
standard commercial
property/casualty premium while for small and medium firms
it was 10%. Areas such as Manhattan and some high risk industries were
adversely affected by higher insurance premiums.
Credit Risk
firms remained concerned about the solvency of the insurers in case of another
terrorist attack.
Limited Coverage
Coverage provided by TRIA was limited to foreign terrorist action certified by
the government. Many firms believed that this was
inadequate.
Behavioural Issues
Peoples belief that it would not happen to them or that if it did that the
government could not idly watch a catastrophe without
assistance.
More recently however there has been a significant increase in the take up
rate of terrorism policies which has been attributed not
only to the decrease in
pricing of the coverage but also due to heightened terrorist concerns by the
government.
In addition many
corporate governance polices make it imperative for management to drive plans
that mitigate their exposure to terrorism
risk and protect both company assets
and individuals from third party claims or shareholders derivate
While directors and
officers’ insurance and lenders insurance policies both require terrorism
insurance on any for underlying
Property and Casualty insurance policies to
protect their commercial
investments.
However until the government makes terrorism insurance compulsory as it is in
other parts of the world there will continue to be this
dual issue of under
insurance and who pays for it in the event of an attack. This may mean that an
attack the size of 9/11 would
leave many business and markets worse off than
they were post 9/11 when all firms were covered against terrorism by default and
losses were diversified on the world wide insurance and reinsurance
The Policy Debate in the U.S.
There has been much debate in the US over the involvement of the federal
government in terrorism insurance, the future of TRIA and
if it is to go forward
what form is appropriate. The fundamental reason suggested as to why the federal
government should be at least
the “insurer of last resort” is that
the government is ultimately responsible for the actions of the terrorist who
responding to government policies and actions or inactions in certain areas.
Consequently terrorism risk is intertwined with national
security and is not an
issue for the insurance industry. Some feel that in the same way as the
government has a duty to provide physical
security measures, it also has a duty
to continue to share the risk of insuring against such
The national security
infrastructure also relies on terrorism insurance for the continuity of economic
and social structure after
such a catastrophic
From the insurance industry prospective terrorism insurance posses many
issues which they have difficulty dealing with including;
the ongoing issues of
effectively pricing the cost of terrorism which unlike other catastrophic events
such as hurricanes and earthquake
presents a set of different characteristics
which are difficult to accurately model, including; limited relevant data,
to quantify probability, dynamic
uncertainty
and the fact that
terrorism is man-made crisis. A second issue for insurers is that unlike the
government, insurers do not have the
ability to spread the cost of catastrophic
events across the whole population for generations to come, their ability to
spread risk
is limited to insurers and reinsurers and this may, in the event of
a mega catastrophe result in liquidity problems and possible
insolvencies which
would have a significant impact on the whole
Investment markets
answers such as CAT Bonds have also proved to provide an inadequate solution to
this problem as demonstrated by
Cyclone Katrina.
In 2004 a survey conducted by the General Accounting Office (GOA) concluded
that since 9/11 insurers and reinsurers have done little
to develop a private
industry program that would provide sufficient capacity without government
intervention.
The private sector
especially reinsurers, have demonstrated an unwillingness to regrow the market.
Some economists suggest that the
private market has the capacity to develop a
reinsurance market but is limited by the governments’ involvement through
Others suggest that tax, accounting and regulations changes would make it
more attractive for insurers to enter the market if they
could hold surplus
capital and allow prices to adjust
Many commentators simply
Acknowledged throughout this debate is that TRIA has successfully achieved
its objectives of: ensuring the widespread availability
and affordability of
property and casualty insurance for terrorism risk; has allowed a transitional
period for the private markets
to stabilize and resume pricing for such
insurance; and provided time to build capacity to absorb future losses from
another terrorist
The arguments going forward continue to suggest that the non renewal of the
TRIA legislation would leave many insurers and a wide
range of businesses,
organisation and individuals that they service, vulnerable to economic disaster
in the event of a catastrophic
A Interpreting the Issues
My considered view is that the US government must renew TRIA when it expires
in December 2007 in a format which addresses the continually
low take-up rates
by property and casualty policy holders. I consider greater success would be
achieved if greater consultation is
given to a broader array of market
participants, including end users as this would help determine what it is that
users want and
are prepared to pay. I consider that terrorism insurance should
no longer be treated as a policy decision of government with limited
consultation, with the insurance market.
I believe that a private-public partnership is the answer as it insures that
both the private sector i.e. insurers continue to remain
protected against
extremely large losses and this in turn provides stability to the investment
market post an attack while at the
same time this arrangement ensures that the
government continues to fulfil its elected duty of providing national security.
Furthermore
I consider that the US government would be committing a morale
travesty by failing to renew TRIA, even if it is in its current format
research has indicated that if nothing else TRIA binds insurers to the property
and casualty insurance market and these
insurers have demonstrated that given an
opportunity where they are no longer cajoled by the government through
legislation into
this market that they would leave as they did post 9/11.
Insurers are businesses and businesses only make decisions they hope to
profits from, therefore they will only make insurance available to the market
while ever they are able to protect themselves
against the potential for
catastrophic losses by either purchasing reinsurance or securing risk in the
private market through instruments
such a CAT Bonds. If this is unavailable then
they will simply refrain from offering this insurance. This would result in
being left in a much worse position than they were pre 9/11 when
insurance policies were silent on terrorism and all businesses with
property and
casualty policies were insured against an attack.
The lack of availability of reinsurance was highlighted in a United States
General Accounting Office (GOA) reports in
that indicated that since
9/11 reinsurers have continued to demonstrate a reluctance to re-enter the
market for this type of insurance
indicating either a lack of capacity or that
it is simply a bad investment decision.
TRIA also ensures that the government provides re-insurance free of charge.
The questions that must be considered here is whether
reinsurers who are
currently reluctant to fill this role will fill the vacancy left by the
government departure and if they do at
what price? Will this price be affordable
for property and casualty policy holders or will premiums sky rocket and price
from the market?
In my opinion the outcome if the government fails to renew TRIA will result
in a resumption of the post 9/11 situation where very
few businesses had
insurance against a terrorist attack and those that did, had policies that
provided very little cover, at very
high premiums. This means of course that the
people, businesses and supplier most affected by an attack would be are left
burden of the attack and this would be a major disaster. Therefore the
government must intervene in its national security role and
addresses the
disaster aided by the administrative capacity of the insurance industry and
facilitate the processing of much needed
I see the current advantages of TRIA are:
it forces insurers into the market who without regulation may simply decide
to remove this type of risk from their portfolios and
leave the market;
it ensures an initial pool of funds from within the insurance industry;
it ensures that property and casualty policy holders through their premiums
have responsibility for managing their own internal risk;
it provides a mechanism through the insurance industry to manage, administer
and facilitate operations post an attack;
it provides a government pool of initial funds;
through taxation it spreads the risk across the wider community;
it provides a mechanism for determining how the costs from an attack which
are greater than the pool can be allocated across the government,
the community
and the investment market;
it ensures that financial markets remain relatively unaffected in the event
of an attack;
it allows the insurance industry to contribute to the social and economic
continuity of the community post a large scale attack;
it ensures lower premiums than those provided under a free market
arrangement i.e. CAT bonds and Stand-Alone insurance;
it ensures that the claims processing capacity inherent in the insurance
market is utilised post an attack and therefore the recovery
and assistance for
victims provided is much quicker:
It is my view that the Government however should make terrorism insurance
mandatory on all property and casualty insurance premiums.
This would have three
obvious outcomes in that:
premiums would be lower as there would be much greater pool to spread the
risk across;
the question as to who pays when businesses without terrorism insurance are
the subject of an attack is removed from the equation.
A problem arises while
ever a choice exists within a market and an event has the potential to randomly
affect anyone and people believe
that because of the remoteness of chance that
it will never happen to them. In these circumstances should the government and
the wider community and those who have already paid insurance premiums
have a moral or social responsibility to “make good”
the risk taken
position of these people?
It also provides equality across the property and casualty insurance
I believe that domestic terrorism should also be included under TRIA and that
more debate should focus on whether other types of attacks
including nuclear,
chemical, radiological and biological should be included under this
legislation.
I also think debate should consider whether terrorism and its insurance are a
new phenomenon that may require us to consider a new
way of looking at how we
provide for and facilitate it .This for example may see government ultimately
responsible for all the costs
associated with an attack but the facilitation of
support to victims being provided by the insurance industry for a fee.
Alternatively
it may take some other form. Debate on the topic is what I am
It is important that we do not forget what happened post 9/11 when insurers
and reinsurers left the market or if they didn’t,
they provided minimal
cover at exorbitant prices leaving the market and the wider community it
supports completely unprotected and
this in the event of another attack would
result in another unmitigated disaster as was illustrated recently in cyclone
VI What Happened in Australia?
As the events of 9/11 rippled around the globe insurers and reinsurers in
Australia like their US counterparts left the market for
terrorist insurance or
made cover available at very high premiums that offered low maximum coverage.
The outcome created uncertainty
for commercial property investors, lessees and
financiers.
The governments’ response to this market failure was to introduce
legislation in 2003 known as
Terrorism Insurance Act 2003
created a reinsurance pool that covers the insurance company losses, company
losses from property, business interruption
and third party liability coverage.
It does not cover Federal and State Governments as they are self insured except
where property
is owned by government enterprises. The scheme involves the
accumulation of a cash pool of $300 million which is funded by the collection
premiums from insurers. This is backed by a commercial line of credit of $1
billion and then the Government provides indemnity
of $9 billion, giving a total
of $10.3 billion pool to cover damage from a terrorist
The legislation established a statutory authority – the Australian
Reinsurance Pool Corporation- who provides this reinsurance
cover. Insurers do
not have to use this pool; however those that do are required to retain a
certain amount of terrorism risk for
12 months which is set as the lesser of
$1million or 4% of the insurers ISR premiums collected to a maximum industry
retention level
of $10 million per event. The Treasurer sets this rate and the
premium amount charged to insurers for this reinsurance cover. This
amount is used to fund the $300 million pool. The Treasurer is also responsible
for determining how insurers will be charged
if the damage bill from a terrorist
attack exceeds the $10.3 billion and loans are required to cover the
difference.
The legislation compels insurers to provide terrorist cover on all commercial
property policies starting from 2% to a maximum of 12%
of the related property
insurance premiums depending on the location. The scheme is compulsory in order
to spread the cost of this
cover across a broad base and keep premiums to a
minimum. Classes of insurance not covered by the scheme include private
residential
property, marine and aviation, workers compensation and CTP
insurance. Farmers must have business interruption insurance to be covered.
scheme does not cover acts of war or damage resulting from a nuclear attack but
does include attacks of chemical or biological
warfare. The Treasurer in
consultation with the Governor General determines whether an attack is a
terrorist attack or an act of
and the assets must be
based in Australia.
The governments’ objective is to operate the scheme until terrorism
cover becomes commercially available at reasonable terms.
After a review in 2006
it was determined to continue with the programme as the scheme has been hailed
as a success. Kerrie Kelly
Chief Executive of the Insurance Council believes
that “without the scheme, insurance would remain difficult to obtain and
if available would be prohibitively
The Council
has said that the scheme has allowed investment in infrastructure to continue
around Australia.
There are however a number of issues going forward including what happens to
premiums when they reach the $300 million pool; the level
of retention required
by reinsurers; how premiums are
and the fact that
not all lines of insurance are included specifically private property. These
issues are currently being resolved.
VII The Response around the Globe
The United States was not the first country to establish terrorism insurance
Consorico de compensation de ‘Serguros
is the oldest
program in Europe and was established in Spain in 1954. While many countries
responded to 9/11 by establishing terrorism
insurance programs, others already
had pre existing programs following earlier terrorist attacks on their own soil.
A brief overview
of some of these programs follows;
A The U.K Program, Pool Re
was established in 1992 in the wake of the IRA terrorist
attacks on the city of London after which British insurers excluded terrorism
coverage from all commercial policies.
makes the U.K Treasury the
insurer of last resort guaranteeing payment above the industry retention which
increases each year. Primary
insurers pay the entire claim for terrorist damage
and are than reimbursed by the pool for losses above a certain amount per event
per year. Post 9/11 the program was extended to cover “all risks”
(including damage caused by chemical, biological and
nuclear contamination) in
the UK only. Membership to the Pool is not compulsory and premiums which were
doubled since 9/11 are calculated
as a percentage of the total sum insured under
fire and accident policies depending on the location of the risk. Insurers set
for the underlying terrorism policies which cover both damage to
property and business
interruption.
Northern Ireland is specifically excluded from the
as the Northern
Ireland government provides its own terrorism insurance that specifically
excludes cover from local terrorism risk
and since 1978 has made provision for
criminal damage compensation orders which compensate on an indemnity basis for
property damage
and business
interruption.
The Spanish Program
- Consorico de
compensation de ‘Serguros
Consorico de compensation de ‘Serguros
was established in 1954
following acts of violence carried out by the Basque separatist movement. It is
a compulsory government sponsored
but privately managed pool which provides
coverage against injury, property damage and business interruption resulting
from all “extraordinary
risks” including both natural disasters and
phenomena with political social effects or man made disasters such as civil
rebellion and terrorism. Private insurers may provide additional
catastrophe insurance but they must still make payment to the government
which is backed by an unlimited guarantee by the government. Premiums are
determined depending on the location of the risk and
the amount of coverage
required. Following 9/11 business interruption insurance was included in the
program. The insurance pool post
the terrorist attack in Madrid, Spain on the 11
March 2004 covered the majority of the losses from this attack with the
of damage to government trains and life
C The French Program – GAREAT
Laws were passed in 1986 in France ensuring terrorism insurance was included
in all commercial policies. Post 9/11 a reinsurance pool
providing unlimited
coverage was established to cover damage resulting from a terrorist attack above
a specific amount. Membership
of the pool is obligatory and insurers pay 10% to
the government for this reinsurance cover. Premium rates depend on the insurance
value of the property not the location and range from 6% to 18%. There is
limited nuclear exclusion and acts of sabotage are included.
Policies cover both
property and business interruption insurance for commercial, industrial and
professional risk.
D The Israeli Program
In Israel terrorism insurance is specifically excluded from standard property
policies but the private insurance market provides separate
cover. Reinsurance
cover is provided by catastrophe excess of loss treaties. In addition, the state
of Israel covers property damage
losses triggered by politically motivated
violence including terrorism through Property Tax and Compensation Fund (PTCF)
established to cover property losses resulting from war and warlike
activities.
Austria established a pool in January 2004 providing reinsurance protection
against property damage and business interruption up to
a certain limit.
Participation in the pool is
Post 9/11 the
Netherlands also established a terrorism reinsurance company to insure member
companies who retain a percentage of
the risk. Coverage is limited per member
and in aggregate and includes life, health and property/casualty, travel, motor
and vessels
no extra premium charged for this cover. Switzerland allowed insurers from 2003
to cede all property risk insurance for
sums above a certain amount to a
reinsurance facility. Other countries that have government terrorism insurance
include Germany,
India, Namibia, Russia, South Africa Turkey, and Sri Lanka and
in Belgium it is expected from January
Insurance for the Beijing Games
Insuring against the cancellation of the Olympic Games was not contemplated
before 9/11. After this attack the insurance industry
was reluctant to cover
terrorism and consequently the Winter Olympic Games in Salt Lake City in 2002
were uninsured. By the time
the Olympic Games were held in Athens in 2004 the
industry had restabilised resulting in the Olympic Officials taking the
unprecedented
step of buying a $170 million insurance policy to cover the risk
that the games could be called off because of war, terrorism earthquake
flooding. The policy guaranteed that the Organisation, Affiliated National
Committees, and Sports Federations had enough money
to continue operating if
this occurred but the policies did not compensate individual athletes, corporate
sponsors or TV network.
Alternative arrangements
were sought by these parties. IOC President Jacques Rogge commented at the time
that “taking out a
policy to manage the risk associated with one’s
core business is standard, prudent behaviour for any modern
organisation”
The 2008 Beijing Olympic Games will have similar cover. In November 2005 PICC
Property and Casualty Co. Ltd (PICC P&C) were named
the official insurance
provider for not only the Olympic Games but the Para Olympic Games, the Beijing
Organising Committee for the
games, the Chinese Olympic Committee and the
Chinese delegation to the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin,
In addition to this
PICC P&C has written a policy to cover personal accident and medical
insurance for all pre-game and game
volunteers.
In October 2005 Marsh, the worlds leading risk and insurance services firm
were appointed to provide insurance consulting and risk
management services for
the games. Together with China Sport Insurance Brokers Co. Ltd they will work
together to assess and identify
risk; provide loss prevention and risk control
planning and implementation; claims management; contract management and
contingency planning and global project
management.
Security for the games will include 100,000 security personnel of which there
will be 40,000 police, 27,000 armed police and thousands
of security personnel
and volunteers. This will be complemented by aerial patrols by helicopters, and
significant digital and communication
devices, a more unorthodox approach will
involve the use of white mice as food
All these actions
are undertaken to mitigate the risk of a terrorist attack.
Insuring world events against terrorism or its threat has become the norm
since 9/11. In 2006 for the World Cup soccer Championships
in Germany a CAT Bond
was used by Credit Suisse for securities of $260 million against cancellation of
the tournament due to terrorism.
The World Cup Bonds spread the financial risk
of terrorism across capital markets paying a high yield while subjecting the
the risk of loosing 75% of their
IX Conclusions
The question that was asked addressed the role that the insurance industry
has to play in insuring against acts of terrorism. The
answers to this I think
depend on whether you consider terrorism as an issue of national security or
not. As an issue of national
security the government’s involvement and
responsibility is not only necessary but fundamental. Alternatively if you
that it is an issue for the private market then you need to consider
whether there is both the interest and capacity within the market
to supply this
insurance and if so whether the price is affordable. Consideration also needs to
be given to understanding the implications
for the insurance industry if the
private market is either not interested or simply too expensive.
My view is that public– private pooling systems appears to provide a
balanced solution to this problem and my research has indicated
that although
they may vary in solution that this is generally the approach taken around the
globe as it provides dual accountability
between governments and the community
and the insurance and investment markets.
Finally I do consider that there is an argument that supports the view that
terrorism insurance will be more effective if it is made
mandatory on all
property and casualty policy holders.
Dr Gordon Woo “A
Terrorism Risk Analyst’s perspective on TRIA”.
Robert P Hartwig “One
Hundred Minutes of Terror that Changed the Global Insurance Industry
Insurance Information Institute September 11, 001:The First
Erwann Michel-Kerjan and
Burkhard Pedell “Terrorism Risk Coverage in the post 9/11 Era: A
Comparison of the New Public-Private
Partnership in France, Germany and the
Wharton – Risk Management and Decision Processes
Centre; University of Pennsylvania
October 2004
Robert P Hartwig “One
Hundred Minutes of Terror that Changed the Global Insurance Industry
Insurance Information Institute September 11, 001:The First
Howard Kunreuther and
Erwann Michel-Kerjan “Terrorism Insurance 2005”
Regulation Spring 2005 p 44-51.
Insurance Information
Institute News Release “9/11 and insurance, one year later: terror attacks
most complex disaster in
PR Newswire
September 2002, <
www.prnewswire.co.uk/cgi/news/release?id=90342
viewed 21/8/07.
Erwann Michel-Kerjan and
Burkhard Pedell “Terrorism Risk Coverage in the post 9/11 Era: A
Comparison of the New Public-Private
Partnership in France, Germany and the
Wharton – Risk Management and Decision Processes Centre;
University of Pennsylvania
October 2004.
Robert P Hartwig “One
Hundred Minutes of Terror that Changed the Global Insurance Industry
Insurance Information Institute September 11, 2001: The First
“Ownership, control
and “Insurance of the World Trade Centre”
9-11 Research
www.911research.wtc7.net/wtc/background/owners/hmtl
viewed 21/8/07
Warrington J.M. “9/11
WTC Insurance litigation- Phase 2 and 3”
Insurance Law Journal Vol 16.
www.lexis.com/research/retrieve?_m=781ef668d482a4f4566f4fd3943f49964&docn
Viewed 4/11/07.
Howard Kunreuther and Mark
Pauly “What You Don’t Know Can Hurt You: Terrorism Losses and All
Peril Insurances”
Wharton School University of Pennsylvania
December 2004.
Robert P Hartwig “One
Hundred Minutes of Terror that Changed the Global Insurance Industry
Insurance Information Institute September 11, 2001: The First
Howard Kunreuther and
Erwann Michel-Kerjan “Challenges for Terrorism Risk Insurance in the
United States”
Journal of Economic Perspective-
Vol 18, Number 4
Fall 2004 pp201-214.
Insurance Information
Institute “Terrorism and Insurance” July 2004 <
www.iii.org/media/hottopics/insurance/sept11/tria/?printerfriendly=yes
viewed 21/8/07.
Jonathon B. Smith “Terrorism Insurance” Whisper Wave Innovative
Maritime Solutions <
www.whisprwave.com/msu-hs-class/terrorism-insurance.htm
viewed 21/8/07
Dr Gordon Woo “A
Terrorism Risk Analyst’s perspective on TRIA”.
Jonathon B. Smith
“Terrorism Insurance” Whisper Wave Innovative Maritime Solutions
www.whisprwave.com/msu-hs-class/terrorism-insurance.htm
viewed 21/8/07
Sophie Korczyk
“Insuring the Uninsurable: Private Insurance Markets and Government
Intervention in Cases of Extreme Risk”
NAMIC Issue Analysis
Robert P Hartwig “One
Hundred Minutes of Terror that Changed the Global Insurance Industry
Insurance Information Institute September 11, 2001: The First
Insurance Information
Institute “Terrorism Risk and Insurance” August 2007 <
www.iii.org/media/hottopics/insurance/terrorism/?printerfriendly=yes
“Insuring Against
IBIS World USA Newsletter
July 2005 <
www.ibisworld.com/newsletter/issues/us/05jul/news.htm
Insurance Information
Institute “Terrorism Risk and Insurance” August 2007 <
www.iii.org/media/hottopics/insurance/terrorism/?printerfriendly=yes
Howard Kunreuther and
Erwann Michel-Kerjan “Terrorism Insurance 2005”
Regulation Spring
2005 p 44-51.
Insurance Information
Institute “Terrorism Risk and Insurance” August 2007 <
www.iii.org/media/hottopics/insurance/terrorism/?printerfriendly=yes
Howard Kunreuther and
Erwann Michel-Kerjan “Terrorism Insurance 2005”
Regulation Spring
2005 p 44-51.
Insurance Information
Institute “Terrorism Risk and Insurance” August 2007 <
www.iii.org/media/hottopics/insurance/terrorism/?printerfriendly=yes
Howard Kunreuther and
Erwann Michel-Kerjan “Terrorism Insurance 2005”
Regulation Spring
2005 p 44-51.
Insurance Information
Institute “Terrorism Risk and Insurance” August 2007 <
www.iii.org/media/hottopics/insurance/terrorism/?printerfriendly=yes
Richard Allyn “The
Fall and Rise of Terrorism Insurance coverage Since September 11, 2001”
William Mitchell Law Review
March 2003 <
www.rkmc.com
> Viewed 21/8/07.
Litan Robert E.
“Sharing and Reducing the Financial Risk of Future
Mega-Catastrophes”
The Brookings Institute Issues Economic Policy
Number 4 March 2006.
Workshop by the Wharton
Risk management and Decision Process Centre “TRIA and Beyond: What would
be the most effective way
for the Nation to recover from (Mega) Terrorist
Attacks” Feb 2005.
Howard Kunreuther and Mark
Pauly “What You Don’t Know Can Hurt You: Terrorism Losses and All
Peril Insurances”
Wharton School University of Pennsylvania
December 2004.
Sophie Korczyk
“Insuring the Uninsurable: Private Insurance Markets and Government
Intervention in Cases of Extreme Risk”
NAMIC Issue Analysis
Aon Crisis Management
“Stand-Alone Terrorism Insurance Market Update” March 2006.
Insurance Information
Institute “Terrorism and Insurance” July 2004 <
www.iii.org/media/hottopics/insurance/sept11/tria/?printerfriendly=yes
viewed 21/8/07.
Richard Allyn “ The
Fall and Rise of Terrorism Insurance coverage Since September 11, 2001”
William Mitchell Law Review
March 2003 <
www.rkmc.com
> Viewed 21/8/07.
Sophie Korczyk
“Insuring the Uninsurable: Private Insurance Markets and Government
Intervention in Cases of Extreme Risk”
NAMIC Issue Analysis
Workshop by the Wharton
Risk management and Decision Process Centre “TRIA and Beyond: What would
be the most effective way
for the Nation to recover from (Mega) Terrorist
Attacks” Feb 2005.
Howard Kunreuther and
Erwann Michel-Kerjan “Challenges for Terrorism Risk Insurance in the
United States”
Journal of Economic Perspective
Vol 18, Number 4
Fall 2004 pp201-214.
AON Risk Services
“Terrorism Risk Management and Risk Transfer Market Overview”
December 2004.
Workshop by the Wharton
Risk management and Decision Process Centre “TRIA and Beyond: What would
be the most effective way
for the Nation to recover from (Mega)- Terrorist
Attacks” Feb 2005.
Erwann Michel-Kerjan and
Burkhard Pedell “Terrorism Risk Coverage in the post 9/11 Era: A
Comparison of the New Public-Private
Partnership in France, Germany and the
Wharton – Risk Management and Decision Processes Centre;
University of Pennsylvania
October 2004.
Howard Kunreuther and
Erwann Michel-Kerjan “Challenges for Terrorism Risk Insurance in the
United States”
Journal of Economic Perspective
Vol 18, Number 4
Fall 2004 pp201-214.
Debra J. Roberts
“TRIA: Where do we go from here”
The Centre on Federal Financial
Institution
Insurance Information
Institute “Terrorism and Insurance” July 2004 <
www.iii.org/media/hottopics/insurance/sept11/tria/?printerfriendly=yes
viewed 21/8/07.
Richard J Hillman
“Terrorism Insurance – Effects of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act
of 2002” United States General
Accounting Office Testimony Before the
Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, United States Senate
Insurance Act 2003
Peter Costello
“Terrorism Insurance”
Commonwealth of Australia Treasury
Department Media Release <
www.treasurer.gov.au
Peter Costello
“Terrorism Insurance”
Commonwealth of Australia Treasury
Department Media Release <
www.treasurer.gov.au
“ Insurance Council
Terrorism Insurance Act
Media Release Insurance
www.insurancecouncil.com.au
viewed 21/8/07.
Terrorism Insurance Act
Review: 2006 - Encouraging commercial involvement
The Australian Government
www.treasury.gov.au
Insurance Information
Institute “Terrorism Risk and Insurance” August 2007 <
www.iii.org/media/hottopics/insurance/terrorism/?printerfriendly=yes
AON Risk Services
“Terrorism Risk Management and Risk Transfer Market Overview”
December 2004.
Robert P Hartwig
“One Hundred Minutes of Terror that Changed the Global Insurance Industry
Insurance Information Institute September 11, 2001: The First
Erwann Michel-Kerjan and
Burkhard Pedell “Terrorism Risk Coverage in the post 9/11 Era: A
Comparison of the New Public-Private
Partnership in France, Germany and the
Wharton – Risk Management and Decision Processes Centre;
University of Pennsylvania
October 2004.
Robert P Hartwig
“One Hundred Minutes of Terror that Changed the Global Insurance Industry
Insurance Information Institute September 11, 2001: The First
Erwann Michel-Kerjan and
Burkhard Pedell “Terrorism Risk Coverage in the post 9/11 Era: A
Comparison of the New Public-Private
Partnership in France, Germany and the
Wharton – Risk Management and Decision Processes Centre;
University of Pennsylvania
October 2004.
Insurance Information
Institute “Terrorism Risk and Insurance” August 2007 <
www.iii.org/media/hottopics/insurance/terrorism/?printerfriendly=yes
AON Risk Services
“Terrorism Risk Management and Risk Transfer Market Overview”
December 2004.
Robert P Hartwig
“One Hundred Minutes of Terror that Changed the Global Insurance Industry
Insurance Information Institute September 11, 2001: The First
Erwann Michel-Kerjan and
Burkhard Pedell “Terrorism Risk Coverage in the post 9/11 Era: A
Comparison of the New Public-Private
Partnership in France, Germany and the
Wharton – Risk Management and Decision Processes
Centre; University of Pennsylvania
October 2004
Insurance Information
Institute “Terrorism Risk and Insurance” August 2007 <
www.iii.org/media/hottopics/insurance/terrorism/?printerfriendly=yes
AON Risk Services
“Terrorism Risk Management and Risk Transfer Market Overview”
December 2004.
Robert P Hartwig
“One Hundred Minutes of Terror that Changed the Global Insurance Industry
Insurance Information Institute September 11, 2001: The First
Erwann Michel-Kerjan and
Burkhard Pedell “Terrorism Risk Coverage in the post 9/11 Era: A
Comparison of the New Public-Private
Partnership in France, Germany and the
Wharton – Risk Management and Decision Processes
Centre; University of Pennsylvania
October 2004.
Robert P Hartwig
“One Hundred Minutes of Terror that Changed the Global Insurance Industry
Insurance Information Institute September 11, 2001: The First
Insurance Information
Institute “Terrorism Risk and Insurance” August 2007 <
www.iii.org/media/hottopics/insurance/terrorism/?printerfriendly=yes
Robert P Hartwig
“One Hundred Minutes of Terror that Changed the Global Insurance Industry
Insurance Information Institute September 11, 2001: The First
Insurance Information
Institute “Terrorism Risk and Insurance” August 2007 <
www.iii.org/media/hottopics/insurance/terrorism/?printerfriendly=yes
AON Risk Services
“Terrorism Risk Management and Risk Transfer Market Overview”
December 2004.
CBS News “Life
Insurance, For the Olympics”
London, April 27, 2004 <
www.cbsnews/stories/2004/05/05/world/printable615609.shtml
viewed 21/8/07
Cancellation Insurance for Olympic Games” <
www.Gamesbid.com
> viewed 21/8/07.
“Olympic Games Carrier”
www.findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m0Bjk/is_14_16/ai+nl5794177/print
Viewed 21/8/07
“First Insurance
Policies for Beijing @008 Olympics Games Volunteers underwritten”
Website for the 2008 Beijing Games
http://en.beijing2008.com
Al Modugno “Marsh
Selected to Provide Insurance and Risk Services for 2008 Summer Olympics in
Beijing” Press Release
www.global.marsh.com/news/press/pr20051006.php
viewed 21/8/07
Zhan Yan “Olympic
Security on Track” March 25 2007 <
www.boloji.com
> Viewed 21/8/07.
Elliot Blair Smith
“Terrorism insurance gap looms for USA”
www.usatoday.printthis.clickability.com/pt/cpt?action=cpt&title
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (328 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter