URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawJl/2018/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Castles, Margaret --- "A Critical Commentary on the 2017 ALRC Elder Abuse Report: Looking for an Ethical Baseline for Lawyers" [2018] MqLawJl 8; (2018) 18 Macquarie Law Journal 115
A CRITICAL COMMENTARY ON THE 2017 ALRC ELDER ABUSE REPORT: LOOKING FOR AN ETHICAL BASELINE FOR LAWYERS
I THE CURRENT ETHICAL POSITION
II ALRC REFORMS
III IMPACT ON LAWYERS
IV CONCLUSION
A CRITICAL COMMENTARY ON THE 2017 ALRC ELDER ABUSE
REPORT: LOOKING FOR AN ETHICAL BASELINE FOR LAWYERS
MARGARET CASTLES*
In Australia, the ethical rules for lawyers faced with clients exhibiting
signs of mental incapacity or otherwise vulnerable and at
risk of abuse are
neither consistent nor clear. Lawyers cannot freely act to protect vulnerable
clients without risking an unethical
breach of client confidence, a position
that sits in stark contrast to commonly understood moral norms in the community.
Australian Law Reform Commission Elder Abuse Report seeks a community
response to elder abuse. In so doing it opens discussion for
reconceptualisation of some of the underlying assumptions upon which legal
ethical rules in Australia are based. Further, it provides
the opportunity to
form a more solid philosophical basis for lawyers to develop an understanding of
the competing interests between
human rights and the protection of the
vulnerable at the heart of this complex area.
In May 2017, the Australian Law Reform Commission (‘ALRC’)
published its report
Elder Abuse—A National Legal
The report addresses
the legal and social issues raised by the increasing number of older people in
and the potential for
older people to be the subject of abuse for multiple reasons and from different
The complexities of the
subject matter and the diverse circumstances in which elder abuse can occur, are
illustrated by the range
of contexts discussed in the report. Elder abuse can
arise in the provision of financial, medical, care related, physical, housing,
legal, family, administrative, social and community services. It can be
‘casual’ abuse that arises from misconceptions
potential of older people. It can arise within families or within service
provision. It can be entrenched by
legal, systemic, administrative, social and
community standards. Elder abuse requires a whole community response, and the
considers the issues relating to elder abuse from a range of social
perspectives and institutions.
Lawyers come into regular contact with clients who fall into the ambit of the
ALRC report. Lawyers are rightly concerned about mental
capacity in the case of
elderly clients, which can be coupled with concerns about undue pressure and
influence from family and others.
These concerns may or may not arise alongside
concerns about physical, mental, or financial safety and wellbeing. In their
professional
capacity, lawyers are not acting as part of the broader community
and must work within the specific boundaries of legal ethical
guidelines.
This constrains the
actions that they are at liberty to take in relation to their clients. To date,
the various legal ethical rules
that guide lawyers in this complex area have
been inconsistent and often opaque. Lawyers also operate in a legally structured
clients is to manage legal
problems or legal outcomes. It is not their role to be concerned with broader
social, community, financial
After grappling with the practical challenges of elder abuse, the ALRC
recommended reforms that have philosophical, ethical and practical
implications
for legal practitioners. The purpose of this article is to critically analyse
these proposals and evaluate their impact
on lawyers aiming to achieve access to
justice for clients with capacity issues. I will do this in three stages and
much of this
discussion will refer to an earlier article that compared
approaches on client capacity between jurisdictions within Australia and
internationally.
In Part One, I
will briefly revisit and summarise the current ethical position of lawyers in
relation to managing clients with capacity
issues. I will review more recent
ethical guidelines that have been developed in Australia, and give particular
consideration to
the extent to which current guidelines and ethical regimes
conceptualise ideas of autonomy, dignity and protection. In Part Two,
consider the nature and impact of the reforms proposed by the ALRC on the
current position for lawyers. In Part Three, I will
pose a question: If the
reforms are implemented, what will be the implications for lawyers in
philosophical and practical terms?
I THE CURRENT ETHICAL POSITION
Older people do not occupy a special or distinct legal position. The rule of
law, and principles of legal ethics apply across the
community. Older people may
exhibit a cluster of characteristics that expose them to abuse and
vulnerability,
and the same can be
said for people with mental incapacity. However this does not mean that they
should be treated ‘differently’,
individually or as a class, which
would itself constitute a breach of human
This is explicitly
identified in the ALRC report, which frames elder abuse as a human rights issue
grounded in the idea that dignity
and autonomy are the inalienable rights of
every human.
However, the report
also points out that whilst older people can be exposed to a cluster of risks,
their rights are not well
The general human rights approach of equal treatment can be eclipsed by
community perceptions of the elderly as a specific vulnerable
perhaps not unlike
children. This in turn can result in benign paternalism or best-interests
decision making,
consequently informs law, policy and practice around older
Ideas of independence,
self-fulfilment and dignity can be overlooked when focusing on immediate needs
such as physical care, access
to resources, health care, and
accommodation.
As older or
otherwise vulnerable people may experience multiple challenges, it is easy to
assume that merely being older somehow
personhood.
This gives rise to
the concern that underlies the ALRC report: the general belief that the human
right to autonomy and self-determination
must be necessarily balanced against
the physical, care related, and social ‘best interests’ of the
This idea of protection
often slides into paternalistic intervention which fails to recognise that the
subject of the decision should
be involved in decision making, and that their
needs go beyond day to day physical requirements. Benign or ignorant
paternalism,
motived by the perceived best interests of the elder person, is
pervasive and can result in cultural blindness to the foundational
older people. This perception permeates society, and lawyers are no
Legal ethical principles address two key questions that arise for lawyers
encountering client capacity and client abuse:
1. What should a lawyer do if their client’s capacity to give
instructions to the lawyer is in doubt? and;
2. When can and should a lawyer breach their duty of confidence to a client
in order to divulge lack of capacity or report abuse in
order to protect the
client’s best interests?
The first challenge rests partly on the concept of agency – the
principle that the lawyer as agent can only give effect to the
informed instructions. It also rests on the concept of dignity – that
lawyers must act on the client’s
expressed will, not supplant it with some
other idea of what is best for the
The second challenge
arises out of the strict provisions surrounding lawyer-client confidentiality.
Absolute primacy is given to
confidentiality between lawyer and client. This
rests on the presumption of exclusivity between lawyer and client, and on the
entitlement to privacy and confidence. It can only be prised open
in specific and very narrowly defined
circumstances.
The peak professional body in Australia, the Law Council, has issued
Australian Solicitors’ Conduct Rules (‘ASCR’),
states and territories in Australia have adopted with only minor variation.
These rules specify that lawyers must act
in the client’s best
that lawyers must
provide clear and timely advice to assist a client to understand relevant legal
issues and to make informed
and that a lawyer must
follow a client’s lawful, proper, and competent
instructions.
The rules go on to
state that a lawyer must not disclose any information confidential to the client
that is acquired during the engagement
with the client unless the client
and the solicitor does so for the sole purpose of avoiding the probable
commission of a serious criminal
or for the purpose of
avoiding imminent serious physical harm to the client or another
Explicit application of
these principles means that a lawyer cannot take any action on behalf of a
client who does not give instructions
that are prima facie competent, and that
if the lawyer believes the client is incompetent, they are barred by prohibition
from breaching
the confidence of the client by telling anyone else about it.
This might mean that the lawyer believes the client is incompetent
and at risk
but is not able to divulge that information to anyone in order to protect the
client. It also means that if the client
is competent, the lawyer is bound to
follow their instructions, however much the lawyer believes they are not in the
best personal, social, financial, or other
Mindful of these internal tensions of principle, law societies in all states
in Australia have looked for a way to guide lawyers through
this very complex
situation. Progress has been slow. Writing on this topic three years ago, only
two states in Australia, South Australia
(‘SA’) and New South Wales
(‘NSW’), had specific ethical guidelines for working with clients
with incapacity
Guidelines introduced in SA in 2012 proposed a strong human dignity
limiting the role of
lawyers to support and advise, but recommending against any paternalistic
intervention in the case of questionable
They proposed that a
lawyer could never breach client confidence without express instructions, even
to achieve protective measures
for a client losing capacity, and that a lack of
instructions would inevitably result in the lawyer being disabled from acting
for the client. This also meant that the lawyer was not permitted to
reveal the need for protection. Guidelines introduced in NSW
in 2003 took a more
paternalistic approach.
by the practical reality that there would be cases where a lawyer cannot obtain
instructions and has legitimate concerns
2003 NSW guidelines envisaged lawyers breaching confidence in order to seek some
form of intervention
for a client exhibiting incapacity, and also allowed
lawyers to personally initiate this
The guidelines updated
in 2016 place greater emphasis on the balance of confidentiality and protection
but continue to reflect the
common law position that intervention is an option
if there is no reasonable
alternative.
Both sets of
guidelines are grounded in ethical principles, but result in diametrically
opposed outcomes. The SA guidelines took
a clear view on the absolute nature of
client autonomy and the prohibition on lawyers breaching confidence, even in
perceived best
interest, while the NSW guidelines looked to the need to protect
vulnerable clients against disadvantage, even if there was some
lawyer-client confidentiality. This position is illustrated in the case
where the client lacked
any community support, the lawyer was familiar with the client’s
circumstances and there was no reasonable
alternative available to the lawyer to
seek protection for the client. The intersection of rules and reality reflects
the dilemma
for lawyers trying to do the best for the clients they are dealing
Neither set of guidelines
approach the matter lightly. Both acknowledge that capacity can be decision
specific and they contain detailed
and informative guidance on determining
capacity, maximising the client’s capacity to be involved in decision
More recently, Victoria and Western Australia (‘WA’) introduced
detailed guidelines,
and the Law
Society of Queensland has endorsed guidelines prepared
independently.
These guidelines
also reflect divergent approaches. The Victorian guidelines appear to adopt a
position similar to the SA guidelines,
particularly by acknowledging that if a
client cannot give instructions due to incapacity, the lawyer may have to cease
However, the
guidelines then veer towards the NSW approach suggesting that only as a very
last resort should lawyers make an application
for guardianship or protection of
the client.
The WA guidelines
are limited to detailed practical advice without explicit discussion of human
rights principles.
Queensland guidelines are significantly more conservative, suggesting extreme
caution before involving third parties without
The different state
guidelines, to varying degrees, all advocate for respectful, patient, careful
and, if necessary, repeated engagement
with the client in order to maximise
their capacity to make choices. With the exception of SA and Queensland, this
often involves
suggesting medical assessment, inviting the client to include
relatives in future dealings with the lawyer, or involving other supportive
agencies or resources.
The SA and Queensland guidelines take a consistently robust approach to
breach of confidence. Both demand informed client consent
before any breach of
confidence, and in the absence of consent, state that the lawyer should cease to
act for the client.
particularly problematic given the interlinking ethical responsibilities of
legal advisors, who are tasked with the triple
goals of zealously pursuing
client interests (as stated by the client not presumed by the
ensuring that the
clients are fully advised in order to provide meaningful
instructions,
and respecting
confidence.
Guidelines that
recommend advising an elderly client to seek medical assurance of their capacity
to avoid things ‘going wrong’
in the future uniformly fail to
require the client to be advised that one possible outcome of this assessment is
a finding that they
are not legally capable, with consequential removal of their
autonomy. Lawyers in any other context would be ethically obliged to
clients to possible negative outcomes of proposed
Elder clients should be
afforded the same care. The disparity between approaches well illustrates the
dilemma addressed by the ALRC
in its report. Conversely, the conclusion that the
lawyer must cease acting if consent is not forthcoming, rather than seeking to
protect the client, can expose vulnerable clients without community or other
support (as in the case of
) to significant risk. Respecting the
ethical concept of absolute confidentiality might be at the expense of
wellbeing, safety, protection,
and quality of life. The ALRC report acknowledges
this dichotomy, noting that different views of human rights and the practical
of low level abuse on key human rights will influence where the balance
falls in this situation.
It is notable that all of these guidelines fail to reiterate the position
stated by the Law Council of Australia’s ASCR, which
explicitly limit when
a lawyer can breach client confidence to circumstances where the client is at
risk of imminent serious physical
or to prevent the probable
commission of a serious criminal
At present,
psychological or financial harm are expressly excluded. There is no provision
for breaching confidence if the solicitor
has reason to doubt the client’s
capacity and believes they need protection other than from serious physical
The much lower benchmarks
set by Australian law societies (other than in SA and Queensland) demonstrate
the weighing of best interests
over autonomy that is not consistent with the
national statement of ethics on client confidence.
Whilst all of the guidelines propose measures for maximising client
participation in decision making, none go to the lengths that
introduced in the UK which take a different philosophical approach. Underlying
the UK position is the maximisation of client
capacity to make choices within
the lawyer-client relationship by insisting on an evidence-based assessment of
likely client preferences
in the event that paternalistic decision making is
inevitable. This is the UK approach across professions and
By contrast, in
Australia, capacity is still primarily seen as an all or nothing proposition.
This approach can be seen in the recent
call for submissions on the revision of
the Australian Model Rules of Professional Conduct by the Law Council of
Discussing the
current position on the ethical management of clients with questionable
capacity, the document suggests that ‘a
client incapable of managing his
or her own affairs is likely, generally, to be incapable of giving instructions
This simplistic
assumption reinforces the binary approach of incapacity as all or nothing. It
gives little attention to empowering
and supporting decision making for clients
who have nuanced needs and capacities.
The various positions in Australia at this time all rest on the same broad
ethical values of confidentiality, client autonomy and
residual protection from
harm but emphasise different balances between these interests. We still lack a
clear statement of principle
around balancing autonomy and protective best
interests. Very real personal, social and legal dilemmas arise when a person is
legally competent, but not legally protected. Lawyers, acting as lawyers,
may not be able to ignore the plight of a client suffering
abuse, nor leave a
vulnerable and incapable client unprotected. Lawyers have a duty of
confidentiality and loyalty, but when that
duty conflicts with concerns that a
client is at risk, the issues are complex and not helpfully solved by a rigid
statement of principle.
II ALRC REFORMS
The 2017 ALRC report and recommendations bring new depth to this discussion.
The ALRC report spotlights the dilemma lawyers can face
when the threatened
wellbeing or safety of a client conflicts with the lawyer’s duty to
respect the client’s autonomy.
As a member of the community, the lawyer
may feel a moral imperative to take steps to protect a client at risk of abuse.
legal ethical rules do not reflect the community’s moral
position. They restrain the lawyer from acting as their instincts
might suggest.
ASCR rule 9 specifies the only circumstances when a lawyer can breach the
confidence of a client: to prevent the probably
commission of a serious criminal
or to prevent imminent
serious physical harm to the
These exceptions will
apply in extreme circumstances, and to that extent align with the ALRC benchmark
that only serious abuse triggers
intervention. But they set a high benchmark
that will not catch instances of minor financial, psychological, and freedom of
abuse that older adults are also commonly exposed to. This underlines
blurred lines around the meaning of human dignity. The very
capacity to exercise
autonomy and agency may itself be facilitated by the provision of more basic
needs such as care, housing, finances,
health and safety. A high threshold may
overlook the value of supporting quality of life at a less extreme level in
order to facilitate
a dignified and autonomous
The ALRC report is framed in terms of elder abuse. This can take many forms:
physical, emotional, psychological, legal, financial
Issues of mental
capacity that inhibit the ability to make decisions can coincide with, and may
be catalysts for, abuse. Mental capacity
is not axiomatically related to
concerns of abuse, although it may raise concerns about the client’s
capacity to care for themselves
and determine their best interests. Moreover,
mental frailty, lack of confidence, dependency and vulnerability may affect a
willingness and capacity to make decisions freely. Abuse is not
necessarily linked to mental capacity, but elder people are vulnerable
The ALRC report focuses on older people. However, founded as it is on human
rights principles, the report is explicit that its premises
apply to any adult
experiencing abuse. It necessarily draws on extensive discussion of mental
capacity in relation to older
However, the ALRC report
specifically recognises that its recommendations are equally applicable to any
adult person. The ALRC report
adopts the World Health Organisation definition of
elder abuse as ‘a single or repeated act or lack of appropriate action
within any relationship where there is an expectation of trust which
causes harm or distress to an older
It notes that a
confluence of factors including dependency, poor health, mental disorders
including depression, low income or social
economic status, cognitive impairment
and social isolation are typical risk factors for abuse of any person, but are
prevalent in
the case of the older
population.
Recognising the lack of consistency or coverage of the protections for older
people, the ALRC proposes the development of comprehensive
and cogent adult
safeguarding arrangements to provide accessible, consistent and nuanced
protection. In the context of elder abuse,
these protective measures apply
equally to any adult. However, the report also makes a clear statement of
principle that whilst protection
of adults against abuse is imperative, autonomy
is a priority and outweighs
protection.
This is an important
statement of principle. It challenges the implicit tendency of ethical
guidelines and community attitudes to
put protection first. It proposes that the
consent of at risk adults prior to considering any safeguarding arrangements is
imperative, except in serious cases of physical abuse, sexual abuse
or neglect. Only in these extreme circumstances is intervention
without consent
appropriate.
Even then, autonomy
is still a critical factor, with protection given extra weight only in cases of
serious abuse.
The report makes a second innovative recommendation. It suggests moving away
from the concept of ‘presumed capacity’ to
a model of supported
decision making. Every set of guidelines in Australia starts with the
traditional common law proposition that
clients should be presumed to have
capacity unless there is some legitimate reason to think
This places an onus
on lawyers (and others) to make at least a preliminary assessment of client
The necessity for
lawyers to draw upon the expertise of medical professionals to determine
capacity opens the door for loss of the
client’s legal capacity.
Evaluations of legal capacity are not nuanced, yet it is by now well accepted
that people may have
different levels of capacity that have different impacts.
For example, an elderly client with some capacity issues may be well able
make a decision that they want to divide their estate equally to all offspring
(or even that they do not), but may not understand
the consequences of a complex
financial investment arrangement. Many elderly people with diminishing capacity
will have no doubt
that they ‘don’t want to go into a home’,
although they may lack the capacity to organise and implement other arrangements
to maximise their independence for as long as possible. Under existing law and
ethical guidelines, once legal capacity is found to
be lacking, discussions
mandated. It is true that the
older person’s support network can explore
the options, but legally the older person’s rights to be heard and to make
these decisions are taken over by another representative, even though there may
be a range of decisions that they can make autonomously.
Whilst legal guardians are expected to act reasonably in the best interests
of the person,
they are not
required in Australia to specifically seek out the older person’s views.
This contrasts with the situation in
the UK where there are explicit guidelines
for determining the preferred wishes of the older
In supporting an
approach that looks at practical means to maximise the expression of will and
exercise of autonomy, rather than
defaulting to a black and white
‘competent or not’ approach, the ALRC moves closer to the UK
philosophy. For example,
in the context of enduring documents, the ALRC adopts
the ‘Commonwealth Decision Making Principles’ which recommend
incorporating
the supports necessary to enable any person to make an informed
decision, rather than seeing capacity as an ‘all or nothing’
condition. The principles were developed in the 2014 ALRC report
Capacity and Disability in Commonwealth
They require that a
person be given access to as much support as they need to make decisions, that
their will and preferences must
direct decisions that affect their lives, and
that there must be appropriate safeguards in relation to any interventions for
who require decision making
The ‘Commonwealth
Decision Making Principles’ explicitly reject the ‘best
interests’ approach, preferring
a process of determining or discovering a
person’s preference, or likely
preference.
This ideally enables
the person to continue to be involved in shared decision making, rather than
substituted decision makers being
appointed. Any representative of a person is
not only required to understand the shifting nature of
but to also represent
the person’s will, preferences and
The ALRC’s approach is not new. It is already reflected, albeit to
different degrees, in capacity guidelines in Australia where
lawyers are
encouraged to take the time to seek out the resources needed to determine the
client’s will and intent. However,
making this a key recommendation is
important in reframing the approach to elder decision making and providing
lawyers (and others)
with more options when supporting clients with capacity
issues. It is a particularly useful initiative in the context of the narrow
legal ethical principles which bind lawyers and place them in a morally
untenable position. Lawyers are bound to follow only the
instructions of
‘their client’ and if ‘their client’ is represented by a
litigation guardian, they must follow
the instructions of that guardian. Lawyers
need only be satisfied that the guardian is acting ‘in the best
of the client, as determined by the guardian. They do not have
a supervening role to interrogate the basis of instructions given
guardian. By specifically including the ‘will, preferences and
of the person in
that decision making process, the ALRC report provides lawyers with the scope to
expand their role to ensure that
the client’s views are given a voice.
This is particularly important in cases where an elder person is represented by
in decisions affecting their legal autonomy.
The report also deals specifically with the role of legal practitioners both
in relation to elder abuse and in relation to mental
capacity. Firstly, there
are some fairly obvious observations about the need for training and education.
Some lawyers are much more
likely to encounter issues of capacity and warnings
of elder abuse than others. Some will already have sophisticated strategies for
dealing with these challenges, but many will
Mandatory education and
training is important to ensure solicitors who are engaged in activities such as
drafting enduring powers
of attorney and wills, have the skills and expertise to
enhance autonomy and recognise
However, it is
questionable whether one or two hours of CPD training will equip a lawyer with
anything more than a rudimentary grasp
of the complexities and demands that
arise in this area. The depth and breadth of skills required by lawyers to
meaningfully engage
with older clients, both in terms of understanding the
impact of diverse conditions and developing effective communication strategies,
are complex.
Lawyers who work on
‘family agreements’, in which older people might sign over property
in return for promises of support,
should also be alert to family, health and
cognitive influences. However, there is simply no guidance at all as to how far
should inquire into the proposals, insist on enforceable
agreements,
or intervene, or
refuse to act, where potentially adverse outcomes seem likely.
Secondly, the report explores models for introducing protective ‘adult
safeguarding’ measures. Under present ethical rules,
and case law, lawyers
are in a difficult position. They are bound to adhere to principles of client
confidentiality. They are not
permitted to divulge information obtained as part
of the client relationship (including suspicion of incapacity or abuse) without
competent client instructions. However, if they do nothing for want of
instructions, clients may suffer adverse consequences. The
Victorian case
Goddard Elliott v Fritsch
raised this issue in the context of a solicitor
accepting a settlement that the client lacked the mental capacity to instruct
It was not clear in that
case whether the solicitor knew that the client’s mental state had
deteriorated during the retainer,
although it was explicitly stated that the
solicitor’s duty to the client extended to being aware of that
possibility.
The court drew an
important distinction between strongly advising a competent client to accept a
settlement in their best interests,
and accepting a settlement for a client who
is not competent in the belief that it is in their best
Most state ethical guidelines envisage lawyers breaching confidence by
alerting relatives or carers, or themselves initiating protective
When such actions are
challenged, the courts appear to recognise the inevitability of such steps in
some cases and look to the reasonableness
and sensitivity of the lawyer’s
There have been several
cases across jurisdictions that deal with this dilemma. For example, the NSW
considered a situation where a lawyer sought the
appointment of a guardian for his client against the client's specific
The court concluded that
in the circumstances of this case the lawyers' actions, whilst in conflict with
the client's expressed instructions,
did not warrant criticism because he had
taken into account the client’s antipathy to some family members in
deciding what
action to take. The court indicated that it would consider what
steps the lawyer had taken to provide support for the client, and
would require
the lawyer to consider reasonable alternatives to the ultimate decision to seek
a guardian to take over the client's
affairs. Justice Bell in
Goddard Elliott
also noted that a solicitor might then be expected to assist the
court in any inquiry into the client’s capacity, which might
itself prompt
a conflict beteen the duty of confidence to the client and the duty to assist
In terms of clear guidance for the legal profession, there is not a great
deal of joy to be had from the ALRC report. The report canvasses
legislative and ethical limits on medical practitioners breaching privacy to
report abuse in some detail.
points out that various Commonwealth legislative initiatives in the health care
sector permit breach of privacy in the case of
reporting serious
and that the Australian
care or treatment, or for compassionate
Health professionals
may also apply to various state tribunals if they believe a person is being
abused by a guardian.
no great assistance to lawyers who operate under a separate ethical code and in
a different professional context. However,
at the very least, this guidance to
doctors and others provides a principled basis for framing discussion. The ALRC
flags a range
of circumstances when a breach of confidence might occur: in cases
of serious abuse, when it is necessary to ensure appropriate care,
compassionate reasons. These are all easily applicable to the decisions a lawyer
might face with an older client, but are
not currently discussed in any legal
ethical guidelines. In a clear acknowledgment that the present ethical rules are
fraught with
uncertainty, the report acknowledges that lawyers’ ethical
rules might need to be changed to accommodate such
protection.
The perceived trade-off between autonomy and protection is acute when
considering the range of circumstances where a breach of confidence
might arise.
The ALRC points out that there are many reasons why people, including older
people, do not want to report
Older people may choose
to reject support or intervention and will often be fiercely protective of their
right to choose. They do
not want to be treated like children or sheltered from
One submission to the
ALRC describes this as the ‘dignity of risk’, the right to make
decisions that may have adverse
Older people can be
reluctant to disclose or admit to diminishing
Breaching confidence
in the ‘best interests’ of the person is a grave intrusion into
their autonomy. It is for this reason
that the ALRC proposes that supplanting
autonomy for the perceived best interests is only permissible in cases of
serious abuse.
The ALRC proposes the creation of ‘Adult Safeguarding Agencies’
for vulnerable adults who need care and support, who are
being abused or
neglected, or who are at risk of abuse or neglect and cannot protect themselves
from the abuse.
envisages that adult safeguarding agencies will provide a first point of contact
and will then investigate cases. However,
the consent of the at-risk adults
should always be obtained before invoking the support of the safeguarding
The only circumstance
when consent is not required is in cases of serious abuse, sexual abuse, or
Multidisciplinary in
approach, it is implicit that there will be some objective measure in the
approach of adult safeguarding procedures,
although just how that is to be
achieved is not stated. Mindful of the ethical constraints that exist around
breaching client confidence,
the ALRC recommends that any person who reports
abuse to an adult safeguarding agency in good faith should not, as a
consequence,
be found to have departed from standards of professional
Whilst this is not a
reflection of professional ethical rules, it does to an extent coincide with
court decisions in which the genuine
intentions of lawyers in selecting and
pursuing protection for the client are considered
III IMPACT ON LAWYERS
Governed as they are by ‘one size fits all’ ethical principles,
there is often little guidance for lawyers working at
the edges of
‘normal’ presumptions about client capacity. Lawyers have
traditionally been left to make the best decisions
they can. The different
approaches of principle taken in Australian states indicate uncertainty around
balancing ideas of autonomy,
confidentiality, and protection. This creates a
grey area. Consideration of best interests, prioritising physical care needs,
the presumption that relatives will ‘do the right thing’ can
swamp concepts of autonomy and the right to choose. Strict
adherence to client
confidence (as is the case in SA and Queensland) limits intervention to the
narrow circumstances outlined in
ASCR rule 9. Yet it is abundantly clear that
the predominance of elder abuse occurs in the financial area. Limiting the
of lawyers to consider initiating protective evaluation to cases of
serious imminent physical harm creates definitional challenges.
The span of
human rights interests below ‘serious imminent physical harm’ is
extensive and is where many human rights
incursions will occur. Mental
wellbeing, access to family and resources, and financial exploitation are all
abuse but do not appear
to fall within the very high benchmark set by the legal
ethical rules. The relaxation of this requirement that flows from the NSW
guidelines and cases such as
where the last resort
intervention is countenanced, fails to recognise the potential negative impact
of not acting earlier to avert
problems. Given the pervasive and often hidden
instances of elder abuse that fall along the scale of
seriousness,
there may be
times when a lawyer is best placed to identify concerns but, without explicit
consent from the client, is not permitted
to take any action. This idea is
consistent with the fiduciary role of the lawyer who has a limited and legally
focused role to play
with clients, but it is not consistent with a more holistic
community based approach to elder abuse. The ALRC report provides valuable
baseline principles for lawyers working in this grey area. It makes autonomy of
the person the overriding starting point. Only serious
abuse warrants the
overriding of autonomy. It recommends a decision making model that strengthens
and supports available decision
making capacity, rather than a binary competent
or not competent model. It also supports the creation of independent protective
that in turn provide multidisciplinary options for supporting and
protecting clients who may be at risk.
The ALRC proposes that the wishes of the person must be respected and their
confidentiality maintained in all but cases of serious
There are no helpful
definitions to determine what makes abuse serious. It is not clear whether it
means risk to life or permanent
health problems; whether it means embarrassment
and upset, or ongoing psychological impact; whether it means not having access
television, phone and new clothes – or only serious life-threatening
neglect. The ALRC gives examples such as cruel and degrading
treatment and being
locked in a room which suggest that only abuse or neglect at the upper end of
the scale meets the definition.
There is no real discussion of
report also refers to the right to privacy, bodily and psychological integrity,
personal development, and relationships but in
the context of abuse compromising
those rights.
Where abuse is
serious, the ALRC recommends the creation of safeguarding agencies that would
appropriate resources to support the
person. The ALRC encourages anyone to
report abuse to a safeguarding
This might include
members of the public, but also includes doctors, health workers or lawyers with
specific obligations of confidentiality
to the person. Recognising that
reporting and thus breaching confidence does contravene ethical guidelines, the
ALRC notes that there
may need to be alterations to professional conduct rules.
It also recommends that there be a good faith exemption from breach of
under professional conduct or other
This generic proposal
highlights the disparity between legal ethical rules and a broader liberty to
report concerns to an agency
to investigate the need for protection. Adult
safeguarding agencies have been in place in the UK for some time, and are
by the provisions of the
A fundamental principle
of the framework is the inclusion of the voice of the at risk adult and the
leveraging of whatever supports
might facilitate that engagement.
Since its inception, this legislation has drawn mixed reviews. Some
stakeholders saw it as a necessary step forward, bringing adult
protection into
line with child and domestic violence protective regimes. Some thought it did
not go far enough, and others that
the legislation intruded unnecessarily into
the private lives of adults.
There was concern that limiting the definition of abuse to human rights
violations was too broad and failed to acknowledge both the
impact of specific
acts and the possibility of self-neglect as a basis for the need for protection.
This concern aligned with the
definitional problems outlined above. The status
of autonomy and self-direction as a foundational human right could create a
of importance that may have the practical effect of excluding multiple
minor instances of abuse (such as financial, psychological,
relational, social
or health care related abuse) from both public recognition and practical
protection. The idea of a threshold for
triggering concern and intervention
continues to inform policy and law reform in
but in so doing
invites a pinpoint rather than a more nuanced approach.
The legal profession continues to approach these questions from a slightly
different perspective. In its recent call for submissions
for the review of the
current ASCR,
several months after the ALRC report, the Law Council of Australia asked whether
the risk of financial exploitation should
justify a breach of confidence, and
whether guidelines concerning the seeking of a financial management order for a
client would
be useful. Financial exploitation is one of the most common forms
of elder abuse.
It may be a
precursor to more serious abuse in that it takes away means of support, making
the person dependent on the exploiter
and thus exposed to further abuse, or it
could leave them destitute and at risk of serious neglect. However, it does not
fall into the definition of serious abuse proposed by the ALRC. The
Ethics Committee of the Law Council has expressed concern about
further exception to breaching confidence in the ASCR to encompass financial
abuse because ‘financial exploitation’
specificity.
The Law Council
proposes the creation of unambiguous criteria to assist solicitors having to
make such decisions.
of a serious risk benchmark as advocated by the ALRC is not discussed, although
perhaps implicitly it is already reflected
in the existing wording of the
However, as already
noted, most state guidelines already move some way from this benchmark and the
Law Council of Australia also
seems open to moving away from such a strict
approach. Even so, the opacity of the concept of serious risk, coupled with the
and limited role of the lawyer, raises challenges. A lawyer may well be
doubtful that the serious imminent harm test is met if they
are aware that a
client is being given little personal choice or freedom in a family care
arrangement, or is miserable and isolated
in a care facility, or is dissipating
scant assets to family or other sources, or has far more bruises and cuts than
are consistent
with an occasional fall. Self-neglect poses another set of
complex challenges.
Interestingly, the Law Council argues against further exception to
confidentiality (as currently listed in the ASCR at rule 9), for
cases where a
lawyer forms a reasonable belief that the client cannot give instructions, on
the basis that a rule to this effect
is inadequate to guide solicitors through
the complexities of such a
The ALRC report
does not really assist lawyers with this difficult area of decision making. Nor,
realistically, can it. Ultimately,
this remains the role of the Law Council of
Australia and the various state law societies. However, the ALRC report has
brought into
sharp focus some of the dilemmas that are not clearly covered by
existing ethical rules and proposes some important baselines for
discussion. This again reflects two different approaches to the core issue. It
is not always incapacity to instruct that
is the problem. Client unwillingness
to take any action, fuelled by pride, fear, helplessness, lack of confidence or
autonomy, may
be the basis of concern for a lawyer. Lack of capacity is one side
of the coin, the other is much less easily defined and managed.
Firstly, there is a dilemma that is posed by the range of circumstances in
which a breach of confidence, with or without active seeking
out of protective
measures, is warranted. The ALRC stands firm that there should be no disclosure
except in the case of serious abuse,
whereas at least some states in Australia,
and arguably also the Law Council, accept a more permeable barrier. Guarded
support for
the latter position can be found in the case law which implicitly
recognises the pragmatic choices faced by lawyers and the negative
personal implications if some protective action is not
It is clear that the
legal profession has, at least on a case by case basis, moved some way from the
serious physical harm benchmark.
Will the ALRC report, with its emphasis on
autonomy and dignity, exert pressure on the legal profession to revisit that
predominant
Secondly, there is valuable contribution from the ALRC report in its
challenge to the traditional idea of assumed capacity and the
all-or-nothing approach to
In its robust shift
towards supported decision making and the creation of legal processes and
standards around this concept, the
ALRC challenges the traditional approach at a
cultural and legal level. This will potentially permeate practice across
disciplines
in this area, including in the area of law. Dispelling the best
interests all-or-nothing culture that has informed the legal profession,
society, will force re-examination of these issues.
Thirdly, there is an important recommendation for lawyers in the creation of
Adult Safeguarding Agencies. Lawyers are currently left
to decide for themselves
what to do. The example of
in which the court
closely examined the choices that would have minimum impact on the client,
demonstrates how difficult this can
be. The provision of a consistent structure
for supporting people at risk with no other effective supports will provide more
and confidence for lawyers wondering where to take their concerns. It
does not address the issue of divulging confidence, but it
provides a more
certain and reliable resource for lawyers.
Fourthly, another valuable suggestion is in the creation of a ‘good
faith’ exemption against disciplinary action where
a person reveals
confidential information. As stated by the ALRC, the exemption is probably far
too simplistic to offer any protection.
However, it is in principle consistent
with the case law that recognises the dilemma for lawyers and the compelling
reasons that
can exist to take protective measures. This offers a valuable
starting point for the development of clearer protocols.
IV CONCLUSION
Australia appears to be at a crossroads on client capacity and intervention.
The philosophy of paternalism is by now eschewed by all
law societies and by the
courts. This is in line with the philosophy underlining the ALRC report. It is
also well accepted that capacity
is decision specific and nuanced, and that all
ethical guidelines in Australia contain informative guidance on how to identify
manage potential lack of capacity, and in most cases, how to maximise
participation in decision making. Reform in Australia comes
a little later than
in the UK and the USA, where specialised legislation for elder abuse and
protection that focuses on engagement
in decision making rather than more
legalistic approaches have been in place for some
There are definitional, philosophical, and practical challenges. The idea of
a hierarchy of human rights guiding the discussion about
protection potentially
diminishes focus on the day to day instances of abuse. These instances, while
not posing a critical risk,
are part of more subtle but nonetheless pervasive
abuse that might cumulatively undermine the higher right to quality of life. The
ALRC proposes a high ‘serious abuse’ benchmark for intervention,
whereas some existing guidelines and case law suggest
a lower standard.
Financial abuse is the most common area of elder abuse and
exploitation,
but it is not
clearly dealt with by either the ALRC or existing guidelines. Neglect, although
not as often reported as other forms
of abuse, is also not clearly
Definitions and
scale remain a challenge in this discussion. This potentially limits the options
of lawyers faced with the complex
moral and ethical dilemmas of a client who
they believe is in need of protection in order to enhance their safety, life
The ALRC recommends a wholesale departure from the simplistic binary approach
to capacity by proposing an approach that maximises
capacity, so that capacity
can be nurtured for decision making. This reflects the focus on supporting
engagement adopted in the UK.
However, in so doing, it also emphasises a strict
human rights approach that in turn influences community perceptions – and
a recognition that being older does not warrant less autonomy but requires at
times more assistance to exercise that autonomy. Innovative
ideas to address the
complexities of this debate abound. Effective education and training, both at
the community level and within
the legal community, is one. The issues around
competence, client empowerment, facilitating and supporting engagement, and
understanding
the impact of disease and the effects of ageing, are critically
important if lawyers are to be able to deal respectfully and flexibly
diverse client needs. Sensitive, informed and skilful counselling of clients
throughout the engagement would go a considerable
way to open doors for
discussion and problem solving for clients at risk of abuse. Better integration
of services is also an option.
Whilst there are some examples of
interdisciplinary services for elder clients that recognise the co-dependence of
health, law, wellbeing,
these are for the
most part limited to a few community based initiatives. There is no pattern or
tradition of doctors and lawyers
working together in this area, yet this
fundamental step is crucial to a more effective
The broader community response recommended by the ALRC necessitates
examination of approaches to legal practice, the traditional nature
isolates lawyers from engaging in communal responses due to limiting ethical
principles. Traditional adversarial and transactional
approaches to legal
practice in Australia might well give way to developing philosophies. Some
challenge the idea of objective decision
making in favour of mediated or
therapeutic approaches. Involving mediators in facilitating the input of elder
people into decisions
or the greater
focus on therapeutic jurisprudence as a model for engaging with clients at
propose different bases
for decision making. Focusing on engaged participation and holistic
collaborative outcomes, these ideas explicitly
involve the lawyer in a greater
circle of supporters. The legislative approach adopted in the UK is also an
option, but not without
critics. It also poses risks in implementation,
particularly in relation to the tendency towards losing focus on individual
by linking abuse to legal threshold
definitions.
The Law Council of Australia’s call for submissions on amendment of the
ASCR is an opportunity for the legal profession to deeply
consider these issues
and come forward with considered proposals that acknowledge the difficult
position that lawyers can find themselves
in when torn between ethical rules and
broader moral imperatives. The ALRC has greatly assisted that discussion by its
focus on human
rights and the meaning of autonomy and dignity. The
recommendation of a supported decision making model that emphasises the
of the client, whether or not they are able to express them at the
time, and framing the discussion in terms of seriousness of abuse
when balancing
the option of intervention provide solid next steps. At present there are
different benchmarks that apply when questions
nature of abuse, and the appropriate course of action arise. There needs to be
principled reconciliation
of these differences before a more confident position
on the role of lawyers in this very difficult area can be achieved.
LLB (Hons) (Adelaide), Grad Dip Int Law (ANU), Accredited
Mediator (NMAS), Senior Lecturer and Director of Clinical Legal Education,
University of Adelaide Law School.
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Elder Abuse—A
National Legal Response
, Report No 131 (2017) 17.
Margaret Castles, ‘Mind
the Gaps: Ethical Representation of Clients with Questionable Mental
(2015) 18(1)
Legal Ethics
This is an accurate reflection
of lawyers in their traditional advisory role. It does not reflect ideas like
‘ethics of care’
lawyering in which a lawyer would indeed consider
the broader social and community implications of a client’s situation.
do undoubtedly think beyond basic legal advice and indeed consider the
impact of legal advice on the client’s broader interests.
However, we are
still some way from accepting an ethics of care model as the norm in legal
practice. See Christine Parker, ‘A
Critical Morality for Lawyers: Four
Approaches to Lawyers’ Ethics’
[2004] MonashULawRw 3
(2004) 30(1)
Monash University Law
Castles, above n 5.
Wendy Lacey, ‘Neglectful
to the Point of Cruelty? Elder Abuse and the Rights of Older Persons in
[2014] SydLawRw 4
(2014) 36(1)
Sydney Law Review
, 113; Kelly Purser,
Capacity Assessment and the Law: Problems and Solutions
International Publishing, 2017) 12.
Purser, above n 8, 6.
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 1, 48.
Purser, above n 8, 13.
The Law Council of
Australia, in its submission to the ALRC, provides four examples of decisions
made against the expressed preferences
of older people in the belief that they
were in their best interests. See Law Council of Australia, Submission No 61 to
Law Reform Commission,
Inquiry into Protecting the Rights of Older
Australians from Abuse
, 17 August 2016, 9–10.
Castles, above n 5, 37.
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 1, 76–7.
The ALRC notes that
pervasive, benign ageism assumes incompetence in the elderly and that this in
turn has a strong normative influence
in society. See ibid.
The Law Council of
Australia’s commentary on the Solicitors’ Conduct Rules specifically
identify ‘old age’
as a possible indicator of lack of competency,
along with mental illness, undue influence and fraud. See Law Council of
Australian Solicitors’ Conduct Rules 2011 and Commentary
(at August 2013) r 8.1.
For example, by allowing
their own view of what is best conflict with the client’s stated view.
Law Council of Australia,
above n 18, r 9.
Ibid r 4.1.1.
Ibid r 7.1.
Ibid r 8.1.
Ibid r 9.2.1.
Ibid r 9.2.4.
Ibid r 9.2.5.
Whilst lawyers may only act
on client instructions, they can of course counsel clients about the
implications of, or on, other people
or interests.
Castles, above n 5,
Law Society of South
Client Capacity Committee: Statement of Principles with Guidelines
Castles, above n 5, 30.
Law Society of New South
When A Client’s Capacity is in Doubt: A Practical Guide for
Castles, above n 5, 29.
Law Society of New South
Wales, above n 31, 12;
[2001] NSWCA 473
, cited in Law Society of
New South Wales, above n 31.
Purser, above n 8, 3.
Law Institute of Victoria,
Capacity Guidelines and Toolkit: Taking Instructions When a Client’s
Capacity is in Doubt
(at October 2016); Law Society of Western Australia,
When a Client’s Capacity is in Doubt: A Practical Guide for Solicitors
Queensland Law Society,
Queensland Handbook for Practitioners on Legal Capacity
(May 2015).
This advice relates
specifically to situations where the lawyer believes a medical assessment is
needed to determine capacity but
the client refuses. See Law Institute of
Victoria, above n 41, 5.
Law Society of Western
Australia, above n 36.
Queensland Law Society,
above n 47, 32.
Law Council of Australia,
Australian Solicitors’ Conduct Rules
(24 August 2015) rr 4.1.1,
Ibid rr 7.2, 8.1.
Ibid r 9.1.
Margaret Castles,
‘Barriers to Unbundled Legal Services in Australia: Canvassing Reforms to
Better Manage Self-Represented
Litigants in Courts and in Practice’
Journal of Judicial Administration
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 1, 397 [14.102].
Law Council of Australia,
above n 43, rr 4.1.1, 9.
Ibid r 9.2.4.
In its call for submissions
for the purpose of reviewing the current rules, the Law Council notes concern
9 and seeks submissions on expanding the definitions.
See Law Council of Australia,
Review of the Australian Solicitors’
Conduct Rules
(1 February 2018) 44–5.
Castles, above n 5, 43.
Law Council of Australia,
above n 50.
Ibid 36, quoting
[2016] NSWSC 905
, 915 [22], [25] (Lindsay J).
Law Council of Australia,
above n 43, r 9.2.4.
Ibid r 9.2.5.
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 1, 51–2 [2.91]–[2.93].
The ALRC Report provides a
comprehensive list of risk factors. See Australian Law Reform Commission, above
n 1, 18, 20–1.
This is because of the
purely demographic incidence of diminished mental capacity that goes with
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 1, 19.
Ibid 376 [14.6].
The definition of a person
needing safeguarding such that consent might not be needed is that the person
needs care and support,
is being abused, or is at risk of abuse or neglect, and
cannot protect themselves.
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 1, 52.
Castles, above n 5, 32.
interests’ is the typical description of a guardian’s role. A lawyer
may in fact refuse to act on the instructions
of a guardian if they are not
satisfied that they have the best interests of the person in mind.
Castles, above n 5, 24,
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Equality, Capacity and Disability in Commonwealth Laws,
Report No 124 (2014).
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 1, 55.
Ibid 200 [5.186].
Ibid 202 [5.192].
Ibid 164 [5.14], 166
Ibid 282, 287.
Nola Ries, Briony Johnston
and Shaun McCarthy, ‘Legal Education and the Aging Population: Building
Student Knowledge and Skills
Through Learning in Collaboration with Community
Organisations’
[2016] AdelLawRw 19
(2016) 37(2)
Adelaide Law Review
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 1, 205 [6.9], 207 [6.16].
[2012] VSC 87.
Ibid 149 [559].
The outcome of this case
decision turned on whether there was immunity from punishment for a decision
made by a lawyer in the process
of conducting a case in court. This would
prevent the client from recovering damages for the loss suffered due to the
of the settlement without competent instructions, a position that
Justice Bell found most concerning. See ibid [561]; Lise Barry,
Goddard Elliott v Fritsch
[2012] VSC 87
Macquarie Law Journal
Castles, above n 5, 30.
[2001] NSWCA 473.
Goddard Elliot v Fritsch
[2012] VSC 87
, 145 [549].
Ibid 342 [11.32].
Where there is a threat to
life, health or safety.
My Health Records Act 2012
(Cth); Australian Law
Reform Commission, above n 1, 341 [11.28].
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 1, 341 [11.30].
Ibid 341–2 [11.31].
Ibid 414 [14.182].
Ibid 393–4.
Women’s Electoral
Lobby, Submission No 261 to Australian Law Reform Commission,
Inquiry into
Protecting the Rights of Older Australians from Abuse
, February 2017.
Castles, above n 5, 29.
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 1, 376.
Ibid [14.6].
Ibid [14.7].
The report makes clear that
in the case of trained professionals making such reports, the concept of
reasonable suspicion goes hand
in hand with the idea of good faith.
[2001] NSWCA 473.
Lacey, above n 8,
Abuse is limited to
serious physical abuse, sexual abuse or neglect.
See, eg, Australian Law
Reform Commission, above n 1, 397 [14.104]–[14. 105] where minor financial
pilfering by a relative
is defined as not being serious.
Ibid 376 [14.10].
Care Act 2014
For example, by
legislating for power of entry or protection orders in the case of self-neglect.
See Bridget Penhale et al, ‘The
Care Act 2014: A New Legal Framework for
Safeguarding Adults in Civil Society’ (2017) 19(4)
Journal of Adult
Purser, above n 8,
Law Council of
Australia, above n 50.
Three chapters of the
report are devoted to different instances of financial abuse. See Australian Law
Reform Commission, above
This in itself is an
interesting point. The same paper suggests, at pages seven and eight, that
ethical rules should not be overly
prescriptive in favour of a broader
reflection of underlying ethical principles. Yet, on this point, the Law Council
seems concerned
that definitional limits might require more detail. See Law
Council of Australia, above n 50, 44.
Law Council of
Australia, above n 18, rr 7.1, 8.1, 9.2.1.
Law Council of
Australia, above n 50, 40.
Castles, above n 5.
Originally devised in
Equality, Capacity and Disability in Commonwealth Laws
report, the
2017 ALRC report builds on that work in developing a consistent framework. See
Australian Law Reform Commission, above
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 1, 20.
Lorna Montgomery et al,
‘Implications of Divergences in Adult Protection Legislation’ (2016)
Journal of Adult Protection
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 1, 358 [2.51].
Ibid 360 [2.57].
Nola Ries and Elise
Mansfield, ‘Elder Abuse: The Role of General Practitioners in
Community-Based Screening and Multidisciplinary
Action’ (2018) 47(4)
Australian Journal of Medical Practitioners
Kelly Purser and Tuly
Rosenfeld, ‘Evaluation of Legal Capacity by Doctors and Lawyers: The Need
for Collaborative Assessment’
(2014) 201(8)
Medical Journal of
Lise Barry, ‘Elder
Mediation: What’s in a Name?’
(2015) 32(4)
Conflict Resolution
Purser above n 8,
Montgomery et al, above
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (367 KB)
PDF format (269 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter