URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbULawRw/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dietrich, Joachim; Field, Iain --- "'Consent' and Trespass to the Person: Denial of Liability or Defence?" [2025] MelbULawRw 3; (2025) 48(2) Melbourne University Law Review 340
‘CONSENT’ AND TRESPASS TO THE PERSON:
DENIAL OF LIABILITY OR DEFENCE?
II What Is Consent?
III Taxonomic Questions:
Defences, Denials and the Burden of Proof
IV Doctrinal Matters: The Current Legal Position
V Legal Coherence and Defences
VI Moral and Policy Arguments
VII Conclusions
‘CONSENT’ AND TRESPASS TO THE PERSON:
DENIAL OF LIABILITY OR DEFENCE?
Joachim Dietrich
The question of whether consent is a defence to battery or whether the
absence of consent is an element of the claim is unresolved
in Australian law
and has received little attention. Different conclusions have been reached on
the issue in other jurisdictions
and the same question is equally raised by
other trespass claims. Yet, how consent is classified (ie as a defence or a
an element of a claim) and which party (ie plaintiff or defendant)
bears the onus of proving consent (or its absence) may be of practical
importance and of theoretical interest, thereby raising fundamental taxonomic
questions. The primary aim of this article is to tease
out the underlying
conceptual, theoretical and practical issues that contribute to the ongoing
uncertainties as to who bears the
burden of proving, and the correct
classification of, consent (or the absence of
I Introduction and Outline
Is consent a defence to a claim in the tort of battery (a form of trespass to
the person) or is the absence of consent an element
of the claim? Does the
answer turn simply on which party bears the burden of
extent that it does, is it the case that a defendant has to plead and prove
consent as a defence or is it the case that the
plaintiff has to plead and prove
an absence of consent and an assertion of consent by a defendant is merely a
of that element of the plaintiff’s
position in Australia remains unsettled. Apart
from some case law and brief
textbook discussions, surprisingly little has been written on the
discussion there has been has also arisen mostly in the context of battery, but
the issue is broader than
The same question is equally elicited by other claims in trespass to the person,
namely assault and false imprisonment as well as
trespass to land or to
In contrast, the doctrine of consent has received considerable attention from
criminal law scholars in recent years, spurred on by
rapidly evolving sexual
mores and increased awareness of, and concern about, the difficulties faced by
certain groups in proving
the guilt of
perpetrators.
issues with which we are concerned in this article are impacted by those same
concerns (among others) and by the broader question
of the extent (if any) to
which tort law ought to instantiate the norms apparent in the criminal law. Our
primary aims, however,
are to tease out the underlying conceptual, theoretical
and practical issues that contribute to the ongoing uncertainties as to who
bears the burden of proving, and the correct classification of, consent (or the
absence of consent). In doing so, we assess whether
it is possible to articulate
a principled approach to the treatment of consent in trespass that is sensitive
to these issues. We
conclude that a principled approach is possible and suggest
that the best approach would be for the law to embrace a general rule
onus of proving consent rests with defendants, subject to clearly justified
exceptions.
Some might question whether uncertainty surrounding the onus of proof for
consent really
the way in which we choose to describe and classify consent might be of
practical importance because the allocation of the
persuasive (legal) onus can
be decisive in some cases where evidence is limited or conflicting. The
classification of consent is
especially likely to be of practical importance in
cases of alleged sexual battery, which typically turn on conflicting
it might be important in other circumstances
Allocating the burden of proving consent to defendants, thereby suggesting
that contact is prima facie wrongful, might also serve
an important deterrent
and/or social messaging function by indicating to citizens that the law affords
them no privilege to engage
in certain forms of
as importantly, it might encourage and enable victims of certain wrongs to
exercise their rights. Conversely, allocating the
burden of proof to plaintiffs,
thereby suggesting that contact is wrongful only when it is non-consensual,
might signal to potential
wrongdoers that certain forms of conduct are
presumptively permissible and/or discourage certain groups of tort victim from
if social messaging is a purpose of the law, then determining what sort of
conduct is presumptively permissible may depend
on context — that is,
there might be some justification for applying different approaches in different
contexts (eg perhaps
between sexual, medical or sporting contacts).
The classification of consent is of some theoretical interest too, as it
raises fundamental taxonomic questions about what, precisely,
constitutes a
‘defence’ or a ‘denial’ and whether the answer to that
question turns simply on which party
bears the onus of proving the matter. In
any case, it would be wrong to assume that our choice of classification is
inconsequential.
As Hanoch Dagan rightly points out, ‘[t]he taxonomic
scheme we use in law does not merely organise our legal knowledge; rather,
legal taxonomy necessarily participates in our construction of that knowledge
and thus in the ongoing evolution of
Importantly, and consistently with the crux of Dagan’s point, there may
be significant normative values (or perhaps policy arguments)
judicial decisions or commentary on the classification of
These values
may not always be openly articulated. For example, in the early case of
Christopherson v Bare
Christopherson
’), Patteson
J stated that an ‘assault
[or battery] must be an act done against the will of the party assaulted: and
therefore it cannot be said that a party has been assaulted
permission’.
Similarly, Lord Denman CJ stated that ‘it is a manifest contradiction in
terms to say that the defendant assaulted the plaintiff
permission’.
Both statements assume that the absence of consent is embedded in our
understanding of what makes contact an ‘assault’
(or a battery)
— that is, a
normative values, if any, underpin it?
This article traverses and seeks to answer three categories of question: (a)
taxonomic questions, (b) doctrinal questions and (c)
questions concerning
interpersonal morality. These questions raise distinct issues, although there
may be some overlap between them
such that answers to one category of question
may influence answers to the others.
In examining what are broadly taxonomic questions, we consider what
constitutes a ‘defence’ and whether: (i) the classification
legal matter as a defence is determined by who should or does bear the
persuasive onus of establishing that matter, (ii) the
classification of
something as a defence dictates which party should bear the persuasive onus or
(iii) neither option is true. We
then turn to doctrinal matters, the most
fundamental being the current law as to the onus of proof for consent within
different causes
of action and in
different jurisdictions. We engage with recent legal debate in the context of
battery claims, focusing on Australian law, but also with legal precedent
from the United States (‘US’), England and Canada.
We also briefly
consider the
status of the authorities in relation to other trespass claims. Importantly,
consent operates as a defence in other trespass claims, this might raise
implications for its status within battery claims. We then
consider some moral
and policy arguments (focusing on battery), related analogous debates in the
criminal law and, indeed, whether
those debates are relevant to tort law. The
conclusion of the article seeks to draw together the various threads in order to
any clear conclusions that can be drawn, while noting the matters that
remain unresolved.
Before addressing these questions, however, and as a prelude to them, we
begin by exploring consent as a concept. What conduct or
mental state, or what
evidence as to conduct or mental state, will constitute valid consent? There are
myriad ways in which consent
might be conceived, defined and proved in the civil
law and more broadly. We consider the ways in which this might itself contribute
to the ongoing uncertainty.
II What Is Consent?
Most private law scholars are likely to agree that consent, in its core
sense, is subjective in
Hohfeldian terms, consent is a
held by plaintiffs to alter their
legal relations with
same basic concept is at play in the law of negligence when the plaintiff
voluntarily assumes a risk of injury.
both instances, the law’s underlying rationale is to vindicate the
plaintiff’s personal (subjective or ‘actual’)
vis-a-vis their legal
That is not to say, however, that a legal doctrine of consent must be (or is)
entirely subjective, since the plaintiff’s actual
state of mind can only
be determined by ‘direct evidence or ... inference’ from objective
One challenge for the law lies in
balancing these different dimensions of the doctrine in a way that leads to just
same is true of consent (broadly stated) as it applies across legal topics.
Thus, criminal law scholars often speak of subjective
versus objective (or
‘performative’) theories of
And in contract law, Rick Bigwood
explains that
‘assent’ and ‘consent’ perform different functions in
relation to the formation of a contract ... Assent,
which is itself a principal
source of contractual obligation, is not concerned with the
‘justice’ of a contract, but
rather merely with whether there has
been a manifestation of mutual consents sufficient to function as offer and
acceptance. ...
Consent, in contrast ... comprehends a subjective mental state:
to give one’s consent is to exercise the will.
consent-giver’s outward manifestation of consent (assent) is evidence of
that person’s state of mind, but it can never
be conclusive
that any plausible doctrine of consent in tort law must, at the very least,
acknowledge the
evidentiary
role played by some objective facts even if
those facts are not awarded any independent normative force (eg by grounding
some exculpatory
justification such as reasonable mistake of
Recognising that consent (at least in the loose sense in which tort law
scholars have tended to discuss it) has both subjective and
objective dimensions
is important because the relative significance attached to, and the burden of
proving, each dimension might
be determinative of legal outcomes. Those
dimensions ought therefore to be carefully balanced and openly accounted for.
will identify what matters are legally relevant as a matter of evidence
and proof in deciding whether certain conduct is exculpated.
Which party
(plaintiff or defendant) is required to prove such matters is, however, another
question. To be clear, we do not mean
to say that the law must necessarily give
weight to each dimension; our point is simply that the law ought to, at the very
explain the role that each dimension does or does not play in determining
liability and explain who must prove what (whether generally
or in a given
But how does, or should, the law go about making these decisions? To conclude
that consent is subjective or objective, or a combination
of the two, is not to
say anything especially meaningful about what consent
to transform legal relations. As Alan Wertheimer puts it,
the important question is not whether consent is — ontologically speaking
— a performative or a mental state. Rather,
we begin by reminding
ourselves that we are interested in consent because it renders it permissible
for A to [engage in an act] with
B, and we ask ‘what could do
formulation is accepted — and we believe that it should be — then an
important question for the law is what
of evidence will be
sufficient to establish the underlying conditions of consent in a given context.
However, and crucially for present
purposes, there is no necessary correlation
between the answer to this question and its practical consequences, such as the
of the burden of proof or the classification of consent as a defence
or its absence as a denial. Elsewhere in the same article, Wertheimer
It is a mistake to think that we can resolve the moral and legal issues in which
we are interested by an analysis of the ‘meaning’
of consent. ... We
can say, for example, that A commits a criminal offense if he ‘fails to
obtain meaningful consent, and continues
to engage in sexual activity,’ or
that B’s consent must be ‘voluntary’ or
‘competent,’ but then
we seem to need to know when consent is
‘meaningful,’ ‘voluntary,’ or ‘competent.’
In the final
analysis, we have to determine whether the balance of relevant
moral reasons are such that A’s conduct is
impermissible. In that
sense, I am squarely in the camp that maintains that
the criteria for
morally transformative or
consent must, of necessity, be moral
Again, we agree.
It is not, of course, our purpose here to speculate as to what these moral
criteria might be. However, it seems highly
unlikely that a single set of
criteria could ever be identified that could satisfactorily explain when morally
valid consent should
be said to exist in every instance of battery, any more
than one might be identified that explains consent as it applies across the
criminal law.
One key point that flows from the preceding analysis is that the underlying
conditions of consent are important considerations in
determining what
of evidence is relevant to determining consent — that is,
whether that evidence is subjective or objective or some combination
of the two.
But it does not necessarily follow that a conclusion as to the type of evidence
that is relevant to establishing consent
correlates with a particular conclusion
as to who should bear the persuasive onus of proving that matter and of leading
the relevant
evidence (though there might be a correlation, for example, if the
burden of proving the absence of purely subjective consent is
allocated to the
plaintiff and, say, the onus is placed on a defendant to justify their actions
by reference to objective consent
considerations). A purely objective test of
consent might be a defence or the absence of objective consent might be an
the wrong and, similarly, proof of a subjective test to consent could
be allocated to either party (albeit a defendant may experience
some practical
difficulties with establishing subjective consent without some reference to
external objective indicators of
Further, irrespective of what the underlying conditions of consent are, the
classification of consent as a defence or a denial might
still signal or reflect
the evaluation, by law or society, of the prima facie wrongfulness (or not) of
certain conduct: for example,
that sexual contact is prima facie wrongful
(unless subjective consent is shown) or that sexual contact is a social good and
(unless an absence of subjective consent is
In short, irrespective of what
evidence is required to satisfy moral and legal questions of consent, it does
not appear that the
nature of the required evidence is necessarily relevant to,
or a factor in, answering the taxonomic, doctrinal and normative questions
considered below concerning the status of consent and who bears the onus of
establishing that consent (or the absence of that consent).
III Taxonomic
Defences, Denials and the Burden of Proof
We now explore the distinction, if any exists, between a ‘denial’
of the elements of a cause of action and a ‘defence’
to an action
and attempt to track the relationship between both of those concepts and the
onus of proof. As we have intimated, we
consider the allocation of the onus of
proof to be the most significant issue both practically and normatively, but we
also accept
that simply describing a given rule as a ‘defence’ or a
‘denial’ might deter or encourage
certain forms of conduct or serve some messaging function or both of those
functions (albeit we remain unconvinced about the extent
to which tort law
has any significant impact on
behaviour).
For ease of analysis and to
avoid conclusory reasoning, we use the term ‘answer’ to refer to
denials and defences
collectively.
As a matter of logic, it is possible to frame most answers typically
classified as defences in negative terms: the absence of self-defence,
necessity, the absence of consent and so
definition of defences that seeks to distinguish denials must therefore explain
why the absence of these answers — or any
specific answer — cannot
be incorporated into the elements of the cause of action. Indeed, some theorists
support incorporating
the absence of answers typically classified as defences as
a final element in proving liability, postulating that there is no logical
distinction between the two approaches; both a failure to prove an element of a
cause of action or a failure to refute a defence
lead to no liability arising
and so the best approach (according to ‘incorporationists’) is to
classify all answers as
sceptical of that conclusion because, as we have said, we believe that the
classification may have legal (and perhaps social)
consequences. But are
incorporationists nevertheless correct when they say that it is impossible to
draw a strict logical distinction
between these two categories?
In our view, a useful
descriptive
account of the distinction between
denials and defences is that ‘[u]nless all the elements of a tort ... are
established, the
claimant will fail; but the claimant’s success does not
similarly depend on the absence of each valid defence being
established’.
’), Leeming JA similarly observed that,
from the defendant’s perspective, the ‘essential difference is
plea which attacks an element of the cause of action, or by the
positive assertion [by the defendant] of some further matter which,
if accepted,
will exonerate the defendant’.
Neither of these accounts purports to explain the distinction between an
element (ie a denial) and a defence, although each account
might be taken to
suggest that the distinction turns on who bears the persuasive burden of
plaintiffs will succeed if they
establish elements A, B and C, and they need only concern themselves with the
absence of defences
X, Y or Z if defendants plead any of those defences and are
able to raise evidence prima facie to support their
application.
However, it can be difficult
to distinguish between cause and effect. For Leeming JA, the proper allocation
of the onus of proof
appears to flow as a
consequence
of categorising a
legal issue as a defence or an element of the
contrast, some commentators
the concept of ‘defence’
by reference to who bears the onus of proof in the
James Goudkamp has rejected an onus-of-proof account of
Goudkamp considers that the difference between denials and defences ‘is
one of the most basic organising devices in tort
However, he does not see the
difference as turning on the onus of proof.
Goudkamp gives the (sole) example of the application of limitation periods as a
defence, since the persuasive burden rests on the
plaintiff to disprove the
application of the ‘defence’ where a defendant has raised the
possibility of a limitations
period having
One possible response to Goudkamp’s example is to deny that limitations
periods are ‘defences’ and instead to claim
that they form part of
the procedural rules. According to Luís Duarte d’Almeida, for
example, defences prevent a plaintiff
from succeeding ‘on the
merits’ whereas procedural matters may prevent a plaintiff from succeeding
without any evaluation
by a court of the substantive merits of the
On this basis, Duarte
d’Almeida claims that the ‘challenge of providing a theoretical
account of the “denial”/“defence”
distinction only
arises with regard to those circumstances which ... bear on the merits of the
action before the court’.
exclude limitations periods, he argues, undermining Goudkamp’s argument
that the onus of proof is
not determinative.
Certainly, as a singular objection to the onus-of-proof account of defences,
we agree that the unusual rules pertaining to limitations
periods are not
especially compelling. Indeed, Andrew Burrows suggests that the legal burden of
proving a limitation
to be on the defendant and that the law in
this area has simply taken a ‘wrong
As Duarte d’Almeida concedes, however, the line between procedural and
substantive rules is not always a bright
and the application of this
distinction — such as it is — might result in some counterintuitive
classifications, at least
in Australia. Take advocates’ immunity, for
example (which survives in Australia but has been removed in many other
It is not uncommon for judges to describe this rule as a
is nevertheless said to be grounded in a procedural policy consideration —
that is, the need to maintain finality in
decision-making.
It is, as Basten JA has
described it, an ‘immunity from
proceedings’.
Neither classification
— defence or procedural rule — seems intuitively incorrect or
mutually exclusive as a description
of advocates’ immunity. Either way,
the rule operates in much the same way: the opportunity to reopen earlier
litigation ‘on
the merits’ is foreclosed and the principle of
finality is protected.
If we are to accept
that procedural rules fall outside the domain of defences, however, then
advocates’ immunity (and for that
matter, judicial immunity) might be
excluded from our taxonomy of defences (if they are, indeed, procedural
This would be inconsistent with
some mainstream accounts of tort law defences in Australia, if not contemporary
judicial practice,
and would mean that the
law recognises two different categories of immunity (procedural and
substantive).
For these reasons, we doubt that the distinction between procedural and
substantive rules is clear enough to ground the claim that
the domain of
defences is limited to the latter. That said, advocates’ immunity has been
abandoned in the United Kingdom (‘UK’)
and New Zealand and never
existed in Canada or the US, so it need not be accounted for by those concerned
solely with those jurisdictions.
The onus-of-proof account faces other difficulties in Australia, however.
Most notably, the account does not explain the existence
of rules that place the
onus on defendants to disprove an
of a cause of action; some of
these rules are deeply embedded in tort law. In the trespass torts, for example,
it is well established
that fault is an element of the tort of
yet in Australia the onus remains
on the defendant to prove that their conduct lacked the requisite degree of
fault on the basis
of, for example, involuntariness or
Again, it might be argued that
this burden
to be on plaintiffs, but the very fact that different
views exist on the matter illustrates that the mere allocation of the burden
reveals little about the reasons
allocation.
For this reason, historical
allocations of the burden of proof cannot be relied upon to determine where the
burden of proving consent
should lie, at least as a purely normative matter, or
whether consent (or any other rule) is properly classified as a defence or
denial. This may be especially so in Australia, where courts have been accused
of following a ‘misplaced cult of historicism’
on matters concerning
the burden of proof in trespass.
That said, it certainly appears to be the case that the allocation of the
onus of proof in relation to an answer or the classification
of that answer (as
a defence or denial) may in some cases simply flow from and reinforce some
conventional taxonomic assumption.
We are left, then, with a number of possibilities: for some, who bears the
onus of proof determines what qualifies as a defence; for
others, categorising
something as a defence determines the allocation of the burden of proof; and for
yet others, categorising something
as a defence has no necessary connection at
all with which party bears the burden of
Whichever approach is adopted,
however, something else may be going on here; as we intimate in
Part VI, some normative evaluation(s) may be driving the categorisation of a
matter as either an element of the cause of action or
as a defence or,
alternatively, driving where the onus of proof should lie. In the latter case,
the appropriate category then, generally,
attaches to that conclusion. It may
not always be clear, however, which of these processes is occurring or what
normative factors
are at play.
IV Doctrinal Matters: The
Current Legal Position
Battery requires socially unacceptable bodily contact outside ‘the
ordinary conduct of daily
someone’s shoulder to get their attention, is not
actionable even when it
is non-consensual.
Although the basis for
this rule is sometimes said to be implied consent, the rule is better seen as an
objective ‘threshold’
requirement that turns on the social context
of the contact which is unconnected to the plaintiff’s subjective state of
Therefore, the issue of consent only arises where interference in a
person’s bodily integrity is not an exigency of everyday
life as adjudged
within the specific factual context in which the
In Australia, whether consent is a defence to trespass to the person or the
absence of consent
is an element of a trespass claim is unsettled and
recent cases have taken different positions. There is at present no binding
on the issue,
which has received
‘remarkably little
discussion’.
Perhaps the most authoritative statement is that of McHugh J in a dissenting
judgment in
Secretary, Department of Health and Community Services v JWB
In that case, McHugh J rejected the view that lack of consent was an element of
battery and that, consequently, a plaintiff would
need to negative
an approach, according to McHugh J, ‘is inconsistent with a person’s
right of bodily integrity. Other persons do
not have the right to interfere with
an individual’s body unless he or she proves lack of consent to the
interference.’
On McHugh J’s approach, the persuasive onus rests with a defendant to
prove consent.
In the absence of evidence
on consent, proof of the elements will result in the tort being made
In the UK, Hale LJ expressed similar
views on bodily integrity as ‘the first and most important of the
interests protected
by the law of tort’, although her Ladyship made no
comment on whether consent operates as a defence or a
, Leeming JA reached the opposite conclusion to that of McHugh
J, albeit his Honour confined his comments to medical-practitioner-related
battery claims.
His Honour stressed that the absence of consent went to the very essence of
liability in battery and cited, with approval,
Christopherson
authoritatively determining that the absence of consent is an element of
, Leeming JA focused on the historical context of
Christopherson
and also relied on subsequent
authorities.
His Honour stated: ‘Commonly, a modern defendant will both deny (or not
admit) some allegations, and advance further allegations
designed to defeat the
plaintiff. It was not always thus.’
Historically, his Honour noted, ‘there was a crisp and essential
distinction between a denial (known as a traverse) and a plea
of confession and
avoidance: a defendant had to elect between
In that historical context,
Christopherson
held that a defendant could not make a special plea of
‘leave and licence’ (ie consent) to confess and avoid a claim
Instead, consent should have been
pleaded as a denial that any wrong occurred at all — that is, the
defendant needed to ‘traverse’
the plaintiff’s claim
(‘an argumentative plea of not
The decision of the Court
to reject the defendant’s pleading as not good in law therefore
constituted a rejection of consent
Relying on this precedent, Leeming
JA concluded (albeit in obiter) that the onus of proof rests with the plaintiff
to prove the absence
of consent as an element of their
conclusion contrasts with the judgment of Basten JA (Beazley JA agreeing) in
Dean v Phung
that the burden of proof rests with a defendant to prove
consent for medical procedures.
However, in a case argued only four days after
was handed down,
the Australian Capital Territory Court of Appeal in
Moon v Whitehead
that consent
did not discuss
, and it was conceded by the defendant that the onus
rested with him to prove consent on the balance of
probabilities.
Nevertheless, the Court
considered that the authorities favoured that
conclusion.
In the UK, case authority supports the view that an absence of consent forms
an element of the cause of action for a battery
said, there is only scant recent authority on point, and
Freeman v Home
Office [No 2]
, which is ‘generally regarded as the leading English
case’, is only a single-judge
Further, some judges have assumed the opposite to be true or expressed doubts on
the matter. In
Collins v Wilcock
, Robert Goff LJ (for the Court), without
discussing the issue, stated that ‘[g]enerally speaking, consent is a
defence to battery’.
And Clarke MR in
Ashley v Chief Constable of Sussex Police
noted that the conclusion that
the absence of consent is for a plaintiff to prove has ‘been the subject
of some criticism’
and it is ‘open to debate’ whether
‘[the] conclusion on burden of proof is
In the US, an approved draft of the
Restatement (Third) of Torts:
Intentional Torts to Persons
Restatement (Third)
takes the position
that most [US] jurisdictions have not clearly resolved which party bears the
burden of production and persuasion on the question
whether plaintiff has
satisfied any of the categories of consent (§§ 12–19) that
preclude liability for one of the
intentional torts to persons. Among those
addressed the issue, the predominant but not
universal view is that plaintiff has the burden of proving the absence of actual
but there is very little authority concerning burden of proof as to
other categories of consent. ... Because of this dearth and mix
of authority,
and because there are competing considerations with respect to which party
shoulders the burden of proof, this Restatement
takes no position on the
contrasts with the position taken in earlier Restatements, and indeed earlier
drafts of the
Restatement (Third)
, which stated that the burden is on the
plaintiff to prove an absence of consent in
This change of position might
reflect criticism of earlier drafts by some commentators, particularly in
relation to sexual contact,
which we return to in Part
Interestingly, the
Restatement (Third)
notes that the burden of proof
with respect to consent
traditionally on the defendant for trespasses
to property, and that the
greater procedural protection of property rights is consistent with the greater
use of strict-liability criteria for property rights.
Although it might seem
anomalous that property interests receive greater legal protection in this
respect than the personal interests
safeguarded by the intentional torts to
persons, the difference has historical roots and is embedded in some of the case
Canada, it is well established that the onus of proving consent rests
on defendants. The courts have consistently held this to be so in
medical-practitioner-related battery
Non-Marine Underwriters,
Lloyd’s of London v Scalera
majority of the Supreme Court of Canada emphatically endorsed this
‘settled rule’ as applying equally to sexual
concluded by McLachlin J (for L’Heureux-Dubé, Gonthier, McLachlin
and Binnie JJ) that
there is no justification in cases of battery of a sexual nature for departing
from the traditional rule that the plaintiff in a
battery action must prove
direct contact, at which point the onus shifts to the defendant to prove
consent. To do so would be to
place a burden upon plaintiffs in battery actions
of a sexual nature which plaintiffs in other battery actions do not bear. I see
neither the need nor the justification for doing this ... in this
The Supreme Court of
Canada therefore rejected the view that a distinct rule should be applied for
sexual battery as opposed to other
batteries — that is, that different
taken in the
Restatement (Third)
, which recognises that the onus
might operate differently in some ‘categories’ of battery, and that
Leeming JA, who was prepared to accept in
that the status of
consent in Australia might differ not just according to the cause of action but
even within one cause of action,
depending on the
Honour left open the possibility that consent to battery
raise different issues as to the requisite onus of proof compared to consent in
a medical context.
Leeming JA accepted that for other causes of action, such as trespass to
land, Australian precedent supports the conclusion that consent
is a defence
that needs to be pleaded by the
Nonetheless, Leeming JA noted
that ‘there is no reason for every element of those different torts to be
the same as an action
for trespass to the
We return to this question in Part V.
What, then, is the law as to the status of consent in claims for trespass to
land in Australia? In
, Leeming JA accepted the view of McHugh J in
Marion’s Case
that consent is a defence to trespass to
Relying on the combined authority
of older English case law and
Plenty v Dillon
’), decided in the High Court of Australia, McHugh J
Marion’s Case
that a claim of consent is a plea in
defence that the defendant had the ‘leave and licence’ of the
plaintiff to
, Gaudron and McHugh JJ stated that ‘[a] person who enters
the property of another must justify that entry by showing that he
or she either
entered with the consent of the occupier or otherwise had lawful authority to
Interestingly, however, when discussing consent and trespass to land or goods in
English law, Goudkamp tentatively concludes that
since ‘[i]t is not easy
to ascertain how consent precludes liability ... the dominant position seems to
be that consent is
also a denial in trespass to land and to
That conclusion is
suspect, however, as he does not consider relevant authorities to the contrary
but instead merely notes English
and Australian judicial statements defining the
tort of trespass to land with inclusive references to the absence of a
justification.
There has not been much by way of discussion, as far as we are aware, on the
status of consent in false imprisonment, and the Court
Christopherson
left that specific question open.
possible to make sui generis arguments that support the onus of proof being
placed on defendants to prove consent in false
imprisonment claims. This is
because many false imprisonment claims are brought against persons in positions
of actual or apparent
context, it is often difficult to distinguish circumstances in which a plaintiff
voluntarily accedes to a
by a party in a position of power or
from circumstances in which a
plaintiff has no choice but to do so.
Consequently, it can be argued that it would be inappropriate to require a
plaintiff to prove an absence of consent given the difficulties
in ascertaining
precisely what impact perceived coercive powers may have had on the
plaintiff’s decision. But in making that
argument, it is important to
stress it would only apply to false imprisonment claims.
V Legal Coherence and
If consent is a defence to some trespass torts (such as trespass to land and
false imprisonment) but the absence of consent is an
element of others (such as
then, self-evidently, we
cannot examine consent consistently across the board as one or the other.
Instead, discussions of consent
— whether judicial, in commentary or in
teaching materials — would need to be aligned to the context of the claim
which the issue of consent arises. This is not necessarily a huge problem and
in fact some texts and casebooks already distinguish,
if only implicitly, between consent in these
Moreover, there is
no obvious reason why different causes of action ought to treat consent
uniformly or why, even on the same facts, such causes of action
ought to lead to
the same outcomes.
But might the consequences be more significant if consent were to operate
differently within
one cause of action
— battery — depending
on whether a claim arose, say, in a medical context versus a sporting or sexual
Consent would then need to be considered as a defence in some battery claims
and its absence as an element of the tort in others.
This would obviously
generate greater complexity in the law and in textbooks but, more importantly,
also lead to incoherence in the law if the ‘weight or
importance attributed to’ consent-based reasons, relative to other
reasons, were to differ simply because those reasons would be accounted for at
the liability stage or the defences
It is noteworthy that one reason for the majority decision in
was legal coherence — that is, that sexual battery cases ought to be
treated uniformly with other battery
On this view, classifying consent
as a defence in all instances is justifiable — notwithstanding potential
difficulties in
some instances — on the basis that it facilitates the
treatment of ‘like with like’ and the development of a clear
normative framework. However, McLachlin J (for L’Heureux-Dubé,
Gonthier, McLachlin and Binnie JJ) appears to have based
her Honour’s
conclusion on the fact that insufficient reasons have been offered thus far to
support the differential treatment
of sexual battery and other
cases — not necessarily that no such reasons
Indeed, provided that sufficient
reasons are provided and fully accounted for, the sui generis treatment of
consent might be justifiable
on the basis that it reflects the distinct features
of consent that arise in different factual contexts and the different normative
foundations that explain why some interferences are prima facie wrongful whereas
others are only prima facie wrongful when non-consensual.
On this view, there is
no incoherence in treating consent as a defence in some instances and a denial
in others or in allocating
the onus of proving consent differently, provided
that the applicable contributory reasons differ sufficiently between contexts to
justify that differential treatment. Indeed, in such cases it might be
to classify consent, or to allocate the onus of proof,
differently.
That said, when we look beyond trespass to entirely unrelated torts such as
defamation, private nuisance and negligence, consent undeniably
operates as a
This raises the question of
whether an inherent use of the term ‘defence’ is to encapsulate
liability-defeating rules
that are not cause of action
specific — that is, rules which have general application and reflect
broader justificatory concerns. Many ‘defences’
apply across
different causes of action, and so it seems intuitive (and less conducive to
error) to deal with those defences separately
from, and after consideration of,
the relevant cause of action, precisely because similar ideas are at play
irrespective of the cause
Necessity, for example, is available to justify infringements of many
different types of rights.
VI Moral and Policy
Let us put to one side arguments based on legal precedent and coherence.
There has not been much debate about whether, for trespass
claims, the status of
consent reflects, or ought to reflect, moral determinations about the prima
facie wrongfulness of particular
interpersonal interactions and, if so, what
those determinations might be. Do legal conclusions about whether consent is a
or a denial, and who bears the burden of proof, reflect underlying moral
assumptions or values, policy considerations or both? Certainly,
many criminal
law scholars take the view that the distinction between offences and defences is
morally consequential,
and Goudkamp
argues that the distinction between a defence (which privileges otherwise
wrongful conduct) and an element of the cause
of action is morally significant
in tort law:
[T]he suggestion that the distinction [between the elements of torts and
defences] is not inherently [morally] significant looks
decidedly implausible.
Is it really the case that it is not inherently significant whether, for
example, a sexual battery is defined
to include the absence of consent or
whether consent is treated as a defence to liability arising in respect of a
to Goudkamp, such conclusions could guide defendants in their
A conclusion that the absence
of consent is an element of battery may reflect a view that contact in general,
or contact of a particular
inherently acceptable, so a plaintiff must prove that it is wrongful because it
non-consensual. And consent as a defence may reflect a view that contact
generally, or of a particular type, is inherently wrongful
unless a defendant
justifies the contact by establishing consent. In the latter case, a tort is
prima facie committed, but the defendant
has the ‘privilege to
commit’ the
We will return to Goudkamp’s views on consent, battery and sexual contact
although we are inclined to think
that any moral significance flows from the onus of proof and whether a defendant
has to justify
their conduct (if, indeed, tort law plays any real
social-messaging function).
Certainly, there appears to be an underlying moral dimension to statements
such as that of McHugh J in
Marion’s Case
of the importance of the
right to bodily integrity.
with that right is the concomitant protection of a person’s autonomy to
choose what manner of interference is
acceptable.
Consequently, a plaintiff is
prima facie entitled to compensation for harm caused by bodily contact unless
that interference is justified
or explained by a defendant. And in the context
of sexual battery, specifically, the social problem of unwanted sexual touching
the value in protecting bodily integrity against any intrusion. On
that argument, consent is essential for a defendant to justify
any physical
interaction that has caused mental or physical harm or mental
Consent as a defence ensures
that a plaintiff’s autonomy to avoid contact is given adequate regard by
the law. It is not a
logical necessity, however, that protecting a
person’s autonomy
that the onus of proving consent rests
with a defendant. It could also be argued that a plaintiff’s
autonomy is only compromised by
non-consensual
interferences in bodily
integrity: that is, only where the absence of consent is positively established
need the law intervene.
In contrast with tort law, there has been considerable debate among criminal
scholars as to the moral significance of the distinctions
between defences and
elements of crimes generally as well as, more specifically, on the normative
role of consent in battery and
These debates show that normative assumptions about sexual conduct and consent
are contested, although the debates themselves are
generally conducted within a
far clearer conceptual framework than exists in tort
It is also important to bear in
mind that, in criminal matters, the prosecution generally bears the legal burden
of proving beyond
reasonable doubt
matters critical to the guilt of
the accused.
Save in exceptional circumstances, such as proof of
defendants merely bear, in respect of most defences, an evidentiary
which requires them to ‘do
no more than raise a reasonable doubt on the
The ‘orthodox’ position in criminal law is that sexual conduct is
not prima facie wrongful and only becomes so where it
non-consensual.
In an influential essay, Kenneth Campbell argues that this position reflects the
salient normative distinction between offences and
justificatory
That distinction, he explains, turns on the balance of reasons that go for or
against acting (the ‘practical conflicts
According to that thesis, the reason(s) against doing X is/are the same
reason(s) that make(s) doing X an offence in the first
A justified defendant does not
deny that those reasons existed when they did X; rather, they argue that there
were countervailing
reasons to do X.
A punches B in self-defence, for example, she does not deny that there are
generally good reasons not to punch other people; she
simply claims that, in the
circumstances, her reason for punching B outweighed those general reasons not to
punch people. In contrast,
Campbell argues that since there is no prima facie
reason not to engage in sexual conduct, the absence of consent must be an
of the offence of rape.
In a subsequent essay, John Gardner supports Campbell’s account and
goes on to explain:
Of course, it is possible for people to disagree about whether there is a
general reason not to have sexual intercourse or a general
reason not to
occasion actual bodily harm. That is not denied. Campbell’s only point is
that if one has such a disagreement,
one is apt also to disagree about whether
the issue of consent should be handled under the ‘offence’ or the
heading. Those who think that, in the law of rape, sexual
intercourse
should be regarded as the real offence and consent
as a defence had best be able to identify a general reason not to have sexual
intercourse, such that one needs a defeating reason in favour before one should
engage in it. ... Central to Campbell’s modest
proposal is the idea that
cases of justified offending are not cases of innocuous action: the offence is
still committed and is still,
offence, unwelcome. Its commission,
albeit justified, remains
regrettable.
challenge of articulating a general reason not to engage in sexual intercourse
has been taken up by Michelle Madden Dempsey and
Their views are broadly consistent with some feminist discourse on sex and rape,
and their arguments are complex and easily misunderstood
summarised.
In essence, however, Dempsey and Herring claim that sexual penetration requires
the application of some force to achieve penetration,
carries a nontrivial risk
of physical harm (even if consensual) and often has a negative social meaning
attached to it.
Because of those
physical and social factors, even where justified, sexual penetration is a
‘prima facie wrongdoing [that]
leaves a moral residue of
What is the significance
of such regret? According to Dempsey and Herring:
[R]egret generates reason to prefer less wrongful alternatives to securing the
values that justify the prima facie wrongful conduct.
This point is easily
illustrated in the case of prima facie wrongdoing committed in medical
operations. Surgical cutting into a patient’s
body is a prima facie wrong,
but one that may be justified in virtue of reasons generated
by the value of the patient’s life and well-being. Despite its
justification, however, cutting into a patient’s body
is still to be
regretted. This regret generates reasons for medical personnel to seek less
wrongful alternatives to securing the
values sought by the surgery. ... [I]t is
rationally incumbent upon the surgeon to seek less wrongful alternatives to
the source of the pain before cutting into the patient’s body.
... The rational force of regret functions similarly in other
cases of justified
prima facie
wrongdoing.
and Herring explicitly avoid drawing any conclusions as to what practical
consequences might follow for the criminal law from
these moral
Indeed, they clearly state
that they do not suggest that ‘mere prima facie wrongdoing is sufficient
to establish the elements
of a criminal
Most importantly, for
present purposes, they do not indicate how their argument impacts the question
of which party bears the burden
of proving either consent or the absence of
consent. Indeed, as Duarte d’Almeida points out, one’s views as to
a prima facie reason to refrain from sexual
intercourse
’ need not dictate whether consent is a
defence or its absence an element (of an offence or of a
In a subsequent article, however,
Dempsey and Herring briefly and tentatively raise the possibility of moving
towards consent as
affirmative
defence in the criminal law on the
basis that sexual penetration alone constitutes an
If the law were to require affirmative consent — that is, if the law
were to place a duty on ‘the initiator of sexual
conduct to make sure that
the plaintiff consents to what would otherwise be tortious
— then this legal
position would seem to be supported by placing the onus on a defendant to prove
consent (though that need
not logically be
In a powerful critique of
the 2017 Preliminary Draft No 4 of the
Restatement (Third)
, which also
speaks to the nature of consent in the criminal law, Martha Chamallas
convincingly demonstrates that the burden of proof
should rest with the
defendant to establish an affirmative defence ‘given that a presumptive
invasion of [the] plaintiff’s
interests has
By placing the burden of proof on plaintiffs to show an absence of consent, she
argues, that draft was ‘at odds’ with
a requirement of affirmative
consent on the part of a plaintiff and seemed ‘to presume
Restatement
was to ‘assign the plaintiff the burden of proving her lack of
consent’ in all
as it did in earlier drafts,
would compound ‘the difficulty of incorporating affirmative consent into
the body of tort law’.
Perhaps in response to such criticisms, and noting that the position differs
from state to state, the recently approved final draft
Restatement
adopts a neutral position on the burden of proof in cases of sexual
It is important to note,
however, that Chamallas does not claim to offer any general reason
have sexual intercourse. Her argument is essentially formal in nature and
proceeds on a hypothetical assumption that parliament
already passed
affirmative consent laws.
She does not
(and need not) defend the claim that,
, defendants should have to
justify having sex. Indeed, Chamallas accepts (though not necessarily
uncritically)
that the affirmative
consent movement is being driven by ‘a newer generation of
feminists’ who are ‘intent on reclaiming
consent and making it a
focal point’
and who are committed
to the idea that every person has the right ‘to be treated as an active,
sexual being’.
perspective, the only circumstance in which sex is to be regretted is when it is
non-consensual.
According to the
practical conflicts thesis, then, sex is not something that calls for
justification.
Of course, there are good
policy reasons why we might want to introduce affirmative consent laws, which
Chamallas identifies, but
those reasons do not require us to accept that sex is
generally to be
Do those who support the orthodox view in the context of tort law offer any
reasons in support of their position? As already noted,
Goudkamp is one of the
few scholars who considers whether consent is a defence or whether its absence
is an element of the tort.
When discussing the criminal law of rape, Goudkamp
embraces what he terms Campbell’s ‘practical conflicts thesis’
and thus accepts that criminal law defences ‘specify circumstances in
prima facie
reasons against engaging in the behaviour described
in the offence definition are outweighed by opposing
He therefore accepts the orthodox view that the absence of consent is an element
of the offence of rape because ‘[w]ere consent
a defence to rape, that
would imply that there is a
prima facie
reason to refrain from sexual
intercourse
Rightly or wrongly, Goudkamp appears to assume that the criminal law’s
treatment of non-consent as an element reflects this
moral view of sexual
intercourse rather than other criminal law principles, such as the presumption
of innocence and the need for
the prosecution to prove an absence of consent in
the face of evidential uncertainties: that is, reasons of procedural
Goudkamp is also clearly attracted to the idea that ‘the practical
conflicts thesis might apply ... to tort law ... given that
many crimes are
torts and that the defences that are applicable to many torts are broadly
similar to the defences that are available
Consistently with that view, Goudkamp goes on to conclude (albeit only
tentatively) that the absence of consent is an element of trespass
conclusion appears to apply equally to all forms of trespass to the person and
in all contexts (sexual, medical, sporting and
We agree with Goudkamp that the practical conflicts thesis affords a useful
basis upon which to determine whether, morally, consent
ought to be classified
as a defence or a denial (or whether the plaintiff or the defendant ought to
bear the onus of proof). However,
questions of interpersonal morality are
generally less relevant in tort law than they are in the criminal law. Tort law
seek to justify the criminalisation of conduct and the consequential
punishment that follows from a successful
conviction.
Rather, tort law is primarily concerned with determining whether a civil remedy
is justified. When a plaintiff can show that harm
has flowed from a
defendant’s contact to their body (and this could include psychological
harm), the question for tort law
is typically: should that loss be
compensated?
Compensating a plaintiff does not necessarily involve any serious moral
judgement about the defendant’s behaviour, unlike a
criminal conviction,
which is one reason why the civil standard is lower and other evidentiary
requirements are weaker.
determining whether a plaintiff should be compensated might turn on some morally
neutral concern of distributive justice
or on a pragmatic assessment of which
party is better able to bear the
follows that tort law might justifiably require defendants to prove consent when
the practical conflicts thesis would require
plaintiffs to prove an absence of
consent (and vice versa).
There is also some tension between the practical conflicts thesis and
Goudkamp’s conclusion that the absence of consent is an
The criminal law debates that
we have discussed above are focused primarily on one type of offence (sexual
assaults) and seek to
justify the criminalisation of certain conduct and the
form which that criminalisation takes: that is, what sort of conduct prima
constitutes an offence.
commentary engages with the question of whether sexual contact is of itself
wrongful or whether it merely becomes so when
non-consensual. These debates are
not concerned with other criminal offences that focus on other forms of contact
and are composed
of different elements. In contrast, battery (in tort) is a
singular cause of action that encompasses a variety of conduct and might
constitute any number of different crimes. And consent may have very different
roles in such offences. Grievous bodily harm (‘GBH’)
is one such
absence of consent is not an element of GBH, but acts that constitute GBH would
also constitute battery.
Indeed, consent
is not necessarily decisive in determining criminal responsibility for
the practical conflicts thesis,
then we must also be prepared to accept that the classification of consent (as a
defence or a denial)
as it applies to battery, and/or the allocation of the
burden of proof, might differ depending on
the context.
One author, Luis E Chiesa, writing on US criminal law, highlights the
law’s treatment of different types of batteries. Chiesa
argues that
consent operates in one of two
consent may take away an
element of the
This is why consented-to
kisses or sexual intercourse are not criminal: no offence has been committed. In
such circumstances, no
harm has occurred at all as consent precludes the
elements of the offence being made out.
Chiesa would therefore agree with the orthodox criminal law position, outlined
above, that sexual contact is not prima facie wrongful
and therefore generally
requires no justification.
In tort law
terms, Chiesa’s view is consistent with the judgments in
Christopherson
and the views that the absence of consent is an element of
However, in other circumstances, according to Chiesa, consent is not
determinative of whether an offence has been committed, although
it may be a
consideration in determining whether some nontrivial
bodily contact is nonetheless socially
acceptable.
On that basis, a medical
procedure that involves cutting into a person’s body (which is prima facie
harmful) may serve a useful
purpose and is therefore a justified battery if
consensual.
Similarly, playing football
may involve someone consenting to physical contact that is harmful (eg when it
causes a broken arm).
Such harmful
alongside the social acceptability (or perhaps
utility) of the
But this does not mean that one
can consent to serious harm — such as a broken arm —
circumstances
For Chiesa, for
example, one cannot consent to having one’s arm broken as part of a
sadomasochistic ritual.
Such contact is
criminal because it is harmful and socially unacceptable or, in the words of an
English case, because there is no
‘discernible social
Similarly, the consensual piercing of an ear for cosmetic reasons is socially
acceptable; the consensual piercing of a scrotum for
sadomasochistic reasons is
not. Although the physical impact in both cases may be similar, consent is
relevant in the former to justify
but not in the latter
the absence of consent is not an element of the offence; the crime may still be
committed even where there has been consent.
Instead, the harmful contact must
be justifiable in all of the circumstances and consent is merely a factor
to such justification alongside the social acceptability (or
utility) of the contact.
summary of US law is consistent with other common law
This analysis leads Chiesa to define (criminal) battery as ‘seeking to
prevent the infliction of non-trivial physical harm in
circumstances where the
infliction of such harm is not considered a normal occurrence given current
societal practices’; that
is, it is harm pursuant to ‘[s]ocially
[u]nacceptable [a]ctivities’.
Chiesa does not discuss how his analysis impacts the onus of proof.
Again, these arguments do not necessarily equally or directly apply to tort
law. Even if the criminal law determines that certain
conduct is socially
unacceptable for reasons of promoting public good and community values and that
consent to that conduct is therefore
no answer to criminal
it does not follow that a
plaintiff should be able to sue for damages in the same
circumstances.
Indeed, the dominant view
in tort law is that valid consent is
a sufficient answer to an
interpersonal wrong and that policy concerns such as community values are
irrelevant.
However, we are not aware of
any tort law cases where that issue has actually been
Importantly, however, the debate
in the criminal law about consent and sexual contact is not relevant to
batteries that take the
form of more serious harm (eg contact that would
constitute GBH in the criminal law).
Crucially, the distinction that Chiesa draws when discussing the way that
consent operates is between conduct that does not involve
bodily harm (eg, in
his view, sexual intercourse) and contact that is
(eg surgery);
for the latter type of contact, the conduct then needs to be justified by
meeting the requirement of social
acceptability.
One way in which this
distinction could play out in trespass is that the social acceptability (or
perhaps utility) of the contact
could translate into a conclusion as to whether
the conduct is prima facie wrongful (and therefore needing justification by a
or not (and therefore requiring a plaintiff to show an absence of
consent for it to be deemed wrongful). Consequently, the onus of
establish consent might be on a defendant where the contact is prima facie
unacceptable
and on the plaintiff to establish that they had
indeed not consented to the contact where the contact is prima facie socially
acceptable.
Such an approach may be consistent with the judgment of Leeming JA
, who noted the social utility of medical procedures as,
seemingly, a relevant factor in concluding that the onus should be on plaintiffs
to establish an absence of consent.
said, conclusions as to who should bear the persuasive onus are not logically
dictated by the social acceptability or unacceptability
of conduct. There is
still a leeway for choice here.
such conclusions solve the problem that, undeniably, there exist fundamental
differences of opinion as to the social acceptability
or unacceptability of some
Ultimately, our analysis on social views is speculative; it is unclear which
social values, if any, are being given weight in conclusions
on which party
should bear the onus of proof and on the applicable label that flows from
that conclusion (ie consent as defence or the absence of consent as an
element) — or, alternatively, which social values (if any) drive the
essential characterisation of what is wrongful (eg that
the absence of consent
is the very essence of what makes a battery ‘a battery’). Judges and
commentators for the most
part simply do not allude to such values. It seems
likely, however, that assumptions of social fact and morality nonetheless may
at play here — even if they are often unstated or only partly articulated.
It would be helpful if there were greater transparency
in the articulation of
the moral assumptions (if any) that drive the law’s conclusions or the
conclusions advocated for by
commentators. Goudkamp’s attempt to be
transparent is to be welcomed.
The point of this discussion is not to take a position as to which of these
views about sexual conduct, or any other conduct, are
correct. Rather, the point
is to highlight that there are competing normative views about what constitutes
prima facie wrongful conduct.
These competing views make it difficult to argue
that the law’s determination of the status of consent is itself based on
self-evident
or universal normative truths. Now, in choosing, for example, to
classify consent as a defence (such as the Canadian position), the
law might be
attempting to reflect widely accepted normative views or perhaps even signalling
a normative position — taking
sides, as it
Alternatively, however, legal
conclusions on the burden of proof may be based on other (eg procedural,
historical or precedential)
grounds or even on unstated or intuitive grounds.
is undeniable is that most legal authorities — old and new, criminal
private — that support one or the other position on the status of
consent do so without explicit reference to moral
justifications.
VII Conclusions
This article has considered whether — taxonomically, doctrinally and
normatively — the defendant or the plaintiff bears,
or should bear, the
onus of proving consent or the absence of consent respectively. These questions
have not received a single answer:
the law as to consent and where the onus of
proof lies (or should lie) for battery is not consistently answered across
Further, in
some jurisdictions, the allocation of the onus of proof for other trespass
actions is not necessarily consistent with
the allocation of the onus of proof
for battery.
In Australia, the law
remains uncertain as to who bears the onus of proving consent in
The taxonomic classification of consent as a defence or denial and, indeed,
the precise meanings of those terms are equally uncertain
as is the related
question of whether that classification determines or reflects which party bears
the onus of proving consent (or
its absence). Some have argued to the
Indeed, the onus of disproving
a defence could be on a plaintiff (or the onus of disproving an element might be
on a defendant).
However, we are not aware of any judicial decisions or
commentators that advocate for such a position in relation to consent in
It appears to be almost universally assumed that, if consent is a
defence, then the onus is on the defendant and that, conversely,
if consent is a
denial of an element, then the onus of disproving consent rests on the
In short, there appears to be
an inherent connection between the taxonomic status of consent and the onus of
proof. That said, it
is not possible to identify any clear direction of
reasoning that drives this connection. In other words, it is not clear whether
the onus of proof determines the taxonomic classification of consent as a
defence or a denial of an element or whether the classification
dictates the allocation of the onus of proof. Importantly, irrespective of the
relationship between the status of consent
and the onus of proof, other
value-based concerns may also be relevant to arguments about the allocation of
onus and the taxonomic
classification of consent.
In the light of this uncertainty, we have considered whether legal
determinations as to which party bears the onus of proof might
correlate with
moral views as to whether certain conduct is prima facie desirable, or a social
it is non-consensual or whether certain conduct is prima
facie wrongful
consent has been proven. Certainly, there appears
to be general agreement among criminal law scholars that questions of
interpersonal
morality explain why consent is an element of some offences but a
defence to others. If the same moral considerations were determinative
law, then it might be necessary to concede that there is no single answer to the
questions of who should bear the onus of
proof in battery (or other forms of
trespass) and the question of whether consent ought to be classified as a
defence or a denial.
This outcome would be contrary to the dominant view in
although, alternatively, the
law could allocate the onus differently for different trespass claims or even
for different battery
claims (eg for sexual, sporting or medical
As we have explained, there is
no necessary incoherence in doing so, provided that there are reasons to support
differential treatment.
However, we are ultimately of the view that, while important, moral
considerations are less useful in determining where the onus of
proof should lie
(or how consent should be classified) in tort law than they are in the criminal
law. Tort law defines battery broadly
so as to encompass a variety of contacts
which, in the taxonomy of the criminal law, could constitute anything from
assault, sexual
assault, wounding, GBH or even manslaughter and
This taxonomic distinction might
be dismissed as little more than a historical accident but there are good
reasons why contemporary
tort law might eschew the subdivision of battery into
what are, in effect if not by name, discrete wrongs that differ in their
of consent. Despite the common origins of tort and crime, the criminal
law has been codified in some states and territories and specific
offences have
been subjected to extensive legislative
modification.
In contrast, tort law
remains, for the most part, a common law discipline, organised around general
rules and principles. The opportunity
to carefully differentiate between
different forms of battery at a systemic level simply does not arise on a
case-by-case basis and
so the assumption is that the same rules will apply in
all cases in which the same basic definitional elements are satisfied unless
exceptional treatment is clearly and explicitly justified.
Further, unlike the criminal law, tort law does not seek to justify the
criminalisation of specific forms of conduct and the consequential
that follows from a successful
conviction.
It is true that tort law
serves more than one purpose and that disagreement remains as to what these
various purposes might be, but
it seems uncontroversial to state that a core
function of tort law is shifting loss and that trespass might also perform a
vindicatory
Both of these
functions can be performed without necessarily making any serious moral
judgements about the defendant’s behaviour.
Therefore, although questions
of interpersonal morality are undoubtedly important in tort law, they carry less
weight than they do
in the criminal law and must be carefully balanced against
other considerations.
What, then, of broader policy considerations? Given the different purposes of
tort and crime, the nature of potentially relevant policy
considerations might
also differ between these disciplines. For example, concerns about the
boundaries of socially acceptable behaviour,
which have been determinative in
some areas of the criminal law,
likely to be less relevant in tort law than concerns about the social
of certain conduct and the associated risks of defensive
professional practices or rising insurance
Medical procedures, for
example, are clearly of social value, and this might explain
Leeming JA’s conclusion that the onus of proving that a medical
treatment was non-consensual should rest on the plaintiff, including
circumstances where the plaintiff argues that the consent was vitiated because
the treatment was non-therapeutic and
unnecessary.
On balance, then, it seems to us that the best solution would be for tort law
to maintain a general rule that defendants bear the
onus of proving consent in
all cases of trespass and that, in the interests of clear social messaging,
consent ought also to be generally
classified as a defence. This general rule
would reflect the fact that, in the vast majority of cases, battery involves
requires justification (according to the practical conflicts
It would also have the
coincidental benefit of removing any need to explain why sexual contact is prima
facie wrongful.
However, and as is
always the case, we also accept that there might be some contexts in which
exceptions to this general rule are
justified on the basis of countervailing
moral, normative or policy considerations (such as, perhaps, the social utility
treatment or sport). The recognition of exceptions poses no challenge
to the general rule, provided that they are clearly identified
as such and are
carefully justified, whether legislatively or judicially.
* Faculty of Law, Bond University.
† TC Beirne School of Law, University of Queensland. The authors are
grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their helpful
and thoughtful comments.
Any remaining errors are ours alone.
See generally Harold Luntz et al,
Luntz & Hambly’s Torts: Cases, Legislation and Commentary
(LexisNexis, 9
ed, 2021) 719 [12.1.1].
White v Johnston
[2015] NSWCA 18
87 NSWLR 779
, 802–3 [107] (Leeming JA, Barrett JA agreeing at 782 [2])
’). It is not wholly clear
where Emmett JA stands on the issue. It may be that his Honour merely agrees
with Leeming JA that
the onus is on the plaintiff in cases where fraud is
alleged, as opposed to being on the plaintiff more generally: see at 785–6
[18] (Emmett JA), 786 [23] (Leeming JA).
One exception is James Goudkamp’s
monograph, although this text primarily examined English law: see generally
James Goudkamp,
Tort Law Defences
(Hart Publishing, 2013). We also
considered an American article dealing only with sexual battery: see below nn
–64 and accompanying text. An
Australian article written around 35 years ago engaged with the question more
generally and argued
that the absence of consent was an element of trespass to
the person: SKN Blay, ‘Onus of Proof of Consent in an Action for
to the Person’
(1987) 61(1)
Australian Law Journal
With respect, however, many of the arguments in that article were circular. For
example, the author stated that ‘[t]o
say that consent is a defence to
trespass is contradictory in terms because one cannot commit any trespass with
consent, and more
importantly, a defence cannot be available for a liability
which has not been established and does not exist’: at 28 (emphasis
omitted). Peter W Young’s book,
The Law of Consent
, does not engage
with the issue other than to assert that plaintiffs bear the burden of proving
an absence of consent: Peter W Young,
The Law of Consent
(Law Book, 1986)
See, eg, Martha Chamallas, ‘The
Elephant in the Room: Sidestepping the Affirmative Consent Debate in the
Restatement (Third)
of Intentional Torts to Persons’
(2017) 10(2)
Journal of Tort Law
At times in the literature, the terms
‘battery’ and ‘assault’ are used interchangeably, and at
other times
the latter term incorporates the former. We use the term
‘assault’ in the narrow sense of encompassing only threats of
and ‘battery’ as encompassing actual physical contact. In the
Australian criminal law, assault is generally used
to encompass both: see
Judicial Commission of New South Wales,
Criminal Trials Courts Bench Book
rev ed, 2024) 893 [5-5010].
See, eg, John Gardner and Stephen Shute,
‘The Wrongness of Rape’ in Jeremy Horder (ed),
Oxford Essays in
Jurisprudence: Fourth Series
(Oxford University Press, 2000) 193; John
Gardner, ‘The Opposite of Rape’
(2018) 38(1)
Oxford Journal of
Legal Studies
(‘Opposite of Rape’); Jonathan Herring and
Michelle Madden Dempsey, ‘Rethinking the Criminal Law’s Response
Sexual Penetration: On Theory and Context’ in Clare McGlynn and Vanessa E
Munro (eds),
Rethinking Rape Law: International and Comparative
Perspectives
(Routledge, 2010) 30 (‘Rethinking the Criminal
Law’). The concept of consent has also been examined at length by contract
law scholars: see, eg, Margaret Jane Radin, ‘Regulation by Contract,
Regulation by Machine’ (2004) 160(1)
Journal of Institutional and
Theoretical Economics
142, 144, 153; Debra Satz,
Why Some Things Should
Not Be for Sale: The Moral Limits of Markets
(Oxford University Press, 2010)
96–7; Brian H Bix, ‘Contracts’ in Franklin G Miller and Alan
Wertheimer (eds),
The Ethics of Consent: Theory and Practice
University Press, 2010) 251, 251–67; Randy E Barnett, ‘Contract Is
Not Promise: Contract Is Consent’ in
Gregory Klass, George Letsas and
Prince Saprai (eds),
Philosophical Foundations of Contract Law
University Press, 2014) 42, 43, 48–57; Joseph Raz, ‘Is There a
Reason To Keep a Promise?’ in Gregory Klass,
George Letsas and Prince
Saprai (eds),
Philosophical Foundations of Contract Law
University Press, 2014) 58, 58.
For example, Windeyer J stated that
‘where the elements on which liability depends are not in dispute and
evidence relating
to them is given on both sides, it seems ... that adjudication
is not likely often to depend upon which side has the onus of proof’:
McHale v Watson
[1964] HCA 64
(1964) 111 CLR 384
Chamallas (n
) 309. For an Australian example, see, eg,
Moon v Whitehead
[2015] ACTCA 17
(2015) 10 ACTLR 309
, 321 [37], 323 [43] (Murrell CJ and
Burns J, Penfold J agreeing at 323–4 [49]) (‘
that case, the sexual battery occurred in an apartment with only the plaintiff
and defendant present: see at 311 [3]
(Murrell CJ and Burns J).
Platt v Nutt
, 243, 246–7 (Clarke JA, Hope JA agreeing at 243)
’). In that case, there was conflicting evidence as to
whether the appellant (the
respondent’s then son-in-law) slammed a glass door into the
respondent’s hand while she was helping her daughter move
marital home following a domestic dispute and, if that had occurred, whether the
appellant did so intentionally: at 233–4
(Kirby P), 243 (Clarke JA, Hope
JA agreeing at 243).
See Goudkamp (n
) 41–4. Goudkamp suggests that the
distinction between defences and denials is a morally important one, softly
rejecting the
views of commentators who suggest that the difference is not
morally consequential and serving perhaps only instrumental or efficiency
See ibid 42;
) 237 (Kirby P).
Hanoch Dagan, ‘Legal Realism and
the Taxonomy of Private Law’ in Charles Rickett and Ross Grantham (eds),
Structure and Justification in Private Law: Essays for Peter Birks
Publishing, 2008) 147, 156.
[1848] EngR 242
(1848) 11 QB 473
Christopherson
Ibid. In the criminal law, for some
offences that constitute serious batteries such as grievous bodily harm, Lord
Denman CJ’s
statement is not a contradiction — consent would not
preclude criminal responsibility: see below nn
–7 and accompanying text.
See, eg, Kit Barker et al,
of Torts in Australia
(Oxford University Press, 5
611; Rick Bigwood,
Exploitative Contracts
(Oxford University Press, 2003)
See Kit Barker, ‘Private Law,
Analytical Philosophy and the Modern Value of Wesley Newcomb Hohfeld: A
Centennial Appraisal’
(2018) 38(3)
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
, 590 (‘Centennial Appraisal’). Alternatively, and from the
defendant’s perspective, we might say that consent renders
defendant’s action ‘morally, institutionally, or legally
permissible
’: Alan Wertheimer, ‘What Is Consent? And Is It
Important?’
(2000) 3(2)
Buffalo Criminal Law Review
(emphasis in original).
The precise object of the
plaintiff’s consent differs between these contexts — interference
with a right on the one hand
and risk of injury on the other: see Barker,
‘Centennial Appraisal’
) 590; Bix (n
) 251; Barker et al (n
) 611. Legislation in the Australian
states has modified the first limb of this defence in negligence in the case of
obvious risks
by reversing the onus of proof, so the plaintiff must show that
they were not aware of it: see, eg,
Civil Liability Act 2002
Civil Liability Act 2003
. Even if a risk is objectively obvious, however, the defendant
must still prove that the plaintiff voluntarily accepted the risk
remains a subjective question: Barker et al (n
) 617–18. For this reason, perhaps,
these provisions do not appear to have made it any easier for defendants to
establish the
) 251; Barker, ‘Centennial
Appraisal’ (n
) 611. The term
‘actual consent’ is adopted by the American Law Institute: see
American Law Institute,
Restatement (Third) of Torts: Intentional Torts to
(Tentative Draft No 4, 1 April 2019) §§ 13–15
Restatement (Third) Draft 4
’). American Law Institute,
Restatement (Third) of Torts: Intentional Torts to Persons
Draft No 6, 26 April 2021) (‘
Restatement (Third) Draft 6
was finally approved by the American Law Institute on 16 May 2021, thereby
completing the project on intentional torts to
Restatement
’): American Law Institute, ‘Restatement Third of Torts:
Intentional Torts to Persons Is Approved’ (Press Release,
16 May 2021)
https://www.ali.org/news/articles/restatement-third-torts-intentional-torts-persons-approved
archived at <
https://perma.cc/94LT-ARJJ
) 317 [22] (Murrell CJ and Burns J,
Penfold J agreeing at 323 [49]).
For example, the
Restatement
attempts to traverse these different dimensions by distinguishing
between ‘actual consent’ and ‘apparent or presumed
consent’: see
Restatement (Third) Draft 4
) §§ 13–16. Further
nuanced rules are set out in respect of consent subject to the ‘emergency
‘consent to sexual conduct’ and ‘medical
treatment without legally effective consent as battery’: see
Restatement (Third) Draft 6
) §§ 17–19.
For an excellent analysis of the
relationship between subjective and objective (or performative) explanations of
consent in the criminal
law, see Wertheimer (n
) 89–90 (emphasis altered).
), it was held that consent should be
determined by reference to the plaintiff’s actual (ie subjective) state of
mind and not
by what a reasonable person would have considered that state of
mind to be: at 316–17 [20]–[22] (Murrell CJ and Burns
J, Penfold J
at 323 [49]). In confirming this position, their Honours squarely rejected
the relevance of a reasonable mistake of fact approach
founded on the
defendant’s perspective. Indeed, the general rejection of mistaken fact
defences in tort law formed one of the
primary bases on which their Honours
concluded that consent is subjective: see at 317 [21]–[22]. This view is
consistent with
that of Nikki Godden: see Nikki Godden, ‘Claims in Tort
for Rape: A Valuable Remedy or Damaging Strategy?’ (2011) 22(2)
King’s Law Journal
157, 164–6. We note, however, that some
courts have questioned this orthodoxy in recent years — at least in the
of recognising reasonable mistake of fact as justifying self-defence:
New South Wales v McMaster
[2015] NSWCA 228
(2015) 91 NSWLR 666
[144]–[181] (Beazley P, McColl JA agreeing at 729 [358], Meagher JA
agreeing at 729 [359]) (‘
Ashley v Chief
Constable of Sussex Police
[2008] UKHL 25
[2008] 1 AC 962
, 973–5 [17]–[20]
(Lord Scott), 984 [53] (Lord Rodger), 989–90 [76] (Lord Carswell),
992–3 [85]–[88]
(Lord Neuberger) (‘
Interestingly, the conclusion in
) confirmed that the criminal law
approach to self-defence, as stated by the High Court in
Zecevic v DPP
[1987] HCA 26
(1987) 162 CLR 645
’), applied equally to
tortious wrongdoing: see
) 699 [166]–[168] (Beazley P,
McColl JA agreeing at 729 [358], Meagher JA agreeing at 729 [359]), citing
). This was contrary
to the approach that can be observed in a previous High Court judgment —
that a mistaken belief is not
the relevant inquiry in tort law: see, eg,
Fontin v Katapodis
[1962] HCA 63
(1962) 108 CLR 177
(McTiernan J), 186 (Owen J, Dixon CJ agreeing at 179). However, the
conclusion in
) — although incidentally
consistent with
— is based on different reasons and in part
English criminal law which also accepts mistaken belief as justifying the
defence but holds that such belief
be reasonable:
3 All ER 411
, 415 (Lord Lane CJ for the Court);
) 967 [3] (Lord Bingham),
973 [17]–[18] (Lord Scott), 984 [52]–[53] (Lord Rodger),
989–90 [76] (Lord Carswell),
992–3 [86]–[87] (Lord Neuberger). In
), their Lordships declined to follow the
criminal law on the basis that civil law serves a different function: see at
[3] (Lord Bingham), 973–4 [18] (Lord Scott), 984 [53] (Lord
Rodger), 989–90 [76] (Lord Carswell), 993 [87] (Lord Neuberger).
Scott went on to note, in obiter, that the result was to put the English law of
self-defence on the same footing as consent,
in respect of which a mistaken
belief would suffice, provided that the belief was reasonable: at 974 [19].
Wertheimer (n
) 568 (emphasis omitted).
Ibid 561–2 (emphasis
For example, recent reforms to
criminal sexual assault and rape laws, adopting requirements of
‘affirmative’ consent,
have not been accompanied by any changes to
the onus of proof, which remains with the prosecution: Judicial College of
Bench Book: Criminal Charge Book
(2025) 739 [19]. See also
Chamallas (n
) 282. What affirmative
consent laws do require, however, is more overtly performative (ie objective)
acts of consent to have occurred,
ensuring a greater likelihood of the presence
of subjective consent: see, eg,
Crimes Act 1958
’), as amended by
Justice Legislation Amendment (Sexual Offences and Other Matters) Act
. According to s 37A(a) of the
Vic Crimes Act
), one of the objectives of the
reforms is ‘to uphold the fundamental right of every person to make
decisions about their sexual
behaviour and to choose whether or not to engage in
sexual activity’. The absence of a reasonable belief that the victim
consented continues to be an element of the offences of rape
and sexual assault, but such a belief is not reasonable if the accused
‘within a reasonable time before or at the time the act takes place ...
does not say or do anything to find out whether
B consents to the act’:
see at s 36A(2). See also at
See above nn
and accompanying text.
For a brief discussion, see Iain D
Field, ‘The Problem with Provocation in Trespass’
(2021) 84(2)
Modern Law Review
See Peter Cane,
Responsibility in
Law and Morality
(Hart Publishing, 2002) 89–90 n 83.
See, eg, Julius Stone, ‘Burden
of Proof and the Judicial Process: A Commentary on
Joseph Constantine
Steamship Ltd v Imperial Smelting Corporation Ltd
(1944) 60(3)
Quarterly Review
, 280; Glanville Williams, ‘The Logic of
“Exceptions”’
(1988) 47(2)
Cambridge Law Journal
See Luís Duarte
d’Almeida, ‘Defining “Defences”’ in Andrew Dyson,
James Goudkamp and Frederick
Wilmot-Smith (eds),
Defences in Tort
Publishing, 2015) 35, 36–43. Luís Duarte d’Almeida cites
various proponents of an incorporation model, although
he does not support such
a model himself: see at 43, 50. Goudkamp categorically refutes the
incorporationist view as ‘bizarre’:
Goudkamp (n
Duarte d’Almeida,
‘Defining “Defences”’ (n
) 803 [107]. See also Goudkamp (n
Duarte d’Almeida states that
‘a burden-of-proof account of the
“denials”/“defences” distinction
may well be on the
right track’: Duarte d’Almeida, ‘Defining
“Defences”’ (n
On that account, differences between denials and defences turn on their
‘contrasting probatory behaviour’: at 44.
He cites John CP Goldberg
and Benjamin C Zipursky in support of a definition ‘that affirmative
defences are liability-defeating
grounds which it is the defendant’s
burden to establish’: at 50, citing John CP Goldberg and Benjamin C
The Oxford Introductions to US Law: Torts
(Oxford University
Press, 2010) 110. See generally Luís Duarte d’Almeida, ‘A
Proof-Based Account of Legal Exceptions’
(2013) 33(1)
Oxford Journal of
Legal Studies
The correlation between defences and
the burden of proof is also reflected in judicial approaches to the
interpretation of exculpatory
statutory provisions — that is, provisions
which express ‘an exculpation, justification, excuse, ground of defeasance
or exclusion which assumes the existence of the general or primary grounds from
which the liability or right arises’:
Vines v Djordjevitch
[1955] HCA 19
(1955) 91 CLR 512
, 519–20 (Dixon CJ,
McTiernan, Webb, Fullagar and Kitto JJ), citing
Darling Island Stevedoring
& Lighterage Co Ltd v Jacobsen
[1945] HCA 22
(1945) 70 CLR 635
Dowling v Bowie
[1952] HCA 63
(1952) 86 CLR 136.
Such provisions are presumed to cast the onus of proof on the
defendant absent some ‘identified contrary legislative indication’:
Webster v Lampard
[1993] HCA 57
(1993) 177 CLR 598
, 606 (Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson
JJ). See also at 620 (McHugh J).
That is, the legal onus of proof flows
from the relevant categorisation of the absence of
consent as an element of the claim and therefore rests on the plaintiff: see
806–7 [129]–[130]. See also Andrew Burrows, ‘Some Recurring
Issues in Relation to Limitation of Actions’ in
Andrew Dyson, James
Goudkamp and Frederick Wilmot-Smith (eds),
Defences in Tort
Publishing, 2015) 311, 314–15.
For example, albeit admittedly in the
context of the criminal law, Heydon J has stated:
The language of ‘defences’
. The parties persistently,
though not universally, spoke of the appellant’s ‘defences’.
However, as Nettle JA recognised
in his dissenting judgment, this terminology is
inappropriate. These ‘defences’ were not matters on which the
as the accused bore any burden of proof, whether legal (ie persuasive)
or evidential. They were not matters which the appellant as
the accused was
required to establish in order to avoid the prosecution’s prima facie
entitlement to a conviction. Rather,
they were denials of essential ingredients
in the prosecution’s case. They were matters on which the prosecution bore
(ie persuasive) burden of proof beyond reasonable doubt.
Baiada Poultry Pty Ltd v The Queen
[2012] HCA 14
(2012) 246 CLR 92
(emphasis in original). See also Tony Weir,
An Introduction to Tort Law
(Oxford University Press, 2
ed, 2006) 129; WVH Rogers,
and Jolowicz on Tort
(Sweet & Maxwell, 18
Some influential criminal law scholars
have also rejected an onus-of-proof account of defences: see, eg, George P
Rethinking Criminal Law
(Little, Brown and Company, 1978)
552–5; John Gardner,
Offences and Defences: Selected Essays in the
Philosophy of Criminal Law
(Oxford University Press, 2007) 142
Offences and Defences
’). John Gardner states that
‘[t]he contrast between offences and defences has little to do with the
shifting of any burdens,
and nor should it have’.
Goudkamp (n
See ibid 2–7.
Ibid 4. See also at 130–1.
Duarte d’Almeida,
‘Defining “Defences”’ (n
) 48. See also at 49–52.
Ibid 50–1. See above nn
and accompanying text.
) 314. See also at 315.
Duarte d’Almeida,
‘Defining “Defences”’ (n
D’Orta-Ekenaike v
Victoria Legal Aid
[2005] HCA 12
(2005) 223 CLR 1
, 23–5 [56]–[63], 30–1
[84] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ), 60–1 [181]–[185], 68
[205] (McHugh
70–1 [211]–[215] (Kirby J), 112–20 [359]–[381]
(Callinan J) (‘
D’Orta-Ekenaike
Donnellan v
[2012] NSWCA 433
(2012) NSW Conv R 56-307
, 55696 [259], [263] (Basten JA)
D’Orta-Ekenaike
), McHugh J stated that although the
inability to sue advocates for their in-court conduct is ‘traditionally
described as an
immunity’, ‘that description is just another name
for the conclusion that, as a matter of legal policy, advocates do
duty of care in respect of their conduct in court’: at
33–4 [95] (emphasis in original).
D’Orta-Ekenaike
) 19 [39] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Hayne and Heydon JJ);
) 55696 [259]
(Basten JA), 55698 [276] (Barrett JA). In more recent years, however, the High
Court has tended to refer to the rule
simply as an immunity, perhaps to avoid
any classificatory difficulties: see, eg,
Attwells v Jackson Lalic Lawyers
(2016) 259 CLR 1
, 11–12 [1]–[3] (French CJ, Kiefel,
Bell, Gageler and Keane JJ), 29 [65]–[66] (Nettle J),
37–8 [98]–[102] (Gordon J) (‘
Kendirjian v Lepore
[2017] HCA 13
(2017) 259 CLR 275
, 281 [16] (Gordon J), 281–2
[17]–[18] (Edelman J, Kiefel CJ agreeing at 278 [1], Bell J agreeing
at 278 [2], Gageler J agreeing at 278 [3], Keane J agreeing at 278 [4])
Giannarelli v Wraith
165 CLR 543
, 558 (Mason CJ), 574 (Wilson J);
D’Orta-Ekenaike
) 17–18 [34]–[36], 30–1
[84] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ),
56 [168] (McHugh J), 117 [374] (Callinan J);
) 19–21 [30]–[36] (French CJ,
Kiefel, Bell, Gageler and Keane JJ), 29 [66] (Nettle J), 37–8
[100]–[101] (Gordon J).
) 55696 [259]. It is more commonly
referred to by the High Court as an ‘immunity from suit’: see, eg,
D’Orta-Ekenaike
[39] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ), 33 [93] (McHugh J), 72 [219]
[13] (Gordon J),
281 [17] (Edelman J, Kiefel CJ agreeing at 278 [1], Bell J agreeing at 278
[2], Gageler J agreeing at 278 [3], Keane J agreeing at
) 11 [1] (French
CJ, Kiefel, Bell, Gageler and Keane JJ), 29 [65] (Nettle J).
D’Orta-Ekenaike
) 20–1 [45] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Hayne and Heydon JJ);
) 37–8 [98]–[101] (Gordon
For the classic pronouncement of
judicial immunity, see
Floyd v Barker
[1572] EngR 142
(1607) 12 Co Rep 23
See, eg, Cane (n
), Basten JA describes the immunity as a
defence and not a denial: see at 55696 [259]. Other judicial statements and
commentaries,
however, classify advocates’ immunity as a ‘no duty
rule’ and therefore as a denial of liability: see, eg,
D’Orta-Ekenaike
33–5 [95]–[97] (McHugh J), quoting
Brodie v Singleton Shire
[2001] HCA 29
(2001) 206 CLR 512
, 555–6 [93]–[94] (Gaudron, McHugh and
Gummow JJ). In
D’Orta-Ekenaike
), McHugh J indicated that ‘the
immunity afforded advocates in Australia involves a recognition of the existence
of obligations
of due care and skill owed to clients,
but for policy reasons
denies a duty of care that gives rise to a cause of action in
’: at 34 [97] (emphasis added). Leading Australian texts also
appear to take this ‘no duty’ approach, although they
perhaps do so
more as a matter of convenience and convention rather than to satisfy any
underlying theoretical preference: see, eg,
Luntz et al (n
) 165–6 [2.6.20]–[2.6.24];
Barker et al (n
) 522–3. See
also Prue Vines, Peter Handford and Carol Harlow, ‘Duty of Care’ in
Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines
Fleming’s the Law of Torts
(Lawbook, 10
ed, 2011) 151, 158.
Most immunities have nothing to do
with the integrity of the judicial process and are therefore presumptively
substantive in nature:
see Goudkamp (n
) 122–6. For example, trade union
immunities were developed to rebalance labour relations following the rapid
judicial expansion
of the economic torts: see at 125.
Arthur J S Hall & Co v
[2002] 1 AC 615, 681, 683 (Lord Steyn), 685 (Lord Browne-Wilkinson),
704, 707 (Lord Hoffmann), 753 (Lord Millett);
Lai v Chamberlains
[2006] NZSC 70
, 44 [80] (Elias CJ for Elias CJ, Gault and Keith JJ), 61 [155] (Tipping
J), 73 [203] (Thomas J);
Demarco v Ungaro
(1979) 95 DLR (3d) 385
(Krever J);
Ferri v Ackerman
[1979] USSC 178
, 205 (Stevens J for the Court)
Weaver v Ward
[1792] EngR 2772
; (1616) Hob
Stanley v Powell
[1890] UKLawRpKQB 153
[1891] 1 QB 86
93–4 (Denman J);
) 387–8 (Windeyer J).
) 388–9 (Windeyer J).
Fowler v Lanning
, 439–40 (Diplock J);
) 237–40 (Kirby P).
John G Fleming,
(Law Book, 7
ed, 1987) 21, quoted in
(Kirby P). See also Dagan (n
155–6. Hanoch Dagan warns against some of the risks consequent upon
accepting historical categories or rigid taxonomies, rendering
them immune from
proper justification.
For example, Leeming JA does not focus
on the normative arguments in favour of his Honour’s conclusion in
) that non-consent is
an element of battery, but rather his Honour relies on a close analysis of the
precedent and the significance
of the legal pleading rules central to the
determination in
Christopherson
) 804–7 [114]–[130]. See above
and accompanying text.
See above nn
and accompanying text.
See Andrew Dyson, James Goudkamp and
Frederick Wilmot-Smith, ‘Central Issues in the Law of Tort Defences’
in Andrew Dyson,
James Goudkamp and Frederick Wilmot-Smith (eds),
Defences in
(Hart Publishing, 2015) 3, 5–7. The authors set out the different
usages and give examples of authors who define a ‘defence’
to who bears the onus and other authors who determine a ‘defence’ by
reference to other grounds, usually unstated,
and see onus of proof as
consequential on that determination: see, eg, Weir (n
) 129; Burrows (n
) 314–15; Robert Stevens,
‘Should Contributory Fault Be Analogue or Digital?’ in Andrew Dyson,
James Goudkamp and
Frederick Wilmot-Smith (eds),
Defences in Tort
Publishing, 2015) 247, 250.
Collins v Wilcock
[1984] 1 WLR
, 1177 (Robert Goff LJ for the Court) (‘
also at 1178 (Robert Goff LJ for the Court);
Rixon v Star City Pty Ltd
[2001] NSWCA 265
(2001) 53 NSWLR 98
114 [55] (Sheller JA, Priestley JA agreeing at 100 [1], Heydon JA agreeing at
115 [61]) (‘
) 112–14 [50]–[55] (Sheller
JA, Priestley JA agreeing at 100 [1], Heydon JA agreeing at 115 [61]). Cf
(Robert Goff LJ for the Court). Presumably, if consent to such contact was
expressly withdrawn, it could become a
) 1177–8 (Robert Goff LJ for the
) 800 [94] (Leeming JA).
Dean v Phung
[2012] NSWCA 223
(2012) Aust Torts
Reports 82-111
, 66350 [59] (Basten JA, Beazley JA agreeing at 66339 [1])
Gorman v McKnight
, the Court left the
question open, stating that ‘[v]iews differ’ on the matter: (2020)
19 ASTLR 181, 194 [73] (Bell P,
Payne JA agreeing
at 197 [91], Emmett AJA agreeing at 198 [99]).
[1992] HCA 15
(1992) 175 CLR 218
Marion’s Case
Ibid 310–11. The other Justices
did not discuss this matter.
Ibid 311. In the context of sexual
trespass, see Anita Bernstein, ‘Rape Is Trespass’
(2017) 10(2)
Journal of Tort Law
, 317, 319–21. Anita Bernstein stresses the
rights of a ‘self-possessor’ to absolute dominion over her body
the right to exclude): see especially at 320. Interestingly, however,
despite Bernstein’s powerful defence of the rights of
rape victims, she
does not cavil with the conclusion that the absence of consent is for a
plaintiff to prove, as expressed in American
Law Institute,
Restatement
(Third) of Torts: Intentional Torts to Persons
(Preliminary Draft No 4, 6
March 2017) § 12 cmt (d) (‘
Preliminary Draft No 4
) 322–3. The most recent
draft, however, amends this position: see below nn
–7 and accompanying
Marion’s Case
Ibid 311 (McHugh J).
Parkinson v St James & Seacroft
University Hospital NHS Trust
[2001] EWCA Civ 530
[2002] QB 266
, 284 [56].
) 807 [130]. Cf
Marion’s Case
) 806 [125], 807 [130]. See also at
804–5 [117]–[122] (Leeming JA), discussing
Christopherson
) 556 (Lord Denman CJ, Wightman J
agreeing at 556), 556 (Patteson J,
Wightman J agreeing at 556), 556 (Coleridge J, Wightman J agreeing at
) 800–7 [94]–[130], discussing
Freeman v Home Office [No 2]
[1984] 1 QB 524
, 539 (McCowan J) (High
) 803 [109].
Ibid 803 [110].
Christopherson
) 554. See also at 556 (Lord Denman CJ,
Wightman J agreeing at 556), 556 (Patteson J, Wightman J agreeing at 556), 556
J, Wightman J agreeing at 556), discussed in
) 804 [114]–[118] (Leeming JA).
Christopherson
) 554. See also at 556 (Lord Denman CJ,
Wightman J agreeing at 556), 556 (Patteson J, Wightman J agreeing at 556), 556
J, Wightman J agreeing at 556), discussed in
) 804 [114]–[118] (Leeming JA).
Christopherson
) 556 (Lord Denman CJ, Wightman J
agreeing at 556), 556
(Patteson J, Wightman J agreeing at 556), 556 (Coleridge J, Wightman J
agreeing at 556);
[118] (Leeming JA).
) 807 [130].
) 66350–1 [64] (Basten JA, Beazley
JA agreeing at 66339 [1]).
) 314–15 [14]–[16] (Murrell CJ
and Burns J, Penfold J agreeing at 323–4 [49]). See also at 309;
) 779. Cf at 807 [130]
(Leeming JA).
) 314–15 [14]–[16] (Murrell CJ
and Burns J, Penfold J agreeing at 323–4 [49]).
See ibid 314–16 [14]–[19],
321 [37] (Murrell CJ and Burns J, Penfold J agreeing at 323–4 [49]).
See Goudkamp (n
Christopherson
) 554, 556 (Lord Denman CJ, Wightman J
agreeing at 556), 556 (Patteson J, Wightman J agreeing at 556), 556 (Coleridge
J, Wightman
J agreeing at 556);
) 539 (McCowan J) (High Court);
Bocardo SA v Star Energy UK Onshore Ltd
[2010] UKSC 35
[2011] 1 AC 380
, 391 [6] (Lord
Hope DPSC, Lord Walker JSC agreeing
at 404 [46], Lord Brown JSC agreeing at 406 [57], Lord Collins JSC agreeing
at 418 [94], Lord Clarke JSC agreeing at 422 [116])
Goudkamp (n
) 539 (McCowan J) (High Court). See also
at 543. The matter was not discussed on appeal: Goudkamp (n
) 65 n 123. Goudkamp
‘tentatively’ reaches the same conclusion after noting that
‘it is extremely difficult to discover’
the correct legal position:
at 67. See also Jodi Gardner, ‘Rethinking Risk-Taking: The Death of
(2023) 82(1)
Cambridge Law Journal
[2006] EWCA Civ 1085
[2007] 1 WLR 398
, 410 [31].
Restatement (Third) Draft 4
) § 12 cmt (e) (emphasis in
original). For the ‘categories of consent’ referred to in this
excerpt, see above n
and accompanying
See, eg, American Law Institute,
Restatement of Torts
(1934) § 13 cmt (f); American Law Institute,
Restatement (Second) of Torts
(1965) §§ 10 cmt (c), 13 cmt (d);
Preliminary Draft No 4
) §§ 1 cmt (f), 5 cmt
(j), 7 cmt (k).
See, eg, Chamallas (n
) 304–6, 309–10. Kenneth W
Simons and W Jonathan Cardi, the Reporter and Associate Reporter of the
Restatement (Third)
, accepted the view that there is no harm where
a protected interest, placing the burden on the plaintiff to prove a
lack of consent is a natural application of the general principle’:
Kenneth W Simons and W Jonathan Cardi, ‘Restating the Intentional Torts to
Persons: Seeing the Forest and the Trees’
(2017) 10(2)
Journal of Tort
Restatement (Third) Draft 4
) § 12 cmt (e). Another possible
explanation is that tort law operates in a secondary capacity to protect
property rights, which
are established by an independent legal department, in
contrast with torts against the person, which instantiate rights reflective
basic moral values that exist independently of the law: see also Robert Stevens,
Torts and Rights
(Oxford University Press, 2007) 2–3, 5–7. By
treating consent as a defence in respect of interferences with property,
might be argued, tort law simply accepts that interferences with those
antecedent rights are prima facie wrong. However, the precise
circumstances in
which it is wrong to interfere with a right in property, and, more importantly,
what elements must be proven to
establish such a wrong,
determined by
tort law. Thus, the mere fact that the underlying right is established by an
independent body of law does not mean
that consent to an interference with that
right could never be classified as a denial or that the plaintiff might bear the
proving an absence of consent in appropriate circumstances.
Allan v New Mount Sinai
(1980) 109 DLR (3d) 634
, 641 (Linden J). A new trial was ordered on
appeal on other grounds: see
Allan v New Mount Sinai Hospital
DLR (3d) 276
, 277 (Jessup JA).
[2000] 1 SCR 551
[7]–[10], 572–6 [27]–[34] (McLachlin J for
L’Heureux-Dubé, Gonthier, McLachlin and Binnie
Ibid 579 [43]. The minority
concluded that a different rule for sexual battery was warranted: see at 582
[53], 606–12 [101]–[110]
(Iacobucci J for Iacobucci, Major and
Bastarache JJ).
See above n
and accompanying text. See also
) 801–2 [102],
) 801–2 [102]. Martha Chamallas
states that having general rules on consent is ‘very tricky’ given
that different
for sexual battery claims, a special rule requiring affirmative
consent and
shifting the onus to the defendant is required: see Chamallas (n
) 284, 306–11, 315. Chamallas also
argues that tort law can and should take a different approach to that adopted by
the criminal
law: at 312–13.
) 805 [123]. This is consistent with the
position in the United States (‘US’): see above n
and accompanying text.
) 805 [123], citing Edward Bullen and
Stephen Martin Leake,
Precedents of Pleadings in Personal Actions in the
Superior Courts of Common Law: With Notes, and an Appendix of Recent Statutes
General Rules Relating to Pleading
(Stevens and Sons, 3
1868) 740. That text supports the different position in relation to land.
Similarly, Goudkamp accepts that the status of consent
in relation to one cause
of action need not ‘necessarily carry over to’ another: Goudkamp (n
) 67. In other words, consent
‘need not operate in the same fashion in relation to [the action of
trespass to land] as it does
in the context of trespass to the person’. He
tentatively concluded that, nonetheless, the legal position is the same. Jodi
Gardner also seems to accept that consent may have a different status across
different causes of action: see Jodi Gardner (n
) 805 [123], discussing
Marion’s Case
) 311, citing
Kavanagh v Gudge
[1844] EngR 249
(1844) 7 Man & G
Wood v Manley
[1839] EngR 1030
(1839) 11 Ad & El 34
Plenty v Dillon
(1991) 171 CLR 635
, 647 (Gaudron and McHugh JJ)
’). Similarly, for trespass to goods, consent appears
to be a defence that needs to be specifically pleaded: see, eg,
(1810) 2 Campbell’s Reports, Nisi Prius 378;
[1810] EngR 98
170 ER 1190
(Lord Ellenborough). The same position holds for defamation:
) 805 [123] (Leeming JA);
Marion’s Case
(McHugh J).
Goudkamp (n
See ibid, citing
) 391 [6] (Lord Hope DPSC, Lord Walker
JSC agreeing
at 404 [46], Lord Brown JSC agreeing at 406 [57], Lord Collins JSC agreeing
at 418 [94], Lord Clarke JSC agreeing at 422 [116]). In
that case, Lord Hope
DPSC held that ‘a trespass [to land] occurs when there is an unjustified
intrusion by one party upon land
which is in the possession of another’.
The problem with Goudkamp’s reliance on this statement is that the
to ‘unjustified’ cannot be limited to the absence of
consent, as it could also include, say, statutory authority, and
it is unlikely
that Lord Hope DPSC was suggesting that statutory authority would not be a
defence. The same applies to Barwick CJ’s
definition of trespass as to be
‘on the land of another without legal right, invitation or
permission’:
Public Transport Commission (NSW) v Perry
[1977] HCA 32
, 126, cited in Goudkamp (n
67. The inclusion of ‘legal right’ makes it unlikely that Barwick CJ
was suggesting that all arguments as to legal right
Ironically, such definitions could also be founded on an incorporation model of
‘defences’ and Goudkamp categorically
rejects such a model: see at
5–6; Duarte d’Almeida, ‘Defining “Defences”’
Christopherson
) 556 (Lord Denman CJ, Wightman J
agreeing at 556), 556
(Patteson J, Wightman J agreeing at 556).
See Luntz et al (n
[12.5.1]–[12.5.5].
Myer Stores Ltd v
[1991] VicRp 97
[1991] 2 VR 597
in relation to the plaintiff’s subsequent
attendance at a police station: at 620, 623 (McDonald J).
See, eg, ibid in relation to the
plaintiff’s interview in the defendant’s store office: at 601
(Murphy J), 614–15 (O’Bryan J), 627–9 (McDonald J). See
Symes v Mahon
[1922] SAStRp 57
[1922] SASR 447
, 453–4 (Murray CJ, Murray CJ for
Gordon J agreeing at 454, Poole J agreeing at 454).
See above nn
and accompanying text.
See, eg, Martin Davies, Ian Malkin
and Tania Voon,
Focus Torts
(LexisNexis, 10
859–61, 901–6; Rachael Mulheron,
Principles of Tort Law
(Cambridge University Press, 2016) 713–20, 951–2.
See above n
and accompanying text.
Andrew Fell, ‘The Concept of
Coherence in Australian Private Law’
[2018] MelbULawRw 6
(2018) 41(3)
Melbourne University
, 1200. Various possible meanings may be ascribed to the word
‘coherence’. However, we agree with Andrew Fell that, in
this term, ‘the High Court [of Australia] is best understood as requiring
consistency in the law’s underlying
normative reasons or
justifications’ and that ‘this requires consistency in the weight or
importance attributed to contributory
reasons relative to each other’.
The case therefore supports consent
as a defence (consistently with Canadian medical-practitioner-related battery
cases): see
576–7 [35]–[36] (McLachlin J for L’Heureux-Dubé,
Gonthier, McLachlin and Binnie JJ). For similar reasoning,
see Simons and Cardi
) 396. However, Simons and Cardi
therefore support understanding the absence of consent as an element, even for
sexual battery, consistently
with US battery cases generally: cf Chamallas (n
) 309–10, 315.
) 576 [36] (McLachlin J for
L’Heureux-Dubé, Gonthier, McLachlin and
Binnie JJ).
See Goudkamp (n
) 805 [123] (Leeming JA);
Marion’s Case
(McHugh J). See also
Clarey v Principal of the Women’s College
[1953] HCA 58
(1953) 90 CLR 170
(Williams ACJ, Webb, Kitto and Taylor JJ). See also Barker et al (n
Goudkamp (n
) 114–15. Applying similar
reasoning, it has been argued that the illegality principle ought not to be
characterised as a no-duty
rule of negligence because it operates from outside
the relationship of the parties and also, importantly, operates in other areas
of law and causes of action as well: see Beverley McLachlin, ‘Weaving the
Law’s Seamless Web: Reflections on the Illegality
Defence in Tort
Law’ in Andrew Dyson, James Goudkamp and Frederick Wilmot-Smith (eds),
Defences in Tort
(Hart Publishing, 2015) 207, 217–18.
See, eg, Fletcher (n
) 554–5; John Gardner,
and Defences
) 142. See also
Goudkamp (n
) 42–4. Cf Williams
) 277; Heidi M Hurd,
‘Justification and Excuse, Wrongdoing and Culpability
(1999) 74(5)
Notre Dame Law Review
Goudkamp (n
Ibid. The reverse of this argument
is also possible, namely that the law’s allocation of the burden of proof
to one or the
other party sends a normative signal that contact is inherently
wrongful (or not wrongful). For example, Joanne Conaghan considers
‘our conception of rape would look very different’ if there operated
a presumption that sexual intercourse was non-consensual
unless positive
evidence of consent was adduced: Joanne Conaghan, ‘The Essence of
(2019) 39(1)
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
alternative process of argument is to take a normative position and then rely on
that to justify where the burden of proof
should lie. Despite the quote above,
we do not take Goudkamp to be any different: see above n
and accompanying text. He supports the
view that there is no prima facie reason to refrain from sexual intercourse
according to our
sexual morality: see ibid 43. This normative view supports
with English law’s conclusion that the
absence of consent is an element of battery: see at 65, 67. Presumably, this
Goudkamp would therefore argue that the burden should similarly be on
plaintiffs in other jurisdictions, such as Canada, rather than
arguing that, in
such jurisdictions, sexual contact is prima facie wrongful because the law puts
the burden on defendants: see above
–8 and accompanying text.
See below nn
–9 and accompanying text.
Marion’s Case
), McLachlin J (for
L’Heureux-Dubé, Gonthier, McLachlin and Binnie JJ) stated that
‘the law of battery [was] based
on protecting individuals’ right to
personal autonomy’:
at 563 [10]. Her Honour reached the same conclusion as McHugh J as to the
onus of proof:
see at 579 [43];
Marion’s Case
This contrasts with the
‘orthodox view’ on sexual contact in the criminal law: see below n
and accompanying text. To be sure,
consent may be readily provable in some contexts.
For a discussion of the general
debate in the criminal law, see, eg, Goudkamp (n
) 42–4, discussing Williams (n
) 277, Kenneth Campbell, ‘Offence
and Defence’ in IH Dennis (ed),
Criminal Law and Justice: Essays from
the WG Hart Workshop: 1986
(Sweet & Maxwell, 1987) 73, 74, 78–9,
See Gardner and Shute (n
) 205. One interesting and important
question, which is beyond the scope of this article, is whether consent is
capable of fixing
the boundaries of what constitutes rape and, if not, how else
we might approach fixing those boundaries. Gardner and Stephen Shute
what makes rape wrong — in both criminal and tort law — is that
‘all sheer use of human beings, all
treatment of them merely as means, is
; and rape is the central case of such abuse’ (emphasis in
original). In a subsequent article, Gardner goes further, saying
that what makes
rape wrong at its core — and what distinguishes it from good sex —
is that it is non-collaborative: see
generally John Gardner, ‘Opposite of
). For a discussion of
the different views as to what it is that makes rape ‘rape’, see
generally Conaghan
Lee v The Queen
[2014] HCA 20
253 CLR 455
, 466–7 [32] (French CJ, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ);
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) s 13.1(1) (‘
Cth Criminal
Commonwealth v
Melbourne Harbour Trust Commissioners
[1922] HCA 31
(1922) 31 CLR 1
(Knox CJ, Gavan Duffy and Starke JJ), 17–18 (Isaacs J);
Williamson v
[1926] HCA 46
(1926) 39 CLR 95
, 113 (Isaacs J);
Sheldrake v DPP (UK)
[2004] UKHL 43
, 289 [1], 312–13 [50] (Lord Bingham, Lord Steyn agreeing at 314
[55], Lord Phillips MR agreeing at 314 [56]), 323 [79]
(Lord Carswell);
Kuczborski v Queensland
[2014] HCA 46
(2014) 254 CLR 51
122–3 [240]–[244] (Crennan, Kiefel, Gageler and Keane JJ). For proof
of insanity, see
Woolmington v DPP (UK)
[1935] AC 462, 481 (Viscount
Sankey LC, Viscount Sankey LC for Lord Atkin agreeing at 483, Lord Hewart CJ
agreeing at 483, Lord Tomlin
agreeing at 483, Lord Wright agreeing at 483)
Woolmington
Cth Criminal Code
) s 13.3(3).
R v DPP (UK); Ex parte
[1999] UKHL 43
[2000] 2 AC 326
, 379 (Lord Hope).
See Herring and Dempsey,
‘Rethinking the Criminal Law’ (n
) 34, citing John Gardner, ‘Fletcher
on Offences and Defences’
(2004) 39(4)
Tulsa Law Review
Criminal Responsibility
(Oxford University Press, 2005) 106.
Victor Tadros and Gardner are supporters of the orthodox view.
Campbell (n
) 77, 82–4. See also Goudkamp (n
) 43; Duarte d’Almeida,
‘Defining “Defences”’ (n
We borrow this label from Goudkamp
) 43. See also Campbell (n
) 77, 79, 83.
See Campbell (n
See ibid 77, 79, 83.
See ibid 82–4.
John Gardner,
Offences and
See Michelle Madden Dempsey and
Jonathan Herring, ‘Why Sexual Penetration Requires Justification’
(2007) 27(3)
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
See, eg, Andrea Dworkin,
Intercourse: The Twentieth Anniversary Edition
(Basic Books, 2007) 154,
quoted in ibid 474; Catharine A MacKinnon,
Towards a Feminist Theory of the
(Harvard University Press, 1989) 149, quoted in ibid 480.
See Dempsey and Herring,
For a summary, see Herring and Dempsey, ‘Rethinking the Criminal
Jonathan Herring and Michelle
Madden Dempsey argue that consent alone may not suffice to ‘fully justify
sexual penetration’:
Herring and Dempsey, ‘Rethinking the Criminal
) 30. See also at 37; Dempsey and
Herring, ‘Why’ (n
Dempsey and Herring,
See ibid 467, 470–1.
Ibid 472. ‘[T]he fact that a
given type of action is prima facie wrongful never establishes a prima facie
case in favour of
criminalization’: Herring and Dempsey, ‘Rethinking
the Criminal Law’ (n
See Duarte d’Almeida,
‘Defining “Defences”’ (n
) 42 (emphasis in original).
See Herring and Dempsey,
‘Rethinking the Criminal Law’ (n
Chamallas (n
For example, in some jurisdictions
where affirmative consent has been adopted in the criminal law, the onus stills
rests with the
prosecution to prove an absence of consent, although proving the
absence of affirmative consent is less of a burden than proving
the absence of
consent generally: see above n
also Conaghan (n
Chamallas (n
) 309. Chamallas concedes that this
approach has not been adopted in the criminal law: see at 311–12.
Affirmative consent has,
however, been incorporated into university and college
disciplinary codes: see at 282, 298–9. See generally
Preliminary Draft
Chamallas (n
) 309. Chamallas adds that this ‘is
reminiscent of consent presumptions in traditional criminal law’. Although
not expressly
commenting on other types of batteries, by advocating for a
distinct rule specific to sexual conduct cases Chamallas implicitly agrees
Preliminary Draft No 4
that the onus generally rests on plaintiffs to prove the absence of consent, as
she advocates for a distinct rule specific to sexual
conduct cases: see
Chamallas (n
) 284. See above n
Chamallas (n
See above n
Chamallas (n
Restatement (Third) Draft
) § 18 cmt (l). It must
be noted, however, that the paucity of civil claims by victims of sexual battery
against the perpetrators
(rather, than, say third-party institutions sought to
be held responsible for such acts) means that there is only limited legal
on the issue and, even in the US, that there have been very few
examples of direct tort claims against perpetrators for sexual battery:
314. The position is similar in the United Kingdom, though Godden nonetheless
sees advantages in victims pursuing civil
claims: see Godden (n
) 157, 167–70. The absence of civil
claims may be one reason why, unlike in the criminal law context, there has also
been minimal
debate in tort law about the underpinning moral dimensions of the
role of consent in sexual contact. See also Goudkamp (n
See Chamallas (n
) 306–7, 309.
Chamallas does not take a formal
side on the issue. However, it is possible to discern in her narrative a note of
regret that the
views of some feminists, in particular Catharine A MacKinnon,
have been rejected in favour of ‘what Deborah Turkheimer [sic]
“the culture of consent”’: see Chamallas (n
) 282–3, citing Deborah Tuerkheimer,
‘Rape on and off Campus’
(2015) 65(1)
Emory Law Journal
See also at 3. See generally MacKinnon (n
Chamallas (n
To be clear, this is not the view
of all, or even most, feminist scholars — many favour more nuanced
accounts of sexual wrongdoing
that downplay the transformative power of consent:
see, eg, Herring and Dempsey, ‘Rethinking the Criminal Law’ (n
) 31–6; Nicola Lacey,
Unspeakable
Subjects: Feminist Essays in Legal and Social Theory
(Hart Publishing, 1998)
118–21. For an overview of the different views as to the
‘essence’ of rape, see generally
See Campbell (n
In particular, Chamallas identifies
that affirmative consent laws might bolster ‘sexual freedom and
autonomy’ by changing
underlying norms: Chamallas (n
Goudkamp (n
) 43 (emphasis in original).
Ibid (emphasis in original),
discussing Campbell (n
). See also
Simons and Cardi (n
matter the prevalence of sexual assault, consensual sex is surely the
norm.’ It is interesting that Goudkamp
uses the phrase ‘our sexual
morality’ to mean, presumably, current sexual norms: Goudkamp (n
) 43. During some periods in the history
of criminal rape laws, however, sexual intercourse
marriage would have been considered immoral and non-consensual sex within
marriage was not rape: see, eg, Sir Matthew
The History of the Pleas of
(1736) vol 1, 629. See also Lisa Featherstone,
(Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2011) 8–9.
Goudkamp (n
) 43. See also Penny Crofts et al,
Waller & Williams Criminal Law: Text and Cases
(LexisNexis,
ed, 2020) 90–2 [2.84]–[2.86];
Woolmington
) 481–2 (Viscount Sankey LC,
Viscount Sankey LC for Lord Atkin agreeing at 483, Lord Hewart CJ agreeing
at 483, Lord Tomlin agreeing at 483, Lord Wright agreeing at 483).
Alternatively, the criminal law position might even be the product
of historical
gendered prejudices. Let us not forget that until relatively recently in the
history of the criminal law, consent was
irrelevant where sexual intercourse
occurred in marriage: see
[1991] HCA 48
(1991) 174 CLR 379
, 386–90 (Mason
CJ, Deane and Toohey JJ), 402–3 (Brennan J), 405 (Dawson J).
Goudkamp (n
) 44. See also
), where Leeming JA states that ‘it
is desirable for there to be a measure of coherence’ between the position
in the criminal
law and tort law:
at 806 [128].
See Goudkamp (n
) 65–8. It is not entirely clear
whether Goudkamp’s conclusion is premised in any way on his acceptance of
the practical
conflicts thesis as an explanation of the criminal law or on his
argument that the same thesis might apply in tort law.
See Prue Vines,
‘Introduction’ in Carolyn Sappideen and Prue Vines (eds),
Fleming’s the Law of Torts
(Lawbook, 10
ed, 2011) 3,
See, eg, ibid 3–4;
Fairchild v Glenhaven Funeral Services Ltd
[2002] UKHL 22
[2003] 1 AC 32
, 44 [9] (Lord
Bingham). More recently, it has been argued that tort law also serves an
important vindicatory function, although the
precise meaning of vindication and
the manner in which that function is performed remain controversial: see
generally Kit Barker,
‘Private and Public: The Mixed Concept of
Vindication in Torts and Private Law’ in Stephen GA Pitel, Jason W Neyers
Erika Chamberlain (eds),
Tort Law: Challenging Orthodoxy
Publishing, 2013) 59; Jason NE Varuhas, ‘The Concept of
“Vindication” in the Law of Torts: Rights, Interests
(2014) 34(2)
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
) 973–4 [17]–[18] (Lord
Scott); Kylie Burns et al, ‘Australia: A Land of Plenty (of Legislative
in Matthew Dyson (ed),
Comparing Tort and Crime: Learning
from across and within Legal Systems
(Cambridge University Press, 2015) 367,
396, 402–4.
This is seen, perhaps, in cases of
vicarious liability. As one text explains, a possible justification for such
liability is that
‘damages are taken from a deep pocket’: W Page
Keeton et al,
Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts
(West Publishing,
ed, 1984) 500, quoting T Baty,
Vicarious Liability: A Short
History of the Liability of Employers, Principals, Partners, Associations and
Trade-Union Members with
a Chapter on the Laws of Scotland and Foreign
(Clarendon Press, 1916) 154.
See Goudkamp (n
See above nn
–47 and accompanying text.
The absence of consent is not an
element of grievous bodily harm: see, eg,
Criminal Code Act 1899
sch 1 ss 1 (definition of ‘grievous bodily harm’), 320(1)
Qld Criminal Code
’). On the other hand, the absence of
consent is an element of assault: see at sch 1 s 245.
See ibid sch 1 ss 1 (definition of
‘grievous bodily harm’), 320(1). Cf Luntz et al (n
733 [12.4.1]. See also at 720 [12.1.7].
See Luis E Chiesa, ‘Consent
Is Not a Defense to Battery: A Reply to Professor Bergelson’
(2011) 9(1)
Ohio State Journal of Criminal Law
See above nn
–40 and accompanying text.
See above nn
and accompanying text.
See Chiesa (n
) 196, 207–8.
See ibid 204.
See ibid 207.
See ibid 207–8.
See ibid 203–4. Luis E Chiesa
gives the examples of piercing children’s ears, providing surgery for
sex-change purposes
and boxing as being socially acceptable and tattooing
children, providing surgery to amputate a limb for someone suffering a
disorder and street fighting as being socially unacceptable.
See ibid 204.
[2018] EWCA Crim 560
, 12 [40] (Lord Burnett CJ for the Court) (‘
case held that consented-to body modifications nevertheless constituted unlawful
at 13 [45] (Lord Burnett CJ for the Court). See also
[1993] UKHL 19
, which held that sadomasochistic activities were not justifiable: at
236–7 (Lord Templeman), 245–6
(Lord Jauncey), 255–6 (Lord Lowry) (‘
surgeon broke an arm to reset the limb, that would be socially acceptable so
long as either the patient consented or
the defence of necessity applied: see at
266 (Lord Mustill); Goudkamp (n
See Chiesa (n
) uses the term ‘social
benefit’: at 12 [40] (Lord Burnett CJ for the Court). Problematically,
socially acceptable
conduct may not have net social utility —
boxing, perhaps, is an example. This means that it is questionable whether these
two concepts (ie ‘socially acceptable’ and ‘social
benefit’) are interchangeable. Nonetheless, it seems clear
that references
to social acceptability have a strong correlation with assumed views about the
utility of conduct and vice versa:
see Chiesa (n
See above nn
–90 and accompanying text. See the
authorities cited in Kenneth J Arenson, ‘Consent as a Common Law Defence
to Non-Sexual
Assaults: The Effect of
Neal v The Queen
[2014] UTasLawRw 16
University of Tasmania
, 301–2 n 4. See
also at 300–1. In
), the England and Wales Court
of Appeal stated that the requisite justification could not be stated as a
universally applicable test,
but that justification was underpinned by the
considerations of whether (a) the activity conferred a discernible social
benefit and
(b) it would simply be regarded as unreasonable for the law to
criminalise the activity if it was undertaken consensually: at 12
Burnett CJ for the Court).
One example is sadomasochistic
wounding: see
236–7 (Lord Templeman),
245–6 (Lord Jauncey), 255–6 (Lord Lowry).
This assumes that such consent was
valid, made voluntarily and made with capacity, of course, which might be
doubted in this example:
see, eg, ibid 236 (Lord Templeman), 246
(Lord Jauncey).
See above nn
–3 and accompanying text. See also
) 3–5; Goudkamp (n
Bain v Altoft
, 40–1 (Gibbs J, Lucas J agreeing at 42, Douglas J agreeing
at 43). Where the harm caused by a consensual battery (eg from a mutually
consensual fight) is minor, it has been held that civil
damages may not be
available to the injured plaintiff:
at 40–2 (Gibbs J, Lucas J agreeing at 42, Douglas J agreeing at 42). In
that case, however,
Gibbs J suggested that the same conclusion would not necessarily apply where
the force used was excessive or involved the use of a
weapon: see at 41 (Gibbs
J, Lucas J agreeing at 42,
Douglas J agreeing at 42).
See Chiesa (n
) 196, 205–8. Dempsey and Herring
agree that medical surgery, as prima facie harmful conduct, may be justified,
but it is still
to be regretted as a less desirable choice than less intrusive
treatments: see above n
accompanying text.
) 801–2 [102], quoting
) 266 (Lord Mustill).
Of course, it does not follow that
because the contact is socially useful that we can assume that the plaintiff has
consented to
it unless they can show otherwise. Vaccination is an obvious
See above n
See above nn
–8 and accompanying text.
Some cases have, however,
explicitly referred to non-moral normative justifications such as rule-of-law
concerns about the desirability
of coherent and consistent positions across
different types of claims: see above Part V.
See above Part IV.
See above Part IV.
See above Part IV.
See above nn
and accompanying text.
Marion’s Case
) 311 (McHugh J);
) 806 [125], 807 [130] (Leeming
Marion’s Case
) 310–11 (McHugh J);
) 66350–1 [64] (Basten JA,
Beazley JA agreeing at 66339 [1]);
) 317 [22] (Murrell CJ and Burns J,
Penfold J agreeing at 323 [49]).
) 801–2 [102], 807 [130] (Leeming
JA, Barrett JA agreeing at 782 [2]),
785–6 [18] (Emmett JA).
Qld Criminal Code
) sch 1 ss 1 (definition of
‘grievous bodily harm’), 245,
300–3, 320(1), 323, 352. Cf Luntz et al (n
) 733 [12.4.1].
Cth Criminal Code
Criminal Code Act 1983
Qld Criminal Code
Criminal Code Act 1924
Criminal Code Act Compilation Act
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Law Consolidation
Vic Crimes Act
). See also
Crofts et al (n
[2.6]–[2.8].
See Vines (n
Ibid. See above nn
–3 and accompanying text.
) 236–7 (Lord Templeman),
245–6 (Lord Jauncey), 255–6 (Lord Lowry).
See Luntz et al (n
) 21–2 [1.1.34]; Vines (n
) 799 [92], 807 [130].
See above nn
–8 and accompanying text. This is
more so because ordinary, socially acceptable contact within daily life does not
battery: see above nn
–6 and accompanying text.
It follows that we are broadly in
agreement with the approach taken by McLachlin J (for
L’Heureux-Dubé, Gonthier, McLachlin and Binnie JJ) in
): at 568–70
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (357 KB)
PDF format (349 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter