URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2008/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:20:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Zeller, Bruno --- "From Text to Context:; The International View" [2008] MqJlBLaw 12; (2008) 5 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 281
From Text to Context: The International View
Introduction
Internationalization of Legal Principles
Articles 7 and 8 CISG8 and the Question of Textualism
UNIDROIT Principles
From Text to Context: The International View
DR BRUNO ZELLER*
Literature and case law has acknowledged that a paradigm shift in the
interpretation of legal texts has occurred. The textual approach
is being slowly
replaced by a contextual one. This article intends to point out that such a
development is inevitable as international
treaties and soft laws mandate a
shift to a contextual approach. As many treaties have become part of domestic
and most of these treaties demand a contextual approach
certainty can only be achieved if domestic law moves in the same
direction. This is especially so if the enormous impact of globalization
business in general is taken into consideration.
Introduction
The problem of interpreting contractual document has produced a debate which
has not been completely resolved. His Hon. J J Spigelman
in his illuminating and
most useful contribution to the debate has forcefully argued the textual
approach. He pointed out that “law
is a fashion
and he voiced the
concern whether “the change in the general style of contractual
interpretation – from text to context
– has undermined the desirable
objective of ensuring commercial
certainty.”
His Honor importantly pointed out that ensuring commercial certainty in all
cases is a desirable objective. Therefore what is understood
under the term of
“commercial certainty” needs to be fleshed out. It is indeed true to
say that certainty must have a
link to risk allocation and hence financial
decision making. Certainty can also be achieved by universally adopting either a
or contextual approach. This is where the real problem and definition of
certainty must rest. Certainty in essence must be linked
to a uniform
application of laws irrespective where the conflict arises. This is so as
globalization and internationalization of
trade opened the world. It is not by
accident that it can be said that the world is
. The important effect of
globalization is that legal boundaries do not any more equate to political
boundaries. Conventions and treaties
have permeated and influenced domestic
systems to a great extent. The result is that decisions in one state are as
close as possible
as in another one despite the fact that their domestic legal
systems are different.
It is not by accident that Lewison, when discussing the attitude of the court
in the interpretation of commercial contract can point
out that the emphasis in
interpretation should include the commercial purpose of the contract. He
“This attitude has grown remarkably in recent years, and is perhaps the
single most important change in the construction of
all classes of written
instruments this
Spigelman JJ. agrees that there is no doubt that a “business
like” interpretation is an acceptable constraint on contractual
interpretations.
This paper attempts to explain briefly that methods rooted in domestic legal
systems should not be viewed as the only determining
factor in contractual
interpretations. It really does not matter whether a textual approach is sound
and justified if the results
it produces are not in step with international
legal developments. In the end justice is not served if the same contract can
different results only because one is decided using domestic principles
while the other one has been decided pursuant to international
uniform laws,
both laws, being part of the same municipal system of law.
Internationalization of Legal
The “dualism” of legal principles has been influenced by
transplantations of legal documents as well as conventions and
treaties. To that
end they have influenced directly or indirectly the way contracts are and need
to be interpreted. One example will
briefly illustrate the transplantation
effects on our domestic system namely the Warsaw Convention. It is now
established that in
certain circumstances where a law has been transplanted
techniques other than the ones explored in Australia can be used.
The Australian High Court has recognized that the “goal” of
international law is the mandate of uniformity. It is encouraging
to note that
the High Court understands that uniformity of law is an important feature which
contributes towards certainty and predictability
in international trade. In a
domestic matter the High Court noted:
“decision must be reached by this court with close attention to any
relevant developments of international law, including decisions
of the municipal
courts of other states parties
The Australian High Court went even further and clearly stated that “no
differentiation could be drawn on the basis that it
was not obligatory for
Australia to apply the language of the Warsaw Convention to domestic carriage by
air within Australia.”
The mere fact that the Warsaw convention was transplanted into Australian
domestic law was sufficient for the High Court to abandon
ethnocentric
interpretation in favor of an international one. Arguably a reason not to adopt
an international interpretation would
be difficult to maintain and would run
contrary to the objective of certainty.
This leads to another point of variance namely where a particular area of law
such as the sale of goods is covered by two domestic
instruments. On one hand we
have the common law and related State statutes such the Sales of Goods Acts and
on the other hand we
have the Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention) Acts (CISG). One
deals with domestic sales the other one exclusively with international
is of more than passing interest that the CISG in its mandate included an
interpretational article which cannot be overruled
by using any other techniques
which may be current in domestic law.
The differenced are far reaching. If a textual approach of interpretation
would be applied to the CISG the law would be wrongly applied
and could lead
arguably to an appeal in law as the interpretative articles 7 and 8 mandate the
contextual approach. Furthermore if
the textual approach would be used to
domestic contracts a contextual approach would be needed for international
contracts hence
creating a dual system of interpretation. Such an outcome does
not contribute to certainty or justice.
Articles 7 and 8
and the Question of Textualism
As noted above the CISG includes two interpretative articles into its regime.
The problem in interpreting contracts is to ascertain
the intentions of the
parties. The long standing argument in the common law has been to determine the
intentions in an objective
sense and not in a subjective one. In
Toll (FGCR)
Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
the High Court affirmed the objective approach. However a closer reading
suggests that the objective approach as formulated by Lord
Investors Compensation Scheme
was not followed as the court noted:
“The meaning of the terms of a contractual document is to be determined by
what a reasonable person would have understood them
to mean. That, normally
requires consideration not only of the text, but also of the surrounding
circumstances known to the parties,
and the purpose and object of the
transaction.”
At the same time it can be argued that “the previous negotiations of
the parties and their declarations of subjective
have not been
embraced. However as Spigelman JJ. notes, “
affirms the
longstanding view, also expressed in
, that the orthodox approach
to interpretation is
objective.”
Such interpretations are at odds with the mandate of the CISG. The questions
which need to be looked at are: what are the required
interpretational
techniques used within the CISG?
The starting point is Article 7(1) which is very specific in stating:
“In the interpretation of this Convention, regard is to be had to its
international character and to the need to promote uniformity
in its application
and the observance of good faith in international
Two main issues pertinent for this discussion can be clearly established.
First that any interpretation of the convention must be
undertaken with the view
to “promote uniformity in its application” Secondly that such
interpretation must be conducted
by observing the principle of good faith.
What this means has been clarified by academic
as well as court
is that recourse to
domestic principles and laws is not permitted hence it must be interpreted
autonomously.
On the other hand
Downs Investments Pty Ltd (in liq) v Perwaja Steel SDN
is an example where the
mandate of article 7 was not followed
Of the forty-four cited cases,
Delchi Carrier S.P.A. v Rotorex
Roder Zelt- und
Hallenbaukonstruktionen GmbH v Rosedown Park Pty Ltd
had any connection to the
CISG. The remainders were only relevant in domestic matters. Furthermore it is
ironic that the only relevant
case namely
Delchi Carriers
, which was
relied upon by the court is noted by many scholars as an example where the court
could not overcome its ethnocentric
. Chan Leng Sun has put
the problem succinctly by noting:
“It can be seen that common law jurists have a lot of baggage to discard
when faced with the CISG. The tricky question is what
to discard and what to
apply in conjunction with the stipulations in the CISG. The CISG is not
exhaustive. There is still an important
role for domestic law, but there is a
risk of the homeward trend even on matters governed by the CISG. The knee-jerk
recourse to
the comfort of familiar domestic methodology must be
suppressed.”
Of importance is the fact that domestic legislation can track the CISG. It
be “trite to argue that because the laws are similar or even
the same the outcome would be the
This is specially
so when article 8
is taken into
consideration which in brief allows recourse to the subjective intentions of the
parties. The court in
MCC MarbleCeramic Center, Inc. v Ceramica Nuova
D’Agostino S.P.A
stated categorically:
“…article 8(3) of the CISG expressly directs courts to give due
consideration … to all relevant circumstances of
the case including the
negotiations …to determine the intent of the parties … article 8(3)
is a clear instruction to
admit and consider ….evidence regarding the
negotiations to the extent they reveal the parties ‘subjective
That is not to say the CISG only relies on the subjective intent of parties.
Indeed the convention in article 8 clearly established
an interpretation ladder
where, failing the subjective intent, the objective intent of the parties must
be taken into account. This
is a common sense approach as it fosters the
legitimate expectations of contractual parties.
The Federal District Court of
was asked to establish
whether the parties only intended to treat the sales contract as a mere
verification. The court noted:
The plain language of the CISG requires the Court to evaluate a party's
subjective intent, so long as the other party was aware of
that intent.
Otherwise, paragraph two of article 8
The court could not establish that the parties knew or could not have been
unaware of their intent and thereof article 8(2) is applicable.
Because the Court is confined to Article 8(2) of the CISG, it is to look at the
objective evidence of the parties' intent. In other
words, the Court must
consider whether ACI's actions made its subjective intent to treat the sales
contracts as mere verifications
known to the understanding of a reasonable
person of the same kind as the other party (i.e., Guang Dong) in the same
circumstances.
At first glance this is a clear mandate to courts to abandon the parol
evidence rule or the textual approach. The question may be
asked with is the
better or superior approach to the problem? However this question simply is a
theoretical one. The real question
is what the law is saying on this particular
issue. If the attention is turned back to what his Honor Spigelman had to say,
conclusion is that the textual approach is to be the preferred way
contracts can be interpreted. The textual approach however is
not a mandatory
substantive rule. Turning back to international instruments and in this case
particularly the CISG the answer is
different. The only solution which can and
must be found rests within the regulations of the CISG. The relevant rules are
to be found
in articles 7 and 8 which mandate the contextual approach.
The inevitable conclusion to such as question is which law should prevail.
Two considerations need to be taken into account. First
established wisdom
dictates that the first instrument to be looked at is the contract. If the
matter is clear, any questions arising
out of the contract can be resolved by
taking recourse to the wishes of the parties as expressed in the contract. If
the contract
is not clear then recourse has to be had to the law. In this case
the CISG would overrule the common law or the Goods Act in cases
international sales.
It must be noted that drafters of contractual contract whether they fall
within he common law or the CISG always have the option to
“entire agreement clause” into the contract. Both instruments the
common law and the CISG via article 6 observe
the important maxim of contractual
freedom. If such a clause is included into the contract the question of
contextualism vs texstualism
would be resolved in favor of textualism
irrespective of any law used in Australia.
Secondly it must be established that the CISG does not breach mandatory rules
of the sovereign state in which the matter is resolved.
In other words the
question is whether the parol evidence rule is a mandatory rule. A question as
to the application of a mandatory
law has been recently asked in the Supreme
Court of Victoria
context of the parol evidence rule but in relation to the
Trade Practices
.1974 (Cth) (TPA)
The facts are simple. The arbitration clause contained a term whereby the
seat of arbitration was to be Singapore and the proper law
of the contract was
the Philippines. However the arbitration took place in Melbourne. One of the
questions was which law was applicable
to deal with a misrepresentation which
was made by persons present within
The arbitral tribunal
applied the law of the Philippines.
In a similar case
stated that:
“The fact that the proper law of the contract is the law of a foreign
country does not prevent the conduct of one party to
the contract from falling
within the purview of s.52, if it would do so
otherwise.”
However in the Victorian Supreme Court Hollingworth J noted that the Law of
the Philippines was applicable, a contrary view as the
one expressed by Gleeson
The argument can be advanced that the clear distinction of domestic law vs.
foreign law has been blurred and what may be clearly a
mandatory law in a
domestic setting may be weakened if applied in the international context.
As far as the parol evidence rule is concerned no mandatory law in Australia
is applicable hence the contextual approach must be applied.
Spigelman JJ also
correctly pointed out that Australian and English interpretative methods are not
It can be argued that
Australian courts are closer connected to the contextual approach than their
English counterparts. This is
all in line with a shifting legal landscape due
perhaps to the ever increasing introduction of international uniform laws
they are black letter law or soft laws.
UNIDROIT Principles
His Honor also mentioned the Principles of European Contract Law (PECL) and
the UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts
Principles) as an example where English law will depart from Australian
However the point is that
these principles will also impinge on our laws specifically in the area of
arbitration where UNIDROIT principles
are frequently used. An interesting point
to consider would be if a party to a domestic contract would include the
UNIDROIT principles
as the governing law. As the parol evidence rule or the
textual approach is not a mandatory rule or approach the contractual terms
need to be given priority. This would lead to a contextual approach, as the
UNIDROIT principles, taking their lead from the
CISG, also include the
subjective approach into their regime. Furthermore courts and tribunals
increasingly look for guidance from
international instruments such as the
UNIDROIT principles and the CISG when interpreting domestic contracts.
Courts have referred to the Principles on several occasions. It is
specifically instructive to note the views expressed in
Hideo Yoshimoto v
Canterbury Golf International
The New Zealand Court
of Appeal found it necessary to refer to the UNIDROIT Principles and the CISG as
they grappled with difficulties
in interpreting a contract. Specifically the
advantages of article 4.3 of the Principles were explained as allowing the court
realistic approach in the interpretation of contracts. However the court
did not apply the Principles or the CISG for that matter,
as they were not
prepared to go beyond these declarations. The court commented:
“But while this Court could seek to depart from the law as applied in
England and bring the law in New Zealand into line with
these international
conventions, I do not think it would be permitted to do so by the Privy
Arguably therefore there is sufficient evidence that domestic systems have
engaged in considering the Principles in the process of
transplantation. Bonell points out that the Principles are useful as a means of
interpreting and supplementing
the otherwise applicable law in cross border
transactions.
The argument
Bonell advances is that even if the CISG is applicable the UNIDROIT principles
can be used as a guide to clarify otherwise
unclear matters where the CISG is
either silent or not explicit.
The UNIDROIT Principles and the CISG have also found their way into English
case law. In
ProForce Recruit Ltd v Rugby Group
- a domestic case
– Mummery LJ noted:
“careful consideration may have to be given to the aims to be achieved by
contractual interpretation and the precise extent
to which the law requires an
objective interpretation, It may be appropriate to consider a number of
international instruments applying
to contracts. It is sufficient to take two
examples. The UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts give
the common intention of the parties and on questions of
interpretation requires regard to be had to all the circumstances, including
pre-contractual negotiations of the parties (art 4.3). The UN Convention on
Contracts for the International Sale of Goods (1980)
provides that a party's
intention is in certain circumstances relevant, and in determining that
intention regard is to be had to
all relevant circumstances, including
preliminary
negotiations”
Similar sentiments were expressed in another English domestic case by Lady
The Square Mile Partnership Ltd v Fitzmaurice McCall
It certainly can be
argued that the English courts are increasingly becoming aware of the need to
“modernize” contractual
interpretation in order to stay in step with
international developments.
A further points needs to be made. The EU currently is making progress with
the writing and eventual introduction of a uniform European
Sales law. No doubt
such a move will change the English Common Law. On an official political level,
unification of sales laws has
played an important part. A few years ago,
the European Parliament passed a resolution requesting the European organs
to start work on a pan-European Contract Law. That was
in 1989 and a second time
Although at the
beginning the Commission was reluctant
has now become active.
It listed in its communication of
the various options
available for a further development of Contract Law in EU
Based on the
opinions which the Commission received,
the European Commission published
an ‘action plan’ for a coherent European Contract
In this action plan, the
Commission provides for the drafting of a so-called ‘reference
frame’ for Contract Law,
which should form the basis for further reflection on an optional instrument in
the area of European contract law. The reference
frame is expected to be
published by the end of 2007. Several ‘think tanks’ have taken up
the work, and the ‘soft
law codification’ in the form of the
Principles of European Contract Law (1995/1999/2003) shows that the sceptics of
‘Europeanized’ contract law are
The conclusion simply is that unification of laws in general and sales laws
in particular are strongly embedded in legal thinking
in the EU. No doubt the
unified EU sales law will reflect its parentage namely the CISG and PECL and
hence as far as interpretation
of contracts is concerned, rely on a contextual
approach. Whether the UK, or any other domestic system for that matter, can
out,” remains to be seen.
The conclusion which can be drawn is the likelihood that the textual approach
will give way to the contextual approach because international
instruments are
basing the interpretation of contracts on the subjective as well as the
objective intent of the parties and hence
the textual approach has been
abandoned. After all a contract is the culmination of the wishes of two parties.
In many cases not
all the agreed terms are contained within the contract as they
are either steeped in customary dealings or are assumed as having
been settled
in pre-negotiations. The problem with the textual approach is that a third party
namely the court attempts to determine
what the parties intended to agree on
without asking the parties. The surrounding circumstances are ignored or at best
fully into consideration. Certainty may be achieved as far as the law
is concerned but the question whether the true meaning of the
relationship has been determined remains unanswered.
The fact that the UNIDROIT principles in particular are increasingly finding
their way into court decisions is also telling. Courts
arguably are at least
comparatively addressing the alternative to the parol evidence rule or the
textual approach and despite the
fact that in many cases the decisions is not
based on the UNIDROIT principles the fact remains that international documents
are attracting
the attention of some courts where the textual approach is still
The point to make is that the international instruments are not following the
textual approach and hence domestic law for the sake
of unity and certainty
should be encouraged to follow the same path and not restrict the scope of
surrounding circumstances .
* Associate Professor, Victoria University, Adjunct Professor, Murdoch
University, Perth.
Spiegelman JJ. “From text to context: Contemporary
contractual interpretation”
(2007) 81 ALJ 322
Spigelman JJ n 1 at 323.
Friedman, T,
The world is
flat: a brief history of the globalized world in the twenty-first century
Allan Lane, London (2005).
Lewison, K.,
Interpretation of Contracts 2004
ed. Sweet & Maxwell)
London, p 236.
Spigelman JJ n 1 at 330.
Air Link Pty Limited v
[2005] HCA 39
(10 August 2005] at [40].
Air Link Pty Limited v
n 6 at [49].
This discussion is not a
detailed one as excellent material can be found which analysis articles 7 and 8
in detail. As an example
see Zeller B. “Determining the Contractual Intent
of Parties under the CISG and Common Law - A Comparative Analysis”
Vol. 4, No. 4 European Journal of Law Reform (Kluwer) 629.
(2004) 219 CLR 167.
Lord Hoffman in Investors
Compensation Scheme Ltd. V West Bromwich Building Society
[1997] UKHL 28
[1998] 1 All ER 98
WLR 896 at 912-913.
Spigelman JJ n 1 at
Mazzotta , F.
“The International Character of the UN Convention on Contracts for the
International Sale of Goods: An Italian Case
[http://cisgw3.law.pace.edu/cisg/biblio/mazzotta.html] viewed
10 January 2008.
See as an example Italy 12
July 2000 District Court Vigevano (
Rheinland Versicherungen v. Atlarex
[http://cisgw3.law.pace.edu/cases/000712i3.html] viewed 10 January 2008.
[2001] QCA 433
[2002] 2 Qd R
[1995] USCA2 1270
71 F 3d 1024
[1995] FCA 1221
(1995) 57 FCR 216.
See for example Cook S
The UN Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods: A
Mandate to Abandon Legal Ethnocentric”
(1997) 16 Journal of Law and
Presented in "Celebrating
Success: 25 Years United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International
Sale of Goods" (Collation
of Papers at UNCITRAL – SIAC Conference 22-23
September 2005, Singapore), [http://cisgw3.law.pace.edu/cisg/biblio/sun1.html]
viewed 10 January 2008.
CISG and the
Unification of International Trade Law
. (Routledge-Cavendish 2007) p 83.
Article 8 states:
(1) For the purposes of this Convention statements made by and other conduct
of a party are to be interpreted according to his intent
where the other party
knew or could not have been unaware what that intent was.
(2) If the preceding paragraph is not applicable, statements made by and
other conduct of a party are to be interpreted according
to the understanding
that a reasonable person of the same kind as the other party would have had in
the same circumstances.
(3) In determining the intent of a party or the understanding a reasonable
person would have had, due consideration is to be given
to all relevant
circumstances of the case including the negotiations, any practices which the
parties have established between themselves,
usages and any subsequent conduct
of the parties.
[1998] USCA11 1817
144 F.3d 1384
Cir. (Fla) 1998
http://www.cisg.law.pace.edu
January 2008
MCC Marble 1387 n8 and 1388
United States 28 September
2007 Federal District Court [Kansas] (
Guang Dong Light Headgear Factory Co.
Ltd. v. ACI International, Inc.
[http://cisgw3.law.pace.edu/cases/070928u2.html]
viewed 10 January 2008.
United States 28 September
2007 Federal District Court [Kansas] n 24, 52.
United States 28 September
2007 Federal District Court [Kansas].
Transfield v Pacific
[2006] VSC 175.
Megens, P and Bonnell, M.
“The Bakun dispute: Mandatory national laws in international
arbitration”
Francis Travel Marketing
Pty Ltd v Virgin Atlantic Airways Ltd
(1996) 39 NSWLR 160.
Spigelman JJ,n 1 at
Spigelman JJ n 1 at
Court of Appeal,
Wellington,
2000 NZCA 350.
Court of Appeal, Wellington
n 33 at [90]. It should be noted that the English Privy Council was still the
highest court of Appeal
in the New Zealand Court Hierarchy. This has now changed
Bonell, M. “The
UNIDROIT Principles and Transnational Law” in Berger, K.P. (ed) The
Practice of Transnational Law, (2001)
Kluwer Law, 37.
[2006] EWCA Civ 69.
[2006] EWCA Civ 69
See for details United
Kingdom 18 December 2006 Court of Appeal (Civil Division) (
The Square Mile
Partnership Ltd v Fitzmaurice McCall Ltd
[http://cisgw3.law.pace.edu/cases/061218uk.html]
viewed 10 January 2008.
ABl C 158 p. 400-401,
Europäische Zeitschrift für Privatrecht 1995, 669.
Communication from the
Commission to the European Parliament and the Council, A more Coherent European
Contract Law, COM(2003) 68
This common frame of
reference should provide for best solutions in terms of common terminology and
rules, i.e. the definition of
fundamental concepts and abstract terms like
‘contract’ or ‘damage’ and of the rules that apply for
in the case of non-performance of contracts.
Zeller B., n 20 at 15.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (113 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter