URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2008/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Evans, Simon; Williams, John --- "Appointing Australian Judges: A New Model" [2008] SydLawRw 16; (2008) 30(2) Sydney Law Review 295
Appointing Australian Judges:A New Model
1. Introduction
2. Guiding Principles
A. Merit-Based Appointments
B. Judicial Independence
C. Diversity
D. Accountability through Transparency
E. Context and Constraints
3. Relevant Overseas Models
4. A Model for Australian Judicial Appointments
B. Selection Criteria
(ii) Diversity
C. Outreach and Advertising
D. Applications
E. Consultation
F. Assessing Candidates
(i) Shortlisting
(ii) Interviews by Panels of The Commission
(iii) Assessment of Skills — Assessment Centres
(iv) Final Assessment by the Whole Commission Rather Than a Subset
G. Recommending Names
H. Composition of the Commission
I. Secretariat
J. Audit and Accountability
5. Conclusions
Appointing Australian Judges:
SIMON EVANS
The article argues for reform in the process by which members of the Australian
judiciary are selected. Such reform is needed in
order to ensure two things.
First, that the judiciary retains the independence that is essential for it to
discharge its constitutional
functions. And, second, that it reflects the
society from which it is drawn and continues to enjoy the confidence of that
We recommend that Australia adopt a process for judicial appointments that is
based on the process recently established for England
and Wales under the
Constitution
2005 (UK). Appointments would continue to be made
by the executive. Judicial Appointments Commissions (consisting of three
members, three legal members and six non-legal members —
including the Chair) would recommend to the executive the names of
three persons
from among whom the appointment must be made. The Commissions’
recommendations would be the culmination of an
evidence-based process involving
applications, references, interviews and in some cases practical assessment of
relevant skills.
1. Introduction
The article argues for a particular set of reforms of the process by which
members of the judiciary are selected. In advocating these
reforms we do not
suggest that the appointment process to date has entirely failed. Measured in
historical and international terms
the Australian judiciary is acknowledged to
be of outstanding quality and has enjoyed the public’s confidence.
Nonetheless,
it should be remembered that the current system is itself a product
of reform and adaptation.
reforms are now needed in order to ensure two things. First, that the judiciary
demonstrably retains the independence and
competence that is essential for it to
discharge its constitutional functions. And, second, that it reflects the
society from which
it is drawn and continues to enjoy the confidence of that
While the collective strength and quality of the Australian judiciary is not
in doubt, it is the case that particular appointments
have attracted criticism,
either in relation to the character and ability of the individual chosen or
their conduct while in office.
is a notorious fact that judicial officers have been appointed, including to the
High Court,
whose character and
intellectual and legal capacities have been doubted and whose appointments have
been identified as instances
of political
A further and persistent general criticism of the appointment process relates
to the resulting composition of the various courts.
For instance, speaking in
1983, Justice Lionel Murphy noted that ‘[w]hen it comes to women judges we
have not even reached
the stage of
Such criticisms
are not limited to the gender composition of the
Australia is not alone in considering reform of the appointments
Indeed, similar criticisms
of the classic Westminster appointments process have already resulted in review
and reform in other parts
of the common law world. Those experiences provide the
models for the direction that Australia should now take.
The purpose of this article is not to examine in detail the criticisms of the
current appointments process or to survey the various
appointment processes in
Australia and overseas. These tasks have already been undertaken by
The purpose of this
article is to suggest a viable appointments model within the institutional and
political constraints existing
in Australia today that addresses the need to
ensure an independent and competent judiciary that has the confidence of a
The rest of this paper is in three parts. First, we set out the fundamental
principles that must guide any set of arrangements for
appointment to the
Australian judiciary. Secondly, we analyse relevant overseas models that could
provide a basis for an Australian
appointments system. Thirdly, we argue that a
sensitive adaptation of one such model, the UK Judicial Appointments Commission,
the appropriate basis for an Australian system of judicial appointments
commissions and is consistent with the guiding principles
for any system of
appointments.
2. Guiding Principles
The model that we develop in Part 4 of this paper tracks four guiding
principles. We do not pretend that these principles represent
an exhaustive
list. Indeed, even within this list there is a degree of overlap. However, they
mark out the values that inform the
model. This section outlines the four
guiding principles and their implications for any judicial appointment process.
These principles
are matters of constitutional significance: appointments should
be made solely on the basis of merit, properly understood; an appointments
process should ensure judicial independence; an appointments process should
ensure equality of opportunity, and hence diversity,
in appointments in the
interests of a judiciary that reflects the society from which it is drawn; and
an appointments process should
include appropriate accountability
mechanisms.
A. Merit-Based Appointments
The first principle is that appointments to the Australian judiciary must be
made solely on the basis of merit. As the former Attorney-General
Philip Ruddock
said, ‘[t]he Government believes that the essential criterion for
appointment to the federal judiciary is
Nothing in this
paper is intended to cast the slightest doubt on this foundational
A set of arrangements involving a judicial appointments commission is
consistent with appointment on the basis of merit. (The Judicial
Appointments
Commission in England and Wales (and for the UK Supreme Court) has a mandate to
on the basis of
However, the concept of
merit, which has been said to be an elusive or illusory concept, must be broken
down into its constituent
elements. As stated by Geoffrey Davies, former Judge
of the Queensland Court of Appeal, ‘[n]o word is more used or abused in
this context [the criteria for judicial appointment] than
Without a clear articulation of what constitutes merit, ‘the concept
becomes almost wholly subjective, allowing each decision-maker
to construct his
or her own features which are
significant.’
The risk is
that invocation of merit will simply collapse into the general tendency
‘to see merit in those who exhibit the
same qualities as
themselves’, with the result that those who appoint new judges will select
those who share the professional,
social and gender characteristics of their
predecessors.
These concerns are
exacerbated by the closed nature of most judicial appointment processes
currently used in Australia.
The publication of disaggregated selection criteria provides for greater
transparency by allowing candidates to be assessed against
a common set of
so enabling ‘a
more realistic interpretation of what “merit” actually involves for
a particular job’.
Disaggregating the components of merit also enables evaluation of the
that are implicit in the concept of
As argued by Justice
Sackville, ‘[t]o the extent that publication of standards encourages
public discussion and debate about
the qualities required of judicial officers,
this might be thought to promote greater public confidence in the judicial
appointment
The concept of merit in judicial appointments
be disaggregated
into sub-criteria. The former Federal Attorney-General, for instance, said that
‘[m]erit means legal excellence,
a demonstrated capacity for industry and
a temperament suited to the performance of the judicial
starting point. The concept can be further broken down.
Commentators
established to make or recommend judicial appointments in other
have done so.
Their lists of sub-criteria encompass legal skills and personal qualities. The
legal skills relate to knowledge of
the law, intellectual capacity and
experience; the capacity to ‘stage manage’ proceedings in the
courtroom; facility
with complex fact situations and arguments; and the ability
to write judgments. The personal qualities listed include integrity,
impartiality, industry, a strong sense of fairness, decisiveness, understanding
and a sound temperament.
other desirable skills may differ between courts. For example, forensic
experience may be highly valuable for appointment
to a criminal trial court but
less important for appointment to an appellate court; equally, the intellectual
skills required for
appointment to an appellate court may be of less
significance in evaluating candidates for appointment to high volume
One further implication of disaggregating merit in this way is to
recognise that there is no necessary correlation between successful
practice at
the bar and the skills required for judicial
Appointments should be made on the basis of evidence demonstrating that the
appointee possesses the various qualities that together
constitute merit. No
other process is capable of providing reasonable assurance that the appointee is
among the most qualified candidates
for the position. Without an evidence-based
approach, there is too great a risk of subjectivity re-entering the process,
the attempts to limit it by breaking ‘merit’ down into its
constituent elements.
If the concept of merit is disaggregated and clearly articulated and applied
on the basis of evidence, it is consistent with the best
of existing practice in
judicial appointments. Further, disaggregating the concept highlights the
shortcomings of existing processes
that fail to identify worthy candidates
beyond the range of the ‘usual suspects’. As Roach Anleu and Mack
have observed,
there is no reason to think that merit resides predominantly in
the narrow group that has historically dominated the Australian
B. Judicial Independence
The independence of the judiciary is a fundamental principle of Australian
constitutionalism that must inform any judicial appointment
process. However, it
does not, even within the tradition of Australian constitutionalism, demand an
absolute separation of all aspects
of the judicial process from the political
process. Indeed, such an absolute separation is not possible under the
Constitution
Moreover, it is
perhaps not desirable that appointments be wholly independent from politics.
Ultimately, appointment, remuneration
and removal are within the constitutional
competence of the executive and the parliament. Comment on, and criticism of,
the judiciary
remain legitimate for members of the executive and the parliament.
Indeed, any reform of judicial appointment processes will require
debate in, and
action from, the political branches.
What is essential is that
independence be guaranteed to
judicial officers. The core of judicial independence is freedom from influence
in the central judicial
task of adjudicating disputes about legal rights that
arise between private parties, between the State and private parties, and (in
federation) between components of the State. The core is protected through
institutional arrangements such as tenure, remuneration
and the jurisdictional
separation of powers.
already noted, it is inescapable that politics will have a role to play in the
appointment process. However, if appointments
are perceived to be made on the
basis of political patronage there is a threat to (at least the appearance of)
decisional independence.
It is impossible — and undesirable — to
remove the political entirely from the appointments process. Indeed, in our
‘political’ considerations,
in the sense of responsibility
and accountability for appointments
, need to be intensified rather than
obscured. What an appointments model should attempt to do is attenuate the
direct influence of
the political branch on the appointment process and subject
its involvement in the appointment process to greater transparency and
accountability, while preserving all the existing constitutional arrangements
for ensuring decisional independence.
C. Diversity
Judges are not representatives of any group or constituency. Their duty is to
‘do right to all manner of people according to
law without fear or favour,
affection or ill-will’.
Equally, the judiciary as a whole does not need to be representative of any
group or constituency.
However, a judiciary — indeed any institution — that fails to
reflect the make-up of the society from which it is drawn
will sooner or later
lose the confidence of that
As Justice McHugh put
it, ‘when a court is socially and culturally homogeneous, it is less
likely to command public confidence
in the impartiality of the
institution’.
Australian judiciary is such an institution. The Australian judiciary as
currently constituted does not reflect Australian society.
To focus just on
gender: in 2006, there were ‘26 female judges of the State Supreme Courts,
including two appellate Judges,
one President of the Court of Appeal and one
Chief Justice, namely Chief Justice Marilyn Warren of the Victorian Supreme
the Federal level, there [were] 6 female judges of the Federal Court
and 17 female judges of the Family Court, which is led by Chief
Justice Diana
Bryant’. This amounts to an approximate 20% representation on the bench of
the superior courts.
The point is not that the present system results in the appointment of people
who do not have the required qualities for judicial
office. Rather, the current
process systematically overlooks others who
have the required
considerations support the argument that a judiciary should reflect the society
of which it is part. Here we follow a
summary of these considerations presented
by Alan Paterson in his study of the Scottish appointments
First, there should be no place in the appointments process for direct or
indirect discrimination on unacceptable grounds. The current
system that relies
on soundings and a network of contacts in conjunction with an unarticulated
concept of merit is open to (at least
perceptions of) such
influences.
Second, this perception is to the detriment of public confidence in the
Third, a judiciary that reflects the society from which it is drawn
‘represents a sound use of human resources … modern
societies cannot
afford to lose the intellectual power and energy of … [so much of their]
… population’.
Baroness Prashar, Chair of the Judicial Appointments Commission in the UK,
recently said, ‘[t]he benefit of widening the
range of applicants has a
powerful simplicity. If more, well-qualified people apply to be judges, the
merit of those selected will
either remain the same as now or be enhanced. And
if the appointments process excludes consideration of irrelevant factors then we
might also expect appointed judges to come from a very wide range of
backgrounds’.
Fourth, judges from diverse backgrounds may serve as role models for wider
community involvement in the legal profession.
D. Accountability through Transparency
A basic premise in a Westminster system is responsible government, which has
been supported and supplemented through other institutional
arrangements such as
parliamentary and statutory bodies. Parliamentary committees and the rise of the
‘new administrative law’
arrangements are examples of a modern and
more robust institutional system of executive accountability. Outside the
parliament, the
media and civil society organisations regularly scrutinise the
exercise of public power, complementing the formal institutional accountability
mechanisms.
Accountability for the exercise of executive power is an aspect of a wider
and pervasive principle of modern liberal constitutionalism
that demands
accountability for the exercise of public power in general. As a branch of
government wielding public power, the judiciary
is subject to this principle.
Obviously the judiciary is accountable for its decisions through the right to
open justice, an appellate
procedure and an increasing willingness to engage in
public discussion as to its role. The last of these has been the result of a
changed understanding of the traditional function of the Attorney-General,
particularly at the federal
The question that arises here is how best to ensure executive accountability
in the appointment process. First, it is important to
recognise the limitations
of the current accountability measures. As a means of holding the government to
account for its appointees,
the current system is both unfocused and lacks
rigour. Moreover, the accountability of the government to the parliament is
retrospective.
Good public administration is founded upon the establishment of
transparent processes and standards in advance of their operation
application. The current absence of formal and articulated processes and
standards for judicial appointments leads to disingenuous
statements by
Attorneys-General when announcing an appointment. They are forced to make the
generally implausible comment that ‘X
outstanding
candidate’. Such statements overlook the wealth of talent available and
further reinforce the idea that appointment
can be based on personal,
professional and perhaps political connections to the Attorney-General.
This does not mean that political accountability for appointments is
unimportant or that responsibility for appointments should be
removed completely
from the executive government. The involvement of the political branch in
appointments may open up the possibility
of appointing some candidates whom a
thoroughly depoliticised appointments process would avoid. James Allan has
[Under systems of direct appointment by the executive government] someone and
some political party can be held politically accountable
for the selection.
There is simply more openness and accountability (for choosing, say, another
male or a former politician). Plus,
a decision to opt for a less activist type
of judge or for someone with unorthodox views on the proper way to interpret
constitutional
provisions can be deliberately and consciously taken. The
government and its attorney-general will have to live with the political
ramifications of such a decision, true, but I see no reason why such options
should be foreclosed (or made extremely difficult, as
surely they would be with
an indirect process) in these days of highly powerful
judiciaries.
Allan’s view, an indirect appointments system blunts the political
opposition: ‘[q]uite simply, it is easier to attack
the constitutional
improprieties of an attorney-general than it is to mount a case against a
Judicial Appointments Board, all of
whose members appear thoroughly apolitical,
legally qualified, and
argument is overdrawn and focuses too narrowly on one dimension of the
appointments process. But it is valuable in
highlighting the role of political
accountability that would be lost in a move to a model under which the
Attorney-General had
role to play in appointments.
The limitations of the current mechanisms for holding governments accountable
for judicial appointments do not mean that the entire
modern administrative law
system should be directed at judicial appointments. Judicial and administrative
review of appointment decisions
inappropriate.
Rather, political
accountability should be supplemented with accountability mechanisms that are
appropriate to the nature of this
kind of exercise. Transparency is a key means
to provide greater accountability in the appointment
In other areas of
public administration, parliamentary and statutory measures of accountability
are present. By contrast, the current
process has minimum transparency, for
example, only requiring the Commonwealth Attorney-General ‘to consult with
the Attorneys-General
of the States’ in relation to High Court
appointments. There is no external scrutiny of the current selection processes,
feeds distrust, perhaps misplaced, that selection is made upon a basis
other than the merit of the candidate. In short, where transparency
be accommodated consistently with other important interests, including
confidentiality, it
be accommodated. This extends to the process
and criteria for appointment and the identity of those making recommendations
appointment.
While our model calls for greater transparency and thus accountability in the
selection process, transparency is not an overriding
principle. There are
powerful institutional and pragmatic reasons for preserving strict
confidentiality of aspects of the process.
For example, if names of potential
appointees, especially in small jurisdictions, were made public it may adversely
affect relationships
with clients. The upshot may be to discourage meritorious
individuals from seeking appointment. Even in larger jurisdictions, breaches
confidentiality would undermine the operation of the system. This is not special
pleading for judicial appointments. Confidentiality
is a common feature of
appointments processes generally. It ensures that meritorious candidates are not
deterred by the prospect
of disclosure of a candidacy that might be perceived as
overreaching or that might (wrongly) be perceived as reflecting badly on
candidate if it was ultimately unsuccessful. Equally, confidentiality of
references ensures that referees are not deterred from
being fully candid about
the evidence that supports (or undermines) the candidate’s
application.
E. Context and Constraints
These four guiding principles are important. But so too are the
constitutional context and practical constraints. Any model for judicial
appointments must take into account the federal structure and the separation of
powers. The model must also acknowledge a degree
of asymmetry between the
Commonwealth, State and Territory systems.
First, at the Commonwealth level, the guarantees and limitation derived from
Chapter III of the
Constitution
must be observed. While we believe the
involvement of, say, the Chief Justice of the Federal Court as a member of a
federal appointments
commission is not incompatible with the judicial function
(provided that he or she consents to his or her
involvement)
there are limits
upon the functions of any proposed judicial appointments commission. For
instance, a federal appointments commission
would be a recommending body, not an
appointing body. Thus any recommendations must be transmitted to the
Governor-General through
the Federal Executive
This maintains the
current system of ministerial accountability for appointments.
Second, the situation for the States, while not as constitutionally as rigid
as the Commonwealth, still suggests caution in radical
departure from the
current processes. Thus while there is no strict separation of powers at the
State level,
there is merit in
limiting the function of the appointments commission to recommendations.
Third, there are a number of practical considerations applicable at both
levels. Should there for instance, be separate appointment
bodies for the local
or magistrates courts and one for senior courts? Alternatively, should each
State have a separate appointments
commission, or should there be a single
national appointments commission? The likely workload of the appointments body,
size of the jurisdiction or jurisdictions involved and the existing
workloads of the likely members of the appointments body, will
constrain the
approach taken. A judicial appointments commission such as we suggest below will
inevitably demand more human and material
resources than the current political
arrangements for judicial appointments. The arrangements must be flexible enough
to apply to
all judiciaries, and any benefits gained must justify the outlay in
additional resources. One example of logistical considerations
emerges from the
experience in England and Wales. The Commission for Judicial Appointments
concluded that the traditional automatic
consultations of many sources were
‘wasteful of judicial time’. They advocated better targeted and
solicited input ‘focused
on giving better quality responses to those
candidates and about those issues where third party evidence is likely to be
… The views of senior judges on candidates, of whom they have
knowledge and experience, need to be captured in a more balanced
and accountable
Any model must be
attentive to concerns of this kind.
3. Relevant Overseas Models
Many comparable common law jurisdictions have moved to reform their
appointments processes in response to concerns similar to those
expressed in
Australia. Some processes are clearly inappropriate for Australia: neither the
system of elected judges (under which
approximately 90% of United States State
judges are chosen) nor the system of partisan scrutiny by a Senate Committee (as
a preliminary
to the United States Senate’s consent to federal judicial
appointments) is appropriate for Australia. Each system is highly
transparent
but infects the appointment process with a partisan flavour that is alien to
Australia’s constitutional traditions.
Equally the South African model is inappropriate. The process centres on the
constitutionally-established Judicial Services Commission,
which includes five
legal professionals, three judges, 11 politicians and four other politically
selected members. The political
representation and the openness of the process
(the JSC publishes transcripts of interviews it holds with judicial candidates)
be problematic and unnecessary to adopt in Australia, especially in the
smaller jurisdictions.
New Zealand’s modifications of the traditional executive-centred
appointments process have been minor. Appointments are still
made by the
Governor-General, acting on the advice of the Attorney-General (or, in the case
of the Chief Justice, on the advice of
The process is still
regulated by convention rather than law. One such convention appears to be that
judges are selected according
to four ‘clearly defined, transparent and
publicly announced criteria’: legal ability; qualities of character;
technical skills; and reflection of
The Attorney-General
also mentions appointments at Cabinet
they have been decided
— convention suggests that Cabinet is not supposed to have any input into
these decisions.
legitimately doubt whether these conventions tie the hands of the executive in
any meaningful way, as the controversy over
the appointment of the initial
complement of judges to the Supreme Court
In Canada, since 1988, candidates for appointment to provincial superior
courts have had to submit formal applications, be scrutinised
by the Federal
Commissioner of Judicial Affairs and be interviewed by provincial or territorial
committees.
More recently, the
executive’s discretion in relation to Supreme Court appointments has been
the subject of intense debate
and has been somewhat
After an interim
process that applied to two appointments in
a new process was adopted
in 2005 but was interrupted by the Liberal Party’s loss at the general
election. In accordance with
a policy statement issued by the government early
advisory committee was established to consider evidence of the qualifications of
members of a long-list of nominees already identified
by the government. The
advisory committee consisted of a Member of Parliament from each recognised
party, a retired judge, a nominee
of the provincial Attorneys-General, a nominee
of the law societies and two prominent non-legal Canadians, each of whom come
the region where the vacancy arose. Nominees did not appear before the
Committee. The Committee recommended to the Minister three
candidates (without
ranking them). The government could appoint one of these, or in exceptional
circumstances, another person. Although
the election intervened before any
appointment was made, the new government retained the Committee’s list of
candidates and
made an appointment from that list. However, instead of the
Minister then appearing before a parliamentary committee ‘to explain
appointment process and the professional and personal qualities of the
appointee’, the appointee himself (now Justice Rothstein)
appeared before
the parliamentary committee. In Professor Peter Hogg’s words, the
Committee’s role was to satisfy itself
‘that this person has the
right stuff to be a judge of the Supreme Court of
This interview
process was broadcast live on Canadian
television.
While this model may
be appropriate for Canada’s highest court, which has a thoroughly
politicised role under the Charter and
in Canadian federalism, it is
inappropriate as a model for Australia’s very different courts.
The most likely model for Australia is the model recently implemented in
England and Wales under the
Constitution
Reform Act 2005
(UK). In April
2006, responsibility for identifying judges to be appointed was transferred from
the Lord Chancellor, with the Commission
for Judicial Appointments fulfilling an
oversight role, to the Judicial Appointments Commission
The JAC is composed of six lay persons, five judges, one solicitor, one
barrister, one magistrate and one tribunal
Three of the judicial
members are selected by the Judges’ Council; the Chair and the other 11
members of the Commission by
a selection
The Chair of the
Commission must be a lay person
and no Member of Parliament can be appointed to the Commission. The remit of the
JAC is to make a recommendation to the Secretary
of State for Constitutional
Affairs as to who should hold judicial offices for courts below the Court of
Constitutional Reform Act
2005 (UK) sets out clear principles on
which the Commission’s recommendations must be premised. It explicitly
states that selections
be founded solely on merit and that the person selected
be of good character.
Additionally, the Act mandates that the Commission ‘have regard to the
need to encourage diversity in the range of persons
available for selection for
appointments’.
In order to
selection procedures for identifying
and assessing
candidates.
However, the Lord
Chancellor must consult the Lord Chief Justice and that each House of Parliament
must approve the proposed guidance
prior to it being adopted by the
Commission.
Beyond these broad guiding principles, the Act leaves it to the Commission to
determine the precise selection process to be
undertaken.
Since its inception
the JAC has been working to formulate a selection procedure that accords with
the principles articulated in the
Act. To date, it has specified five core
qualities and abilities generally required of a candidate for any judicial
as well as publishing
guidance on what constitutes ‘good
character’.
It has also
devised mechanisms to ‘encourage a wide range of applicants’ to
apply and to minimise barriers individuals
face to becoming part of the
The Commission has
determined to broaden the range of applicants by employing the media and
professional organisations to raise awareness
of appointment opportunities
through print and online, and by developing targeted advertising campaigns for
each judicial position
that becomes
A novel approach has
been the use of ‘roadshows’, which provide potential candidates with
information on the selection
process and first-hand accounts of judicial office.
The Commission has also committed itself to collecting data on candidate
at each stage of the selection process for the purposes of
publication.
Under the current appointments processes, candidates complete an application
form and nominate referees, although the Commission may
also consult
predetermined ‘Commission
These would
probably be senior judges and practitioners, as was the case during the interim
appointments processes. The next stage
involves a sifting process. Candidates
are shortlisted on the basis of their application form and references, or, where
been utilised, on qualifying tests. The next stage will then vary
depending on the nature of the post to be filled. Candidates may
need to attend
a selection day where they partake in role plays and a panel interview, or
otherwise only a panel interview is conducted.
The Lord Chief Justice and
another person who has previously held the office for which selection is to be
made or who has other relevant
experience are sent a report on the candidate for
their input.
Once this process
has been completed the Commission must select one candidate whom it recommends
to the Lord Chancellor.
then the responsibility of the Lord Chancellor to accept or reject the
Commission’s recommendation.
If an applicant has a complaint about maladministration by the Commission or
the Lord Chancellor during the selection process he or
she is entitled to
complain directly to the body with which he or she has the complaint or to the
Judicial Appointments and Conduct
Ombudsman. The Ombudsman is responsible for
evaluating all such complaints and determining whether or not it is necessary to
investigate
them. If it is determined that an investigation is necessary the
Ombudsman must investigate the complaint and then issue a report
on any action
that is required.
4. A Model for Australian Judicial
Appointments
The model that we propose for Australia in this article is a modified version
of the system currently operating in the England and
Wales. We do so for the
following reasons.
First, the model is a cautious and incremental development that does not
break with Australia’s legal traditions.
Second, a judicial appointments commission provides a workable model that
best meets the principles outlined in the first part of
the paper. The
Commission on Judicial Appointments, the predecessor to the UK Judicial
Appointments Commission, operated from 2001.
There is now a body of work
reporting on its operation, its strengths and perceived weaknesses, which
confirms the suitability, measured
against the principles outlined earlier, of a
judicial appointments commission.
Third, the model in operation in the United Kingdom arguably represents best
practices within the common law constitutional tradition.
As Kate Malleson
concludes when examining the recent United Kingdom developments:
Far from being a grab for power on the part of the government, as some
commentators initially feared, the proposal for establishing
appointments commission is a rare and commendable example of the executive
giving away a source of political control and
potential patronage. The creation
of a commission has the potential to secure the long-term independence of the
judicial system,
to promote the diversification of the bench, and to enhance
public confidence in the system. The record of commissions in other
in achieving these goals is generally good, although success is
not inevitable. The model of commission set up in England and Wales
sufficiently well-constructed to form the basis for a successful new
model is informed by the English experience it is not a carbon copy of it. There
are significant reasons for departing from
some of its details while maintaining
its fundamental structure. Opponents of a judicial appointments commission have
made the point
that there is a huge difference between the number of judicial
and quasi-judicial appointments made in the United Kingdom and
The English
Commission is responsible for appointing more than 30,000 officers including
tribunal members and lay
Magistrates.
Constitutional
limitations in Australia prevent widespread use of acting judges and recorders
that provide important training ground
for English
appointments.
Thus, it is
argued, there is no need for a judicial appointments commission in Australia.
This is a pragmatic argument which misses
the point of reform. It is not to
reduce the workload of the Attorney-General’s department, but to bring a
principle-based
approach to judicial appointments. Indeed, even if there were
appointment to be made by the Commonwealth or State and
Territory governments this would not detract from the objectives and processes
that the model seeks to enshrine.
This article next outlines some of the specific features of the proposed
Australian model. It does not profess to prescribe the finer
details of the
operation of each Australian judicial appointments
commission.
Many of those issues
rightly should be left to the Commission to determine for itself in light of the
general guidelines. What this
model does is canvass many of the significant
issues in accordance with the general principles previously outlined.
Under our proposal each Commission would:
Define subsidiary selection criteria tailored to the specific needs of each
court that give effect to the primary statutory criterion
that judicial
appointments are made on merit.
When notified by the Attorney-General that the government wishes to make an
appointment to a particular court, advertise and conduct
outreach activities to
identify possible candidates for appointment to the courts within their
Receive applications for appointment that address the selection
Call for references from referees nominated by eligible applicants.
Call for references from the Commission’s nominated referees (a
published list of relevant office-holders).
Assess evidence of qualifications against the selection criteria. Evidence
is contained in applications, references, structured interviews
and (for some
appointments) through formal assessment of applicant’s practical
Recommend three suitably qualified candidates to the Attorney-General for
appointment.
turn to some specific issues raised by the above points.
As a matter of principle the model should apply to all jurisdictions in
Australia (Federal, State and Territory) and to all levels
of the judicial
hierarchy in each jurisdiction: commissions should make recommendations in
relation to appointments to specialist
State courts, the County/District Courts
and the State Supreme Courts as well as to all the Federal courts below the High
The problems with the current appointments process, as we highlighted
earlier, are broadly similar across those jurisdictions and
a broadly similar
set of responses seem indicated. We will describe later how the model may need
to be adapted between Federal, State
and Territory jurisdictions to accommodate
constitutional imperatives. Some variation may also be required between courts
each jurisdiction: for example, the magistracy in the states and
territories has by far the most judicial officers and thus the most
need for new appointments and the most possible candidates for appointment on
each occasion.
Recommendations for appointments to the High Court should ultimately be made
by a Commission. The visibility of the Court means that
its inclusion in the
model sends a leadership signal about the nature of appointments in Australia.
However, we also believe that
the Federal Commission should be in operation for
a period before any High Court appointments are made through this process. There
are a number of significant issues regarding the High Court that need to be
carefully considered and accommodated within the Commission
framework. For
instance, in the case of an unexpected vacancy there is a need for the
Commission to move expeditiously. It is not
desirable for the Court to have less
than its full complement for an extended period of time. Further, the Chief
Justice or the most
senior Justice willing to serve would be included as a
member of the Commission for appointments to the High Court.
B. Selection Criteria
The Commission should apply selection criteria that track
sections 63
Constitution
1. Selection must be solely on merit.
2. A person must not be selected unless the selecting body is satisfied that he
or she is of good character.
3. In performing its functions, the Commission must have regard to the need to
encourage diversity in the range of persons available
for selection for
appointments.
An important initial task for each Commission will be to develop the
statutory merit criterion into selection criteria that are capable
of being put
into practice. Its non-legal members should include at least one member with
expertise in developing such processes
and it should be assisted by an expert
secretariat. One recent articulation of the qualities and skills needed for
judicial officers
was outlined in the The Commissioners’ Review of the
High Court 2005 Competition. They listed, for example, eight qualities
skills. They were:
1. Analysing and Decision Making
2. Legal Knowledge and Expertise
3. Integrity and Independence
4. Authority
5. Leadership & Administrative Duties
6. Managing Workload
7. Communicating
8. Treatment of
example is indicative of an approach that requires the application and
assessment process to be made on the basis of known and
articulated criteria.
The model we suggest will require that the Commission develop a concept of merit
in line with best practice
in comparable overseas
Selection criteria should allow candidates to demonstrate that they have the
capacity to develop (some) relevant skills within a reasonable
time, rather than
require them to demonstrate all those skills at the time of application. Some
applicants — for example, barristers
with a narrowly focussed practice,
solicitors, Crown Solicitors, Parliamentary Counsel, Ombudsmen, academics and
others — might
already possess most of the skills necessary for
appointment and be able to develop the others in an appropriate timeframe. This
may be particularly true of candidates with less traditional backgrounds for
judicial appointment than those with extensive practice
at the Bar. Such
candidates should not be excluded from selection on this basis. One consequence
of the belief that lack of forensic
skill should not automatically disqualify
otherwise qualified individuals for judicial office is a need for well-resourced
to accompany appointments. As Chief Justice Gleeson noted when
discussing the opening up of appointments to judiciary to non-traditional
appointees:
I am not seeking to advocate the retention of the Bar’s absolute monopoly
on judicial appointment. My point is different; and
one that has largely been
ignored by people who profess to be interested in breaking down that monopoly.
It is that, historically,
the monopoly has been protected by the lack of proper
arrangements for judicial training and development. Real change, as distinct
from window-dressing, in the one area, requires real progress in the
(ii) Diversity
Seeking diversity remains for some the most controversial aspect of the use
of an appointments commission. Even those in favour of
a commission recognise
that there are limits on the extent to which such mechanisms can be called upon
to achieve a more diverse
at least without
addressing the systematic biases in legal education and the legal
profession.
On this model, merit
remains the sole selection criterion. Diversity in appointments is achieved by
recognising that the present
undifferentiated merit criterion implicitly limits
diversity and by ensuring that candidates previously overlooked are encouraged
to apply and be assessed against the articulated components of merit. The focus
on merit does not mean that ‘colourful’
appointments will be
excluded by the model.
This model does not endorse the use of quotas or other artificial means to
achieve greater diversity. It does, however, recognise
the problem associated
with a failure to have a judiciary that more closely reflects the society from
which it is drawn. Some of
the problems associated with under-representation may
be traced to the problem of an unarticulated concept of merit. By better
what is meant by merit and how it is assessed the Commission will go
some of the way to improving at least the means by which greater
representation
may be achieved.
The Commission needs to be conscious of the rate of applications from
under-represented groups. The outreach programme will encourage
people from
diverse backgrounds to apply for judicial office.
Lastly the monitoring and reporting function of the Commission will better
inform future appointment rounds and assist in the targeting
under-represented groups.
C. Outreach and Advertising
Transparency requires that all suitably qualified members should be made
aware of judicial vacancies for which it is proposed to make
an appointment. It
also reinforces to the public that judicial office is a public office that is
selected solely on merit. The Commission
will be responsible for outreach into
the legal community to encourage individuals to apply. As the United Kingdom
Commission challenged
potential applicants, ‘don’t be shy —
A number of outreach techniques may be considered such as advertising
positions, writing directly to all practitioners meeting the
providing detailed
application kits with biographical details of typical and atypical recent
appointments.
We recommend that the Commission not maintain lists of potential appointees.
Such lists might have value if they ensured that the
Commission took into
account all relevant candidates when a particular vacancy
However, that objective
can be achieved by other means without the risks associated with keeping lists
of names. On a practical level
the maintenance of up-to-date lists is a
significant logistical exercise. Without resources these lists may quickly go
collection of names also raises issues of confidentiality.
Furthermore, any list would be of limited value as appointments will be
against jurisdiction-specific or court-specific criteria. Thus, lists would not
achieve more than a well-targeted outreach programme.
A persistent criticism of the outreach aspect of the model, and of
appointments commission processes more generally, is that the effort
required to
complete the processes will deter good people from applying. This is potentially
a serious concern, as empirically indicated
until recently in England and Wales.
A similar criticism, however, could be made of those that apply for any public
office, or application
for silk at the bar. We believe that whatever
‘damage’ the application process may be perceived to do to the
office is outweighed by the benefits provided by the reform to the
appointment process, particularly if the process can be streamlined
applicants need not provide significant amounts of material of doubtful
relevance and limited utility. The experience in
the United Kingdom has been
that after some initial resistance a new culture of judicial appointment is
emerging. Moreover, as the
process is founded upon merit, applicants will be
assured that extraneous considerations will not be taken into account.
D. Applications
The Commissioners, with the support of the secretariat, will consider
applications for the advertised judicial vacancy. This core
function will start
with the receipt of the applications and will have a number of distinct phases.
A number of general points should be made about this process. First,
applications should be made on a standard form based upon the
determined by the Commission. Again the disaggregated and articulated merit
principle will shape the contents of the application.
Second, the application form will allow an applicant to demonstrate their
capacity to comply with any statutory requirements (such
as years of admission)
and address the knowledge and skill requirements of the particular vacancy. The
application form will provide
for a degree of self-assessment on the part of the
applicant against the criteria.
Third, the applicant may nominate referees that the Commission will contact
as part of the consultation phase.
The secretariat will assess the application forms in this initial stage for
completeness and objective qualifications, such as compliance
with statutory
requirements. The bureaucratic processes associated with the management of
applications need to be efficient as well
as thorough. Applicants need to be
confident in the management of the process. In the United Kingdom some concerns
have been raised
of the overly bureaucratic nature of the application regime.
This is a serious one and needs to be addressed by the Commission.
E. Consultation
Consultation with interested parties about potential candidates for judicial
office has historic and, in the case of the High Court,
foundations.
Judges have been
consulted in the appointment process, either because they are regarded as the
best assessors of the merit of prospective
appointees or (particularly in the
UK) because their central role is perceived to be an essential guarantor of the
apolitical nature
appointments.
Consultation is
valuable when it has a clear rationale and scope. That should be to expand the
range of prospective candidates and
to provide evidence to the selection body
to meet the selection
It should be neither
ritual nor deferential
selection process should rely on evidence disclosed through that process and not
on rumour and supposition.
Once the concept of merit is disaggregated into its constituent components,
it is clear that judges require a greater range of skills
traditionally associated with the bar, from which the great majority of judges
have been drawn. Moreover, many of those
skills, such as industry, a capacity to
listen courteously and to understand
are themselves generic
and can be found in other parts of the profession. It is therefore important to
recognise that assessment
of candidates for appointment should take into account
a wider range of evidence than the views of the senior judiciary on the forensic
and other courtroom skills of the barristers who appear before them.
The UK Judicial Appointments Commission was established following consistent
complaints about the transparency and accountability
of the existing process
which ‘relied to a large extent on secret “soundings” of the
senior judiciary’ late
in the appointment
The Commission for
Judicial Appointments in England and Wales (the JAC’s predecessor) argued
that the concerns arising from
secret soundings, or reliance on personal
knowledge of the applicants more generally, can be addressed by ensuring that
is supported by detailed examples and is relevant to the needs of the
post, and is available in a timely manner to those assessing
candidates.
It therefore
recommended that the practice of seeking input from the senior judiciary at a
late stage in the selection process should
‘[i]t reinforces perceptions that judicial appointments are in the gift of
the Senior Judiciary and that the system is susceptible
to patronage. Judicial
intelligence about the extent to which candidates fulfil the relevant
criteria/competencies should be collected
earlier in the process and taken into
account in a clear and transparent
model maintains consultation but provides for a more structured process by which
it is undertaken. In general, consultation brings
both strengths and weaknesses
to the appointment process. The main strength is that it provides evidence-based
assessment of the
respective qualities of candidates. The main weaknesses are
that there is a real risk of non-evidence-based assessment being entertained
it tends to privilege the more visible candidates to the detriment of diversity
and public confidence.
Arguably this is the nature of the current consultation process in Australia.
The risks are particularly acute when consultations
seek to ascertain the
candidate’s substantive legal or political views or involve the political
branches of government.
1913 when Prime Minister Hughes was considering appointing Albert Piddington to
a vacancy on the High Court, he asked Piddington’s
brother-in-law to sound
out his views on the relation between Commonwealth and State powers. Having
satisfied himself that Piddington
was ‘in sympathy with supremacy of
Commonwealth powers’, Hughes appointed him to the High Court. In the face
criticism to the effect that Hughes was seeking to stack the High
Court, Piddington decided to resign on the grounds that he had
compromised
Recent English experience suggests that some forms of consultation do not
address the selection criteria of merit. For instance in
Commissioners’ Review of the High Court 2005 Competition it was noted
One assessor commented that the quality of responses was improving, but it had
started from a very low base. Much automatic consultee
input was useless. Many
more senior judges had done a better job than previously, even though some
continued only to offer the odd
word. Some consultees offered only comments, but
not scores. Some gave only summaries which effectively produced a rank order,
without evidence. There were now both good and bad examples of consultees
[sic] responses that could be used to guide future
respondents.
process of consultation needs to be carefully managed. The Commission must
ensure that consultations with traditional sources
of advice are maintained and
expanded. These ‘automatic consultees’ need to respond with
evidence-based assessments of
the candidates or their assessments should be
ignored. The automatic consultees should go beyond the traditional sources of
to ensure that less visible candidates are not excluded from the pool of
applications.
The last issue to be considered with regard to consultation is the
availability of the consultees’ reports to the applicant.
There are two
competing principles in terms of their disclosure. Obviously transparency and
procedural fairness would suggest that
adverse assessments should be made known
to the applicant, if only for them to know of its existence. Alternatively, the
fundamental
need for candour and frank assessments of applicants suggests that
they should not be disclosed to an applicant. On balance we recommend
reports not be made available to an applicant but that if the Commission
proposes to take into account negative comment (supported
by evidence) contained
in such reports that it disclose the gist of the information to the applicant
and afford him or her an opportunity
to respond. Given that applicants can
nominate referees or consultees and the assessments are to be evidence-based
against set criteria,
there is a balance and degree of fairness accorded to the
F. Assessing Candidates
(i) Shortlisting
At this stage it will be necessary to sift or shortlist applications to
identify the candidates to be interviewed. Because of the
numbers of applicants,
the shortlisting may need to be carried out by the Commission’s
secretariat. If so, it should be carried
out under procedures developed and
monitored by the Commission. The shortlisted candidates should be those whose
formal applications
are rated most highly when measured against the selection
(ii) Interviews by Panels of The Commission
Shortlisted candidates should be interviewed by panels composed of Commission
members. A panel system is considered the most appropriate
given that the full
Commission is too large and unwieldy, and its members too busy, to carry out all
the interviews. Each panel should
consist of one judicial member, one legal
member and two non-legal members, with one of the non-legal members
Where there are large numbers of applicants or candidates, it may be
difficult to assess their suitability for the particular position
in the absence
of an interview. Through the interview process ‘the interviewing
panel…[can] become acquainted with applicants
and … assess their
qualities against appropriate
Interviews must be structured and targeted to assessing the candidate’s
claims against the selection criteria. There should
be no room for discussion of
the candidate’s substantive legal or political views. Subject to these
overriding principles,
the Commission should develop and publish protocols for
interviews that are in line with international best practice.
A formal interview process is an important element in assessing the
candidate’s claims against the selection criteria. ‘[E]ven
case of candidates known by repute, [a formal interviewing process might well
reveal] aspects of their character or qualities
that might not generally be
appreciated.’
Systematising the interview process, and divorcing it from the political
branches of government, helps counter the idea some candidates
are favoured or
appointed because of the content of their private interview with
Attorney-General.
(iii) Assessment of Skills — Assessment
The skills associated with judicial office travel beyond the mastery of the
law. One means by which these skills can be assessed is
through practical
exercises designed to test legal skills in realistic but hypothetical
situations. In the United Kingdom assessment
centres are used to test the
ability of applicants to deal with a range of situations such as difficult
litigants or sensitive situations.
These assessment centres may provide a useful
tool in the selection process, since Australia, unlike the United Kingdom, has
had the widespread practice of appointing part-time judges, a practice that
provides both a training ground and a career path for
potential appointments.
We recommend the use of assessment centres as a method of assessing
candidates. In particular where appointments are being considered
for local or
magistrates courts, a practical demonstration of skill may assist the selection
committee. The same argument can be
made for higher courts. What will dictate
the use of assessment centres is a view by the Commission as to the best means
of assessing
applicants against the stated criteria. This may vary depending on
the nature of the jurisdiction.
(iv) Final Assessment by the Whole Commission Rather
Than a Subset
In England, selections for some courts are made by panels drawn from the
Commission rather than by the whole Commission and more generally
the Commission
can delegate the power to make selections to
recommend this approach in Australia. The Australian Commissions will be making
considerably fewer appointments than the
English Commission. The practical
issues involved in convening the whole Commission are therefore much attenuated.
There is also
a benefit to having the perspectives of each of the members of the
Commission involved in the selection process, particularly if
Commissioners have been involved in different interview panels. Each has
something to contribute.
G. Recommending Names
Once the Commission has assessed prospective candidates against the criteria
for the particular appointment, it should provide a shortlist
of candidates to
the Attorney-General of the jurisdiction concerned. We recommend that this list
contain three names. It should not
contain just one name. This is a departure
from the English model. There are two reasons. First, there will rarely be a
‘best qualified’ person. Secondly, judicial appointments
have a ‘political’, in the sense discussed above,
component that the
Commission is not qualified to assess.
The process that we recommend is:
The Attorney-General must either recommend that the Governor or
Governor-General appoint one of the three candidates recommended by
Commission or require the Commission to reconsider its recommendation.
If the Attorney-General requires the Commission to reconsider its
recommendation, then he or she must recommend to the Governor or
Governor-General that they appoint one of the three candidates subsequently
recommended by the Commission or one of the three candidates
recommended at the
first stage. (The Commission may recommend the same candidates.)
The Attorney-General may only require the Commission to reconsider its
recommendations once. If he or she does so, then written reasons
provided to the Commission for his or her opinion that there is not enough
evidence that the person is suitable for appointment.
Clearly this
proposal operates as a constraint on the ability of government to reject
candidates on political grounds. It may be argued
that the constraints on the
Attorney-General elevate the Commission to an appointment body rather than one
that merely recommends
a list of suitably qualified
candidates.
In truth it would
be difficult, though not impossible, for an Attorney-General to resist the
recommendations of the Commission. An
alternative has been suggested that would
allow greater scope for the Attorney-General to disregard the shortlist where
‘legitimate
reasons’ such as ‘the need to add a judge with
particular expertise to a court or to take advantage of a “window
opportunity” to appoint a candidate whom the commission did not know was
available for appointment when it prepared its
recommended short
In addition
there may be a need ‘for geographic balance in a particular
While these are legitimate reasons (and some of which the Commission could
choose to incorporate into the selection process) there
is a real danger that in
relaxing the obligations on the Attorney-General, he or she may seek to sideline
the Commission and ignore
its recommendations. This could potentially be
debilitating for the Commission especially if it was to occur in its infancy.
the line between ‘legitimate’ and
‘illegitimate’ reasons rests upon the Attorney-General making an
of the political cost in choosing the latter. Historically this has
not proved to be a strong accountability measure.
Our model strikes an appropriate balance between the various principles
outlined above. In particular it acknowledges the traditional
accountability
process of the Attorney-General as well as producing a shortlist of qualified
individuals assessed and selected on
Constitution
may be thought to present obstacles to this process
applying to Federal judicial appointments.
We do not agree. Our proposed
model is consistent with the explicit constitutional requirement that
appointments of Federal judges
be made by the
Governor-General.
Appointments of Federal judges will continue to be made by the Governor-General
on the advice of his or her Ministers. It has been
suggested that there is a
further constitutional requirement implied by, but not expressed in, the text of
Constitution
. The suggested implication is that the Federal executive
government not be constrained by legislation in its exercise of the power
recommend to the Governor-General who should be appointed. In our view, the
suggested implication is implausible. As a matter
of principle, all executive
power is subject to legislative control (unless the
Constitution
clearly to the contrary). That is the consistent pattern of several centuries of
legal development during which executive power
has been progressively brought
under the control of the democratic branches of government. It is always a
matter for the legislature
whether to bring executive power under legislative
control or to leave power in the hands of the executive, subject to political
control through parliamentary mechanisms. Other commentators who have considered
this question agree.
H. Composition of the Commission
The model outlined in this article has described a generic Australian
judicial appointments commission. While a single national appointments
might enjoy efficiencies of scale, there are practical and political obstacles
to such an approach.
likely that there will be Commonwealth as well as State and Territory
commissions
with slight
variations between them. For instance some States may wish to graft the
appointments function onto existing bodies, such
as the Judicial Commission of
New South Wales. Further, as with many innovations within the Australian legal
system, one State or
the Commonwealth may wish to take the lead in establishing
an appointments commission.
Each State or Territory Commission would be a multi-member body of judicial,
professional and ‘lay’ members comprising:
The Chief Justice of the State, the Chief Judge of the County or District
Court, and the Chief Magistrate or Chief Judge of the Local
Court (in each case,
if the head of jurisdiction is not willing to serve, then the next most senior
member of each court willing
to serve would become a member of the
Commission)
The President of the State or Territory Bar Association or his or her
The President of the State or Territory solicitors’ association or his
or her nominee
A suitably qualified legal academic chosen by other members of the
Six other suitable non-lawyers qualified by experience and chosen by the
other members of the Commission.
would be a multi-member body corresponding with the State and
Territory Commissions. It would comprise:
The Chief Justice of the Federal Court, the Chief Judge of the Family Court,
the Chief Federal Magistrate or the next most senior
member of each court
willing to serve
The President of the Australian Bar Association or his or her nominee
The President of the Law Council of Australia or his or her nominee
A suitably qualified legal academic chosen by other members of the
Six other suitable non-lawyers qualified by experience chosen by the other
members of the Commission.
The first function of the Commissions is
to ensure that judicial appointments in Australia continue to be based on merit.
Accordingly,
half of the members of each Commission must be legally qualified.
These members, including three senior judges, have direct experience
aspects of merit related to legal expertise.
The Commissions are also intended to ensure three subsidiary implications of
the particularised and disaggregated merit principle.
First, judicial appointments must not be made on the basis of the
appointee’s connections (or perceived connections) to government.
members were not captured by government, there would be a risk of that
arising. It would be pointless — perhaps positively
harmful — if the politics of appointments were simply displaced into
appointment of the Commission.
Secondly, judicial appointments must not be made on the basis of the gender,
racial, professional and social similarity between appointees
and current
judges. The risk of appointment on this basis — known in the literature as
‘homosocial reproduction’
— has been demonstrated in many
contexts involving appointment to high level positions, particularly where the
selection criteria
have not been particularised and
disaggregated.
Thirdly, judicial appointments must be made on the basis of evidence
demonstrating those particulars and each Commission must be constituted
that is appropriate for assessing that evidence.
These three
implications of the merit principle have consequences for the structure and
method of appointment of the various Commonwealth
and State and Territory
commissions.
To the greatest extent possible, members of the Commissions should be
rather than by the government. On our model, six of
the twelve members are appointed
Although such
appointments may appear to
their organisation on the
Commission, the alternatives — appointment by government or appointment by
judicial members of the
Commission — would compromise the appearance of
independence from government or from the judicial members of the Commission.
In our view it is not practicable to have all the members of the commissions
. For example, the Auditor General, Public Service
Commissioner and Ombudsman in each jurisdiction would have skills and attributes
that are useful in appointing judges. However, their existing workloads would
seem to make it quite impossible to have them as active
members of appointment
commissions.
Neither is the United Kingdom model of having a double layer of appointments
practicable. Under such a model, the members of the first
small panel are
. They in turn appoint the members of the JAC based
on nominations from the Judges’ Council, consultations with the
professional
bodies and competitive selection of the lay members. In principle
such a system would be desirable but is likely to prove unworkable
especially in
Australia’s smaller jurisdictions.
Judges should not constitute a majority of the members of the Australian
Commissions. Although judges must be members of Commissions
(because of their
expertise in assessing some of the professional components of merit), the risks
of homosocial reproduction —
in effect capture of the appointments process
by the judges — are too great for them to constitute a majority.
For the same reason, the Chair of each appointments commission should be a
non-legal member. He or she should be chosen by the judicial
and professional
members of that Commission after consulting the Attorney-General. He or she is
likely to have substantial direct
experience of senior appointments processes,
for example in industry or the public sector. The remaining non-legal members
academic member should be selected by the Chair and the judicial and
professional members of the
Commission.
Once again, the
United Kingdom model of a separate appointing panel, although extremely
attractive in avoiding the appearance of
judges and lawyers having control of
the appointments process, would likely be unworkable at least until wider
reforms are made to
public appointments processes in Australia. The risk of
capture should instead be managed by stipulating the criteria for selection
the non-legal and academic members and ensuring public accountability for their
selection. Non-legal members should be chosen
on the basis of their capacity to
contribute expertise to the selection process that is not possessed by legal
professionals and
judges. The criteria for appointment of these non-legal
members should be spelt out in statute highlighting the experience and skills
desirable in members. These may include experience in high level selection
processes as well as public or private sector management
experience. They should
not include representation of any particular group or interest. It is desirable
that the Commission achieve
gender balance as a
A senior legal academic should be a member because of their skills and
expertise. In particular, they are likely to have a long term
developments in Australian and comparative law and judging; to have an
understanding of trends in legal scholarship and legal
education; to have a
grounded view on what constitutes good legal writing; to understand methods for
assessing legal knowledge; and
to have experience of appointments processes.
Commissions should not include politicians. While political accountability
for the appointment of judges is important, that is not
best achieved by having
representatives of government and opposition on the appointments commission.
Although this would ensure a
accountability,
increase the risk of the process leaking and would likely lead to a
politicisation of the appointments process and a greater
likelihood of
‘compromise’ selections. Agreement based on compromise between the
political parties in selection of judicial
officers would only further
institutionalise the politics of appointment.
It would be a significant criticism of the overall composition of the
Commission if it were too heavily slanted in favour of the legal
community and
‘the Commission [was] still … an “insider
that the proposal should ‘protect against any in-built biases that may
exist within the judiciary and
profession’.
reason, our model moves away from a legally dominated Commission to one in which
legally qualified members constitute only
one-half of the Commission.
The legal academic and the lay members of Commissions would be appointed for
five year terms with the possibility of renewal for a
further five year term.
However, the first six lay members would be appointed in pairs for three, four
and five year terms to stagger
the ends of their terms so that their experience
is not lost simultaneously.
I. Secretariat
Even in the smallest Australian jurisdictions, the appointments commissions
will require the support of a secretariat. Although Australia
is three times
smaller and has fewer tribunals than the United Kingdom, whose Judicial
Appointments Commission has a 105-member secretariat,
nevertheless, the total
resource demands of the proposed system should not be underestimated. As noted
above, there are good federalist
reasons for allowing the Commonwealth and the
States and Territories to proceed independently of each other. That said, it
be possible for the Commonwealth or the States and Territories to share
secretariat facilities while maintaining their own Commissions.
That would give
it a critical mass that enabled efficient resourcing and a sufficient volume of
work to justify a standing body.
Without such centralisation, there is a risk of
inefficiency due to small size and only occasional work. Absent a national
secretariat,
the secretariat in small jurisdictions may be absorbed back into
the Attorney-General’s Department or the Supreme Court, losing
independence that the system is designed to foster.
J. Audit and Accountability
To enhance accountability, the Commission itself must be subject to
appropriate accountability mechanisms.
It should publish the sub-criteria into which it disaggregates the merit
It should provide to the Parliament an annual report and a report on each
appointment round. These reports should contain an evaluation
Commission’s outreach activities and of the operation of the selection
It should establish complaints handling procedures. The English experience
with the Commission for Judicial Appointments has shown
the value of such
complaints mechanisms in improving the operation of the overall appointments
Applicants should also be able to lodge complaints with the Ombudsman or the
Judicial Services Commission or Judicial Conduct Commission.
Thought needs to be
given about whether the Ombudsman should have unfettered access to the
Commission’s files or whether the
interests of confidentiality require
some restriction on access. The presumption should be against any such
restriction.
The Freedom of Information regime applying to the Commission (and parallel
provisions restricting parliamentary access to documents)
will need to be
carefully designed to protect the confidentiality of applications, references,
interviews and assessments, as well
of the Commission’s deliberations,
while allowing for effective scrutiny of the Commission’s
5. Conclusions
Reform of the process of judicial appointment in Australia is overdue. The
current system of appointment is neither rigorous nor transparent;
nor does it
secure any meaningful accountability of the Executive for its choices.
The model proposed here, like the current system, starts with merit as the
sole criterion for appoint to judicial office. However,
unlike the current
system we wish to replace the unarticulated and untested assertion that all
appointments are meritorious with
a process that assures the public and the
appointee that the judiciary is composed of individuals who have the skills and
required to fulfil the responsibilities of judicial office.
Our model draws upon the relevant international experience and adapts it to
Australian circumstances. Since the election of the Rudd
Government in November
2007, there are indications that the new Attorney-General will be considering
reform in relations to Commonwealth
appointments.
In proposing a
specific model in this article we wish to move the debate beyond the theoretical
into consideration of the concrete
measures that we believe will ensure that
appointments to Australia’s judiciary are of the highest calibre.
Associate Professor and Deputy Dean,
Melbourne Law School, University of Melbourne. The research for this paper was
supported by
the Judicial Conference of Australia. An earlier version of this
article was presented at the JCA Colloquium, 7–9 October 2006.
does not reflect the views of the JCA. We acknowledge the research assistance of
Rayner Thwaites, Anna Hood, Jess Moir,
Christopher Tran and Tessa Setiadi, and
the valuable comments of Justices Sackville, Debelle, Basten, Hasluck and
Chesterman.
Professor, School of Law,
University of Adelaide.
For some developments since
federation, see, for example, James Crawford & Brian Opeskin,
Courts of Law
(4th ed, 2004) at 127;
Forge v Australian Securities and
Investments Commission
[2006] HCA 44
(2006) 228 CLR 45.
Enid Campbell & H P Lee,
The Australian Judiciary
(2001) at 77, 101–11.
See, for example, James
Douglas, ‘Sir Charles Powers’ in Michael White & Aladin
Rahemtula (eds),
Queensland Judges on the High Court
(2003) at 171.
See, for example, Chris
Merritt, ‘Selection Mystery’ ‘Prejudice’,
(9 March 2007) at 23 (identifying five recent appointments as
raising issues of inexperience and political connections).
Lionel Murphy, ‘Address
to the National Press Club’ in Tony Maniaty (ed),
The Power of
(1989) at 97.
Commonwealth Attorney-General
Michael Lavarch,
Discussion Paper:
Judicial Appointments —
Procedure and Criteria
(1993) 6–9 at 16–19; Greta Bird,
‘Power, Politics and the Location of “the Other” in
Multicultural
Australia’ in
The Criminal Justice System in a
Multicultural Society
, Australian Institute of Criminology Conference
Proceedings, Melbourne, 4–6 May 1993,
http://www.aic.gov.au/conferences/multiculturalism/
accessed 22
September 2006 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5XYnVwD4Q
May 2008); Australian Law Reform Commission,
Multiculturalism and the
, Report No 57 (1992) at 29, 33–4; Elizabeth Handsley,
‘“The judicial whisper goes around”: appointment of
officers in Australia’ in Kate Malleson & Peter H Russell (eds),
Appointing Judges in an Age of Judicial Power: Critical Perspectives from
Around the World
(2006) at 122.
See generally Kate Malleson
& Peter H Russell (eds),
Appointing Judges in an Age of Judicial Power:
Critical Perspectives from Around the World
See, for example, ibid.
Philip Ruddock,
‘Selection and Appointment of Judges’, (Speech delivered at the
University of Sydney, 2 May 2005) at
Constitutional Reform
(UK) c 4, s 63(2) (‘Selection must be solely on
merit’). Section 63(2) provides that the selecting body must be satisfied
that appointees are of good character.
Geoffrey Davies,
‘Appointment of Judges’, (Speech delivered at the QUT Faculty of Law
— Free Lecture Series, Banco
Court, Brisbane, 31 August 2006)
http://www.law.qut.edu.au/about/AppointmentofJudges.pdf
5 accessed 22
September 2006 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5Xg5ok9jv
Sharyn Roach Anleu &
Kathy Mack ‘Judicial Appointment and the Skills for Judicial Office’
(2005) 15(1)
Journal of Judicial Administration
Ruth McColl, ‘Women
in the Law’ (Speech delivered at the Anglo-Australian Society of Law,
Court of Appeal, Supreme Court
of New South Wales, 3 May 2006)
http://www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/lawlink/Supreme_Court/ll_sc.nsf/pages/SCO_mccoll030506
accessed 22 September 2006 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5XYnlLXDI
accessed 4 May 2008), (quoting the Chief Justice of Canada, Beverley McLachlin
Roach Anleu & Mack,
above n12 at 38.
Ronald Sackville,
‘Judicial Appointments: A Discussion Paper’
(2005) 14(3)
of Judicial Administration
Roach Anleu & Mack,
above n12 at 47, quoting Claire Burton,
Redefining Merit
Roach Anleu & Mack,
above n12 at 47.
Sackville, above n15 at
Ruddock, above n9 at
Lavarch, above n6 at
[2.2.1]–[2.13.4]; Sir Anthony Mason ‘The Appointment and Removal of
Judges’ in Judicial Commission
of New South Wales,
A Fragile Bastion:
Judicial Independence in the Nineties and Beyond
(1997) at 10–11. See
also Law Council of Australia,
Policy on the Process of Judicial
Appointments
http://www.lawcouncil.asn.au/get/policies/1957352833/0.pdf
accessed 22
September 2006 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5XY nooqLH
Department of
Constitutional Affairs, ‘Competency Frameworks’ in
Appointments in England and Wales: Policies and Procedures
http://www.dca.gov.uk/judicial/appointments/jappinfr.htm
accessed 22
September 2006 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5Xg1nuyn1
May 2008); Department of Constitutional Affairs, ‘Changes from 3 April
Judicial Appointments in England and Wales: Policies and
http://www.dca.gov.uk/judicial/process.htm#3rdaprilchanges
accessed 22
September 2006 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5Xg236fKq
See Sackville, above n15 at
129 (referring to the selection criteria adopted by the Tasmanian Department of
Justice), 133 (summarising
the criteria for judicial appointment in England and
Roach Anleu & Mack,
above n12 at 39.
Which requires that federal
judges be appointed by the Governor-General on the advice of Ministers.
Grollo v Palmer
[1995] HCA 26
(1995) 184 CLR 348
Kable v Director of Public Prosecutions
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 189 CLR 51
High Court of Australia
Department of
Constitutional Affairs,
Constitutional Reform: A New Way of Appointing
(2003) at 3, 19–20. See also The Commission for Judicial
Appointments,
Annual Report 2002
at [8.3] and Mason, above n20 at 7.
Michael McHugh,
‘Women Justices for the High Court’ (Speech delivered at the High
Court dinner hosted by the West Australian
Law Society, 27 October 2004)
http://www.hcourt.gov.au/speeches/mchughj/mchughj_27oct04.html
11 September 2006 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5Xg2Ccy9D
9 May 2008).
Terence Higgins,
‘Women in Law: Past Achievements and Future Directions’ (Speech
delivered at the Sir Richard Blackburn
Lecture, Pilgrim House, Canberra, 16 May
http://www.courts.act.gov.au/supreme/content/pdfs/Blackburn%20Lecture%202006.pdf
accessed 23 April 2008 at 7–8 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5Xg2NtnSw
accessed 9 May 2008).
Annual Report 2002
above n28 at [8.3].
Alan Paterson, ‘The
Scottish Judicial Appointments Board: New Wine in Old Bottles?’ in Kate
Malleson & Peter H Russell
Appointing Judges in an Age of Judicial
Power: Critical Perspectives from Around the World
(2006) 13 at 26–31.
We place no weight on what Paterson identifies as the third consideration in his
survey — that a wider
range of appointments would change and perhaps
improve judicial decision-making. As Paterson’s survey demonstrates,
are widely divided on the evidence for this consideration: at
29–31. See also Cheryl Thomas, The Commission for Judicial Appointments,
Judicial Diversity in the United Kingdom and Other Jurisdictions: A Review of
Research, Policies and Practices
(2005) at 57–60
http://www.cja.gov.uk/files/Judicial_Diversity_Review_Report_PDF.pdf
accessed 11 September 2006 (archived
http://web.archive.org/web/*/http://www.cja.gov.uk/files/Judicial_Diversity_ Review_Report_PDF.pdf
accessed 9 May 2008).
Paterson, above n32 at
Beverley McLachlin,
‘Promoting Gender Equality in the Judiciary’, Seminar to the
Association of Women Barristers, House
of Commons (Canada) (2 July 2003) at 6,
quoted in Paterson, above n32 at 31.
Baroness Usha Prashar,
‘Speech at the Annual ILEX Luncheon’ (Clothworkers’ Hall,
London, 17 May 2006) at [10].
Daryl Williams, ‘The
Role of the Attorney-General’
Public Law Review
James Allan,
‘Judicial Appointments in New Zealand: If it were done when ’tis
done, then ’twere well it were done
openly and directly’ in Kate
Malleson & Peter H Russell (eds),
Appointing Judges in an Age of Judicial
Power: Critical Perspectives from Around the World
(2006) 103 at 115.
See, for example,
Administrative Review Council,
What Decisions Should be Subject to Merits
(1999) at 20–22 (factors that may exclude merits review:
decisions to appoint a person to undertake a specified function, recommendations
to ultimate decision-makers, decisions where there is no appropriate remedy);
Administrative Review Council,
The Scope of Judicial Review
(in most cases, limits on judicial review are justified for
decisions where there is neither a right to a benefit nor a duty on the
maker to consider conferring a benefit; sometimes, limits on judicial review are
justified for decisions where there is
a particular need for certainty or
decisions about policy).
Some measure of
retrospective accountability is also appropriate. We discuss this below.
Critics of appointments
commissions also highlight the value of transparency. F L Morton recently argued
that, as power cannot be
depoliticised (a point with which we agree),
‘[t]he best one can do is to make the exercise of power as transparent as
and then create effective checks and balances’: Frederick
Morton, ‘Judicial Appointments in Post-Charter Canada: A System
Transition’ in Kate Malleson & Peter H Russell (eds),
Judges in an Age of
Judicial Power: Critical Perspectives from Around the
(2006) 56 at 75. He agrees with James Allan that the best achievable
system would be one in which ‘the judges of the highest
appointed ‘“openly and directly by the elected government of the
day”’, with opportunity for opposition
parties to question
appointees (not, it seems, prospective appointees) on their legal and
constitutional outlook: ibid. He concludes:
‘The government will still get
the judge it wants, but it can be held accountable for — or get credit for
appointments at the next election’: ibid. Plainly,
Morton’s concern is with the highest courts, particularly those exercising
powers of judicial review on substantive rights issues. But even in relation to
these courts his proposal is for a very diffuse form
of accountability that (in
Australia, at least) would lead to a novel
politicisation of the
Wilson v Minister for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs
[1996] HCA 18
(1996) 189 CLR 1
Commonwealth
Constitution
Kable v Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 189 CLR 51
Forge v Australian
Securities and Investments Commission
[2006] HCA 44
(2006) 228 CLR 45
Commission for Judicial
Appointments,
The Commissioners’ Review of the High Court 2005
Competition: Report to the Lord Chancellor
(2006) [2.13]. See also the
comments on judicial input in Chapter 6.
Judicature Act 1908
(NZ) ss 4(2) and 57(2) and
Supreme Court Act 2003
(NZ) s 17. There
are a few exceptions to this statement. Allan, above n37 at fn5.
Ministry of Justice,
Judicial Appointments: Office of the High Court Judge
http://www.justice.govt.nz/pubs/other/pamphlets/2003/judicial-appointments/high-court-judge.html#Criteria%20for%20appointment
accessed 14 September 2006 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5Xg32G4p7
accessed 9 May 2008).
Appointments
, Courts of New Zealand
http://www.courtsofnz.govt.nz/about/judges/appointments.html
accessed 14
September 2006 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5Xg3FMZxO
Allan, above n37 at
Morton, above n41 at
See, for example, Minister
of Justice (Canada),
Proposal to Reform the Supreme Court of Canada
Appointments Process
(April 2005)
http://canada.justice.gc.ca/eng/dept-min/pub/scc-csc/scc-csc.pdf
accessed 14 September 2006 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5XhtKbB4H
accessed 9 May 2008).
See Department of Justice
Report Of The Interim Ad Hoc Committee On The Appointment Of
Supreme Court Judges
(August 2004)
http://canada.justice.gc.ca/eng/dept-min/pub/scj2-jcs2/annexa.html
accessed 14 September 2006 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5Xg3rlPdH
accessed 9 May 2008).
Minister of Justice
(Canada), above n51.
Peter Hogg, ‘Judicial
Interview Process. Opening Remarks to Ad Hoc Committee on Supreme Court
Appointment’ (Speech delivered
at the Ad Hoc Committee on Supreme Court
Appointment’, Canada, 27 February 2006)
http://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/dept-min/pub/scc-csc/sp-dis.html
April 2008. (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5Xg3w8b3S
accessed at 9
The process is somewhat
different for heads of division, the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court.
Constitutional Reform
c 4, sched 12.
The Chair of the appointing
panel (who cannot be a practising lawyer or judge, a Commissioner or an MP) is
appointed by agreement
of the Lord Chancellor and Lord Chief Justice; the
remaining members are the Lord Chief Justice, the Chair of the Judicial
Appointments
Commission (if he or she has been appointed) and a person nominated
by the Chair of the appointing panel. See
Constitutional Reform Act 2005
(UK) c 4, sched 12. The panel must consider the views of the Bar and Law Society
in selecting the professional members of the Commission.
Constitutional Reform
See generally the Judicial
Appointments Commission’s website, <www.judicialappointments.
gov.uk> accessed 9 May 2008.
Constitutional Reform
(UK) c 4, s 63(2)-(3).
Constitutional Reform
(UK) c 4, s 64(1).
Constitutional Reform
(UK) c 4, s 65(1).
Constitutional Reform
(UK) c 4, s 66(1).
See for example,
Constitutional Reform Act 2005
c 4, s 70(2).
Judicial Appointments
http://www.judicialappointments.gov.uk/select/qualities.htm
accessed 5 April 2008 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5Xg4Bm00p
accessed 9 May 2008).
Good character being a
statutory requirement for selection: see
Constitutional Reform Act 2005
(UK) c 4, s 63(3). The guidance was published at the end of 2007: see Judicial
Appointments
http://www.judicialappointments.gov.uk/docs/Judicial_Appointments_Commission_ Good_Character_Guidance.pdf
accessed 5 April 2008 (copy at
http://www. webcitation.org/5Xg4IQWjv
accessed 9 May 2008).
Baroness Usha Prashar,
Ibid; see also Judicial
Appointments Commission
http://www.judicialappointments.gov.uk/select/step.htm
accessed 5 April
2008 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5Xg4QZTQ6
accessed 9 May
See Judicial Appointments
http://www.judicialappointments.gov.uk/select/widening.htm
5 April 2008 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5Xg4fgjFR
The selection process is
outlined on the JAC’s website: see Judicial Appointments Commission
http://www.judicialappointments.gov.uk/select/step.htm
accessed 5 April
2008 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5Xg52crKo
accessed at 9 May
This is a statutory
requirement: see
Constitutional Reform Act 2005
(UK) c 4, ss 88(3),
Constitutional Reform
(UK) c 4, s 96.
Constitutional Reform
(UK) c 4, ss 99-102.
The system operating in
Scotland is assessed in Paterson, above n32. A somewhat different system
operates in Northern Ireland: see
Sackville, above n15 at 136. We are not the
first to propose a judicial appointments commission for Australia. Other
proposals include:
• The Hon Geoffrey Davies recently proposed a Queensland commission
consisting of seven members, ‘the Chief Justice; either
another Supreme
Court judge appointed by the Chief Justice or, if the appointment is to the
District Court, the Chief Judge of that
Court; the President of the Bar; the
President of the Law Society; the head of a church in Queensland (to be rotated
annually among
the various churches); the editor o
f The Courier Ma
r The Australi
an, to be rotated annually; the local President of
Zonta’: Davies, above n11. (Zonta is ‘a global service organization
of executives and professionals working together to advance the status of women
worldwide through service and advocacy’: Zonta
International
http://www.zonta.org
accessed 26 September 2006.)
• Sir Anthony Mason recommended a commission of ‘not more than
nine members of whom at least five should be judges and
lawyers’, perhaps ‘two judges, a nominee of the relevant Bar
Association, a nominee of the relevant Law Council
or Society and a nominee of
the Council of Law Deans, one or two nominees of government and two lay persons
who should be selected
having regard to their capacity to represent the
community’: Mason, above n20 at 10–11.
• Sir Garfield Barwick suggested that there be some restraint on the
executive in judicial appointments, including possibly
a judicial appointments
commission (including ‘judges, practising lawyers, academic lawyers, and,
indeed, laymen likely to
be knowledgeable in the achievements of possible
appointees’): Sir Garfield Barwick, ‘The State of the Australian
Judicature’
1 Australian Law Journa
l 480 at 494.
e Attorney General’s Discussion Paper: Judicial
Appointments Procedure and Criteria: Attorney General Discussion Pap
(1993) at 24-26 summarises the composition of then existing and recommended
appointments commissions in comparable jurisdictions
(which include judges,
practising and academic lawyers, community representatives, Attorneys-General,
retired judges and politicians,
serving politicians and media
representatives).
• George Winterton’s 1987 proposal differed from ours in
insisting that the legal members not be representatives of their
professional
bodies ‘so that they represent nothing but the public interest’:
George Winterton, ‘Appointment of
Federal Judges in Australia’
6 Melbourne University Law Revi
ew 185 at 210–11.
For general discussion and more general proposals, see also Sir Gerard
Brennan, ‘The Selection of Judges for Commonwealth
Papers on Parliament
; Amber Augustin, ‘Federalism and the High
Court: Fixing the appointment process’ (2006)
Sackville, above n15 at142–43; Handsley, above n6 at 136–37; George
Williams & Rachel Davis, ‘Reform of
the Judicial Appointments Process:
Gender and the Bench of the High Court of Australia’
[2003] MelbULawRw 32
Melbourne University Law Review
at 859–863.
Kate Malleson, ‘The
New Judicial Appointments Commission in England and Wales: New Wine in New
Bottles?’ in Kate Malleson
& Peter H Russell (eds),
Judges in an Age of Judicial Power: Critical Perspectives from Around the
(2006) 39 at 51.
Ruddock, above n9 at
Malleson, above n77 at 48.
We do not consider the process for appointing tribunal members in Australia.
There is obviously a case
for an independent appointments process for
independent merits review tribunals like the AAT.
Forge v Australian
Securities and Investments Commission
[2006] HCA 44
(2006) 228 CLR 45.
As noted below we do
consider the establishment of State and Territory judicial appointment
commissions. Whether there will be a
national body is itself an issue for
consideration.
Where the Attorney-General
proposes to make more than one appointment to the same registry of the same
court, the judicial appointment
commission would provide two more names than the
proposed number of appointments.
The Commissioners’
Review of the High Court 2005 Competition
above n45 at [4.3].
While there is broad
agreement on the main sub-criteria of the concept of merit, and perhaps these
could be spelt out in statute,
the concept of merit will need to be spelt out in
different ways for different courts and will evolve over time. This flexibility
is best achieved by leaving it to the Commission to specify the sub-criteria. It
will be accountable for its specifications through
their publication in the
course of each selection exercise and in its annual reports.
Murray Gleeson,
’Judicial Selection and Training: Two Sides of the One Coin‘ (Speech
delivered at Judicial Conference
of Australia, Colloquium – Darwin, 31st
http://www.hcourt.gov.au/speeches/cj/cj_judicialselection.htm
accessed 18 September 2006 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5Xg5Ys727
accessed 9 May 2008).
Davies, above n11.
See Thomas, above n32
(discussing the need for reform of educational and professional structures in
the UK to ensure that there
is a diverse pool of candidates qualified for
appointment to the judiciary).
Compare James Crawford.
Australian Courts of Law
ed, 1982) at 53 quoted in
Winterton, ‘Federal Judicial Appointments in
[1987] MelbULawRw 17
Melbourne University Law Review
Malleson, above n76 at
To avoid the irritation of
unsolicited letters individuals will be able to opt out from being contacted by
the judicial appointments
commission.
When several appointments
are made at the one time or in very short succession, it may be possible to make
recommendations based
on information gathered during the one selection process,
rather than undertaking separate selection exercises.
Famously Sir Garfield
Barwick was critical of the degree of consultation that Mr Whitlam accorded him
when selecting Justice Lionel
Murphy. Reportedly Whitlam met with Barwick to
discuss possible replacements for the vacancy left by the sudden death of Sir
Menzies. Murphy’s name ‘was not mentioned’. When
Whitlam next contacted Barwick he announced that ‘Murphy
has agreed to
accept the appointment’. Garfield Barwick,
A Radical Tory
The latter point is put
forcefully by the UK Judges’ Council response to the consultation papers
on constitutional reform,
available at
<www.dca.gov.uk/judicial/pdfs/jcresp.pdf> at [71] (archived
http://web.archive.org/web/*/www.dca.gov.uk/judicial/pdfs/jcresp.pdf
accessed 9 May 2008).
In considering the use to
be made of judicial panel members’ personal knowledge of candidates, it
was recently been stressed
by the Commission for Judicial Appointments in the UK
that use can be made of such knowledge subject to the all-important caveat
it is ‘clearly evidence-based’:
The Commissioners’ Review
of the High Court 2005 Competition
, above n45 at
[8.51]. See also at
[8.18]–[8.28].
The detrimental effects of
a deferential approach to intervention by the senior judiciary is discussed in
Commission for Judicial
Appointments,
The Commissioners’ Review of the
Recorder 2004/05 Competition (Midland Circuit): Report to the Lord
(2005) at [3.37].
On the need to determine
whether rumours adverse to a candidate’s selection are substantiated when
they first emerge, rather
than later in the practitioner’s career see id
at [3.37] (recommendation 11).
Mason, above n20 at 10.
Thomas, above n32 at
section 1.3. See also
The Commissioners’ Review of the High Court 2005
Competition
, above n45. For empirical findings attesting to suspicions in
the pool of potential judicial applicants relating to the use of secret
soundings in the judicial appointment process: see Centre for Research in
Equality and Diversity,
Assessment Centres for Judicial Appointments and
Diversity: Research Report for the Department of Constitutional Affairs
(2006) 11 at 58, 62–3.
Report of the
Commissioners’ Review of the Circuit Judge 2005/2006 Competition
Commissioners’ Review of the Recorder Competition 2004/05 Competition
(Midland Circuit)
, above n94 at [3.37] (recommendation 12).
These concerns were
identified in the UK: see, Commission for Judicial Appointments,
the Commissioners’ Review of the Circuit Judge 2005/2006 Competition
(2006) at [4.17]–[4.23]. These comments were addressed to observations of
senior judicial intervention late in the appointments
For a recent allegation
of inappropriate probing of the political views of candidates for the judiciary
see Misha Ketchell, ‘Is
This How the Australian Government Selects its Top
Judges?’ (3 July 2006), copy on file with the authors. For an expansion
related points on the potential for political patronage in the current process:
see Davies, above n11 at 3–4.
Morris Graham,
‘Piddington’ in Tony Blackshield, Michael Coper and George Williams,
The Oxford Companion to the High Court of Australia
(2001) at 534.
Commissioners’ Review of the High Court 2005 Competition
, above n45 at
Sackville, above n15 at
142. See to the same effect the recommendations of
The Commissioners’
Review of the High Court 2005 Competition
, above n45 at [8.49].
Sackville, above n15 at
See, for example,
Constitutional Reform Act 2005
(UK) c 4, ss 79–80.
Ronald Sackville,
‘The Judicial Appointments Process in Australia: Towards Independence and
Accountability’, (Paper
given at the Australian Bar Association Judicial
Appointments Forum, 27 October 2006) at 16–20.
We do not recommend that
the Attorney-General be permitted to appoint a candidate not recommended by the
Commission: cf Williams
and Davis, above n75 at 858–59.
Commonwealth
Constitution
Tony Blackshield and
George Williams,
Australian Constitutional Law and Theory
ed, 2002) at 520; George Winterton,
Parliament, the Executive and the
Governor-General: A Constitutional Analysis
(1983) at 95; Leslie Zines,
The High Court and the
Constitution
ed, 1997) at 262-63.
A national body could
consist of the members of the State, Territory and Commonwealth Commissions. The
constituent bodies would
continue to be responsible for recommending
appointments in their respective jurisdictions. The national body would be too
and too disparate to function effectively as an appointing body. (Of
course, it is consistent with the abstract principles of federalism
national body to appoint state judges: see, for example, the Canadian system.
And in principle a small and workable national
Commission could be established
to make State appointments. However, this would be a substantial departure from
the Australian federal
judicial model and would not be consistent with the
Australian federal system, whatever its attractions in (say) Canada might be.)
The national body on our model would therefore be a body with no formal
functions other than supervision of the shared secretariat
(through an executive
council), and monitoring and policy development at a national level.
Perhaps sharing a
national secretariat: see
We outline the process
of choosing these academic and lay members below.
For a brief survey of the
literature, see Ryan A Smith, ‘Race, Gender, And Authority in the
Workplace: Theory And Research’
Annual Review of
509 at 521–22.
With some modification
in the case of federal judicial officers to ensure that the appointment is
consistent with the persona designata
Once the Chair of the
Commission (one of the lay members) is appointed, he or she should be a member
of the panel appointing the
other lay members and the legal academic.
If a jurisdiction
adopted an independent evidence-based process for appointment to statutory
offices and government bodies, appointments
to the Commission in that
responsibility of the Commission
Allan, above n37 at
114–15; and generally Morton, above n41.
Nicola Roxon,
‘Comment on Proposal for Judicial Appointments Commission’ paper
given at the Judicial Conference of Australia,
Colloquium 2006 Canberra, 8
October 2006 at
http://www.jca.asn.au/content/attachments/2006-williams_evans_comments.pdf
accessed 4 April 2007 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5NrSWASKx
accessed 9 May 2008).
Robert McClelland,
‘Judicial Appointments’, (Speech delivered at the Judicial
Appointments Forum, Bar Association of
Queensland Annual Conference, Gold Coast,
17 February 2008)
http://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/www/ministers/robertmc.nsf/Page/Speeches_2008_18February2008-JudicialAppointmentsForum
accessed 4 May 2008 (copy at
http://www.webcitation.org/5XYnHgO8c
accessed 9 May 2008).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (265 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter