URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMelbLRS/2018/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Blackham, A --- "A Compromised Balance? A Comparative Examination of Exceptions to Age Discrimination Law in Australia and the UK" [2018] UMelbLRS 8
A COMPROMISED BALANCE?
A COMPARATIVE EXAMINATION OF
EXCEPTIONS TO AGE DISCRIMINATION LAW IN AUSTRALIA AND THE UK
Exceptions to discrimination law reveal both tensions and telling
compromises regarding the boundaries of the equality principle.
Drawing on case
studies of exceptions to age discrimination law in Australia and the UK, this
article considers the normative position
on age equality law that emerges from
these legal boundaries. It argues that broad exceptions to age discrimination
law reflect a
deprioritising of age equality, and a preference for the
instrumental or economic aims underlying age equality law. The restrictive
boundaries of age discrimination law risk undermining the effectiveness of
equality law in practice.
I INTRODUCTION
Discrimination
legislation represents a negotiated compromise between the progressive potential
of equality law and the established
This compromise is
particularly evident in the exceptions allowed to discrimination law; permitting
certain areas or behaviours to
be immune from the strictures of equality law
presents a strong stance regarding the normative limits of equality. Thus,
to equality law reveal both tensions
and telling compromises
regarding the boundaries of equality and
equal treatment.
discrimination law, these tensions and compromises are particularly fraught. Age
discrimination is typically seen as less socially
problematic than other forms
of discrimination,
and is regarded
as socially acceptable or justified in a wide variety of
Age is still regarded as a relevant principle for social ordering, meaning it is
taken into account in a wide range of social and
economic decisions. Thus, age
discrimination can be instrumentally useful in a variety of settings, reflecting
the ‘double
bind’ between the instrumental and intrinsic purposes of
age discrimination
This fraught compromise inherent in age discrimination law is reflected in the
broad exceptions typically allowed to the principle
of age equality. Thus, age
discrimination law represents a key case study for exploring the role of
exceptions in navigating tensions
in equality law.
In this article, I
consider the role of exceptions in negotiating the tensions of equality law,
focusing on age discrimination law
in particular. Drawing on case studies of
exceptions to age discrimination law in Australia and the UK, I consider the
position on age equality that emerges from these legal boundaries.
Australia and the UK both face significant demographic change
in the coming
years, with populations that are ‘ageing
This will have
significant consequences for the sustainability of labour markets and social
security systems in both countries, flagging
the instrumental need for age
discrimination laws to lift employment rates for older
Indeed, in 2016, the Australian Human Rights Commission described age
discrimination against older workers as ‘systemic’
significant barrier to workforce
participation’.
shared experience of demographic ageing, Australia and the UK share a common
legal tradition, and have both framed their
equality law on an individual rights
model. Indeed, Australian discrimination law was originally based on that of the
the same time, there are still significant differences to the exceptions
integrated in the national legal frameworks, reflecting
different national
normative decisions about the boundaries of age equality law. Thus, the
countries are useful comparators for an
exploration of the normative
consequences of exceptions to equality law.
While previous studies have
undertaken comparative analysis of the situation in Australia and the
this study extends existing
research by conducting a detailed comparative legal doctrinal analysis of
exceptions within the two regimes.
Though age discrimination may occur across
society, my focus here is particularly on age discrimination in employment.
potential economic value and individual significance of extending
working lives, the field of employment represents a key challenge
and focus for
equality law. Thus, it is a key site for contests regarding the appropriate
boundaries of discrimination law. Drawing
on this comparative analysis, I argue
that the broad exceptions to age discrimination law in both jurisdictions
reflect a deprioritising
of age equality, and a preference for the instrumental
or economic aims underlying age equality law. I argue that the restrictive
boundaries of age discrimination law risk undermining the effectiveness of
equality law in practice.
II EXCEPTIONS TO DISCRIMINATION LAW
Exceptions to
discrimination law represent a negotiated compromise regarding the boundaries of
equality law and its progressive potential.
For Easteal, Cheung and Priest,
‘[a]ll anti-discrimination acts have been controversial to some extent and
have necessitated
compromises to be
Exceptions are a tool to enact these
compromises.
level, exceptions may be seen as a concession to the status quo; or perhaps a
concession to interest-group lobbying. For
Thornton, vested interests are
reflected in the text of discrimination statutes, showing a ‘deference to
conservative community
In the UK, Dickens and Sargeant both argue that business lobbying has led to a
number of ‘“business-friendly” concessions’
implementing EU law in the
— including in the introduction of a national default retirement age in
As exceptions are a core
means of drawing the boundaries for equality law, they understandably also
represent a key battleground
for equality law. For example, in the passing of
Equal Opportunity Act 2010
(Vic), exceptions for religious
discrimination in Victoria were
despite other measures being introduced into the Act to progressively realise
While exceptions
might be attributable to vested interests and lobbying, they also likely reflect
a normative determination that certain
areas or groups should not be subject to
equality law’s progressive potential: equality law has certain, predefined
Excluding certain behaviour or groups from equality law therefore
reflects a normative judgment as to the acceptable limits of equality
draws the line between normatively acceptable and unacceptable
discrimination.
For Thornton,
exceptions illustrate ‘contemporary resistance to state regulation of the
market’, and become ‘almost
schizophrenic’ in trying to decide
the line between acceptable and unacceptable
discrimination.
Thus, these
normative judgments are far from clear-cut, and different statutory exceptions
may prove to be inconsistent or contradictory
in practice.
extent, exceptions may assist with securing the workability of discrimination
statutes. For Smith, exceptions to equality
law help to ‘prevent
absurdities’,
particularly where (as in Australia) there is no general justification defence
to the general principle of
In Australia, the
‘patchwork’ of exceptions to equality law is seen as helping to make
the statute work in practice,
as part of a ‘concession to a strict formal
equality approach’ where discrimination is never
While this may be
correct, determining what is an ‘absurdity’ requires a normative
judgment about the acceptable limits
of equality law. This argument therefore
supports the normative role of exceptions in concreting the compromise embodied
in discrimination
The normative limits created by exceptions are
fundamentally linked to the aims or objectives of equality law. In age
discrimination
law, for example, statutes are generally seeking to achieve two,
potentially incommensurate, objectives: first, to achieve instrumental
ends, such as by extending working lives and reducing demand on pension systems;
and, second, to achieve intrinsic or dignity
ends, and respect the dignity of
workers of all ages.
aims are likely to come into conflict: age discrimination can be economically
efficient, in some circumstances, while still
infringing workers’
discrimination law reflects a negotiated compromise regarding how these
objectives should be reconciled if they conflict.
Age discrimination law is
therefore aptly regarded as a balancing act, concerned with the
intergenerational distribution of goods
in society such as work and employment
opportunities. Exceptions, then, are a means of striking a balance between
conflicting interests.
For Thornton, this is a balance between freedom and
for Fredman, between
liberty and equality.
give ‘freedom to act’ to vested interests, and reveal a
‘lukewarm’ commitment to equality, which
plays ‘second fiddle
to freedom’.
For Dickens,
the balance is between fairness and
efficiency:
the ‘business
case for equality’, which was key to prompting equality regulation in
Britain, means that the boundaries
of regulation may only extend to the extent
that they ‘promote and support business
interests’.
Diversity is
promoted to the extent that it is ‘good for
and business
profitability is seen as being in the public
Going further,
Thornton also maps exceptions onto the public and private spheres, arguing that
discrimination law mandates equality
in public, and freedom in
enabling the
‘untrammelled pursuit of personal desires’ in the private
Harrison and Parkinson
see this divide as normatively desirable, and argue that discrimination law
should only apply to the commons,
with (religious) liberty
However, for
Thornton, the public–private dichotomy is inherently gendered:
traditionally, women have been relegated to the
private sphere, and men have
occupied the public sphere.
Accepting the public–private divide therefore limits the scope of equality
law to assist women and address gender inequality.
Indeed, what is
‘private’ is socially constructed, and often shaped by the
Thus, using the
public–private dichotomy as a justification for exceptions to equality law
theoretically problematic and normatively questionable, as it reinforces
gender differences.
important to acknowledge the qualitative differences in exceptions to equality
law: some operate to allow discrimination in
a negative sense by limiting the
scope of equality law, as in provisions allowing discrimination to achieve the
operational requirements
of a position. Other exceptions operate to allow
discrimination in a positive sense, such as provisions allowing positive
In both cases,
exceptions operate to modify a strict principle of formal equality. In the first
case, negative exceptions limit the
principle of formal equality to not apply in
specific cases or situations. In the second case, positive exceptions limit the
of formal equality with the aim of achieving substantive equality.
This article focuses on the first type of exceptions, which negatively
scope of equality law. Positive action is a broader topic, which has been
III THE AUSTRALIAN AND UK LEGAL FRAMEWORKS
In Australia’s
federal structure, age discrimination in employment is regulated by a myriad of
pieces of legislation at federal,
state and territory level; and as both an
equality issue generally, and in relation to employment particularly. At the
federal level,
age discrimination claims are made under a specific regulatory
framework for age (the
Age Discrimination Act 2004
’)), rather than a single piece of equality legislation
for all grounds. Further, claims may be made under either equality legislation
) or employment legislation (the
Fair Work Act 2009
prohibits ‘adverse
action’ on the grounds of
which includes dismissal, injuring an employee in employment, prejudicial
altering of an employee’s position, or discriminating
between the employee
and other employees.
also provides protection against termination of employment on the
basis of age.
The Australian
system represents a complex legal framework, with substantial variation between
and employment legislation. For the purposes
of coherence, this article
focuses particularly on exceptions under equality
legislation, rather than
employment legislation.
In Australia, the
prohibition of age discrimination in employment is subject to a
‘significant number of
exceptions’.
In the second reading speech for the
, it was explicitly noted that
‘[a]ll anti-discrimination laws must strike the right balance between
prohibiting unfair discrimination
and allowing legitimate differential
treatment. ... The bill takes a commonsense approach and exempts legitimate
distinctions based
Thus, the exceptions
were explicitly linked with the compromises inherent in age
discrimination law. These ‘legitimate distinctions’ spanned
range of areas, including superannuation, tax, health, social security and
migration, on the basis that ‘[a]ge differences
in these areas are based
on distinct and broadly accepted social policy
rationales’.
Thus, broad
acceptance of various social policy rationales was seen to mean that age-based
distinctions were legitimate. At the time,
the Council on the Ageing
(‘COTA’) expressed its concern regarding the excessively wide range
of exceptions to the
In 2012, the
Australian Commonwealth government released an exposure draft of a consolidated
anti-discrimination law (‘2012
Draft Bill’), which would have
unified the various equality statutes at the federal
While there still would have been separate equality and labour law statutes, as
well as statutes at the federal, state, and territory
level, the 2012 Draft Bill
would have provided greater uniformity and simplicity in the federal equality
structure. The Bill was
delayed, and ultimately not pursued with a change of
government in 2013.
However, its
terms are helpful in illuminating potential challenges to Australian age
discrimination law. Most of the exceptions
would have been
retained by the 2012 Draft Bill. However, the Bill also included a requirement
that the exceptions be reviewed within
recognising the potential
overlap between existing exceptions and the proposed new justifiable conduct
situation in the UK is far more straightforward than that in Australia: the
Equality Act 2010
’) is a single piece of
legislation prohibiting discrimination because of a range of protected
characteristics, including age.
There is no separate legislation relating to
employment, and while some equality regulation is devolved to Northern Ireland,
and Scotland, the core provisions remain largely the same in each
consolidated a number of pieces of equality legislation into a single statute in
including the
Employment Equality (Age) Regulations 2006
(UK) SI 2006/1031, which
implemented the EU
Framework Directive 2000/78
into UK law as it related
With consolidation, there is a risk that exceptions most relevant to one
protected characteristic are unthinkingly imported for
While there are many
exceptions that apply uniformly to all protected characteristics in the
, some differences are retained — particularly for age
discrimination. This may reflect the fact that many exceptions to age
discrimination law in the UK are based on provisions in the
: the EU had a strong influence on the development
of age discrimination law in the UK.
IV EXCEPTIONS TO AGE DISCRIMINATION LAW
In the sections that
follow, I thematically consider case studies of exceptions to age discrimination
law in Australia and the UK,
focusing on exceptions relating to domestic duties,
occupational requirements, religious bodies, statutory provisions, public safety
and security, and justified
discrimination.
I consider the extent to which these exceptions are appropriate for the
functioning of age discrimination legislation, or where they
might undermine the
potential of age equality law. This discussion reveals that exceptions to age
equality law are often different
to — and potentially broader than —
exceptions in other areas of discrimination law. I argue that this indicates
the compromise reached in the context of age equality law is more focused
on instrumental than intrinsic ends, and represents a de-prioritising
equality principle.
A Domestic Duties
The exclusion of domestic
duties on residential premises from discrimination law is a key embodiment of
the public–private dichotomy,
and allows the ‘untrammelled
pursuit’ of ageist desires and preferences in the private
It also reflects the
importance of freedom of contract in the common law
not apply to the performance of domestic duties on residential
Similar exceptions are
in place in Victoria,
Queensland,
the Northern
and the Australian
Capital Territory,
have been retained in the 2012 Draft
This exception does not
apply in the UK or in Tasmania.
Similar exceptions exist in sex
and disability
discrimination
law in Australia at the federal level.
Consistent with Thornton’s
arguments, the exclusion of domestic duties on residential premises is highly
gendered: the International
Labour Organization estimates that Australia had
3,800 domestic workers in 2010, 3,600 of which were
These estimates likely
significantly understate the number of domestic workers in Australia: the 2016
Census of Population and Housing
recorded roughly 36,567 domestic cleaners in
Australia (8,522 men and 28,047 women); and 31,822 housekeepers (5,033 men and
women). When added to other occupations that are likely to constitute
‘domestic duties’ and occur in a residential setting
(such as carers
and aides, child carers, personal carers and assistants, age and disabled
carers, nursing support, and personal care
workers), there could be anywhere up
to 432,501 domestic workers in Australia, with over 84%
This reflects the growth
in the domestic ‘outsourcing’ of
gender disparities in these figures are striking. Excluding domestic workers
from the protections afforded by age discrimination
legislation will
disproportionately affect women, continuing the public–private dichotomy
and reinforcing gender
differences.
This also reflects
the traditional view that domestic duties are ‘women’s
In many cases,
domestic work will be mediated via third parties, including through the use of
agencies, franchises, or company
structures.
This limits the
utility of employment discrimination law in this context, even without the
domestic duties
domestic workers experience a myriad of problems at work — including
undervaluing of their labour, failure to comply
with existing agreements for
work, income insecurity and a risk of unfair
— it appears
normatively problematic to also exclude protection from discrimination law. It
is also inconsistent with the International
Labour Organization’s
Convention (No 189) Concerning Decent Work for Domestic Workers
not yet ratified by Australia or the UK — which requires members to take
measures ‘to respect, promote and realize
the fundamental principles and
rights at work’ for domestic workers, including ‘the elimination of
discrimination in
respect of employment and occupation’, by
‘extending or adapting existing measures to cover domestic
Thus, the need
to overcome the gendered public–private dichotomy, and trends in
international law, require a fundamental review
of the domestic duties exception
and statutes in the states and territories. This is an
exception that might fundamentally undermine the potential of age equality
for a group of vulnerable workers.
B Occupational Requirements
UK and Australian age discrimination laws make exceptions for occupational
requirements, reflecting the tension between fairness
and efficiency in equality
In Australia, the
Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (‘ACCI’) originally
objected to the
on the basis that it would undermine merit in
employment decisions and would lead to older workers having lighter duties:
[T]he laws could open the floodgate to employees demanding easier work
conditions because of their age.
... ‘It is quite conceivable that, without proper exemptions in place,
performance or productivity criteria in industry would
be exposed to complaint
or challenge under the indirect age discrimination concept ... It may also mean
that employers are required
to increasingly provide light or limited duties
for persons of a particular age category to avoid the risk of complaint
litigation.’
ACCI’s concerns reflect a perception that age equality will undermine work
productivity and will require lighter duties
or preferential treatment for older
workers. Thus, the exceptions for occupational requirements may be seen as a
compromise designed
to ensure high work productivity where age impacts upon an
individual’s ability to fulfil a position.
apply where the applicant or employee ‘is unable to carry out the inherent
requirements of the particular employment
because of’
The ‘inherent
requirements’ formulation of this exception echoes that in the
International Labour Organization’s
Convention (No 111) Concerning
Discrimination in Respect of Employment and
and is similar
to an exception originally included in the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
s 170CK(3), which has since been repealed. The exception appears
broader than those in other federal discrimination
Indeed, while the
wording of the
is similar to the exception under Australian federal
disability discrimination
legislation,
it omits that
statute’s reference to the need for ‘reasonable adjustments’
in the inherent requirements
exception risks significantly undercutting the equality
principle, more so than other formulations of this exception in federal
discrimination
While there is case
law on inherent requirements in the context of
disability,
the case law in
relation to age is limited. Some guidance on what is meant by ‘inherent
requirements’ in this context
can be gleaned from
Qantas Airways Ltd v
, where a pilot challenged the termination of his employment at age
The pilot’s forced retirement was consistent with the ‘Rule of
60’, an international air standard that prevented
state parties from
allowing pilots over the age of 60 to act as a pilot in command of an
international air flight, and which allowed
states to exclude a pilot over 60
from entering their air space.
While the standard did not apply in Australia,
it would have prevented Mr
Christie from flying to many
international destinations.
Australian High Court provided limited guidance on the test to be used to
identify the ‘inherent requirements’ of
a position. Indeed, Brennan
CJ sought ‘to guard against too final a definition of the means by which
the inherent nature of
a requirement is determined’, instead preferring a
‘case by case’
For Gaudron J and
McHugh J, an inherent requirement was ‘something that is essential to the
‘essential to the performance of a particular
and could be
derived from the contract of
employment.
Thus, inherent
requirements of a position were not restricted to the ‘characteristic
tasks or skills required for the work
done in that
To Gaudron J,
an inherent requirement could be identified in a practical way by asking
‘whether the position would be essentially
the same if that requirement
were dispensed with’.
Gummow J adopted a slightly different formulation, more focused on the contract
of employment as a determining characteristic:
The ‘position’ here is the particular bundle of contractual rights
and obligations, supplemented ... by the operation
of statute. In such a
setting, the term ‘inherent’ suggests an essential element of that
spoken of rather than something
inessential or
accidental.
J (in dissent) described inherent requirements as those which are not
‘transient, subject to change, geographically limited
or otherwise
temporary. The word “inherent” imports those features of the
requirements for the particular position as
are essential to its very
Thus, unlike the
other Justices, Kirby J emphasised the importance of
requirement to be inherent: the requirement could not vary by time or
In sum, then, while
all members of the Court regarded an inherent requirement as something
‘essential’ to the position,
their interpretation of that term
varied significantly.
The High Court ultimately accepted Qantas’s
argument that the termination was based on the inherent requirements of the
although the Court was divided on what the inherent requirement
actually was: for Brennan CJ, it was the ability to participate in
the bidding
system for shifts;
for Gaudron
J, it was working a minimum number of hours on trips scheduled by Qantas, but
chosen by the pilot in accordance with
the rostering system (as opposed to
compliance with the rostering system
for McHugh J, it was
that Mr Christie could fly to a reasonable number of Qantas’s overseas
destinations and, therefore, be
for Gummow J, that Mr
Christie be available for service in any part of the world where Qantas
and for Kirby J (in
dissent), ‘requirements’ related to rostering and geography were not
‘inherent’ but merely
‘operational’ and liable to change
Thus, it is
clear that there is significant scope for disagreement regarding what
constitutes an ‘inherent requirement’
and what is
‘essential’.
Further, this approach implies that a range of operational requirements that are
unrelated to an individual’s capacity to perform
the role might
nevertheless be
‘inherent’.
Thornton has therefore argued that the decision elevates ‘administrative
convenience to the status of an inherent requirement’,
which gives
significant scope to the employer’s management prerogative, and will
‘always’ tilt the outcome of a
case towards the employer’s
The outcome in
may be compared with the various judgments in the
litigation — decisions concerning the maximum recruitment age for the
Army’s Specialist Service Officer (‘SSO’)
Pilot Scheme, which
The Commonwealth argued that the inherent requirements of the position included
physical fitness.
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission held that physical and medical fitness
was an inherent requirement of the position,
but that there was ‘no direct
correlation between a person’s age and medical
Wilcox J of
the Federal Court similarly held that, to satisfy the exception, there needed to
be an ‘extremely close correlation’
between age and the fitness
requirement, so that age may be logically treated as proxy for fitness: a
logical link between the two
sufficient.
decision, Black CJ held that inherent requirements of the position
‘may’ include the ability to be properly
trained (and
‘unlearn’ bad habits), the ability to integrate into the regiment,
and the ability to maintain a high level
of medical fitness over a six-year
While Black CJ assumed
that all three of these criteria were inherent requirements, it was held that
there was no direct correlation
The terms of the statute
required a ‘tight correlation’ between the rules adopted and the
inherent requirements of the
position: it was not enough to have a logical link,
as this would defeat the purpose of the
legislation.
Furthermore, it
has elsewhere been rejected that having the time and potential to be promoted
(that is, before compulsory retirement)
was an inherent requirement of the
position, such that it justified a failure to promote an older
legal complexity, it is unsurprising that the ‘inherent
requirements’ exception has led to a number of difficulties
in practice:
according to the Housing Industry Association, ‘this is an invariably
difficult area for
the ‘inherent requirements’ exception is a live issue in many
More generally,
employers can both ‘obscure’ and ‘refute’ claims of age
discrimination ‘by hiding behind
inherent requirements and the language of
According to
Easteal, Cheung and Priest, ‘the identification of inherent requirements
is vulnerable to conscious and unconscious
beliefs about ageing’ and may
therefore be susceptible to concerns about unconscious
The current form of the
inherent requirements exception therefore raises substantial cause for
The 2012 Draft Bill retained an ‘inherent requirements’
exception where ‘the other person is unable to carry out
the inherent
requirements of the particular work because he or she has that protected
attribute’ and ‘the discrimination
is necessary because the other
person is unable to carry out those inherent
requirements’.
introduction of the requirement that discrimination be ‘necessary’
could lead courts to scrutinise employers’
arguments in far more detail.
However, it still raises issues regarding what is properly identified as an
‘inherent requirement’.
A far more limited exception has been
adopted in some states and territories. In
and the Australian
Capital Territory,
occupational requirements relating to age are limited to those for dramatic
performances and modelling, where ‘necessary ...
for reasons of
authenticity or
credibility’;
providing welfare or education services to people of a particular age, where
those services ‘can most effectively
be provided by a person of a
particular age or age
This represents
a far more limited and considered exception for
occupational requirements.
Other states and territories, however, have
adopted far broader and potentially unbounded exceptions. Discrimination on the
of age is allowed if based on ‘genuine occupational
requirements’ in
Queensland,
the Northern
There is no
additional exposition or limitation in the statutes of what this might entail in
concessions to efficiency and securing productivity have been made in some
states. In Queensland, employers may ‘fix
reasonable terms’ if an
employee ‘has a restricted capacity to do work genuinely and reasonably
required for the position’
due to an impairment, or requires special
conditions to do the work.
South Australia, the prohibition of age discrimination does not apply if the
person ‘is not, or would not be,
(a) to perform adequately, and without endangering himself or herself or
other persons, the work genuinely and reasonably required
for the employment or
position in question; or
(b) to respond adequately to situations of emergency that should reasonably
be anticipated in connection with the employment or position
Australia, the exception is extended to encompass terms and conditions imposed
on the basis of age ‘if those terms
and conditions are imposed in order to
comply with health and safety considerations which are reasonable in the
circumstances’.
the Australian states and territories vary widely in the scope of their
occupational requirements exception: some are far more
restricted than the
; some are potentially even broader.
The Australian ‘inherent
requirements’ exception is somewhat similar to the exception in the
for occupational requirements that are a proportionate means of
achieving a legitimate aim.
The exception in the
is similar to that in the
, which says that
Member States may provide that a difference of treatment which is based on [age]
shall not constitute discrimination where, by reason
of the nature of the
particular occupational activities concerned or of the context in which they are
carried out, such a characteristic
constitutes a genuine and determining
occupational requirement, provided that the objective is legitimate and the
requirement is
proportionate.
provision in the
is arguably broader than that in the Directive, as
it omits reference to a ‘genuine and determining occupational
requirement’.
exception, the
appears to seek to balance fairness with efficiency. However, the test is
substantially different in the UK, importing
the requirement that occupational
proportionate
and directed towards a
This far more
explicitly imports a balancing exercise into the exception: aims and means must
be assessed in context to establish
that an occupational requirement is
While there has been limited case law on the occupational
requirement exception in the UK (at least as it relates to age), EU cases
address this issue. In Case C-229/08,
Wolf v Stadt Frankfurt am Main
Court of Justice of the European Union (‘CJEU’) considered whether a
maximum recruitment age of 30 for firefighters
was a genuine occupational
requirement.
The CJEU recognised that the aim of the legislation was to guarantee the
operational capacity and proper functioning of the fire
service, which was a
legitimate objective.
physical capacities might be a genuine and determining operational requirement
for intermediate career members of the fire
and uncontested data
produced by the German government demonstrated that physical capacity could
decline with age.
Recruitment
at an older age would therefore reduce the number of years in which firefighters
could fulfil physically demanding
Thus, while the CJEU
did not decide the issue (as it was merely providing guidance to the national
it noted that the
legislation could be seen as appropriate and necessary for achieving legitimate
objectives.
A different
result was reached in Case C-416/13,
Pérez v Ayuntamiento de
, where no evidence was presented to show that a recruitment age limit
of 30 was necessary to safeguard the operation of the police
force, and there
was no evidence that the capabilities required of police officers were as
‘exceptionally high’ as those
required of
firefighters.
This may be
contrasted with Case C-258/15,
Sorondo v Academia Vasca de Policía y
Emergencias
, where a recruitment age limit of 35 for police officers was
held not to be precluded by
Framework Directive
In that case,
evidence was presented of the need for particular physical capacities to perform
the essential duties of the police
that the operational
capability of police officers in these positions declined from the age of
that officers were phased
into less physically demanding roles from age
and that there was a need
to gradually replace older police officers with younger, more physically
capable, officers.
the CJEU appears to be taking a more rigorous approach to the occupational
requirements exception than the one taken in Australia:
operational requirements
(such as a desire to recruit firefighters or police officers for a certain
period of service) will only
influence the CJEU’s decision-making where
they are essential to safeguard the operation of the institution. This may be
, where a rostering system was sufficient to
persuade the High Court.
The decision in
may also be
contrasted with Case C-447/09,
Prigge v Deutsche Lufthansa AG
related to a collective agreement that provided for the automatic termination of
pilots’ employment at age
In relation to whether the provision was a genuine occupational requirement, the
CJEU held that, for airline pilots,
it is essential that they possess ... particular physical capabilities in so far
as physical defects in that profession may have
significant consequences. It is
also undeniable that those capabilities diminish with age ... It follows that
possessing particular
physical capabilities may be considered as a
‘genuine and determining occupational requirement’, within the
Article 4(1) of the Directive, for acting as an airline pilot and
that the possession of such capabilities is related to
underlying the provision — guaranteeing air traffic safety — was
legitimate.
However, it was
also necessary to consider whether the provision was
proportionate.
The exception
in art 4(1) needed to be interpreted strictly, as it constituted a
‘derogation from the principle of
non-discrimination’.
Given that national and international legislation allowed pilots over the age of
60 to fly, subject to certain restrictions, this
indicated that ‘national
and international authorities consider that, until the age of 65, pilots have
the physical capabilities
to act as a
By imposing a
lower age of 60, the collective agreement imposed a ‘disproportionate
requirement’ on the pilots
Therefore, the
retirement age in the collective agreement was not
The multistage
test imposed by the
Framework Directive 2000/78
— that the measure
represent a genuine and determining occupational requirement, that the objective
be legitimate, and that
the requirement be proportionate — is far more
exacting in practice than the ‘inherent requirements’ test in the
. The requirement of proportionality ensures that a nuanced balancing
exercise occurs between the interests of employers and employees,
taking into
account broader social and economic objectives. Without this requirement, the
risks giving employers significant power to determine the
‘inherent requirements’ of a position, such as to exclude workers
different ages.
C Religious Bodies
Both UK and Australian
age discrimination statutes contain some exceptions relating to religious or
charitable bodies. For Parkinson,
exceptions of this nature provide an
appropriate level of freedom for religious groups, providing them with the
‘freedom to
be different’, rather than forcing religious groups to
comply with the will of the
This, then, gives religious groups freedom at the margins to build their own
communities in accordance with their collective
offering a balance
between (religious) freedom and equality. By contrast, Fredman sees these
exceptions as representing a compromise
between protection of religion and other
protected characteristics: religious exceptions give priority to religion in
circumstances.
Parkinson’s
argument raises the question of how far this freedom or prioritisation should
extend: should it also apply to others
who want to build the cohesiveness of
their group, such as small employers or clubs, who are small in number and
arguably make little
practical difference to the rest of the
population?
Or, conversely,
should we see religious groups not as marginal, but as core and powerful
employers that wield substantial influence
and have important symbolic roles in
ensuring the efficacy of age equality law? In Australia, for instance, religious
major employers: UnitingCare Australia is one of the largest
providers of community services in the country, employing over 40,000
engaging over 30,000
volunteers.
The Catholic
Church is ‘one of Australia’s largest employers’, employing
around 2% of the Australian workforce
or over 180,000
Thus, excluding
religious bodies from the scope of discrimination law may substantially undercut
the provisions of equality law.
While religious tenets and doctrines often
relate to gender, sexuality, and religion, there appears (at least initially) to
relevance in relation to age. Religious exceptions may well have less
relevance to age discrimination, and may have been copied from
discrimination statutes. That said, it is important to note that age
discrimination
evident in some religious doctrine: age is not
irrelevant to religious decision-making. For example, Catholic priests are
effectively
subject to compulsory retirement. Under the
Code of Canon
[w]hen a pastor has completed seventy-[f]ive years of age, he is requested to
submit his resignation from office to the diocesan
bishop who is to decide to
accept or defer it after he has considered all the circumstances of the person
and place. Attentive to
the norms established by the conference of bishops,
the diocesan bishop must provide suitable support and housing for a
it is important to remain mindful of existing age-based practices by religious
bodies, and the potential significance of
religious exceptions at a practical
and symbolic level.
More generally, though, religious exceptions do not just
balance a conflict between equality and religious freedom. In a study of
religious schools, Evans and Gaze found significant diversity in the extent to
which exceptions (particularly those relating to gender,
religion and sexuality)
were used in practice in the schools’ work as both employers and
educators: while some used the available
exceptions ‘rarely or
never’, others used the ‘full range’ of exceptions
Indeed, some saw the application of anti-discrimination law to their institution
as ‘a denial of a fundamental right to religious
freedom and
The authors
therefore concluded that the diversity and heterogeneity of religious schools
meant that the use of exceptions to equality
law could not be seen as a simple
conflict between equality and religious
the issue is more
complex, and requires a more nuanced perspective than mere juxtaposition of
In Australia, s 35 of the
provides that the prohibition of
age discrimination ‘does not affect an act or practice of a body
established for religious
purposes that’
(a) conforms to the doctrines, tenets or beliefs of that religion; or
(b) is necessary to avoid injury to the religious sensitivities of adherents
provisions are in place in New South
and Western
In the Australian
Capital Territory, both (a)
(b) must be satisfied to meet the
On paper, this
exception paves the way for significant detraction from the protection afforded
in employment. The religious exceptions in Australia may be attributable to
successful lobbying by religious groups: for
example, Parkinson notes that
reforms to the New South Wales religious exception were prevented when the
government ‘responded
to the opposition of the churches’, and did
not undertake reform in accordance with the Law Reform Commission’s
recommendations.
also contains exceptions for charitable
apply to age discrimination in
employment.
relating to employment by religious bodies are confined to the grounds of sex,
marriage, sexuality, transgender
and religious
Thus, the exception
for charitable and/or religious bodies is much narrower in the UK in relation to
employment discrimination.
The exception in many Australian states and
territories is also narrower than that in the
: in Victoria, for
example, age discrimination is only excepted for the appointment, ordination,
and training of priests, ministers
or members of a religious order, and for the
selection and appointment of people to perform or participate in religious
observances
or practices.
Actions conforming with the doctrines of the religion, or done to avoid injury
to the religious sensitivities of adherents of the
religion, are only excluded
where they relate to religious belief or activity, sex, sexual orientation,
lawful sexual activity, marital
status, parental status or gender identity
provisions are in place in the Northern
and in Tasmania
and South Australia, the religious bodies exception does not apply to age
discrimination.
Queensland, the broader exception relating to religious doctrines and
sensitivities does not apply to
These exceptions
call into question the extent to which religious autonomy should be recognised,
particularly when religious groups
fulfil a public role as a major employer. The
exception potentially allows age discrimination to occur even when a
religious tenet or belief is unrelated to the employee’s
actual role or
position. In the EU, for example, Temperman has argued that exceptions should
apply to ecclesiastical roles, but not
roles that do not merit a religious
requirement (such as cleaners, secretaries, or catering
This is consistent
with the first limb of the exception in Victoria, which relates to priests and
ministers of religion. The
exception requires no examination of the
employee’s position or responsibility: a blanket exception is merely
provided for
discrimination that ‘conforms to the doctrines, tenets or
beliefs of that
The current
drafting of the
exception provides no scope to balance religious
freedom and the right that is being overruled; there is no opportunity to
the relative importance of competing priorities, as one right has
‘absolute priority over the
Thus, Evans and
Gaze (writing in the context of religious schools) argue there is scope for a
more contextual approach in relation to religious exceptions to equality law
in Australia.
religious exceptions to federal age discrimination law in Australia were
reframed slightly in the 2012 Draft Bill. Rather than
offering a blanket
exception for religious groups, the age discrimination exception in the 2012
Draft Bill was limited to the appointment
of priests, ministers, and
‘persons to perform duties or functions’ in religious
Age was not one of
the grounds included in the broad exceptions for conduct by religious
This implies that
including a wide religious exception in the
was unnecessarily broad,
and that changes could be made to this exception without causing too many
difficulties. Indeed, it is hard
to justify the retention of this broad
exception given the importance of religious institutions as employers at a
practical and symbolic
D Statutory Provisions
Exceptions are also
provided in age discrimination law for complying with other statutory provisions
or court decisions. This arguably
shows the ‘subordinate status’ of
equality law, which is subject to discrimination embedded in other statutes and
This, then, is
‘potentially one of the most devastating’ exceptions to age
discrimination law.
includes an exception for acts done in ‘direct
compliance’ with a specified law, statute or court
This exception would
have been retained and extended in the 2012 Draft Bill, which included
exceptions for complying with Commonwealth
laws and complying with court
determinations.
Metropolitan Health Service (WA)
, which related to workers’
compensation payments, the Court held that ‘direct compliance’ with
a law or statute
requires that impugned conduct is conduct which is actuated by an obligation
which is directly imposed upon a party by the provisions
of a statute or other
nominated statutory instrument, rather than by directions made, or given,
pursuant to a general power to give
directions provided for in a
making workers’ compensation payments for the duration of the term
specified in the statute, and no longer than that period,
the respondent in
‘acted in direct compliance with the statute’, despite
the fact that the respondent was ‘at liberty’ to continue
formulations of this exception are in place in the states and territories. In
Victoria, actions are excepted if they are
‘necessary to comply with, or
... authorised by’ an act or
or necessary to
comply with an order of a court or
formulation is in place in the Northern Territory, although that Act refers to
acts being ‘specifically
authorised’.
Tasmania, acts are allowed if ‘reasonably necessary to comply with’
a law or order of a court,
and in New South Wales, Western Australia and the Australian Capital Territory
if they are ‘necessary’ to comply with
a law or order of a
Statutory authority is
not an exception in South Australia; and in Western Australia and Queensland the
only applies to statutes that were in force at the time the
legislation came
By contrast,
, a person does not contravene a provision relating to age
discrimination if they do anything they ‘must do’ pursuant
requirement of an enactment.
In practice, the requirement that employers ‘must do’ the thing
pursuant to the enactment imposes a far higher degree
of scrutiny on employer
actions. In the UK case of
Heron v Sefton Metropolitan Borough Council
Ms Heron received a redundancy payment calculated in accordance with the Civil
Service Compensation Scheme 1994, which was made
by the Minister under the
Superannuation Act 1972
Under the Compensation Scheme, employees above the pension age would receive
only six months’ pay in the event of a compulsory
redundancy, not an
amount calculated based on their years of
Metropolitan Borough Council argued that the difference in treatment was covered
by the statutory exception to the
The Employment Appeal Tribunal found that the exception did not apply to this
case because, while the Compensation Scheme provided
for a difference in
treatment on the basis of age, ‘it [did] not
that difference to be respected. A
requirement is something which means that the person subject to it
Further, the Compensation Scheme did not apply directly to Ms Heron’s
employment: it was incorporated into her
Thus, the terms
were contractual (not statutory) even if they required the Council to pay no
more than six months’
Thus, the way the UK
exception has been applied by the courts imposes a far higher standard of
scrutiny on employers’ actions,
and has less risk of undermining the
statutory protection of age equality.
E Public Safety and Security
Similar to concerns that
age discrimination law will affect organisational productivity and efficiency,
there is also a concern that
age equality may impair public safety or security.
This would presumably occur if older workers were employed in positions for
they lacked the physical or mental capacity to perform the role, and where
a failure to perform had security or safety implications.
Arguably, this could
be covered under an inherent requirements or occupational requirements
exception, and does not need specific
provision in age discrimination law.
Despite this, some jurisdictions make provision for exceptions for national
security and/or
public safety.
, s 192 provides an exception
for doing acts ‘for the purpose of safeguarding national security’,
so long as the acts
are proportionate. Further, the age discrimination
provisions do not apply to service in the armed
Section 192 appears
to reflect art 2(5) of the
Framework Directive
provides that that directive is
without prejudice to measures laid down by national law which, in a democratic
society, are necessary for public security, for the
maintenance of public order
and the prevention of criminal offences, for the protection of health and for
the protection of the rights
and freedoms of others.
provision was considered in Case C-447/09,
Prigge v Deutsche Lufthansa
, where the social partners argued that the retirement age was
‘appropriate to limit the possibility for pilots to act as pilots
60 for reasons of the safety of passengers, persons in areas over which aircraft
fly and the safety of pilots
themselves’,
therefore fell within art 2(5). The CJEU rejected this argument as the age
provisions were not necessary to achieve the aim of
public security: indeed,
national and international legislation did not prohibit those over 60 from
acting as pilots, it just restrained
activities.
, any concern about public safety is provided for via the exception
for compliance with statutory provisions: civil aviation safety
regulations and
defence personnel regulations are explicitly exempt under s
However, some states and
territories make exceptions for public health. In Queensland, acts are allowed
if ‘reasonably necessary
to protect public health’ or occupational
health and safety.
are also made in Western Australia and the Australian Capital Territory for
imposing terms and conditions to comply with
‘health and safety
considerations which are reasonable in the
circumstances’.
F Objectively Justifying Discrimination
The foregoing discussion
has illustrated that the exceptions to the
are significantly more
wide-reaching than those under the
. However, where UK employers are
not covered by an explicit statutory exception, there is the possibility of
objectively justifying
direct age discrimination: this cannot be done under the
allows less favourable treatment on the grounds of
age to be objectively justified if the treatment is shown to be ‘a
proportionate
means of achieving a legitimate
This does not
apply to any other protected
characteristic.
ability to justify direct discrimination under the
prospect of conducting a judicially-scrutinised balancing exercise, to allow a
context-sensitive and negotiated solution
to competing
The balance struck
will depend on the weight given to equality compared with other competing
By requiring measures
to pursue a ‘legitimate aim’, the
incorporates broader
social and economic interests into the balancing exercise. For example, in the
context of mandatory retirement,
and in light of developing EU
jurisprudence,
the UK Supreme Court has identified two broad categories of legitimate aims that
may support an employer-justified retirement age:
intergenerational
; and, second,
However, in
that case, the Supreme Court concluded that the UK had decided to give employers
the flexibility to choose which objectives
to pursue — so long as they
could count as ‘legitimate objectives of a public interest nature’,
were consistent
with the state’s social policy aims, and the means used to
achieve the objectives were
proportionate.
This implies
that while it is for states to identify broad social policy aims, employers may
articulate and apply those aims as they
relate to their particular
circumstances. Indeed, even where aims are directed to an employer’s own
best interests, this will
not prevent them being legitimate social policy
This may reduce the
extent to which broader interests are incorporated into the balancing exercise
under the objective justification
unclear whether there will be sufficient judicial scrutiny of employer practices
to ensure the legitimacy of the balancing
exercise. Courts and tribunals may
lack the willingness or capacity to subject employer policies to detailed
scrutiny, meaning they
are likely to defer to organisational
decision-makers.
generally, the balancing process is only publicly scrutinised when an individual
complaint is made to a court or tribunal. In
practice, employers may be adopting
age discriminatory practices without conducting any balancing exercise or
considering possible
alternatives: for example, in a survey of employers, of the
19% of respondents that had retained a retirement age for their workforce,
majority failed to provide a justification for their retirement age when
Thus, the potential
for the objective justification process to prompt an effective balancing
exercise may be limited in practice.
Overall, the ability to objectively
justify direct age discrimination may lead to the retention of a number of
socially undesirable
and age-discriminatory employment policies without any
effective balancing exercise or negotiation being conducted. Allowing age-based
practices to be justified may have significant consequences in practice for
employment terms and conditions, and could have a significantly
deleterious
effect on individual employees.
At the same time, not allowing age
discrimination to be objectively justified may lead to a more conservative
interpretation of discrimination
statutes, and a broader interpretation of
exceptions, particularly in the context of complex legal
provisions.
In Australia,
these challenges could have been addressed to some extent by the 2012 Draft
Bill, which would have streamlined the
various exceptions in the
included a general justification defence for ‘justifiable’ conduct.
Conduct was defined as ‘justifiable’
(a) the first person engaged in the conduct, in good faith, for the purpose
of achieving a particular aim; and
(b) that aim is a legitimate aim; and
(c) the first person considered, and a reasonable person in the
circumstances of the first person would have considered, that engaging
conduct would achieve that aim; and
(d) the conduct is a proportionate means of achieving that
In determining
whether conduct was ‘justifiable’, courts would be required
(a) the objects of [the legislation];
(b) the nature and extent of the discriminatory effect of the conduct;
(c) whether the ... person could instead have engaged in other conduct that
would have had no, or a lesser, discriminatory effect;
(d) the cost and feasibility of engaging in other conduct
In its report on the
2012 Draft Bill, the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation
Committee noted the concerns of a number
of submissions and witnesses regarding
the wording of cl 23.
particular, concerns were expressed that there was no clear definition of
‘legitimate aims’ and ‘proportionate’
in the Bill,
creating confusion and necessitating judicial determinations before employers
and employees could have legal
Further, the 2012
Draft Bill also retained many other exceptions, meaning the justification
defence would be
in addition
to the existing exceptions, not instead of
There was therefore a
risk that the ‘justifiable conduct’ provision would undermine legal
protection against discrimination.
The UK experience lends some weight to this
argument, as it does not appear to have prompted an effective balancing exercise
in practice.
There are additional age-based exceptions in some states and
territories. For example, early or voluntary retirement schemes are the
of specific exceptions in
retirement is an exception to the laws in
and the Northern
and there is an
exception in Queensland if a retirement age was imposed prior to 1994 or relates
to a partnership.
retirement schemes and compulsory retirement ages may both be objectively
justified under the
. Indeed, the objective justification process
allows for a wide variety of age-based measures to be adopted or retained.
Despite this,
two specific exceptions (which could have been covered by the
objective justification process) are included in the
: first, for
benefits tied to length of service; and second, for redundancy
These exceptions may
have been introduced to provide a level of legal clarity around common age-based
practices; or may be thought
to provide a more structured approach to two
contentious issues. Thus, while the objective justification process has the
to cover a wide range of age-based measures, the test does not appear
to offer sufficient certainty or specificity in some circumstances.
V DISCUSSION AND LESSONS
The foregoing analysis
has revealed the very real tensions inherent in age discrimination law, and the
various ways these tensions
have been managed via exceptions in Australia and
the UK. These exceptions reflect an attempt to balance equality and freedom;
and efficiency; public and private interests; and instrumental and
intrinsic aims of age equality law. The exceptions to the
broader than those under the
, reflecting a prioritisation of freedom
(and religious freedom in particular), efficiency, and the instrumental ends of
age discrimination
law. However, the broader exceptions under the Australian
legislation are balanced by the ability to objectively justify direct age
discrimination under the
. This comparative analysis has therefore
revealed a fundamental difference in the structure
of exceptions under UK
and Australian age discrimination law: UK law
tends towards less specific
exceptions, relying instead on a general justification
Australian law tends
towards specific exceptions that
attempt to provide for all possible
eventualities, without an objective justification defence.
It is an open
question whether the ability to justify direct age discrimination is a positive
development, or whether it could serve
to undermine the legal protection
afforded by equality law. In the UK, a handful of employers have used the
justification provisions
to maintain mandatory retirement ages and to adopt
age-based policies in relation to a range of employment
While some of
these policies might benefit older workers (such as higher redundancy pay),
others may well curtail their employment
prematurely (such as mandatory
retirement) and have socially undesirable
consequences.
Thus, it is debatable whether the 2012 Draft Bill would have been a positive
development in Australia in allowing age discrimination
to be justified. Indeed,
some UK scholars have argued that the
should be amended to introduce
a specific and limited list of acceptable exceptions to age discrimination
as is arguably provided
for in the Australian statutes. This raises more fundamental questions regarding
whether age as a protected
characteristic is special or different when compared
with other sorts of
discrimination,
to the extent
that a justification provision is required for direct discrimination. These
deeper questions need to be addressed,
particularly given the proposals in the
2012 Draft Bill in the Australian context, and the continuing ability to justify
direct discrimination
in the UK context.
Overall, the extensive exceptions to
age discrimination law under the
, and state and territory
statutes send a clear message that age equality and intrinsic ends are secondary
to other, competing considerations.
This seriously undermines the symbolic and
progressive potential of age discrimination
Considered thought
therefore must be given to whether there is a need to limit or amend existing
exceptions, and the desirability
of a general justification defence. In
particular, this article has questioned the breadth and
scope of exceptions
relating to domestic duties, occupational requirements, religious bodies and
statutory provisions. Limiting exceptions
would endorse an individual rights
perspective and the intrinsic motivations of equality law. It would help to
promote addressing
age discrimination as a primary priority, rather than just a
means of achieving workforce diversity and instrumental
Thus, effectively
responding to demographic ageing demands a reconsideration of the scope and
appropriateness of existing exceptions
to age discrimination law.
VI CONCLUSION
Dramatic demographic
change, and the potential economic costs of an ageing population, have brought
age discrimination laws and their
effectiveness to the front of
governments’ minds. This article has emphasised the tensions and
compromises inherent in age
discrimination law, and demonstrated how these
tensions might be managed via exceptions to equality law. While these exceptions
represent a negotiated compromise, others risk undermining the
equality principle to a substantial extent. Rather than copying boilerplate
provisions from other equality statutes, or merely applying other exceptions to
age, serious thought needs to be given to whether
these exceptions are
appropriate in the context of age equality, or whether they just serve to
undermine legal protection as a concession
to vested interests. While often
neglected as a topic of study, exceptions to equality law reveal significant
insights about governmental
priorities and national sentiments. In both
Australia and the UK, it is timely to review and reconsider exceptions to age
BA, LLB (Hons) (Melb), PhD
(Cantab); Senior Lecturer and ARC Discovery Early Career Research Fellow,
Melbourne Law School, The University
of Melbourne. This research was
by the Australian Government through the Australian Research Council’s
Discovery Projects
funding scheme (project DE170100228). The views
expressed herein are those of
the author and are not necessarily those of
the Australian Government or the Australian Research Council.
Going further, Barmes argues
that law (and individual rights at work) ‘simultaneously ... challenge and
... sustain the status
quo’: Lizzie Barmes,
Bullying and Behavioural
Conflict at Work: The Duality of Individual Rights
(Oxford University Press,
Malcolm Sargeant,
‘Mandatory Retirement Age and Age Discrimination’ (2004) 26
Employee Relations
See Sandra Fredman,
Discrimination Law
(Oxford University Press, 2
Hendrickx sees this as a
tension between individual and collective interests: Frank Hendrickx, ‘Age
and European Employment
Discrimination Law’ in Frank Hendrickx (ed),
Active Ageing and Labour Law: Contributions in Honour of Professor Roger
(Intersentia, 2012) 3, 21.
Select Committee on Public
Service and Demographic Change,
Ready for Ageing?
(House of Lords Paper
No 140, Session 2012–13, 14 March 2013) 7. See also Treasury, Australian
Government,
2015 Intergenerational Report: Australia in 2055
March 2015) 13–14.
See Australian Human Rights
Commission,
Willing to Work: National Inquiry into Employment Discrimination
against Older Australians and Australians with Disability
(Report, 2 May
Ibid 6. The Australian Human
Rights Commission’s report into age discrimination in employment did not
consider exceptions to
age discrimination law.
See Margaret Thornton,
Liberal Promise: Anti-Discrimination Legislation in Australia
University Press, 1990) 1. For discussion of the influence of UK ageing
developments on Australia, see generally Katherine
Lindsay, ‘“Cradle
to Grave”: Age Discrimination and Legislative Policy in Australia’
[1996] AUJlHRights 17
Australian Journal of Human Rights
See, eg, Philip Taylor,
Margaret Steinberg and Linda Walley, ‘Mature Age Employment: Recent
Developments in Public Policy in
Australia and the UK’ (2000) 19
Australasian Journal on Ageing
125; Kathleen Riach, ‘Older Workers:
Learning from Three International Experiences’ (2006) 5
Social Policy
and Society
551; Susan Bisom-Rapp, Andrew Frazer and Malcolm Sargeant,
‘Decent Work, Older Workers and Vulnerability in the Economic Recession:
Comparative Study of Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States’
Employee Rights and Employment Policy Journal
Patricia Easteal, Channy
Hiu Tung Cheung and Susan Priest, ‘Too Many Candles on the Birthday Cake:
Age Discrimination, Work
and the Law’
[2007] QUTLawJJl 6
Queensland University of
Technology Law and Justice Journal
Margaret Thornton,
‘The Public/Private Dichotomy: Gendered and Discriminatory’
Journal of Law and Society
Linda Dickens,
‘Re-Regulation for Gender Equality: From “Either/Or” to
“Both”’ (2006) 37
Industrial Relations Journal
306; Malcolm Sargeant, ‘The Employment Equality (Age) Regulations 2006: A
Legitimisation of Age Discrimination in Employment’
Industrial Law Journal
, 224; Linda Dickens, ‘The Road Is Long:
Thirty Years of Equality Legislation in Britain’ (2007) 45
Journal of Industrial Relations
Sargeant, ‘The
Employment Equality (Age) Regulations 2006’ (n
) 224–7. This was ultimately
removed in 2011.
Dominique Allen,
‘Equal Opportunity: Unfinished Business’
Alternative
Law Journal
, 273. See also Margaret Thornton, ‘Excepting Equality
in the Victorian
Equal Opportunity Act
Australian Journal of
Equal Opportunity Act
See Sargeant, ‘The
Employment Equality (Age) Regulations 2006’ (n
Thornton, ‘The
Public/Private Dichotomy’ (n
Belinda Smith, ‘From
: How Far Has Australian Anti-Discrimination Law
Come in 30 Years?’
Australian Journal of Labour Law
Thornton, ‘Excepting
Equality’ (n
Thornton, ‘Excepting
Equality’ (n
Dickens, ‘The Road Is
) 468. Fredman
describes this as a tension between economic and market concerns and equality:
‘Re-Regulation for Gender Equality’ (n
) 299, 306.
Sargeant, ‘The
Employment Equality (Age) Regulations 2006’ (n
‘Re-Regulation for Gender Equality’ (n
Thornton, ‘Excepting
Equality’ (n
The Liberal
Joel Harrison and Patrick
Parkinson, ‘Freedom beyond the Commons: Managing the Tension between Faith
and Equality in a Multicultural
[2014] MonashULawRw 19
Monash University
Thornton, ‘The
Public/Private Dichotomy’ (n
Ibid 449–51.
Ibid 449–51,
See Smith (n
Christopher McCrudden,
‘Rethinking Positive Action’
Industrial Law Journal
; Lizzie Barmes, ‘Equality Law and Experimentation: The Positive Action
Cambridge Law Journal
; Lizzie Barmes,
‘Navigating Multi-Layered Uncertainty: EU Member State and Organizational
Perspectives on Positive Action’
in Geraldine Healy, Gill Kirton and Mike
Noon (eds),
Equality, Inequalities and Diversity: Contemporary Challenges and
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2011) 56. This article also excludes
discussion of exemptions to equality law that can be granted under the
Australian Human Rights Commission Act 1986
’) and, to a more limited extent, under the
Fair Work Act 2009
s 772(1)(f).
Neil Rees, Simon Rice and
Dominique Allen,
Australian Anti-Discrimination Law
(Federation Press,
ed, 2014) 6 [1.2.9].
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 26 June 2003, 17621
(Daryl Williams).
Ibid 17622.
COTA National Seniors,
Submission No 6 to Australian Senate Legal and Constitutional Committee,
Provisions of the Age Discrimination Bill 2003
(1 September 2003)
Exposure Draft, Human
Rights and Anti-Discrimination Bill 2012 (Cth) (‘2012 Draft Bill’).
For a discussion, see Therese
MacDermott, ‘Affirming Age: Making Federal
Anti-Discrimination Regulation Work for Older Australians’
Australian Journal of Labour Law
See Daniel Hirst,
‘Anti-Discrimination Laws Overhaul Delayed’,
The Sydney Morning
(Sydney, 21 March 2013) 13.
2012 Draft Bill (n
Exposure Draft Explanatory
Notes, Human Rights and Anti-Discrimination Bill 2012
[139]–[142], 48–9 [218]–[219].
See generally Paul Chaney,
Equality and Public Policy: Exploring the Impact of Devolution in the UK
(University of Wales Press, 2011) 111–46.
Explanatory Notes,
Equality Act 2010
(UK) 2–4 [4]–[11].
Council Directive
2000/78/EC of 27 November 2000 Establishing a General Framework
Equal Treatment in Employment and Occupation
[2000] OJ L 303/16
Directive 2000/78
Maleiha Malik,
‘“Modernising Discrimination Law”: Proposals for a Single
Equality Act for Great Britain’
International Journal of
Discrimination and the Law
Youth wages — which
are excluded from the
s 25 and the
items 11–12 — have been analysed by scholars elsewhere: see, eg,
Alysia Blackham, ‘Normative Visions of Age: Progress
and Change in
Australian Labour Law’ in John Howe, Anna Chapman and Ingrid Landau (eds),
The Evolving Project of Labour Law: Foundations, Development and Future
Research Directions
(Federation Press, 2017) 117. This article also does not
consider age discrimination in small partnerships, which are excluded from
scope of the
) s 21. ‘Justified’
discrimination may be best described as a defence to equality law, rather than
an exception. However,
given the relevance of this provision to exceptions more
generally, it is considered here alongside other exceptions.
The Liberal
See also Catherine Barnard
and Alysia Blackham, ‘Discrimination and the Self-Employed: The Scope of
Protection in an Interconnected
Age’ in Hugh Collins (ed),
Contract Law and the Charter of Fundamental Rights
(Intersentia, 2017) 197,
) s 18(3). ‘Domestic duties’
is not defined in the
Equal Opportunity Act
Victoria includes an additional exception relating to the
care of children: at
Anti-Discrimination Act
Anti-Discrimination Act
Equal Opportunity Act
Anti-Discrimination Act
s 49ZYB(3).
In South Australia, this is
expressed as employment ‘for purposes not connected with a
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
s 85F(1)(a).
Discrimination Act
The Australian Capital Territory includes an additional
exception relating to the care of children: at
2012 Draft Bill (n
Though the limited
application of UK equality law to the self-employed may prevent this difference
having much impact in practice:
Hashwani v Jivraj
[2011] UKSC 40
[2011] 1 WLR
relation to contract workers.
Sex Discrimination Act
Discrimination Act 1992
International Labour
International Labour Organization, Domestic Workers across the
Global and Regional Statistics and the Extent of Legal Protection
(Report, 2013) 117.
‘TableBuilder’,
Australian Bureau of Statistics
(Online Data
Tool, 2017) <
www.abs.gov.au/
websitedbs/D3310114.nsf/Home/2016%20TableBuilder
archived at <
https://perma.cc/
>. Of course, some of these
workers would be performing these roles in a commercial setting.
Gabrielle Meagher,
Friend or Flunkey? Paid Domestic Workers in the New Economy
(University
of New South Wales Press, 2003) 48.
See generally Thornton,
‘The Public/Private Dichotomy’ (n
Though there may be grounds
for a discrimination claim against the agency themselves. This is consistent
with anecdotal evidence
that agencies practice discrimination, including on the
basis of age: ibid 109.
Ibid 99–100,
Opened for signature 16
June 2011, [2015] ITS 11 (entered into force 5 September 2013) (‘
Convention No 189
’) arts 3(2), 18.
See Dickens, ‘The
Road Is Long’ (n
Kirsty Magarey,
Discrimination Bill 2003
Digest No 29 2003–04, 8
) s 18(4). Similarly, the
excludes actions ‘taken because of the inherent requirements of the ...
Opened for signature 25
1958, 362 UNTS 31
(entered into force 15 June 1960) art 1(2) (‘
Convention No 111
Discrimination Act 1984
, which refers to ‘a genuine
occupational qualification to be a person of a different sex from the sex of the
other person’.
Discrimination Act 1992
Ibid. See Therese
MacDermott, ‘Age Discrimination and Employment Law: The Sky’s the
Australian Journal of Labour Law
However, note the argument
that the provision should be interpreted in a limited way, to apply only where
an individual is unable
to carry out the inherent requirements of the position
age, not because of characteristics relating to age: Rees,
Rice and Allen (n
[6.4.7.22].
Commonwealth
(1999) 200 CLR 177.
For an analysis of the differences between
the two jurisdictions, see MacDermott, ‘Age Discrimination and Employment
(1998) 193 CLR 280
’). The case was decided under the
Relations Act 1988
(Cth) s 170DF(1)(f). This section has been largely
replicated in s 772(1)(f) of the
most relevance to the interpretation of the
. As Rees, Rice and Allen
argue, it is more difficult to apply the reasoning in
, due to the differences between the legislative schemes: Rees, Rice
and Allen (n
) 376 [6.4.9.4].
Convention on
International Civil Aviation
, opened for signature 7 December
1944, 15 UNTS
(entered into force 4 April 1947) arts 39–40; International Civil
Aviation Organization,
Annex 1 to the Convention on International Civil
Aviation: Personnel Licensing
ed, July 2011) [2.1.10.1].
(Gaudron J), 325 [135] (Kirby J).
) 285 [3] (Brennan CJ), 292 [26] (Gaudron
J), 305–6 [75], 310 [86]–[87] (McHugh J), 317 [112] (Gummow J), 326
[137] (Kirby
Ibid 284 [1].
Ibid 294 [34] (Gaudron
Ibid 305 [74] (McHugh
Ibid 307–8 [80]
(McHugh J); cf at 295 [37] (Gaudron J).
Ibid 294 [33] (Gaudron J);
see also at 304–5 [72]–[73] (McHugh J).
Ibid 295 [36].
Ibid 318 [114].
Ibid 340 [164].
Ibid 341 [164].
Ibid 285 [3]; cf at
295–6 [38]–[39] (Gaudron J).
Ibid 310 [86].
Ibid 319 [117].
The issue of inherent
requirements was also flagged in
Harley v Commonwealth
[2011] FMCA 197
where a 54-year-old man argued that he was discriminated against on the basis of
his age when his application to join the RAAF Active
Reserve was refused after
he failed to pass a fitness ‘beep test’. The reported case only
relates to a preliminary procedural
question (the appointment of a court
See Therese MacDermott,
‘Challenging Age Discrimination in Australian Workplaces: From
Anti-Discrimination Legislation to Industrial
Regulation’
[2011] UNSWLawJl 7
University of New South Wales Law Journal
, 193. See also MacDermott,
‘Age Discrimination and Employment
Margaret Thornton,
‘Disabling Discrimination Legislation: The High Court and Judicial
[2009] AUJlHRights 7
(2009) 15(1)
Australian Journal of Human Rights
Commonwealth v Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
(1998) 158 ALR 468
Bradley (Trial)
Commonwealth v Bradley
[1999] FCA 1524
(1999) 95 FCR 218
Bradley (Appeal)
’). This case was
determined under the
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act
(Cth) (now the
Australian Human Rights Commission Act 1986
Bradley (Trial)
Commonwealth v
[1999] FCA 1524
(1999) 95 FCR 218
, 232–3 [26]–[29].
[26]–[29], 237 [41].
Ibid 234 [33],
235–6 [35]–[37].
Commonwealth v
[2000] FCA 1854
(2000) 108 FCR 378
, 395 [62], 396 [67]–[68] (Katz J).
Although the Commonwealth admitted that time remaining before retirement did not
automatically
preclude promotion, meaning it was therefore not a requirement (ie
something that must be complied with), as well as not being inherent:
[64]–[65], 397 [73]–[74] (Katz J). See also
Commonwealth v Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[1999] FCA 616
(1999) 57 ALD 623
Housing Industry
Association, Submission No 237 to Australian Human Rights Commission,
to Work: National Inquiry into Employment Discrimination against Older
Australians and Australians with Disability
(4 December 2015) 7, quoted in
Australian Human Rights Commission (n
Alkira Centre Box Hill Inc
[2009] FMCA 288.
Easteal, Cheung and
2012 Draft Bill (n
) cl 24(2).
Equal Opportunity Act
, which relates to artistic performances and
Anti-Discrimination
Equal Opportunity Act
, which relates to artistic performances, models and welfare
Discrimination Act
(ACT) s 57A, which relates to artistic performances, models and welfare
Opportunity Act 2010
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
In that state, additional
classes of jobs or occupations can be added by the regulations: at
Anti-Discrimination
Anti-Discrimination
Anti-Discrimination
Equal Opportunity Act
In the Northern
Territory this appears to be extended even further, by allowing an exception for
the inability to perform the inherent
requirements of the position where special
needs have been accommodated:
Anti-Discrimination Act 1992
35(1)(b)(ii).
Anti-Discrimination
Equal Opportunity Act
Equal Opportunity Act
) sch 9 item 1(1).
Framework Directive
) art 4(1).
) sch 9 item 1(1)(b).
, I-38 [24], I-41 [36].
Ibid I-42–I-43
Ibid I-43 [41].
Ibid I-43–I-44
Ibid I-40 [32].
Ibid I-44 [44].
(Court of Justice of the
European Union, C-416/13, 13 November 2014) [54], [63], [68]–[70].
(Court of Justice of the
European Union, C-258/15, 15 November 2016) [50].
These were:
‘ensuring the protection of people and property, ensuring that each
individual can freely exercise his or her rights
and freedoms, and ensuring the
safety of citizens’:
, I-8036 [2].
Ibid I-8059 [67].
Ibid I-8059
Ibid I-8059 [70].
Ibid I-8060 [72].
Ibid I-8060 [73].
Ibid I-8060–I-8061
Ibid I-8062–I-8063
Patrick Parkinson,
‘Religious Vilification, Anti-Discrimination Laws and Religious Minorities
in Australia: The Freedom to
Be Different’ (2007) 81
Australian Law
Parkinson (n
) 965. This denies the public
significance of small employers — in the UK, small and medium enterprises
represented 60% of private
sector employment in 2015: Department for Business,
Innovation and Skills,
Business Population Estimates for the UK and Regions
(Statistical Release No URN 15/92, 14 October 2015) 1, 4.
UnitingCare Australia
(Web Page, 20 June 2016) <
www.unitingcare.org.au/
>, archived at <
https://perma.cc/Q6XJ-WQL2
Australian Catholic
Council for Employment Relations,
Good Works: The Catholic Church as an
Employer in Australia
(2015) 3, 7.
Code of Canon Law
title 3 ch 6 can 538 § 3 [tr Canon Law Society of America,
‘Code of Canon Law’,
The Holy See
(Web Page, Libreria
Editrice Vaticana, 4 November
www.vatican.va/archive/ENG1104/__P1U.HTM
archived at <
https://perma.cc/
Carolyn Evans and Beth
Gaze, ‘Discrimination by Religious Schools: Views from the Coal
[2010] MelbULawRw 13
Melbourne University Law Review
In the explanatory
memorandum to the
, both (a) and (b) were listed as being necessary to
meet the exception: Explanatory Memorandum,
Age Discrimination Bill 2003
cl 35. Cf the actual terms of the
, which requires
or (b) to be satisfied: Magarey
Anti-Discrimination
Equal Opportunity Act
; see also at
Discrimination Act
; see also at
on religious educational
institutions.
Similarly, the
excludes action taken in good faith against a staff member in a
religious institution ‘to avoid injury to the religious susceptibilities
of adherents of that religion or creed’:
) s 351(2)(c).
Parkinson (n
Ibid s 193(9).
Ibid sch 9 item 2.
Ibid sch 9 items
Equal Opportunity Act
A similar provision is in place in Queensland:
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
Equal Opportunity Act
Anti-Discrimination
(NT) ss 37A,
Equal Opportunity
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
Anti-Discrimination
; see also at
, which excludes age.
Jeroen Temperman,
‘Recognition, Registration and Autonomy of Religious Groups: European
Approaches and Their Human Rights Implications’
in David M Kirkham (ed),
State Responses to Minority
(Ashgate, 2013) 151,
Evans and Gaze (n
2012 Draft Bill (n
Ibid cl 33.
The Liberal
Ibid 132–3.
Indeed, Rees, Rice and Allen argue that there may be hundreds, if not thousands,
of provisions in state and territory
statutes that discriminate on the basis of
age, which are excluded under the
exception: Rees, Rice and Allen (n
) s 39; see also at ss 38,
2012 Draft Bill (n
) cls 26, 31.
[2010] FCA 1332
(2010) 215 FCR 393
Equal Opportunity Act
In Queensland, this reads ‘specifically authorised
by’ an Act or court order:
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
Equal Opportunity Act
Anti-Discrimination
Anti-Discrimination
Discrimination Act
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Opportunity Act 1984
Anti-Discrimination
s 106(1)(a)
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
66ZS(1)(a).
) sch 22 item 1(1).
(Employment Appeal
Tribunal, Mitting J, 29 October 2013) [2], [6]–[7].
) sch 22 item 1(1).
) [18] (emphasis added).
) sch 9 item 4(3).
) I-8057 [62].
Ibid I-8058 [63].
, sch 1 items 15C, 24.
Anti-Discrimination
Equal Opportunity Act
In the Australian Capital Territory, health
requirements must be both reasonable and relevant:
Discrimination Act
Indirect discrimination
may also be justified as a ‘proportionate means of achieving a legitimate
Compare the test under the
, where the
condition, requirement or practice must be shown to be ‘not reasonable in
the circumstances’ to establish
indirect discrimination:
s 15(1)(b).
Note, however, that
‘the burden of proving that the condition, requirement or practice is
reasonable ... lies on the discriminator’:
See Hendrickx (n
) 27; Fredman (n
Seldon v Clarkson
Wright & Jakes
[2012] UKSC 16
[2012] ICR 716
, 734 [56]. See, eg,
), discussed in
Part IV(B).
That is, ‘the
avoidance of unseemly debates about capacity’:
) 734 [56]–[58]
(Baroness Hale
Ibid 734 [55] (Baroness
Ibid 739–40 [75]
(Lord Hope DPSC).
See, eg, the discussion
of whether ‘cost-saving[s]’ are a legitimate aim: Jackie Lane,
Cumbria Primary Care Trust
: The Objective
Justification Test for Age Discrimination’
Samuel R Bagenstos,
‘The Structural Turn and the Limits of Antidiscrimination Law’
California Law Review
, 20–1, 25–6.
Robert Thomas et al,
Speechly Bircham and King’s College London Management Learning Board,
Recovery in Sight? The State of HR
(Survey, 2013) 8.
See Alysia Blackham,
‘Defining “Discrimination” in UK and Australian Age
Discrimination Law’ (2017) 43
Monash University Law Review
(forthcoming).
2012 Draft Bill (n
) cl 23(3).
Ibid cl 23(4).
Legal and Constitutional
Affairs Legislation Committee, Senate,
Exposure Draft of the Human Rights and
Anti-Discrimination Bill 2012
(Report, February 2013) 53–5
[5.5]–[5.13].
Ibid. Indeed, this is
how the defence has played out in the UK.
See 2012 Draft Bill (n
) pt 2-2 div 4.
Equal Opportunity Act
Anti-Discrimination
Equal Opportunity Act
Anti-Discrimination
Anti-Discrimination
It is questionable whether this will be valid, as it is
inconsistent with federal laws.
Anti-Discrimination
) sch 9 items 10, 13.
This may reflect the
EU-influenced human rights framework in the UK, where proportionality is a key
See, eg, Alysia
Blackham, ‘Falling on Their Feet: Young Workers, Employment and Age
Discrimination’
Industrial Law Journal
Rachel Filinson,
‘Age Discrimination Legislation in the UK: A Comparative and
Gerontological Analysis’ (2008) 23
Journal of Cross-Cultural
Gerontology
225, 234–5.
See, eg, Select
Committee on Education and Employment, UK Parliament,
Age Discrimination in
(House of Commons Paper No 259, Session 2000–01) app 17
(Memorandum from GMB Research Department) <
www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200001/
cmselect/cmeduemp/
259/259ap19.htm
archived at <
https://perma.cc/2V36-F7BF
generally Sargeant, ‘The Employment Equality (Age) Regulations 2006’
For full analysis, see
Filinson (n
See Rees, Rice and Allen
) 357 [6.4.7.3], 517.
Sargeant, ‘The
Employment Equality (Age) Regulations 2006’ (n
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (933 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter