URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/FedJSchol/2022/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:57:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Allsop, Justice James --- "Independence and apparent bias: Judicial and arbitral confidence: Halliburton v Chubb" (FCA) [2022] FedJSchol 19
(1) The obligation of impartiality is a core principle and the duty applies
to party-appointed arbitrators and the presiding arbitrator or chair. This resolves, for English law, the debate about the role of
the party-appointed arbitrator, though in the operation of the duty to disclose and of the test of apparent bias, the existence of
the debate and differences of views were recognised to be important.
(2) The relevant human construct to assess both whether a duty of disclosure arises and whether there is a real possibility of bias
is the fair-minded and informed observer and the test of bias is whether the observer would consider there was a real possibility
of bias, assessed objectively. This assessment is made having regard to the customs and practices of international arbitration in
any particular field. This equates, as Lord Goff had urged in
, the expression of the test for apparent bias in arbitration with that of curial adjudication.
(3) There is a legal duty of disclosure which is a component of, or drawn from, the statutory and contractual duty to act fairly and
impartially. The duty of disclosure is wider than matters that would give rise to an apprehension of bias and extends to matters
give rise to an apprehension of bias. The duty of disclosure is a continuing one. This can be seen to distinguish the position of
arbitrator from that of judge if, as in Australia, the similar disclosure is a matter of prudence and professional practice.
(4) The duty of disclosure does not override the arbitratoraEURtms duty of privacy and confidentiality, but absent a contract restricting
disclosure, certain matters can be disclosed without breach of the duty of privacy and confidentiality and without obtaining specific
or express consent: the identity of the common party in multiple references; whether a proposed appointment to another reference
was to be a party-appointment or as nomination as the third arbitrator; a statement of the fact that the other reference arises from
the same incident or had the same or overlapping subject matter; and a high-level statement about whether similar issues were likely
to arise in the other reference. Consent to such disclosures can be inferred.
(5) A failure by the arbitrator to make disclosure which should have been made is a factor to be taken into account by the fair-minded
and informed observer construct as to whether there is a real possibility of bias.
(6) The relevant dates to evaluate whether the duty of disclosure has been complied with, or whether there is a real possibility of
bias are different. For the former, the test is prospective: by reference to facts and circumstances at the time the duty arose.
For the latter, the test is by reference to facts and matters known at the date of the relevant application to the Court, such as
to remove the arbitrator.
Time does not permit detailed examination of the reasons of Popplewell J or the Court of Appeal. Neither found a basis for apprehended
bias, but the Court of Appeal said that Mr Rokison had failed to comply with a legal duty of disclosure.
The appeal to the Supreme Court by Halliburton attracted interventions by the LCIA, the ICC and CIArb that the Court of AppealaEURtms
judgment was out of step with international standards in their discussion of multiple common appointments. Other interventions were
made by LMAA,
and ARIAS (UK)
which were anxious to see unimpaired the ability to appoint common arbitrators to chain or string, supply, transport, shipping and
reinsurance arbitrations.
HalliburtonaEURtms case was one of unconscious apparent bias: in Mr Rokison taking the benefit of paid appointments in references
2 and 3, Mr Rokison gave Chubb an unfair advantage in being a common party in related arbitrations where (to the ignorance of Halliburton)
he could be influenced by evidence and submissions in references 2 and 3 which could affect his approach in reference 1; Chubb would
know of his responses to evidence and submissions in references 2 and 3, but Halliburton would not; the failure to disclose deprived
Halliburton of forming its own view about the position; and Mr Rokison was said not to have paid proper regard to HalliburtonaEURtms
interests in the fairness of procedure.
The duty of impartiality aEUR" discussion of principle
Lord Hodge applied in the arbitral context the relevant test for apparent bias in judicial proceedings taken from
Porter v Magill
Helow v Secretary of State for the Home Department
Without going into detailed textual comparison (and, if I may say, rightly so), he said that the English common law test was aEURoesimilaraEUR
to the test of aEURoejustifiable doubtsaEUR in the UNCITRAL Model Law.
This test was held to apply to judges and
arbitrators. However, the importance of the reasons of Lodge Hodge can be found in his LordshipaEURtms emphasis on context and his
First, frank disclosure in arbitration is crucial because of the privacy of consensual arbitration. There may be no public record
to which to have regard in evaluating an arbitrator, which makes it difficult or impossible for an arbitratoraEURtms participation
in multiple references and the submissions and evidence led in them to be known by those not participating in those references.
Secondly, there is usually no appeal from an arbitral award, and there are very limited powers of review. Therefore, the choice of
the arbitrator is of critical importance.
Thirdly, the judge holds public office and is paid by the state; the arbitrator is chosen by one or both parties or by an institution
and is remunerated by the parties, and ultimately, by the losing party. An arbitrator in practice has an interest in future appointments.
This may give rise to an interest in avoiding action that may alienate the parties, such as assertive case management.
Fourthly, there is a diverse range of persons who may be appointed as arbitrators, coming from many jurisdictions and different legal
traditions, with potentially diverging views on ethically acceptable conduct.
Fifthly, and importantly, Lord Hodge recognised the differing understandings of the obligations of the party-appointed arbitrator.
His Lordship referred to the aEURoelively debateaEUR as to the role of party-appointed arbitrators, referring to the articles and
writings of Paulsson, van den Berg, Brower and Rosenberg, Born, and Redfern and Hunter, discussed above. Lord Hodge rejected the
nuances involved in the debate: No allegiance or duty is owed; no representative role is undertaken. Once appointed, independence
and impartiality are unqualified.
Lord Hodge was expressly influenced by the place of London in arbitral adjudication, and the English legal systemaEURtms reputation
for guaranteeing neutrality and impartiality.
His Lordship drew from Chief Justice MenonaEURtms article that the requirement that all arbitrators had the same undifferentiated
duty reflects an increasingly widespread legal norm. Whilst recognising that the view was not universal, and that some legal systems
do accept that the party-appointed arbitrator has a special role in relation to his or her appointing party, this was not so in English
law. So, in applying the relevant test, one does not have regard to the characteristics of the party including whether one or more
was foreign.
The contrast in the approach in different legal systems was illuminated by the discussion of the 2018 Second Circuit decision in
Certain LloydaEURtms Underwriters v Florida
which expressly recognised a distinction between party-appointed arbitrators and aEURoeneutralaEUR arbitrators and that party-appointed
arbitrators were expected to espouse the view of the appointing party and serve as de facto advocates.
Lord Hodge then sought to reconcile this international divergence in the perception of the role of party-appointed arbitrator in
a subtle and important discussion of the attribution of knowledge to the human construct: The fair-minded and informed observer would
be credited with the knowledge that some, perhaps many, parties and arbitrators have the view reflected in the Second CircuitaEURtms
reasons, and that there is a debate within the arbitration community as to the role of the party-appointed arbitrator and the compatibility
of that role with the requirement of impartiality.
This was not to recognise a different obligation within the application of the test in England; rather, it is to understand the context
in which the objective judgment (by the Court through the human construct) will be made.
The duty of disclosure: discussion of principle
The Court of Appeal was, in Lord HodgeaEURtms view, correct to hold that there is a legal duty to disclose in English law. In arbitration,
it arises from the obligation under the 1996 Act to act fairly and impartially, which gives rise to an implied term for the need
to disclose matters.
To align or reconcile the duty to disclose with the duty of privacy and confidentiality, it becomes necessary to obtain the consent
of relevant parties to disclosure, failing which consent the offered appointment must be declined. However, the context of particular
trades or institutions (such as dealt with by the LMAA and GAFTA) may found an implied consent to multiple appointments. Importantly
also, there was the recognition of the entitlement to disclose, confidentially, the existence of a current or past arbitration involving
the common party and the identity of the common party, but not the identity of other parties without obtaining consent from all such
parties. Such entitlement comes from common practice. Jurisprudentially this can be seen, as Lord Hodge said
, as the law recognising the realities of accepted and acceptable commercial and arbitral practice as a guide to the formulation of
legal rules. Further, there was a public interest in upholding the integrity of arbitration as a system of dispute resolution calling
for proper disclosure and calling for the giving of certainty to the legal standing of established arbitral practice.
Thus, at least in Bermuda Form arbitrations, an arbitrator may (subject to contrary agreement) make disclosure on a confidential
basis of the existence of the arbitration and the identity of the common party without the express consent of other parties. Consent
of the common party is inferred.
As to the content of the duty, Lord Hodge considered that with one qualification the duty as expressed by the Court of Appeal was
aEUR|Disclosure should be given of facts and circumstances known to the arbitrator which aEUR| would or might give rise to justifiable
doubts as to his impartiality aEUR| [which] means facts or circumstances which
would or might
lead the fair-minded and informed observed, having considered the facts, to conclude that there was a real possibility that the arbitrator
was biased.
The qualification of Lord Hodge was to what was aEURoeknownaEUR. Generally there is no duty to inquire; one must disclose what one
knows. However, Lord Hodge would not rule out circumstances raising a duty to make reasonable inquiries, noting that the IBA Guidelines,
Part 1, General Standard 7(d) provide for a duty to make reasonable inquiries.
His Lordship thus left to future cases the development of the question by reference to arbitral practice and rules.
Lord Hodge then discussed the phrase aEURoewould or mightaEUR.
to disclose something that aEURoemightaEUR give rise to justifiable doubts can only arise, his Lordship said, where the matter might
give rise to such doubts. Lord Hodge discussed the human contextual reality: the existence of matters that, if unexplained, would
give rise to justifiable doubts, so the necessity to disclose and explain; or matters, more than trivial, which could, by themselves
or with other facts, give rise to justifiable doubts, if later discovered. This analysis, necessarily less than precise, begins to
explain the wider notion of disclosure and its relationship to the test for apparent bias, by reference to appropriate human conduct
to maintain trust in the particular tribunal members and in the institution and process of arbitration as a whole.
As the discussion of Lord Hodge makes clear, the good sense of this approach comes from the consensual character of the process and
the central value of party autonomy. It is the partiesaEURtm process. That is the attraction of arbitration: The existence of matters
that might reasonably found a justifiable doubt as to impartiality, then or later, calls forth a sense of entitlement in the parties
to know of the matter and to consider their positions for themselves. Reasonable minds can, and often do, differ about these sorts
of questions. To recognise that and the policy of supporting trust and confidence in a consensual relationship built on party choice
and autonomy justifies this wider penumbra of the obligation to disclose.
The development of English law to impose this duty was seen to be consistent with developments elsewhere.
Whilst the expression of the obligation under English law is not directed, as many arbitral rules are,
to the perceptions of the parties, the distinction is unlikely to be sharp in practice. As expressed in summary form by Lord Hodge
it is sufficient if matters are such that they are relevant and material to an assessment of the arbitratoraEURtms impartiality and
could reasonably lead to such an adverse conclusion. In practice, and in the context of the reality of the parties before the arbitrator,
it is difficult to see how the
objectively perceived
relevance to the parties is not central to the objective assessment by the fair-minded and informed observer.
The duty of disclosure is continuing and subject to changing circumstances.
Its fulfilment is to be tested prospectively, and not retrospectively by reference to matters known later to the fair-minded and
informed observer at the point of assessing bias.
However, the question of whether justifiable doubts exist is to be assessed by reference to the fact as they exist at the time of
the application.
Against that detailed discussion, Lord Hodge concluded that Mr Rokison should have disclosed to Halliburton the multiple references,
but that in all the circumstances, by the time the matter came before the Court, the fair-minded and informed observer would not
reach a conclusion of apparent bias.
Particular relevant circumstances to that evaluation included that Mr Rokison gave an explanation of his failure to disclose his
appointments in references 2 and 3 which was accepted by HalliburtonaEURtms lawyers as a genuine oversight, Mr Rokison was of the
view that there was no material overlap between the references and had offered to resign if the separate issues in references 2 and
3 did not dispose of those references, and Mr Rokison at all times adopted courteous and measured responses.
Where does all this leave us?
Halliburton
highlights, with clarity, the intimate relationship between the duties of impartiality and of disclosure. Parties are only equipped
to make a judgment upon whether they are satisfied that an arbitrator is sufficiently impartial notwithstanding a potential lack
of complete independence if they are aware of all of the relevant circumstances, including multiple or overlapping appointments.
An explicit duty of disclosure is a necessary incident of the private and confidential nature of most arbitrations, which may prevent
the parties from ascertaining a complete picture of the circumstances from their own inquiries alone. In what may be seen as a welcome
development supporting the all-important trust of parties in the arbitral process, the legal obligation to disclose a wider range
of matters than those which would found a conclusion of apparent bias can now be taken to be recognised not just in many arbitral
institutional rules, but also by the common law of England.
Commentary on the Supreme CourtaEURtms decision has canvassed areas for further development of the common law of England with respect
to disclosure and remaining issues for debate.
That does not reveal an omission in the judgment. Rather, it reflects that decision-making, in the context of concrete problems rather
than exhaustive rule-making, is the foundation of the common lawaEURtms support for honest good sense in commerce.
The emphasis (with respect, correctly) placed by Lord Hodge on context may contain the key for those in Australia who may have to
determine, as a matter of statutory construction, whether there really is any practical difference (at least in likely result) between
test introduced into Australian arbitration legislation, with or without its aEURoemodest adjustmentaEUR in
of a fair-minded and informed observer (bearing in mind Lord PhillipsaEURtm view as to the identity of aEURoereal possibilityaEUR
and aEURoereal dangeraEUR, removing any connotation of the immediacy of the threat from the word aEURoedangeraEUR, and Lord HodgeaEURtms
view of the aEURoesimilarityaEUR of the Model Law aEURoejustifiable doubtsaEUR to the English test) and the Australian judicial test
if applied in the context of arbitral adjudication in the relevant field of commerce in which the arbitration takes place, and if
firmly established.
An issue that is perhaps under-explored in the commentary to date is the impact of the decision on the position of the party-appointed
arbitrator. I make several final observations in this regard.
First, English law has set its face against recognition of any form of special duty or role of a party-appointed arbitrator, or of
That said, secondly, there is a recognition of the legitimacy of other views and other approaches about this in other jurisdictions.
Thirdly, it is not clear how taking these matters into account as part of context in the appreciation of the fair-minded and informed
observeraEURtms task will play out. That, perhaps, is only an aspect of the intensely factual and contextual nature of the relevant
evaluation.
Fourthly, the use by Lord Hodge of the Second Circuit decision in the
case may not, with respect, fully deal with the subtleties involved. The American position, even after the change of the AAA/ABA
Code of Ethics in 2004 towards recognition that all arbitrators should abide by the same formal ethical standards, is expressed,
partly by reference to pre-2004 prevailing authority in the Supreme Court
discussed in
, in language accepting the place of advocacy on the part of party-appointed arbitrator. The views of others as to the importance
of the party having an impartial, but culturally and conceptually aware nominee, can be seen as more subtle than the American position.
The confidence of parties in the arbitral process is crucial. That confidence is bolstered by an ultimate demand for honesty and
impartiality; but it also may be seen to be bolstered by parties being happy with their informed choice of arbitrator to decide their
dispute with the other sideaEURtms appointee and a chair chosen by them or appointed independently. There is already a qualification
to independence: the arbitrator is chosen not imposed. But there need not, and should not, be a qualification to impartiality, unless
the parties wish to choose a system and supervising court that finds impartiality to be legitimately qualified by a duty to advocate
one sideaEURtms case.
Fifthly, whether one personally agrees with the views of Chief Justice Menon and Jan Paulsson, or with those of Gary Born, Raymond
Bishop and Lucy Reed, may not matter. Different arbitral laws, statutory and general, may express themselves differently, as the
Second Circuit and the Supreme Court did in
Halliburton
. This displays a choice that is given to parties and their advisors about the law of the arbitration and the seat. Parties can choose
the approach they wish to have taken.
Sixthly, and finally, the debate about party-appointed arbitrators may underscore the distinction between institutional and ad hoc
arbitration. A denial of the right of party-appointment would throw into high relief the need for integrity of the institution appointing
the arbitration panel or the pool from which the panel is chosen. Reliance on the institution may simply push the relevant questions
of independence, impartiality and disclosure further away from the knowledge of the parties and from the operation of party autonomy.
Or, it may give institutions the opportunity to fashion bespoke solutions to any perceived problems of compromise of impartiality
by party-appointment, such as by aEURoeblindaEUR appointments, where the arbitrators do not know whether they are party-appointed
Chief Justice of the Federal Court of Australia. I am grateful to my associate Lucy Nason for her assistance in research and discussion
in the preparation of this paper.
[2020] UKSC 48
[2021] AC 1083
; See by way of commentary Charles Kimmins, Nigel Rawding, Luke Pearce and Olivia Valner, aEUR~The Test for Apparent Bias and ArbitratorsaEURtm
Duties of Disclosure Following
Halliburton v Chubb
: Welcome Clarification, but Questions RemainaEURtm
(2021) 38(3)
Journal of International Arbitration
and Daze C Nga and Peace O Adeleye, aEUR~The English Supreme CourtaEURtms Decision in
Halliburton v Chubb
: An Examination of the Issues Arising from ArbitratorsaEURtm Acceptance of Multiple Appointments in Related Arbitrations and ArbitratoraEURtms
Duty to DiscloseaEURtm (2022) 88(1)
The International Journal of Arbitration, Mediation and Dispute Management
aEURoeJurisdictionaEUR in the sense of the authority to decide.
International Commercial Arbitration
ed, Kluwer Law International, 2021), pp 1908-9 and footnote 857.
Abaclat v. Argentina, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify A Majority of the Tribunal in ICSID Case No. ARB/07/05 of 4 February
at paragraph 75 as quoted in Born,
International Commercial Arbitration
, at footnote 857.
See the IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration (2014).
Also, guidelines can, by their length and any attempt at exhaustive listing, create uncertainty and confusion. Text has its limits
as well as its strengths. Sometimes, the more guidelines, the more text, the more construction and interpretation, and the greater
the degree of confusion or uncertainty. Cf
W Ltd v M Sdn Bhd
[2016] EWHC (Comm) 422
(Knowles J); I McGilchrist,
The Master and his Emissary
(Yale University Press, 2009); and J Allsop aEUR~Thinking about the Law: The importance of how we attend and of context (paper delivered
to the Middle Temple, 18 July 2022).
UK Departmental Advisory Committee on Arbitration Law,
Report on the Arbitration Bill
(1996) at paragraphs 102-104. See also Born,
International Commercial Arbitration
, at 1909 and footnote 860.
Law Commission,
Review of the Arbitration Act 1996: A consultation paper
(Law Commission Consultation paper 257), September 2022 at [3.3]. I respectfully agree with Rozas that the distinction can be over-emphasised.
FernA!ndez Rozas, aEUR~Clearer Ethics Guidelines and Comparative Standards for ArbitratorsaEURtm in M FernA!ndez-Ballesteros &
D Arias (eds),
Liber Amicorum Bernardo Cremades
(2010) at 414, as quoted in Born,
International Commercial Arbitration
, at footnote 861
See, for example, Article 12 of the UNCITRAL Model Law 1985 with amendments as adopted in 2006; Article 11 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules 2021; Article 11 of the ICC Arbitration Rules 2021; Article 5 of the LCIA Rules 2020; Article 11 of the HKIAC Administered
Arbitration Rules 2018; Article 13 of the SIAC Rules 2016; Article 32 of the CIETAC Arbitration Rules 2015; Article 14 of the ICDR
Rules 2021; Article 21 of the ACICA Rules 2021.
FowleraEURtms Dictionary of Modern English Usage
ed, Clarendon Press, 1996), 357-8.
Porter v Magill
[2001] UKHL 67
[2002] 2 AC 357
(Lord Hope);
Helow v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2008] 1WLR 2416 [1]-[3].
[1993] UKHL 1
[1993] AC 646
By the High Court of Australia in
Webb v The Queen
[1994] HCA 30
(1994) 181 CLR 41
at 50 as noted by Lord Hope in
Porter v Magill
[2001] UKHL 67
[2002] 2 AC 357
Porter v Magill
[2001] UKHL 67
[2002] 2 AC 357
This was the human construct preferred in Australia and elsewhere.
[1993] UKHL 1
[1993] AC 646
Director General of Fair Trading v Proprietary Association of Great Britain; Re Medicaments and Related Classes of Goods (No 2)
[2000] EWCA Civ 350
[2001] 1 WLR 700
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
(Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ).
section 18A
International Arbitration Act 1974
(Cth). All uniform Commercial Arbitration Acts in
employ the language of the Commonwealth Act.
S Luttrell,
Bias Challenges in International Commercial Arbitration: The Need For a aEURoeReal DangeraEUR Test
(Kluwer, 2009) and N Brown and S Luttrell,
Submission on the Review of the
International Arbitration Act
(Cth) at page 13 as referred to in D Jones and J Walker
Commercial Arbitration in Australia
ed, Thomson Reuters) at 143-144 [5.220]).
Helow v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2008] UKHL 62
[2008] 1 WLR 2416
(Lord Hope);
Harb v Aziz
[2016] EWCA Civ 556
Helow v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2008] UKHL 62
[2009] 2 All ER 1031
(Lord Hope).
Johnson v Johnson (No 3)
[2000] HCA 48
(2000) 201 CLR 488
British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd v Laurie
(2011) 242 CLR 283
at [46]-[48].
See Allsop, aEUR~International Arbitration and Conformity with International Standards of Due Process and the Rule of LawaEURtm (Speech,
XXIIIrd ICCA Congress, Mauritius, 10 May 2016) and Allsop and S Walpole, aEUR~International Commercial Dispute Resolution as a SystemaEURtm
in S Menon and A Reyes (eds),
Transnational Commercial Disputes in an Age of Anti-Globalism and Pandemic
(forthcoming, Bloomsbury, 2023).
Re JRL; Ex parte CJL
[1986] HCA 39
(1996) 161 CLR 342
N Brown and S Luttrell,
Submission on the Review of the
International Arbitration Act
(Cth) at page 12 as referred to in D Jones and J Walker
Commercial Arbitration in Australia
ed, Thomson Reuters) at 143-144 [5.220]).
International Arbitration Amendment Bill 2009
Explanatory Memorandum[88]-[92]
The word aEURoebiasaEUR is a loaded term, sometimes connoting ill-will. Its legal breadth, especially in its apprehended form, involves,
as Deane J said in
Webb v The Queen
[1994] HCA 30
(1994) 181 CLR 41
at 80, aEURoeprejudice, partiality or prejudgmentaEUR
See, for example,
British American Tobacco Australia Services Ltd v Laurie
[2011] HCA 2
242 CLR 283
[2009] NSWCA 414.
(I was tempted to remark on the appropriateness of dealing with subconscious bias in a footnote.) Unconscious bias refers to the
influence of cognitive shortcuts or heuristics on how we perceive the world around us and make decisions. In its most objectionable
form, unconscious bias can constitute subconscious favouritism towards or prejudice against people of a particular group that influences
oneaEURtms actions or perceptions. For recent commentary see: Chris Guthrie, Jeffrey Rachlinski and Andrew Wistrich, aEUR~Blinking
on the Bench: How Judges Decide CasesaEURtm
Cornell Law Review
; Australian Law Reform Commission (
Without Fear or Favour: Judicial Impartiality and the Law on Bias
(Report No 138), 2021; Edna Sussman, aEUR~Arbitrator Decision-Making: Unconscious Psychological Influences and What You Can Do About
(2013) 24(3)
The American Review of International Arbitration
; Natalie Allen et al, aEURoeIf Everyone is Thinking Alike, Then No One is ThinkingaEURtm: The Importance of Cognitive Diversity in
Arbitral Tribunals to Enhance the Quality of Arbitral Decision MakingaEURtm
(2021) 38(5)
Journal of International Arbitration
; Stepan Puchkov, aEUR~Subconscious Bias as a Factor Influencing Arbitral Decision-MakingaEURtm (2018) 84(1)
The International Journal of Arbitration, Mediation and Dispute Management
According to the so-called aEUR~System 1aEURtm and aEUR~System 2aEURtm conceptualisation of the way humans process information (with
aEUR~System 1aEURtm being constantly alert, fast and intuitive and aEUR~System 2aEURtm being slow, analytical and high effort), it
is theorised that we fall into irrationality and unconscious bias when we fail to engage our System 2 thinking or where System 2
does not detect errors made by System 1. Intuitive, subconscious, System 1 judgments can stem from the influence of oneaEURtms cultural
background, prior experiences and personal inclinations. There are also certain identifiable cognitive and heuristic errors often
described as aEUR~blindersaEURtm that the processes of System 1 tend to produce, including the aEUR~confirmation blinderaEURtm (the
tendency when one forms an initial view to interpret or even seek out subsequent information to support the initial view and disregard
information that is inconsistent with it) and the aEUR~hindsight blinderaEURtm (the tendency to overestimate the probability that
an event will occur after the fact). For the application of this theory to judicial and arbitral practice see, eg, Puchkov, aEUR~Subconscious
Bias as a Factor Influencing Arbitral Decision-MakingaEURtm, 54-55; Sussman, aEUR~Arbitrator Decision-Making: Unconscious Psychological
Influences and What You Can Do About ThemaEURtm at 495; Allen et al, aEUR~If Everyone is Thinking Alike, Then No One is ThinkingaEURtm,
609, 613-614; The Hon Justice K Mason AC, aEUR~Unconscious Judicial PrejudiceaEURtm
Australian Law Journal
, 679-680 quoted in ALRC,
Without Fear or Favour: Judicial Impartiality and the Law on Bias
at [11.52].
Judges and arbitrators are not immune to the influence of unconscious bias, constrained as they are by the bounds of human rationality
and fallibility. The fact that judges and arbitrators may be influenced by unconscious bias does not mean that a judge or arbitrator
cannot be meaningfully impartial. Nonetheless, the potential for (potentially pernicious) unconscious prejudice to influence judges
and arbitrators demands vigilance. The Australian Law Reform Commission suggested in its recent report on judicial impartiality and
the law on bias in Australia that the potential operation of confirmation bias on the minds of judges is one reason why it may generally
be appropriate for a judge to recuse himself or herself from hearing a case involving a person against whom he or she has previously
made an adverse credibility finding. See Benjamin N Cardozo,
The Nature of the Judicial Process
(Yale University Press, 1921); Rebecca Helm, Andrew Wistrich & Jeffrey Rachlinski, aEUR~Are Arbitrators HumanaEURtm (2019) 13(4)
Empirical Legal Studies
666; Allen et al, aEURoeIf Everyone is Thinking Alike, Then No One is ThinkingaEURtm, 610; ALRC,
Without Fear or Favour: Judicial Impartiality and the Law on Bias
at [2.61] 62, [4.26] 114 and [4.82] 133-134; Lord Neuberger, aEURoeJudge not, that ye be not judgedaEURtm: judging judicial decision-makingaEURtm
F A Mann Lecture, London, 29 January 2015), [29].
See, eg, in a judicial context,
GetSwift Ltd v Webb
[2021] FCAFC 26
283 FCR 328
and, in an arbitral context,
Cofely Ltd v Bingham and another
[2016] EWHC 240 (Comm).
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
Rule 1 of the IBA Rules of Ethics for International Arbitrators 1987, entitled the aEURoeFundamental RuleaEUR is that aEURoearbitrators
shall proceed diligently and efficiently to provide the parties with a just and effective resolution of their disputes, and shall
be and shall remain free from biasaEUR.
Some institutional rules and arbitration laws contain general provisions mandating the independence and impartiality of arbitrators.
For example, Article 5.3 of the LCIA Rules 2020 provides that aEURoeall arbitrators shall be and remain at all times impartial and
independent of the partiesaEUR and Article 11(1) of the ICC Arbitration Rules 2021 provides that aEURoeevery arbitrator must be and
must remain impartial and independent of the parties involved in the arbitration.aEUR See also s 33(1)(a) of the English
Arbitration Act 1996
(which provides that the tribunal shall aEURoeact fairly and impartially as between the partiesaEUR|aEUR) and Article 11.1 of the
HKIAC Administered Arbitration Rules 2018 (aEURoean arbitral tribunal confirmed under these Rules shall be and remain at all times
impartial and independent of the partiesaEUR). The test for whether an arbitrator is independent and impartial is often expressed
in the context of provisions concerning challenge to arbitrators. For example, Article 12 of the UNCITRAL Model Law 1985 (with amendments
as adopted in 2006) provides that an arbitrator may be challenged if circumstances exist that aEURoegive rise to justifiable doubts
as to his impartiality or independence.aEUR This formulation of the test is echoed in Article 12 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
2021, which provides: aEURoeany arbitrator may be challenged if circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to the
arbitratoraEURtms impartiality or independence.aEUR Section 24(1)(a) of the English
Arbitration Act 1996
is similarly worded, providing that a party may apply to a court to remove an arbitrator where aEURoecircumstances exist that give
rise to justifiable doubts as to his impartiality.aEUR The aEURoejustifiable doubtsaEUR formulation in provisions on challenge is
also present in Article 11 of the HKIAC Administered Arbitration Rules 2018; Article 14 of the SIAC Rules 2016; Article 14 of the
ICDR Rules 2021; and Article 21 of the ACICA Rules 2021. Some provisions on disclosure, however, go further. While Article 11 of
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules 2021 provides that an arbitrator aEURoeshall disclose any circumstances
to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his or her impartiality or independenceaEUR, Articles 13.4 and 13.5 of the SIAC Rules 2016
provide that nominated arbitrators and arbitrators respectively must disclose aEURoeany circumstances that
give rise to justifiable doubts as to his impartiality or independenceaEUR (emphasis added).
Article 5.4 of the LCIA Rules 2020 provides that candidates for nomination as arbitrator must sign a declaration stating whether
there are any circumstances aEURoewhich are likely to give rise
in the mind of any party
to any justifiable doubts as to his or her impartiality or independenceaEUR (emphasis added). Similarly, Article 11(2) of the ICC
Arbitration Rules 2021 provides that prospective arbitrators shall disclose aEURoeany facts or circumstances which
be of such a nature as to call into question the arbitratoraEURtms independence
in the eyes of the parties
, as well as any circumstances that
give rise to the reasonable doubts as to the arbitratoraEURtms impartialityaEUR (emphasis added).
See, eg, Article 11.5 of the HKIAC Administered Arbitration Rules 2018; Article 14.6 of the SIAC Rules 2016; Article 14(6) of the
ICDR Rules 2021 and Article 20.4 of the ACICA Rules 2021.
Formally different standards for party-appointed arbitrators are certainly the exception rather than the rule. See, for example,
the LMAAaEURtms published guidance on the LMAA Terms 2021, which states that it is the duty of every member of an arbitral tribunal
to attend to all matters with strict impartiality except in the rare case where the arbitration clause requires otherwise: LMAA,
aEUR~Notes on London Arbitration and Frequently Asked QuestionsaEURtm, accessible at: https://lmaa.london/notes-on-london-arbitration/.
As is well-known, the 1977 AAA/ABA Code of Ethics for Arbitrators in Commercial Disputes took the position that party-appointed arbitrators
were permitted to be aEURoepre-disposedaEUR to their appointing partyaEURtms case. However, the revised version of the Code published
in 2004 moved away from this standard, standing that it is aEURoepreferableaEUR for all arbitrators to abide by the same formal ethical
standards. For a discussion of this shift see Alfonso Gomez-Acebo,
Party-Appointed Arbitrators in International Commercial Arbitration
(Kluwer Law International, 2016), 357.
Jan Paulsson, aEUR~Moral Hazard in International Dispute ResolutionaEURtm (2010) 25(2)
ICSID Review aEUR" Foreign Investment Law Journal
Raymond Doak Bishop and Lucy F Reed, aEUR~Practical Guidelines for Interviewing, Selecting and Challenging Party-Appointed Arbitrators
in International Commercial ArbitrationaEURtm
(1998) 14(4)
Arbitration International
Ibid, 405. See also Nigel Blackaby and Constantine Partasides QC with Alan Redfern and Martin Hunter,
Redfern and Hunter on International Commercial Arbitration
ed, Oxford University Press, 2015) at [4.30], 239.
Blackaby, Partasides, Redfern and Hunter,
Redfern and Hunter on International Commercial Arbitration
at [4.30], 239.
Bishop and Reed, aEUR~Practical Guidelines for Interviewing, Selecting and Challenging Party-Appointed Arbitrators in International
Commercial ArbitrationaEURtm, 405.
Ibid. 405-406.
Antonino Albert de Fina described the role as aEURoedelicateaEUR: aEUR~The Party Appointed Arbitrator in International Arbitrations
aEUR" Role and SelectionaEURtm
(1999) 15(4)
Arbitration International
Gomez-Acebo contends that the role of aEUR~cultural translatoraEURtm amounts to nothing more than carrying out oneaEURtms duties
as an arbitrator diligently and that cultural misunderstandings where perceived ought be corrected regardless of whether the clarification
aids the appointing partyaEURtms case. Further, he contends that accepting a particular role for the party-appointed arbitrator brings
with it an unavoidable risk of imbalance between the parties because reasonable minds may differ on the content of that particular
role, resulting, perhaps, in one partyaEURtms case receiving more time and care than anotheraEURtms. See Gomez-Acebo,
Party-Appointed Arbitrators in International Commercial Arbitration
Sundaresh Menon, aEUR~Adjudicator, Advocate or Something in Between? Coming to Terms with the Role of the Party-Appointed ArbitratoraEURtm
(2017) 34(3)
Journal of International Arbitration
International Commercial Arbitration
, 1767, 1941-1946.
Empirical studies show that the ability for parties to have input into the composition of the tribunalaEURtms expertise and experience
is perceived as a significant benefit of arbitration compared with litigation: Born,
International Commercial Arbitration
Veeder describes party-appointed arbitrators as the aEURoehistorical keystoneaEUR of international arbitration, without which parties
would not be (and historically would not have been) incentivised to arbitrate: V.V. Veeder, aEUR~The Historical Keystone to International
Arbitration: The Party-Appointed Arbitrator from Miami to GenevaaEURtm (2013)
Proceedings of the ASIL Annual Meeting, 107,
387, 401-402. Brower and Rosenberg contend that parties are more likely to hold confidence in an arbitral tribunal aEURoethat they
themselves had a say in constitutingaEUR: Charles N Brower and Charles B Rosenberg, aEUR~The Death of the Two-Headed Nightingale:
Why the Paulsson-van den Berg Presumption that Party-Appointed Arbitrators are Untrustworthy is WrongheadedaEURtm
(2013) 29(1)
Arbitration International
International Commercial Arbitration
Ibid, 1945-1946.
The London Maritime Arbitrators Association.
The Grain and Feed Trade Association.
The Insurance and Reinsurance Arbitration Society (UK).
Halliburton
[2020] UKSC 48
[2021] AC 1083
at 1110-1117
[2001] UKHL 67
[2002] 2 AC 357.
[2008] UKHL 62
[2008] 1 WLR 2416.
And also to the tests contained in the IBA Guidelines General Standard 2(c) and Article 10.1 of the LCIA Rules 2014.
Halliburton
[2020] UKSC 48
[2021] AC 1083
at 1112-1117
Lord Hodge said at 1114 [63]: aEURoeNotwithstanding this perception of the reality in some quarters, a party-appointed arbitrator
in English law is expected to come up to precisely the same high standards of fairness and impartiality as the person chairing the
tribunal. Popplewell J correctly summarised the position in English law, and I would venture to say also in Scots law, when he stated
in his judgment (para 19): aEURoethe duty to act independently and impartially involves arbitrators owing no allegiance to the party
appointing them. Once appointed they are entirely independent of their appointing party and bound to conduct and decide the case
fairly and impartially. They are not in any sense . . . a representative of the appointing party or in some way responsible for protecting
or promoting that partyaEURtms interests.aEURaEUR
Ibid at 1114 [63].
Certain Underwriting Members of Lloyds of London v Florida
892 F3d 501
Cir 2018), importantly a decision under the Federal Arbitration Act 9 USCA 10(a)(2).
Halliburton
[2020] UKSC 48
[2021] AC 1083
at 1115-1117
Ibid at 1117-1130 [70]-[116].
Ibid at 1126 [103].
Ibid at 1127 [107].
Ibid at 1127 [107].
Ibid at 1128-1130 [108]-[115].
Lord Hodge noted the disagreement in major English texts on the subject: both Redfern and Hunter (
Law and Practice of International Commercial Arbitration
ed, 2015) at paras 4.79-4.80) and Merkin and Flannery (
Merkin & Flannery on the
Arbitration Act 1996
ed, 2019) at 286-287) expressing the views that an arbitrator should disclose on the aEURoecould reasonablyaEUR or aEURoewould or
mightaEUR basis, whilst Russell (
Russell on Arbitration
ed, 2015) at para 4-131) restricted any legal obligation to disclose to the aEURoewouldaEUR basis. Like the Court of Appeal, Lord
Hodge favoured the former rather than the latter that had been favoured by Popplewell J. It is at this point perhaps that one can
see the difference between the Australian aEURoetwo mightsaEUR and the English would lead to a real possibility. Two mights (that
is might lead to the real possibility) can be seen to circumscribe disclosure in England as wider than would lead to a real possibility.
But again the potential aridity of such a linguistic debate is to be recognised: The two mights in the context of recusal in Australia
is to be firmly established; and the might lead to a real possibility in England is assessed in the context of reasonably debatable
disclosure.
Halliburton
[2020] UKSC 48
[2021] AC 1083
at 1129-1130
, with Lord Hodge referring to Article 12 of the UNCITRAL Model Law and the laws of Scotland, Germany, Belgium, Sweden, Austria and
Switzerland.
See the discussion and footnote references at paragraph [32] above.
Halliburton
[2020] UKSC 48
[2021] AC 1083
Ibid at 1131 [120].
Ibid at 1131-1132 [121]-[122]. See also
[1993] UKHL 1
[1993] AC 646
at 670 (the court must ascertain the relevant circumstances aEURoefrom the available evidence, knowledge of which would not necessarily
be available to an observer in court at the relevant timeaEUR) and
AT&T Corporation v Saudi Cable Co
[2000] 2 LloydaEURtms Rep 127 at [42] per Lord Woolf (aEURoethe court considers on all the material which is placed before it whether
any real danger of unconscious bias on the part of the decision makeraEUR) (emphasis added) and at [63] per Lord Potter (the courtaEURtms
task embodies the standards of the informed observer viewing the matter at the relevant time, aEURoewhich is of course the time when
the matter comes before the courtaEUR).
Ibid at 1138-1139 [149]-[150].
Ibid at 1138-1139 [147]-[149].
As recognised by the Law Commission in its recent paper published in connection with a review of the English
Arbitration Act 1996
: Law Commission,
Review of the Arbitration Act 1996: A consultation paper
(Law Commission Consultation paper 257), September 2022 at 20 [3.8].
Those issues include the extent of the duty of disclosure (is an arbitrator obliged to disclose only those matters of which he or
she has knowledge, or must an arbitrator actively make inquiries?), and the extent to which the partiesaEURtm choice of a particular
set of institutional rules to govern their arbitration may modify the common law position (for example, the potential application
of more onerous disclosure requirements when doubts as to independence and impartiality are assessed from the perspective of the
parties rather than an objective bystander, as is the case under the LCIA Rules 2020 and the ICC Arbitration Rules 2021). Commentary
has also discussed a matter of particular relevance to arbitral practice: the relationship between potentially competing imperatives
of disclosure and confidentiality and how compliance with those two duties may or should be achieved in non-Bermuda Form arbitrations,
an issue left open in
Halliburton
Halliburton
[2020] UKSC 48
[2021] AC 1083
, 1127 [107], 1140 [153]-[154] (Lord Hodge) and 1141 [162] (Lady Arden); Kimmins et al, aEUR~The Test for Apparent Bias and ArbitratorsaEURtm
Duties of Disclosure Following
Halliburton v Chubb
: Welcome Clarification, but Questions RemainaEURtm at 368-369 and 370-372; Nga and Adeleye, aEUR~The English Supreme CourtaEURtms
Decision in
Halliburton v Chubb
: An Examination of the Issues Arising from ArbitratorsaEURtm Acceptance of Multiple Appointments in Related Arbitrations and ArbitratoraEURtms
Duty to DiscloseaEURtm at 216-217; and Law Commission,
Review of the Arbitration Act 1996: A Consultation paper
at 26-27 [3.52]-[3.54].
Commonwealth Coatings Corp v Continental Casualty Co
[1969] USSC 31
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter