URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRS/2010/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Freeland, Steven --- "How international law deals with child soldiers" [2010] ALRS 10
How International Law Deals with Child Soldiers
Professor Steven Freeland, Law School, University of Western
February 2010
I. Introduction
On 24 November 2009, the trial of two alleged former
rebel leaders from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Germain Katanga
and Mathieu Chui, commenced in the International Criminal Court (ICC). Both
have been charged with various crimes against humanity
and war crimes, including
sexual slavery and using children under the age of 15 to participate actively in
hostilities. The trial
of another Congolese rebel leader, Thomas Lubanga Dyilo,
is also progressing at the ICC, Lubanga having been charged with war crimes
relating to the conscription and enlisting of children under 15 and using them
to participate in hostilities.
At the same time, the Special Court of Sierra Leone (SCSL) is also dealing
with various issues relating to the use of children as
participants in armed
conflict. In 2007, three leaders of the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council were
each found guilty on 11 counts
of war crimes and crimes against humanity, which
included conscripting or enlisting children under the age of 15 into armed
or groups, or using them to participate actively in hostilities, as well
as enslavement. This marked the first occasion that an international
has definitively ruled on the charge of recruitment of child soldiers into an
armed force. The accused in that case were
sentenced to 50, 45 and 50 years
imprisonment respectively, the SCSL noting that:
‘[c]hildren were forcibly taken away from their families, often fed on
drugs and used as child soldiers who were trained to
commit other brutal crimes
against the civilian population. Those child soldiers who survived the war were
robbed of a childhood
and most of them lost a chance of an education.’
Of even greater significance, the SCSL is currently trying the former
President of Liberia, Charles Taylor, for a number of similar
crimes. This
action against a former political leader of a country sends a message that no
individual can any longer assume to be
beyond the reach of justice in relation
to crimes against children.
Even though these various judicial proceedings deal with conflicts that have
taken place in Africa, it would be a mistake to think
this is just an
‘African’ problem. Child Soldiers are used in places as
geographically diverse as Columbia, Haiti, the
countries of the former
Yugoslavia and Sri Lanka. The military regime in Burma, for example, can only
survive due to the strength
of its armed forces, a quarter of which are children
under the age of 18. The vast majority of these soldiers have been forcibly
recruited. Human Rights Watch estimates that Burma has the largest number of
Child Soldiers in the world.
All of these examples highlight what has become a tragic phenomenon of our
time – the widespread use of, and participation by
minors in the conduct
of armed conflict and other hostilities. Young boys and girls, who under
international law are regarded as
‘children’, volunteer or, more
frequently, are forcibly ‘recruited’ into government forces or
militia groups
and subsequently involved in the commission of serious –
sometimes heinous – crimes.
This is not a ‘new’ problem. Children have been used in conflict
for decades, if not centuries. But alarmingly the situation
appears to be
worsening. There have been many warning signs demanding that international law
establish a more stringent regulatory
regime to deter the recruitment and use of
children as weapons of war. Yet, sadly, this has not happened, primarily due to
sensitive and political nature of armed conflict. Indeed, it is only
relatively recently that international law has been specifically
towards addressing it.
II. The Extent of the Child Soldier Problem
In 1900, it was estimated that civilians represented approximately 5 percent
of the casualties of conflict. By the time of the Second
World War, this figure
had risen to approximately 65 percent. Human rights groups now calculate that
approximately 90 percent of
all casualties in recent armed conflicts have been
made up of civilians, of which 40 percent are children.
In addition, however, children are increasingly being forced to actively
participate in the conflict as Child Soldiers. It has been
conservatively
estimated that, at any one time, there are approximately 300,000 children
participating in active conflict, though
these figures in all likelihood
significantly understate the true position. In 2004, the Coalition to Stop the
Use of Child Soldiers
found that children were ‘fighting in almost every
major conflict, in both government and opposition forces.’
In addition to the estimated 300,000 children who engage in actual military
conflict, another 500,000 are ‘conscripted’
into paramilitary
organizations, guerilla groups and civil militias in over 85 countries. As well
as serving as fighting troops on
the front line, they serve in other
‘indirect’ roles such as sex slaves, porters, cooks, spies, and
perform dangerous
tasks such as planting land mines.
Children are ‘attractive’ participants in armed conflict for a
number of reasons. They can be intimidated and ‘molded’
easily, are vulnerable to outside influences and can be trained to become
efficient soldiers. They can more readily be
made to perform the most dangerous
(and brutal) of tasks, if not through sheer intimidation, then under the
influence of drugs or
The proliferation of effective small arms and lightweight weapons such as the
ubiquitous AK47 – equally deadly in the hands
of a child trained to use
them - means that they can be deployed in active combat without any apparent
‘hardware’ disadvantages.
The United Nations Security Council has
noted in the past the dangers posed by the illicit trade in ‘small
the special relationship that this has with the problem of Child
Adding to the enormity of the problem, the world continues to be wracked by
armed conflict. Between 1990 and 2007, 16 of the world’s
countries – where the use of Child Soldiers is particularly prevalent -
endured violent internal conflict. Recruiting
children becomes an easy way to
make up for shortages of personnel caused by death or injury.
While many government and paramilitary commanders around the world claim that
they cannot stop the flow of children ‘volunteering’
to join their
ranks, in most cases the use of the term ‘volunteer’ is a complete
misnomer. It is usually the case that
extreme circumstances – hunger,
poverty, abandonment, the death of parents and family, disease and the lack of
even basic medical
services or the threat of violence or property confiscation
– will leave a child little choice but to offer his/her services
‘cause’. The very nature of armed conflict and its adverse effects
on the livelihood of communities and destruction
of the natural environment
merely fuels further this vicious cycle of poverty and violence.
III. What is a ‘Child’ Soldier?
International law defines a child simply in terms of
age. The 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child (CROC) generally regards
child as any person below the age of 18 years. In relation to the international
law principles directly regulating the issue of
Child Soldiers, age is also the
relevant determining factor. Similarly, all other international law provisions
dealing with Child
Soldiers are made dependent on the age of the relevant
individual(s).
This raises the rather complex question of ‘how old is a child’,
particularly (though not only) in relation to the question
participation in conflict. While the use of an objective criterion such as age
is relatively simple for definitional purposes,
it does not take account of
cultural values that will be determinative, in specific societies, as to whether
the person has achieved
adulthood. Many societies have initiation or
‘rites of passage’ ceremonies that form the basis of an
individual’s
transformation from a child to an adult. While some of these
are themselves based on the specific age of the person, it is clear
requisite age may differ from the arbitrary levels set at international law.
Moreover, there are other cultures where the transformation from a child to
an adult will be achieved by a specific act(s) irrespective
of the age of the
individual. Of particular relevance to the question of Child Soldiers,
participation in warfare constitutes a rite
of passage in some societies. There
may therefore be situations where the very act of playing a role in warfare or
armed conflict
will of itself deem that person
to be a child in the
eyes of the community. Indeed, there are societies where having a status akin to
that of a ‘warrior’
may be regarded as a positive attribute.
These factors are not taken into account by the regulations prescribed under
international law, though they are, or at the least should
be relevant in
relation both to the way in which the criminality or otherwise of the actions of
that person is to be regarded and
the consequences – including any
possible sentence - that may arise.
IV. The Regulation of Child Soldiers at International Law
There are a number of fundamental international law
instruments that are directed towards the regulation of Child Soldiers. The
of relevant instruments set standards for States in their recruitment
practices of young persons. Some other instruments deal with
‘criminalization’ of certain actions relating to Child Soldiers
– either conscripting or enlisting them or
forcing them to participate in
hostilities, or with respect to the acts perpetrated by the Child Soldier
him/herself.
(a) The Prohibition and/or Restriction of the Recruitment of Child
Prior to 1977, international law did not deal directly with the
issue of children participating in armed conflict, although the 1949
Conventions afforded children protection (as civilians) during times of armed
conflict. As the issue of Child Soldiers began
to come within the international
political agenda, the international community has, however, more recently sought
to address the
problem directly. Various fundamental instruments have been
agreed, providing a progressive (although not always consistent) series
international standards. These are briefly noted below (in chronological
1977 Additional Protocols to the 1949 Geneva Conventions
These provisions were introduced largely in reaction to the growing
realization within the international community that children were
being used as
active forces in war and armed conflict. They are binding on governmental and
opposition groups. However, the standards
were set at ‘low’ levels
– they set the minimum age for the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict as
15 years and States Parties are only required to take
‘all feasible measures’ to comply with the provisions.
1990 African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child
The African Charter came into force on 29 November 1999 and is the only
regional instrument in the world that currently addresses
the issue of Child
Soldiers. Its adoption reflects the disastrous consequences that the use of
Child Soldiers brings to whole communities
within a significant number of States
in the African continent. It is therefore highly appropriate that steps continue
to be taken
in Africa to inform the world about the extent of the problem.
Of all the international law instruments currently dealing with the use of
Child Soldiers, the African Charter sets the highest standards.
‘without exception’ minimum age of 18 years and has stronger
language – ‘all necessary measures’
– than other
instruments. The tragic reality is that these laudable standards are not
currently being complied with by a number
of African Member States.
1989 Convention of the Rights of the Child
CROC provides rules in relation to the active participation of children and
their recruitment. The language used is generally reflective
of the provisions
set out in the 1977 Additional Protocols. The provisions of CROC also set a
minimum age of 15 years for ‘direct’
participation or recruitment.
This seems an anomaly when one considers the overall context of CROC and the
fact that it defines a
child as any person under 18 years.
Indeed, the inclusion of this minimum age in CROC itself was highly
controversial and led to contentious debate during the drafting
stages. States
such as the United States, the United Kingdom and France objected to 18 being
set as a minimum age, due to the fact
that these and other States regularly
recruit people below that age into their armed forces.
1999 International Labour Organization Convention No. 182 on the
Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst
Forms of Child
This instrument came into force on 19 November 2000. Interestingly the United
States, which is one of only two States (the other being
Somalia) that has not
ratified CROC, played an important role in the drafting and finalization of this
instrument.
Under the terms of this Convention, a child is defined as a person under the
age of 18 years. States Parties to the instrument are
under an obligation to
take immediate and effective measures to secure the prohibition and elimination
of the ‘worst forms
of child labour’, which includes:
‘(a) ... all forms of slavery or practices similar to slavery, such as
the sale and trafficking of children, debt bondage and
serfdom and forced or
compulsory labour, including forced or compulsory recruitment of children for
use in armed conflict’
2000 Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict
This is the most recent international instrument that elaborates on standards
in relation to the recruitment of children into armed
forces. It was formulated
in conjunction with another important instrument relating to the welfare of
children – the 2000 Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Pornography and Child Prostitution.
these instruments were adopted by consensus by the United Nations
General Assembly on 25 May 2000 and came into force in early 2002.
The two Protocols were formulated to strengthen international standards in
relation to specific areas where children were particularly
vulnerable.
Nevertheless, in certain important respects the 2000 Children in Armed Conflict
Protocol represents somewhat of a disappointment.
The opportunity was missed to
provide appropriate universal standards for the new millennium. The instrument
recognizes ‘a
need to increase the protection of children from involvement
in armed conflict’, but it is clear that the spectre of
realpolitik
continues to play a significant role in these areas – even though the
protection of the child should be the overriding concern.
While the terms of the
2000 Children in Armed Conflict Protocol raise the minimum age to 18 for
non-government armed forces, they
fall short of the standards set by some of the
previous instruments in relation to recruitment into State armed forces.
Instead, the 2000 Children in Armed Conflict Protocol raises the minimum age
of compulsory recruitment to 18 years, but allowing for
voluntary recruitment at
a younger age. States are obligated to raise – to some undefined level -
the age of voluntary recruitment
from 15 years. As noted above, most of the
‘voluntary’ recruitment that takes place does not reflect a genuine
of the child’s free will and, in any event, it will often be
difficult to prove a child’s age at the time they volunteer.
Overall, the 2000 Children in Armed Conflict Protocol represents an important
element in the international law regime that seeks to
prohibit and/or restrict
the recruitment of Child Soldiers. The very fact that it has been introduced and
is increasingly accepted
by States indicates that the use of children in armed
conflict is no longer a problem that the international community can ignore.
Civil society and human rights groups now have another legal
‘weapon’ with which to pressure States to address the problem
directly. States are under more specific legal obligations to act than they had
been previously.
Yet, the 2000 Children in Armed Conflict Protocol suffers due to the
inherently political nature of recruitment practices for the
armed forces of
many States. In addition, voluntary recruitment of children is still permitted
at international law. Indeed, many
developed countries of the world, including
the United States, United Kingdom and Australia, permit children under the age
to join their armed forces. While recruitment in these countries would be
on a ‘genuinely voluntary’ basis, other so-called
instances of
‘volunteering’ are obviously not.
What is required is more determined international action. Political reality
means that this can only be lead by the developed countries
setting an example,
so that the real offenders cannot hide behind a ‘people in glass
houses’ type of argument. It is
here that Australia should take positive
action, consistent with Government’s clear desire to promote this country
as a leader
when it come to addressing issues of global concern.
The Australian Defence Force continues to maintain a minimum voluntary
recruitment age of 17 years, provided that those volunteering
have the written
informed consent of their parents or guardians. The benefit to Australia of such
under-age recruitment is minimal
– yet changing this policy and speaking
out against the use of children in war would represent a real opportunity for
to come to the fore in this debate. It would cost us very little,
promote us very positively and give us some real moral authority
on this issue,
which is currently lacking.
If there were more concerted efforts like this to set positive examples, as
well as to improve the enforcement mechanisms, those regimes
and militia that
currently rely on the use of children to fight their wars may begin to decline.
In this regard, Australia has the
opportunity to play an integral role in the
protection of current and future generations of innocent children around the
our voice will not be heard as it should if our hands are not seen to
be absolutely clean.
(b) The Criminalization of the Recruitment of Child Soldiers
The rules of international criminal law embody a
legal regime that defines certain ‘international crimes’ and
for the individual criminal responsibility of those who commit these
crimes. The international criminal judicial bodies are given
of their respective constituent documents.
The inclusion, within the
crime directed towards
the recruitment of children for active participation in
armed conflict therefore represents an appropriate ‘law-making’
for the international community.
The International Criminal Court
The Rome Statute was finalized in July 1998 and came into force on 1 July
2002. It established for the first time a
international
criminal tribunal to try persons charged with committing various international
The activities of the ICC reflect the desire of the international community
that ‘the most serious crimes of concern to the
international community as
a whole must not go unpunished’. The mandate of the ICC is
‘complementary’ to that of
States, meaning that the Court is to be
regarded as a court of last resort. It has jurisdiction with respect to the
following crimes
committed after 1 July 2002:
crime of Genocide;
Against Humanity;
[as yet undefined] crime of Aggression
Within the definition of the crime of war crimes, the Rome Statute
specifies that the recruitment of (certain) Child Soldiers would
constitute a
crime. In the context of an international armed conflict, the definition
‘[c]onscripting or enlisting children under the age of fifteen years
into the national armed forces or using them to participate
actively in
hostilities’
This is repeated in the definition of war crimes in the context of an armed
conflict not of an international character, except that
in those circumstances
it applies to recruitment into ‘armed forces or groups’ rather than
‘the national armed
When one considers the relevant war crimes definitions in the Rome Statute,
one is struck by the minimum age limit. It is difficult
to reconcile the
apparent desire of the international community to protect children under the age
of 18 from participating in armed
conflict with the criminalization of
recruitment activities only in respect of children below the age of 15 years.
One can surely
accept an argument that the recruitment or use of children of,
for example, 15 years of age does constitute (in the absence of other
that may properly negate criminal responsibility) an action that is at odds with
the basic norms that have now been set by
the international community. Such an
action could and
constitute an international crime and the
definitions in the Rome Statute should be ‘upgraded’ accordingly.
Yet, to open
up for discussion the definition of this aspect of war crimes would
almost certainly invite a wholesale renegotiation of many other
crucial issues
within the Rome Statute. This would not appear, at least in the foreseeable
future, to be a realistic possibility.
In other aspects, the provisions in the Rome Statute are an improvement on
the 2000 Children in Armed Conflict Protocol. During the
drafting process of the
Rome Statute, it was generally agreed that the terms ‘using’ and
‘participate’ in
the relevant war crimes provisions would apply not
only to direct participation in conflict, but also to other military activities
linked to combat such as ‘scouting, spying, sabotage, ... the use of
children as decoys, couriers, or at military checkpoints
[and] carrying supplies
to the front line’.
Within the definition of crimes against humanity in the Rome Statute, there
are a number of other provisions that may also be applicable
to the recruitment
and use of Child Soldiers in specific circumstances.
The Special Court for Sierra Leone
The SCSL is mandated to bring justice those who bear the greatest
responsibility for atrocities committed in Sierra Leone after 30
November 1996.
The use of Child Soldiers was common during the conflict in that country. Under
the terms of the Statute of the SCSL,
it has the jurisdiction to try persons who
are alleged to have committed one (or more) of various international crimes
against humanity, violations of article 3 common to the Geneva
Conventions and of 1977 Additional Protocol II or other serious violations
international humanitarian law - as well as certain criminal offences under the
national laws of Sierra Leone.
Mirroring the terms of the Rome Statute in the context of armed conflicts not
of an international character, article 4(c) of the Sierra
Leone Statute
criminalizes the:
‘[c]onscripting or enlisting [of] children under the age of fifteen
years into armed forces or groups or using them to participate
hostilities’
Overall, the international community has recognized the need to criminalize
acts which amount to the recruitment or use of children
for participation in
armed conflict. This is an important step, though the standards that have been
specified – relating to
the minimum age limit – in order to
constitute a crime at international law must be reassessed and upgraded. With
ongoing pressure
from civil society and human rights groups, this will hopefully
become an achievable goal.
(c) The Criminalization of the Actions of Child Soldiers
A far more complex and difficult issue is the
question of whether the Child Soldier him/herself should be held criminally
responsible
under international law for their actions. In 2007, it was reported
that the family of Dominic Ongwen, one of the 5 Lords Resistance
leaders indicted by the ICC, argued that he was a ‘victim’, having
been abducted in 1986 as a 10 year old
by the LRA. Although he has been charged
with crimes committed as an adult, this raises the point as to what should be
the position
of the Child Soldier perpetrator for crimes committed whilst still
Tragically there are many examples of Child Soldiers committing acts of
violent brutality – acts that at first sight would constitute
international crime. In most circumstances, there will be ‘excuses’
for such behaviour – threats and intimidation
(‘kill these people or
we will kill you and find someone else to do it anyway’), the effects of
forced drug taking or
a genuine lack of understanding of the nature and scope of
the act. But what of the situation where such actions are committed by
Soldier in the absence of any such extenuating circumstances?
In such a case, consider the position of a victim’s family after a
brutal act has been committed by a Child Soldier. Would it
be acceptable to
assert that the perpetrator is not to be tried under international law simply
because of his/her age? Does this
satisfy the broader aims of international
justice and support the notion that ‘the most serious crimes of concern to
the international
community as a whole must not go unpunished’?
A consideration of these questions will necessarily involve many cultural,
societal and moral factors – including the issue
of who is a child, as
well as the community’s view as to where responsibility should lie. For
example, a Save the Children
Federation study in Rwanda concluded that public
opinion in that country supported the view that children
responsible for their actions during the genocide that occurred during 1994. An
author on this subject explains this in the
following way:
‘[y]ou will hear Rwandans say that if a child was able to kill, if a
child was able to discriminate between two ethnic groups,
to decide who was a
Hutu moderate and who wasn’t, and was able to carry out murder in that
way, why should that child be considered
differently from an adult? And
therefore the punishment should be the same.’
Yet, the rules of international criminal law cannot always reflect the
differing cultural approaches to difficult issues, including
the views of some
States in relation to the responsibility of children for their actions. Whereas
under many national legal systems
children as young as 10 years (or even less in
some jurisdictions) are deemed capable of forming the requisite intent to commit
crime, international law has tended to gloss over this very difficult issue.
This is particularly reflected in the terms of the Rome
The International Criminal Court
The Rome Statute sets a minimum age for persons over whom the ICC has
‘[t]he Court shall have no jurisdiction over any person who was under
the age of 18 at the time of the alleged commission of
the crime.’
There is clearly a sense of inconsistency as far as the regulation of
international criminal law through the ICC is concerned. On
the one hand, there
exists a prohibition on the recruitment of children under the age of 15 years.
The international standard that
is (quite wrongly) being set at this level means
that there is no
wrongdoing in engaging children of 15, 16 or 17
years to take part in armed conflict. Yet, the ICC is not mandated to examine
actions of those children, even where they might have committed
international crimes.
This anomaly has at least two adverse consequences – first it may,
perversely,
the recruitment of children in this
‘responsibility free’ age bracket. To recruit someone in this
category attracts no
international criminal responsibility under the specific
war crimes provisions relating to Child Soldiers, and there is no possibility
that the actions of the child him/herself will be the subject of direct
investigation (though of course they may be relevant for
other investigations).
In this sense, the terms of the Rome Statute send entirely the wrong message to
those who are involved in
the recruitment of children to participate as Child
Secondly, it appears that the Rome Statute has completely avoided confronting
the issue of the criminal responsibility of Child Soldiers.
It is almost as if
the drafters of the Rome Statute would prefer that a consideration of this
important aspect of the shameful problem
of Child Soldiers be delegated
elsewhere. As the first and only permanent court of its kind, it is important
that the ICC be in a
position to set standards that play a vital role in the
evolution of international criminal law.
It would have been preferable to allow the ICC to have the jurisdiction to
try persons under the age of 18. This would not lead to
a ‘flood’ of
trials, since the ICC Prosecutor would first undertake a rigorous investigation
and then only seek to prosecute
in appropriate circumstances where there are no
justifiable excuses for the relevant actions of the alleged perpetrator. Indeed,
there may never be any such cases, but at least the message as to the heinous
nature of the crimes within the jurisdiction of the
ICC would be emphasized.
Even if the Prosecutor did proceed with such a case, it would highlight even
more to the international community in a transparent
and highly public forum the
horrors of the Child Soldier issue and further galvanize attempts to properly
address it in more effective
ways. In the case where there was such a trial and
subsequent conviction, the Judges would be required – as with all
- to take into account ‘such factors as the gravity of the crime
and the individual circumstances of the convicted person’
in determining
an appropriate sentence.
The Special Court for Sierra Leone
The Sierra Leone Statute approaches the question of the criminal
responsibility of the Child Soldier in a different way. Despite significant
opposition from various children’s groups, the United Nations agreed to
extend the mandate of the SCSL to include children
aged between 15 and 18.
This reflects not only the prevailing cultural values of Sierra Leone in
relation to the conflict but also, significantly, ensures
that the crimes
committed (in the absence of extenuating circumstances) are themselves dealt
with. Besides bringing some element
of ‘closure’ and justice to
victims and their families, this highlights the unacceptable nature of the
in any circumstance
. This is the important message of
international criminal law – that there is certain behaviour (acts
amounting to international
crimes) that is not and cannot be tolerated and will
be prosecuted.
In addition, the provisions allow for a standard of particular care for child
offenders as is appropriate in their specific circumstances.
The abhorrence of
the crime is not in any way diminished or dismissed. The fundamental standards
set by international law are not
compromised. Yet, there is still a mechanism in
place to deal ‘sympathetically’ with the child perpetrator, as is
appropriate
in ‘the individual circumstances of convicted persons’.
In this way the system of justice established under the Sierra Leone Statute
seeks not only to maintain the gravity of the crimes
but also to address the
equally difficult issue of somehow aiding a traumatized child and giving him/her
some hope for the future.
V. Concluding Comments
The escalating use of children as weapons of war is
alarming and represents a massive human tragedy. For every one of the estimated
800,000 children being forced to participate in armed conflict, there is a
childhood lost. Those that survive the ordeal are often
so traumatized that it
is virtually impossible for them in any way to recover the lost years, lost
sensitivities, lost hope, lost
trust and lost optimism. For example, most former
female Child Soldiers are often ostracized by their societies because of the
associated with their use as a sex slave during that time. Even if they
are able to return to their home communities, many have little
supporting themselves and are forced to turn to sex work, further compounding
their stigmatization.
Moreover, repressive regimes are highly dependent on this insidious use of
children to prop up their power base, instill a climate
of terror and carry out
brutal and deadly work at the ground level. If there was a more concerted effort
to improve the standards
and enforcement mechanisms to counter the use of
children in the military, these regimes would be much weaker and children would
be safer. This is where a strong example on the part of developed countries like
Australia in raising the minimum recruitment age
for their armed forces would be
so helpful, in that it would ratchet up further the pressure required to
‘persuade’ other
countries to follow suit.
It is clear that the international community, particularly in the face of
constant pressure from civil society and human rights groups,
must do more to
protect children. Not only is this a moral issue, but it also is highly relevant
for the maintenance of ‘international
peace and security’, one of
the primary purposes of the United Nations. The use of Child Soldiers can no
longer be treated
as a political issue or be regarded as simply a
‘localized’ or internal question. It is a problem that can
to international, regional and even global instability.
In the end the only way to stop the Child Soldier tragedy is to stop armed
conflict altogether. Of course this may in totality be
an unattainable goal, but
that is no reason why tangible steps should not be taken to mitigate the
possibility of internal or international
conflict, particularly in circumstances
where children will be in a vulnerable position and coerced into the front
lines. Without
such efforts, the ‘advantages’ of using children in
warfare, coupled with the flawed (though improving) regime of international
dealing with Child Soldiers means that, as conflict continues, so will the use
of children to wage its deadly fight. Unless more
is done, another 800,000 (or
more) children will, over time, replace those currently being used.
It is an unfortunate truism that international law – including those
provisions that seek to protect the Child Soldier –
unfortunately, go far enough to prevent armed conflict altogether. International
law must be strengthened to provide the
necessary support. It must be utilized
to establish and reflect alternate policies and institutions that truly address
these concerns.
Without a more effective international legal regime, no amount
of good intentions will suffice.
In addition, we must acknowledge and address the entire context of conflict
– the social, cultural, geopolitical, economic,
geographical, development
and equity considerations – and the circumstances in which children
‘voluntarily’ or
by coercion become weapons of war. This represents
an inviolable imperative that must be implemented for the sake of the current
and future generations of innocent children.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (147 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter