URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle --- "Chapter 5 - The Development of Modern Guardianship and Administration" [2011] SydUPLawBk 7; in O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle (eds), "Capacity and the Law" (Sydney University Press, 2011)
5. 1. What this chapter is about
5. 2. Origins of modern guardianship and administration
5. 2. 1. The early history
5. 2. 2. The system introduced into Australia
5. 2. 3. The effect of mental health reforms and legislation
5. 3. The transition from mental health legislation to modern guardianship
5. 3. 1. Tasmania
5. 3. 2. South Australia
5. 3. 3. Victoria
5. 3. 4. Queensland
5. 3. 5. New South Wales
5. 3. 6. Northern Territory
5. 4. The modern system of guardianship and administration emerges
5. 4. 1. The evolution of modern guardianship and administration
5. 4. 2. The components of modern guardianship
5. 4. 3. Modern guardianship and administration State by State
5. 5. Matters not dealt with in this chapter
Chapter 5 - The Development of Modern Guardianship and Administration
5. 1. What this chapter is about
This chapter deals briefly with the development in England of the common law
relating to the guardianship and the administration of
the estates of people
with decision-making disabilities, the introduction of that law into Australia
and its further development
here as a result of legislation and court decisions.
The transition of the guardianship system from a Supreme Court based system
tribunal based system at the end of the twentieth century is dealt with.
The development of the law was usually in arrears of the growing
understanding of the causes of the different kinds of decision-making
and their consequences. This is apparent in the language used at the different
stages of the development of the law.
5. 2. Origins of modern guardianship and
administration
5. 2. 1. The early history
Guardianship and administration has a long history in Anglo-Australian law.
It was originally based on Roman law but developed slowly
As Mc Clemens and Bennett
pointed out, by the time the colony of New South Wales was established, the
(English) law “of the
mentally ill was to be found in the Royal
Prerogative, in the statutes declaratory of it, in the common law writs and in
the decisions
of the Court of
In medieval England responsibility for the mentally disordered lay first with
the church and the lord of the manor. With the consolidation
of power in the
king in the thirteenth century, the enactment of the statute
De Praerogativa
, which was seen as declaratory of the common law, and the development
of the monarch as parens patriae, the king became the protector
of the property
and personal interests of his
Under the statute the
king had the custody of the person and lands of those born with an intellectual
disability during their lifetime
but was responsible for maintaining the person
and their household out of the income from the lands. The monarch had the same
and responsibility for those with a mental illness, but only until they
became well when their lands would be returned to them.
Steadily this responsibility moved from the monarch to the Chancellor and
evolved so that the Chancellor (or a Master of the Chancery
court) would conduct
an inquiry into whether or not the person was mentally incapable. If they were
found to be incapable and need
someone to manage their estate or person, then a
“committee” of their estate or person or both would be
It was usual to appoint
a family member or members as the committee, unless there was a reason not to do
The purpose of these appointments was for one or more people to have the
legal authority either to look after the incapable person,
and to be given an
allowance to provide for them, or to manage the incapable person’s
property and affairs but to be accountable
to the Chancery court for doing so.
As there was no social security system at the time, these arrangements ensured
that wealthy but
mentally incapable people were looked after. These arrangements
were not available to mentally incapable people who could not afford
were entirely reliant on their families, the charity of others or the parish
poor house. Too often the mentally ill found
themselves confined in prisons with
criminals and with other vagrants.
5. 2. 2. The system introduced into
Initially in the colony of New South Wales responsibility for the mentally
unfit lay with the Governor. Juries and other court-like
processes were used
before the governor exercised his discretion to appoint a committee for the
The responsibility then
moved to the courts by virtue of the
New South Wales Act 1823
for the establishment of the Supreme Courts of New South Wales and Tasmania
(then Van Diemen’s Land). The
also provided for jurisdiction to
be given to the Courts through Letters Patent. The relevant Letters Patent for
New South Wales
are known as the Third Charter of
Under them the monarch,
George IV, gave jurisdiction as follows, in terms we find both quaint and
offensive today:
XXVIII. And we do hereby authorise the Supreme Court to appoint guardians and
keepers of infants and their estates, according to
the order and course observed
in England; and also guardians, and keepers of the persons and estates of
natural fools, and of such
as are or shall be deprived of their understanding or
reason by act of God, so as to be unable to govern themselves and their estates;
which We hereby authorise and empower the said court to inquire, hear, and
determine, by inspection of the person, or such ways and
means by which the
truth may be best discovered and known.
This jurisdiction, which eventually evolved into the modern guardianship and
administration/financial management jurisdiction, was
exercised by the Supreme
Courts of first the colonies, and then, after federation, the States and
Territories until the emergence
of the tribunal-based guardianship systems first
in Tasmania in 1963 and the other States and Territories in the 1980s and
5. 2. 3. The effect of mental health reforms and
legislation
The jurisdiction was first augmented by, and then confused and complicated
by, the enactment of mental health legislation, perhaps
the most significant in
New South Wales being the
Lunacy Act 1878 (NSW)
, which contained
elaborate provisions for the care of the mentally ill and their estates.
established the
office of the Master in Lunacy.
In 1972 the Master’s Office became the Protective Office. Mc Clemens and
Bennett pointed out that; “in the form of its
consolidation in the Lunacy
Act of 1898, it laid down the pattern of lunacy law in New South Wales for the
next eighty years”.
The next step in the evolution of modern guardianship and administration in
New South Wales was the enactment of the
Protected Estates Act 1983
and the creation of the position of Protective Commissioner and what became the
Office of the Protective Commissioner under that
when it came into
force in 1985.
Between 1985 and
2009, the Protective Commissioner ceased to be a Master of the Supreme Court and
the separation of the Court from
direct supervision of the estates of incapable
people was completed. In July 2009, the positions of Public Trustee and
Commissioner were effectively merged, together with their offices,
into a statutory corporation and an agency of the New South Wales
called the NSW Trustee and Guardian but usually called the NSW
In 1903 it was argued to a full court of the Supreme Court that the
Act 1878 (NSW)
took away the lunacy jurisdiction given to the Court by the
Third Charter of Justice and as the statute
De Prerogativa Regis
repealed insofar as it was in force in New South Wales and as the
a code, this left the Court with only the powers set out in the
its 1898 form. The full court rejected this argument and held that the
unaffected and
undiminished and that as
De Prerogativa Regis
was declaratory only of the
common law, its repeal had no effect on the continuing operation of the common
law introduced into New
In other words the Court
had broad powers under the royal prerogative which these days is called the
“parens patriae”
power or the inherent jurisdiction of the
By the late 1950s awareness of the different causes of mental incapacity was
increasing. The
Mental Health Act 1958
replaced names, titles and
descriptions such as lunacy, idiot, imbecile and insane asylum which were
outmoded or stigmatising or
just plain offensive and replaced then with terms
such as mentally ill and mental hospital. The Master in Lunacy became the Master
in the Protective Jurisdiction.
Most importantly the
replaced the idea that mental hospitals were
places of restraint and confinement with the idea that they were places of
and that those who were mentally ill required care, treatment and,
sometimes, control. Nevertheless, the distinction between those
mentally ill and those who had an intellectual disability, acquired brain injury
or had dementia (then still called senility
or senile dementia) and their needs
for different kinds of care and treatment had not been made. Most of those who
were not being
cared for by their families were still housed in the old asylums
renamed mental hospitals. Also concentration remained on managing
“mentally ill” person’s property and affairs rather than on
guardianship.
However, the
did provide for those who had “mental infirmity” arising
from disease or age to have their property and affairs managed
by others, by
court order, when necessary.
5. 3. The transition from mental health legislation
to modern guardianship
5. 3. 1. Tasmania
The first move away from the Supreme Court based systems to tribunal based
systems came in Tasmania with the enactment of the
Mental Health Act 1963
. It established both a Guardianship Board, with power to regulate its
own proceedings, and a Mental Health Review Tribunal. The
provided that those with a “mental disorder” described as mental
illness or an intellectual disability (described
subnormality) could be received into guardianship by the Board itself or could
have a private person as a guardian. Guardianship
applications had to be founded
on the recommendations of two doctors. Once an application was received by the
Board, the named guardian
could act as the plenary guardian of the person. The
management of the property and affairs of people with a mental disorder remained
with the Supreme Court.
5. 3. 2. South Australia
In 1975 a committee chaired by a Dr Dibden was established in South Australia
to review that State’s then existing
legislation.
In 1977 the South
Australian parliament enacted the
Mental Health Act 1976-1977 (SA)
established a Guardianship Board with greater powers than its Tasmanian
counterpart. The
applied not only to those with a mental illness or
an intellectual disability but also to those with dementia and acquired brain
injury. However, only the Board itself could take people into guardianship and
only when it was satisfied, after a hearing, that
the required conditions had
been satisfied.
, the South Australian Guardianship Board was the first
guardianship tribunal in Australia empowered to appoint administrators of
estates of those incapable of managing their estates whether or not they had
been received into the guardianship of the Board.
However the Board could make
only plenary guardianship and administration
5. 3. 3. Victoria
In November 1980 officers of the Health Commission of Victoria developed a
position paper on the mental health legislation of that
The Minister for Health
referred this paper to the Consultative Council on Review of Mental Health
Legislation together with the
job of reviewing the
Mental Health Act 1959
and advising on desirable changes to that
. Issues relating
to “mental retardation” were excluded from the Council’s terms
of reference as the Minister set
up another committee known as The
Minister’s Committee Considering Rights and Protective Legislation for
Intellectually Handicapped
Persons (the Cocks Committee).
The Consultative Council made its report in December 1981. It recommended the
establishment of a Guardianship Board to take into its
own guardianship, or
place in the guardianship of others, mentally ill adults who were wholly or
partially incapable of caring for
themselves or of managing their own affairs.
The Council recommended that guardianship orders be “limited to those
areas where
a person was unable to make reasonable judgements in all or some
areas of life decision”, but noted that “full guardianship
required in particular
circumstances”.
The Council also recommended that applications “for control of a
person’s financial and business affairs, whether the
person be a formal
patient or not” (of a mental hospital) be made to the Guardianship
Despite the limitation on its terms of reference, the Council noted that the
South Australian Board was empowered to deal with those
with “mental
retardation” and supported the idea of applications being made to the
proposed Guardianship Board in relation
to them and to “geriatric
The Cocks Committee made its report in December 1982. Its major
recommendations were that a Guardianship Board be established with
appoint limited and plenary guardians, not including itself, and estate managers
for those developmentally disabled adults
who were in need of guardianship or
estate management. The Committee also recommended that the office of Public
Advocate be established
to act as guardian of last resort and as an advocate for
developmentally delayed people.
The Committee proposed, in its report, a draft Guardianship Tribunal Bill to
establish a tribunal with powers to appoint guardians
and administrators, but
only for adults with an intellectual disability.
The legislation that followed these reports, the
Guardianship and
Administration Board Act 1985 (Vic)
which came into force in 1987, applied
to adults with a disability. “Disability” was defined to mean
“intellectual
impairment, mental illness, brain damage, physical
disability or senility”. The Guardianship and Administration Board was
established
to operate as a fully independent tribunal empowered to appoint
others, and not itself, as either limited or plenary guardians or
administrators for adults with a relevant disability who were unable, by reason
of the disability, to make reasonable judgements
in matters relating to their
person, circumstances or estate and were in need of a guardian or administrator.
also established the office and functions of the Public
Because it had much more flexibility and discretion in relation to the orders
it could make than its predecessors in Tasmania and
South Australia, the
Guardianship and Administration Board of Victoria can claim to be the first of
the modern guardianship tribunals.
It commenced operations in 1987. In effect
Victoria went from the nineteenth century approach to guardianship and
administration
to modern guardianship in a single step in
5. 3. 4. Queensland
The Supreme Court based system continued in Queensland until 2000 when the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
was enacted and commenced.
Nevertheless there was some transitional legislation from 1986 when the
Intellectually Handicapped Citizens Act 1985 (Qld)
established the Intellectually Handicapped Citizens Council of Queensland which,
while it had some tribunal-like functions, had a
number of other functions in
relation to adult residents of Queensland with an intellectual disability. The
Council had the power
to hear and determine applications for approval of
“special intervention”, a form of guardianship and support. Although
the definition of “intellectually handicapped citizen” included more
people than just those with an intellectual disability,
the legislation was
enacted primarily for the benefit of those with an intellectual disability as
the second reading speech in relation
to the bill for the
5. 3. 5. New South Wales
By the early 1980s the judges were beginning to note problems with the
Mental Health Act 1958
, but nevertheless stated the law in ways
that were taken up in or continue to underpin the modern guardianship system. In
1981 Helsham
CJ in Equity was willing to assume that a 27 year old woman born
with Down’s Syndrome was mentally ill for the purposed of
Health Act 1958
, but was not prepared to appoint a committee of either
her estate or her person because there was no necessity to do so. The woman
being looked after in an institution for adults with an intellectual disability
where she was receiving care and there were no
problems relation to her
maintenance, support and comfort. Nor were there any difficulties in to the
management of her small
In 1983, Powell J held that neither Down’s Syndrome nor Fragile X
(chromosome) Syndrome was a mental illness for the purposes
Health Act 1958
but could be a mental infirmity arising from disease
approach to the
was consistent with the approach taken by Myers J to
the same provision in 1959 allowing him to appoint a committee of the estate
a person who had chronic schizophrenia. The man had a considerable fortune which
he was completely unable to manage, but was able
to look after himself quite
satisfactorily.
In 1986 Powell
J held that alcohol dependence and alcohol abuse were not mental illnesses and
that anorexia nervosa was not a mental
Earlier, in 1982, Powell J held that an elderly woman with vascular dementia
was not mentally ill under the
Mental Health Act 1958
but by reason
of mental infirmity arising from age was incapable of managing her
Using the same approach
in 1986, Powell J found that a man (CCR) with Alzheimer’s disease was not
mentally ill under the
Mental Health Act 1958
and discharged him
from the mental hospital.
Powell J’s views were controversial in the eyes of psychiatrists
responsible for treating those people with dementia who also
had psychotic
symptoms. In his 1999 book, Dr Peter Shea stated that:
[I]n deciding that CCR was not a mentally ill person, Powell J made a
significant distinction between demented people who were suffering
simply from
cognitive changes associated with dementia and demented patients with certain
additional symptoms. He noted that patients
with dementia could sometimes suffer
hallucinations, delusions and other psychotic symptomatology as well as their
symptoms of cognitive
disturbance. He said that when the psychotic symptoms were
present, the demented patient could be mentally ill for the purposes of
Mental Health Act
. This distinction, while legally rational, made no psychiatric
sense whatsoever. Patients with cognitive changes associated with
dementia can
and often do experience hallucinations, delusions and other psychotic
symptomatology as well as the cognitive symptoms.
Sometimes the hallucinations
and delusions are transitory. Sometimes they persist for some time….
Whatever causes of the cognitive disturbance is also responsible for the
delusions and hallucinations. If the delusions and hallucinations
transitory but recurrent then a demented person may slip in and out of the
definition of a “mentally ill person”
several times a
In 1984 however, Powell J, resorted to the use of the inherent power of the
Supreme Court which he said “derived from the (Third)
Charter of Justice
(1823)” to resolve the case of a 28 year old woman with a severe
intellectual disability and appointed the
Protective Commissioner as the
committee of both her person and her
In that case he also
noted that he had drawn attention to what he saw were the inadequacies of the
law relating to the protection
of people with an intellectual disability and of
the powers of the Court to give protection to
He also noted the concern of others about the serious inadequacies of the
laws relating to the guardianship of people with an intellectual
disability and
went on to suggest that the inherent or parens patriae power of the Court did
not apply to those with a moderate,
mild or borderline intellectual
disability.
Nevertheless, he had
relied on this jurisdiction in 1983 to appoint an interim receiver and manager
of the property and affairs of
a woman who had suffered a stroke but whom
Powell J found not to be “mentally infirm” under the provisions of
Mental Health Act 1958
. He relied on this jurisdiction again
in late 1983 to appoint the Protective Commissioner to undertake the care and
management of
the property in New South Wales of a 12 year old boy, by then
living in Victoria, with massive acquired brain damage, quadriplegia,
blindness and virtually no intellectual or cognitive functioning as a result of
a motor vehicle accident in New South
The problems caused by the definition of mental illness and mental infirmity
in the mental health legislation in New South Wales were
largely overcome by the
enactment of
Protected Estates Act 1983
did not come into force until 5 August 1985. The section provided that if the
Supreme Court was satisfied that a person was
incapable of managing their
affairs, the Court could make a declaration to that effect and order that the
person’s estate would
be subject to management under the
was enacted at a time of growing awareness of the differences between
and the differing needs of people with a mental illness and
those with an
intellectual disability or other forms of decision-making disability. Steps were
also taken to bring down the costs
of obtaining a management order in the
Supreme Court. As part of the evolution of the role of the Protective
Commissioner, the
gave the holder of that office substantial powers
to manage the property and affairs of those whose estates were placed under
management.
However the Supreme Court remained the ultimate
Concurrent with these developments in the Supreme Court and in the
legislation, the Inquiry into Health Services for the Psychiatrically
Developmentally Disabled, chaired by David Richmond, carried out its work and,
in March 1983, reported to the Minister for
Health. The Richmond Report, as it
soon became known, recommended first that services to people with a psychiatric
condition or an
intellectual disability “be delivered primarily on the
basis of a system of integrated community based networks, backed up
specialist hospital or other services as required”. There were to be two
prime operational objectives, to fund or provide
services which maintained
clients in their normal community environment and to reduce progressively the
size and number of mental
hospitals by decentralising the services they
provided. Services for those with an intellectual disability were to be
separated from
mental health services, funded separately and delivered under
separate management as community based services which included the
development
of small community based residential units to rehouse residents from the
existing institutions.
Although the New South Wales system remained Supreme Court based, one small
tribunal, the Intellectually Handicapped Persons Review
Tribunal was established
under the 1967 amendments to the
Child Welfare Act 1939
Tribunal operated in the context of a set of arrangements that could be applied
to people with an intellectual disability as
different from those with a mental
illness. The new
Child Welfare Act 1939
operated so
that a child or young person who had an intellectual disability who did not need
continuous treatment or attention in
a hospital but who needed care protection
or supervision in their own interests or in the interests of others could be
placed under
and remain under the guardianship of the Minister, for the whole of
their lives if necessary, to ensure that they received the services
and support
that they needed. The Tribunal had the role of reviewing these guardianship
arrangements every two years and ordering
their continuation where
appropriate.
While the judges of the Supreme Court have been concerned about the apparent
limits on their jurisdiction imposed, usually unintentionally,
by legislation,
they have usually overcome the problems raised when it has been necessary to do
so in order to arrive at the just
and sensible result in the best interests of
the incapable person. This has been seen in the cases already referred to;
however the
judges are clear that the Court’s substantial and broad
inherent powers arose from the fact that the Supreme Court has been
“all jurisdiction which may be necessary for the administration of justice
in New South Wales”.
grant of jurisdiction is seen as including the prerogative jurisdiction that
developed in the common law often called the parens
patriae jurisdiction. It
arms the Court with jurisdiction to meet new situations that arise that
sometimes need to be resolved by
court intervention and decision-making. In
relation to medical treatment, this jurisdiction is seen as protective in
5. 3. 6. Northern Territory
Despite the enactment of the first two of the modern guardianship statutes in
Guardianship and Administration Board Act 1985 (Vic)
Disability Services and Guardianship Act 1987
in Victoria and New
South Wales respectively, the Northern Territory enacted a form of transitional
legislation in 1988, namely the
Adult Guardianship Act 1988
The immediate cause of
the legislation was the concern of magistrates in Alice Springs about the lack
of facilities for people with
an intellectual disability and behavioural
problems which led to them being brought before the
While it can be applied
to a wider range of people with decision-making disabilities, it is drafted with
the needs of people with
intellectual disabilities in mind. The
provides for the appointment of guardians with either plenary or limited
These appointments are
made by the magistrates after receiving reports and recommendations from a
Guardianship Panel appointed separately
each time there is an application for
guardianship. Under the
, the magistrates can appoint either a private
person as guardian or the Public Guardian who is the relevant Minister. The
guardianship role is carried out by designated staff of the
Department of Community Services. The guardian of a person can also be
as administrator of their estate.
The Adult Guardianship Act 1988 (NT)
, which continues essentially in
the form in which it was enacted, was the last of the transitional stage
legislation to be enacted.
It leaves the appointment of administrators of most
substantial estates in the hands of the Supreme Court under the
Infirm Persons’ Property Act 1979 (NT)
. The appointment of guardians
is not entrusted to a board or tribunal, but remains with the Magistrates Court,
albeit advised by
a panel established to give professional, expert and relevant
community advice and recommendations. The Magistrates Court can appoint
person’s guardian as the administrator of their estate. Like the
transitional Queensland legislation, the
is orientated to the needs
of people with an intellectual disability and few financial resources.
5. 4. The modern system of guardianship and
administration emerges
5. 4. 1. The evolution of modern guardianship and
administration
Modern guardianship and administration evolved over the centuries, but it
took a great leap forward in Australia between 1986 and
2000 when all the States
and Territories enacted new legislation which was designed to respond much more
effectively to the needs
of people with decision-making disabilities arising
from causes other than mental illness. The new legislation reflected the growing
understanding among policy makers and the public generally of the different
causes of decision-making disabilities and the differing
needs of the people who
had these differently based disabilities. In addition there was a greater
awareness of the rights of people
with disabilities of all kinds to lives as
normal a life as possible, and in the community rather than in institutions.
5. 4. 2. The components of modern
guardianship
There are a number of components of modern guardianship. The legislation of
all the Australian jurisdictions contains most of these
components, except for
the Northern Territory. The first component is a tribunal able to develop its
own procedures to deal with
the particular kinds of matters it is required to
hear and determine and provide procedural fairness. Such a tribunal has to be
to the public so that people do not have to retain lawyers to use it.
It has to be flexible about the evidence it receives so that
people do not have
to obtain expensive reports from specialists just for its hearings when other
evidence that is just as credible
and probative of the issues that have to be
proved to the tribunal is available. The tribunal should have the flexibility to
the orders it can make to meet the particular needs of the person before
it who is in need of an order. Consequently, it should be
able to make both
guardianship and administration orders that are either limited or plenary
depending on what is needed in a particular
case. These orders should be
reviewable on a regular basis. It does not matter if the Supreme Court in the
particular State or Territory
retains its jurisdiction in relation to
guardianship and administration as most people will use the cheaper and more
accessible tribunal,
but be able to use the Court when the circumstances of the
case make that appropriate. The tribunal should not charge fees for bringing
applications to it as this results in applications that should be made to the
tribunal not being brought to it.
In addition to the tribunal, in Australia called either a Board or Tribunal
depending on what State or Territory you are in, there
should be a Public
Advocate or Public Guardian, an independent statutory appointee to act as
guardian as necessary, but also to have
other functions to promote the interests
of people with disabilities. The Public Advocate or Guardian should be separate
from another
essential element of the system, namely the Public Trustee, State
Trustee or NSW Trustee, another independent statutory appointee
authorised to
manage the estates of those incapable of managing their own property and affairs
and to supervise the management by
private persons of the estate of a person
subject to a tribunal order.
The legislation must recognise, and provide for, the different kinds of
disabilities that give rise to decision-making disabilities,
set out the
principles upon which the system is based, including the principles of the least
restrictive alternative and of orders
made and continued only when the need to
do so is shown.
5. 4. 3. Modern guardianship and administration
State by State
Victoria – 1987.
As already noted, the
Guardianship
and Administration Board Act 1985 (Vic)
which came into force in 1987,
established the first of the modern, independent guardianship tribunals in
It also created the
position of Public Advocate, an independent, statutory appointee empowered not
only to act as a guardian of adults
with a disability, but also to undertake
systemic advocacy and other functions to promote the interests of adults with
decision-making
disabilities. Victoria’s Guardianship and Administration
Board was abolished in 1998 and its jurisdiction taken into the Victorian
and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT) which came into existence 1 July
New South Wales – 1989.
New South Wales was the next to
move to modern guardianship with the enactment of the
Disability Services and
Guardianship Act 1987
which came into force in August 1989. It came
after the Richmond Report, Powell J’s series of judgments and expressions
concern about terms used in the
Mental Health Act 1958
enactment of the
Protected Estates Act 1983
. It was said to be
largely the work of an interdepartmental working party which had representatives
of the Departments of Health,
the Attorney General, Youth and Community Services
and the Premier as well as the Protective Commissioner and representatives of
the New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability and the Mental Health
Co-ordinating Council. Consultations on the drafting
of the bill were conducted
with the Disability Council of New South Wales and with non-government agencies
representing the interests
of a wide range of people with decision-making
disabilities.
The Victorian
legislation was an influential model in the development of the New South Wales
. The New South Wales Council for Intellectual Disability and other
organisations and individuals supporting the rights of people
intellectual disability to lead as normal life as possible in the community
played a significant role, not only in shaping
the legislation, but also in
ensuring its enactment by the Unsworth Labor Government in 1987 and its being
brought into force by
the Greiner Coalition Government in 1989.
was renamed the
Guardianship Act
established
the Guardianship Tribunal (then known as the Guardianship Board) in New South
Wales as well as the office of Public
The position of Public
Guardian was held by the Protective Commissioner, but the Office of the Public
Guardian and the Office of
the Protective Commissioner were run separately with
the Director and staff of the Office the Public Guardian carrying out most of
the functions of the Public Guardian under delegation. However, as already
noted, in 2009 the Protective Commissioner (and Public
Trustee) were replaced by
a statutory corporation, the NSW Trustee and Guardian. Although the person
holding the office of Public
Guardian works within that statutory corporation,
the position of Public Guardian remains established under the
Guardianship
Initially the Guardianship Tribunal in New South Wales could not deal with an
application for a financial management order in relation
to a person unless it
had also received an application for a guardianship order in relation to that
person. The need to remove that
limitation soon became apparent. Now the
Tribunal may receive either or both applications in relation to a person 16
years or above.
It may make
either limited or plenary guardianship orders, and since 2009, has had the power
to make plenary financial management
orders and an unencumbered discretion to
exclude a specified part of a person’s estate from
management.
Northern Territory – 1988.
Northern Territory followed in
1988 with the
Adult Guardianship Act 1988 (NT)
which, as already noted,
is transitional legislation rather than a modern guardianship Act. A number of
reports have been commissioned
all of which recommended modernising the
legislation. As yet none of them has been acted upon.
Western Australia – 1992.
In Western Australia in 1984 a
committee reviewing that State’s mental health legislation recommended
that a “guardianship
board should be established with power to appoint
limited and plenary guardians and estate administrators for incapable persons
were in need of guardianship or estate administration”. The committee
also recommended that the office of Public Guardian with
power to act as
“guardian of last resort and an advocate for incapable
Victorian legislation had a significant influence in the development of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
as did those organisations
and individuals representing the interests of people with a disability,
including Errol Cocks the chair
of the Victorian Minister’s Committee
Considering Rights and Protective Legislation for Intellectually Handicapped
who was a Western Australian. An indicator of this influence is that
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
made it clear that the
Guardianship Board established by it could make not only plenary but also
limited administration orders.
The Guardianship and Administration Board of Western Australia commenced
operations in October 1992. It was abolished and its jurisdiction
taken over by
the State Administrative Tribunal of Western Australia (WASAT) when that
tribunal came into existence 1 January
In enacting the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
, Western Australia moved
from a Supreme Court based system to a tribunal based system for dealing with
guardianship and administration
matters. The 2004 changes to the nature of the
tribunal dealing with this jurisdiction made it clear that the inherent
of the Supreme Court of Western Australia was not
Australian Capital Territory – 1992.
In 1982 Lockhart J
sitting in the Supreme Court of the ACT, relied upon the
Lunacy Act 1898
in its application to the ACT to appoint managers for a man who had
suffered extensive brain injuries in a motor vehicle accident.
He did so by
treating the man’s acquired brain damage as “mental infirmity
arising from disease” under the NSW
After reviewing the
state of the relevant law in the ACT, Lockhart J stated;
Plainly, the legislation relating to the management of the property and affairs
of mentally infirm persons in the Australian Capital
Territory is in need of
In August 1988 the Commonwealth Attorney-General, Lionel Bowen gave the
Australian Law reform Commission a reference to consider new
guardianship and
administration legislation for the Australian Capital Territory. The Commission
made its report in August 1988 recommending
the establishment of a specialist
Guardianship and Management of Property Tribunal together with a Public Advocate
having a role
similar to the Public Advocate in
Annexed to the
Commission’s report was a draft Guardianship and Management of Property
Bill which provided for the Public Advocate
as well as the Public Trustee,
trustee companies and natural persons to be able to be appointed as managers
(administrators) by the
The report described
the state of the relevant law in the Australian Capital Territory as at 31
August 1989 and referred to it as
being from a bygone
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
, which came
into force 7 January 1992, is based heavily on the draft Bill in the report. The
established a specialist Guardianship and Management of Property
Tribunal but that tribunal was located in the Magistrates Court
Territory’s Chief Magistrate as its President. Separate legislation
operated to have the effect of removing the guardianship
and administration of
property from the Supreme Court and giving it to the Guardianship and Management
of Property Tribunal.
Community Advocate Act 1991
established the statutory office of
Community Advocate to act as a guardian and to carry out a range of other
functions to promote
the interests of people with
disabilities.
The role of the
Community Advocate was taken over by the Public Advocate established under the
Public Advocate Act 2005
which commenced in March
The influence of the
Victorian legislation is apparent from the Australian Law Reform
Commission’s report and from the second
reading speech of the Minister for
introducing the legislation.
Commencing in February 2009, the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal (ACAT)
took over the jurisdiction previously exercised by the
Guardianship and
Management of Property Tribunal.
South Australia – 1995.
In 1988 a Review of the
Guardianship Board and the Mental Health Review Tribunal was established in
South Australia. The Review reported
in 1989 noting that under the system then
existing in South Australia the role of families and carers was inappropriately
and undervalued and that there was conflict for the Guardianship
Board in its roles as investigator, formal decision-maker and
In 1990 a review was undertaken of the consent to medical and dental
procedures which had been inserted into the
Mental Health Act
That review reflected some of the concerns of the earlier review and supported
its philosophical directions, in particular
the involvement of the family in
decision-making about medical and dental
treatments.
Both those reports were released and extensive consultation in relation to
them with a wide group of consumers of the affected services,
carers, government
departments, non-government organisations and professional groups took place
before the new legislation enacted
Guardianship and Administration Act
was introduced to the House of Assembly in 1992 and the
Legislative Council in 1993. In both houses of the South Australian parliament
it was noted that the thrust of the legislation was consistent with the emerging
national model of guardianship which had already
been adopted in New South
Wales, Western Australia and the Australian Capital Territory and was under
consideration in Tasmania and
Queensland.
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
established a new
Guardianship Board without the role of guardian that its predecessor had.
Without much heralding of it, the
introduced the concept of enduring
guardianship by which an adult may appoint their own guardian to make personal
decisions for them,
including medical treatment decisions, when they lost the
capacity to make their own
As we shall see,
enduring guardianship has been legislated for in most of the other States and is
an important way in which people
can plan ahead and decide for themselves who
they want to make decisions for them when they are no longer able
Unlike the guardianship tribunals in the other States, the South Australian
Guardianship Board was empowered, under the
Mental Health Act 1993
to review detention orders made under that Act and to hear and determine appeals
against orders, made under that Act by doctors,
for the detention of people in
mental hospitals for treatment.
The Board was empowered to appoint “natural persons” or the Public
Advocate as guardian.
created the statutory office of Public
Like its counterpart
in Western Australia, the South Australian Guardianship Board was empowered to
make both limited and full (plenary)
administration
Although assented to in
May 1993, the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
did not come
into force until 6 March 1995.
Tasmania – 1997.
Guardianship and Administration
completed the transition of Tasmania’s guardianship
system from the Supreme Court based to a tribunal based system. It was
at the end of a long process which started with a review of the
Mental Health
by the then existing Guardianship Board and the Public Trust
Office. In 1989 the review recommended changes to modernise the system
the Victorian model. Largely through the efforts of the Chairman of the
Guardianship Board, John Blackwood, the legislation
was drafted to establish a
Guardianship and Administration Board empowered to appoint guardians, including
the Public Guardian, under
limited or full (plenary) guardianship orders for
adults with decision-making disabilities who needed such an
The Board also makes
administration orders.
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
created the office of
Public Guardian with guardianship and other functions similar to the Public
Advocates of Victoria and South
into force 1 September 1997.
Queensland – 2000.
Queensland was the last jurisdiction
in Australia to enact modern guardianship legislation, and it did the job
thoroughly. The Queensland
Law Reform Commission was given a reference in
September 1990 to review the existing Queensland laws relating to people with
disabilities.
The Commission had the benefit of the experience of the
guardianship bodies in the other States and the Australian Capital Territory.
reported in June 1996 with very detailed proposals and a draft Assisted and
Substituted Decision Making
The Commission’s
report led to the enactment of the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
which, in addition to providing for enduring powers of attorney and advance
health directives, also established the office of Adult
Guardian with powers
wider than those of the Public Advocates of Victoria and South
The provisions
relating to the Adult Guardian were relocated to the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
when it came into force 1 July
established the Guardianship and Administration Tribunal empowered to appoint
guardians, including the Adult Guardian, and administrators.
With the enactment of the Queensland legislation, the transition to modern
guardianship throughout Australia, except for the Northern
Territory, was
5. 5. Matters not dealt with in this
This chapter has traced the development of the main aspects of modern
guardianship and administration. In the late twentieth century
other matters
seen as part of, or related to modern guardianship, were developed. These
included enduring powers of attorney, enduring
guardianship, substitute
decision-making for medical and dental consent and end of life decision-making.
These matters are taken
up in other chapters of this book.
Kittrie, N.
The Right to be
, Baltimore, The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1971, 9, 56-57;
Weiner, B. and Wettstein, R.
Legal Issues in Mental Health Care
York, Plenum Press, 1993, 274; Jenner Wily, H. and Stallworthy, K.,
Abnormality and the Law
, Christchurch, N. M. Peryer Limited, 1962, 13-14;
Carney, T. “Civil and Social Guardianship for Intellectually Handicapped
Monash University Law Review
, pp.205-207.
McClemens, J. and Bennett, J.
“Historical Notes on the Law of New South Wale
[1962] SydLawRw 4
(1962-1964)
Sydney Law Review
In re W. M.
[1903] NSWStRp 48
(1903) 3 SR
[1812] EngR 565
(1812) 35 ER 22.
Ex parte Le Heup
[1811] EngR 503
Kittrie, N. op.cit. 56-61;
Regan, J. “Protective Services for the Elderly: Commitment, Guardianship,
and Alternatives”,
William and Mary Law Review
McClemens and Bennett op. cit.
4 George IV Ch. 96.
Both the Supreme Court of New
South Wales and the Supreme Court of Van Diemen’s Land had their
ceremonial openings and first
substantive sittings in May 1824. (See, Bennett,
Sir John Pedder – First Chief Justice of Tasmania
The Federation Press, 2003, 13.) They were separate courts from that time, but
they had the same jurisdiction in relation
to the guardianship of adults under
the relevant charters of justice.
Under s.3 of the Act an
“insane person” was anyone who was an idiotic lunatic or of unsound
mind and incapable of managing
himself or his affairs. For a history of the
lunacy jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of NSW see, Bennett, J.
A History of
the Supreme Court of New South Wales
, Sydney, The Law Book Company, Ch. 7.
See also McClemens and Bennett, op. cit. 53-74; Powell J. in
(1986) 6 NSWLR 622
, 634-637 and Powell, P.,
The Origins and
Development of the Protective Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of NSW
Sydney, Francis Forbes Society for Australian Legal History, 2004 .
See s. 105.
McClemens and Bennett, op.
Protected Estates Act
NSW Trustee and Guardian
In re W. M.
(1903) 3 SR (NSW) 522.
Mental Health Act 1958
Ibid. s.38.
Ibid. s.39.
For further information
Mental Health Act 1963
see Carney, T. and Singer, P.,
Ethical and Legal Issues in
Guardianship Options for
Intellectually Disadvantaged People
Rights Commission Monograph Series No. 2, Canberra, Australian Government
Publishing Service, 1986, pp. 29-31.
Parliamentary Debates South
Australia, 1976-77, vol. 3. p. 3203.
For further information
1976-77 (SA) see Carney, T.
and Singer, P., op. cit., pp. 23-25.
Wise v Rosenbaum and
Public Trustee
[1981] VicRp 73
[1981] VR 765
, Gobbo J refers to this paper (at 775) while
dealing with an application which showed the need for reform in this area of the
Report of the Consultative
Council on Review of Mental Health Legislation. (To the Minister for Health,
December 1981) Recommendations
11 and 13, p. 11.
Ibid. Recommendation 12, p.
Ibid. paragraphs 6.14, p. 67
and 6.18, pp. 70-71.
Report of the
Minister’s Committee on Rights and Protective Legislation for
Intellectually Handicapped Persons, (to the Minister
for Health, December 1982),
For a description of the
operation of the Victorian system before the
Guardianship and Administration
Board Act 1985 (Vic)
came into force see, Carney, T. and Singer, P.,
op.cit., pp. 25-26.
For a description of the
operation of the Supreme Court based Queensland system see, Carney, T. and
Singer, P., op.cit, pp. 26-28.
Queensland Parliamentary
Debates, 28 Feb. and 1March 1985, pp. 3597-3603.
[1981] 2 NSWLR
[1983] 1 NSWLR 54.
Re an Alleged Incompetent
(1959) 76 WN (NSW) 477.
CN v Medical
Superintendent of Rozelle Hospital
(unreported, Supreme Court of NSW,
Powell J, 4 March 1986);
JAH v Medical Superintendent of Rozelle Hospital
(unreported, Supreme Court of NSW, Powell J, 4 March 1986).
, Sydney, Hawkings Press, 1999, p. 106.
, 696. Powell J sets out a history of the Court’s jurisdiction
based on the prerogative/inherent/parens patriae power at pp.
Protected Estates Act
generally and
. For an overview of what was intended by
the enactment of the
Protected Estates Act
and associated legislation,
see NSW Parliamentary Debates, Vol. 177, pp.3086-3092 (22 Nov. 1983).
Richmond Report,
Recommendations 1-3. Report
, General Proposals, pp. 5-6.
For a description of the
intended operation of the new
, see the second reading speech on the
Child Welfare (Amendment) Bill
NSW Parliamentary Debates, Vol. 372, pp.
4319-4328 (15 March 1967).
Supreme Court Act 1970
MAW v Western Sydney Area
Health Service
[2000] NSWSC 358
(1999) 49 NSWLR 231
v Central Sydney Area Health Service
[2000] NSWSC 1241
(2000) 50 NSWLR 549
For a description of the
relevant law in the Northern Territory prior to the enactment of the
Guardianship Act
, see Carney, T. and Singer, P., op.cit., pp. 15-17.
Northern Territory
Parliamentary Record, Debates, Thurs. 26 May 1988, p. 3420 and Thurs. 25 August
1988, p. 4012.
Adult Guardianship Act
ss. 15, 17-19.
The Act was renamed the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
in 1998 by the
Tribunals and Licensing Authorities (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1998
Tribunals and Licensing
Authorities (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1998 (Vic)
s. 117 and generally;
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
NSW Parliamentary Debates,
12 Nov. 1987, p. 15937.
Disability Services Act
The Guardianship Board was
renamed the Guardianship Tribunal with effect from 2 Feb. 1998. See
Guardianship Amendment Act 1997
Sch. 1 [2] and [3].
Guardianship Act 1987
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act 2009
Western Australia Parliament
Parliamentary Debates, 6 June 1990, p. 1913.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
State Administrative Tribunal (Conferral of
and generally.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
For a description of the Western
Australian system before the enactment of the
Guardianship and Administration
, see Carney, T. and Singer, P., pp. 28-29.
(1982) 43 ACTR
Australian Law Reform
Commission Report No. 52,
Guardianship and Management of Property
Fyshwick, Pirie Printers, 1989.
Ibid. p. 62.
Ibid. pp.8-10. See also
Carney, T. and Singer, P., pp. 8-15.
Guardianship and
Management of Property (Consequential Provisions) Act 1991(ACT)
Community Advocate Act
Public Advocate Act
repealed the
Community Advocate Act 1991(ACT)
Debates of the Legislative
Assembly for the ACT, 12 Sept. 1991, pp.3216-3222, at 3219.
See Explanation of Bill for
Guardianship and Administration (Mental Incapacity) Bill
Parliamentary Debates of South Australia, 1991-1992, Vol. 5 (6 May 1992, House
of Assembly) p. 4819 and second reading speech of
the Guardianship and
Administration Bill, Parliamentary Debates of South Australia, 1992-1993, Vol.
2 (30 March 1993, Legislative
Council) p. 1764.
Ibid. and Parliamentary
Debates of South Australia, 1992-1993, Vol. 2 (30 March 1993, Legislative
Council) p. 1765.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
ss. 25-27 and Parliamentary Debates of South
Australia, 1992-1993, Vol. 2 (30 March 1993, Legislative Council) pp. 1765 and
X ref to Ch on End.
Mental Health Act 1993
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
ss. 6,8 and
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Queensland Law Reform
Commission, Report No. 49,
Assisted and Substituted Decisions -
Decision-making by and for people with a decision-making disability
1996). For a description of the relevant law then existing in Queensland, see
Ch. 2 of the Report.
Powers of Attorney Act
ss. 126-127 and Ch. 7 generally.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
ss.173-174 and Ch. 8 generally.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (191 KB)
PDF format (94.8 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter