URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJl/2025/32.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:44:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Palmerlee, Henry --- "Taking Procedural Fairness Seriously: Structured Proportionality and Legislative Scrutiny" [2025] UNSWLawJl 32; (2025) 48(3) UNSW Law Journal 1006
I INTRODUCTION
II TAKING PROCEDURAL FAIRNESS SERIOUSLY
A Taking Procedural Fairness Seriously
B The Two Key Actors
1 Ministers
2 Parliamentary Scrutiny Committees
C Procedural Fairness in a Culture of Justification
D Three Justificatory Pathologies
E Interim Conclusion
III A JUSTIFICATORY CASE STUDY
A Part 6 of the ART Bill
B Executive Justification of Part 6: Seeking Balance
1 Statement of Compatibility
2 Attorney-General’s Correspondence with SSCSB
C Interim Conclusion
IV STRUCTURED PROPORTIONALITY AND LEGISLATIVE SCRUTINY
A Structured Proportionality
B Proportionality and Justification
1 Proportionality as a Justificatory Framework
2 The Value of a Consistent Approach
C Objections to Structured Proportionality in the Legislative Context
1 Partisanship Objection
2 Epistemic Objection
3 Capability Objection
V CONCLUSION
TAKING PROCEDURAL FAIRNESS SERIOUSLY: STRUCTURED
PROPORTIONALITY AND LEGISLATIVE SCRUTINY
HENRY PALMERLEE
This article argues that the Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of
Bills (‘SSCSB’) should use the analytic framework
of structured
proportionality to hold Ministers accountable for justifying laws which infringe
administrative law norms of procedural
fairness. While procedural fairness in
Australian public law has been primarily examined through the lens of judicial
review, this
article shifts the focus to Parliament –
specifically,
role of the
SSCSB. Through a case study on the Administrative
Review Tribunal Bill 2024 (Cth), this article illustrates the inadequacy of
ministerial justifications for legislative abrogation of procedural
fairness in administrative proceedings. Structured proportionality
is proposed
as a novel and valuable addition to a more robust scrutiny process. By demanding
rigorous justification based on structured
proportionality, the SSCSB can
enhance legislative practices and safeguard a fundamental common law right.
What is just ..., then, is what is proportionate.
–Aristotle,
Nicomachean
I INTRODUCTION
The right to be heard is a foundational principle of justice. Seneca declared
that ‘he who decides anything without having heard
the other side, though
he may decide rightly, by no means has acted
For Kautilya,
justice demanded that ‘[a] judge shall not ... drive away or unjustly
silence any litigant’.
Adam, notes Edelman J, was afforded a right of reply before the
With humanity’s
capacity to speak seems to come a burning desire to be heard.
Equally well-established is the Commonwealth Parliament’s largely
plenary legislative power to pursue its policy objectives
at the expense of
procedural fairness in administrative
It is therefore somewhat surprising that in Australian public law, procedural
fairness in government decision-making is primarily
conceptualised as an issue
of judicial review. Judges are tasked to articulate procedural fairness’
demands and protect its
remit. Very few scholars have approached procedural
fairness from a parliamentary angle.
As such, there is much to be gained – at both the explanatory and
normative levels – by supplementing our understanding
of procedural
fairness in the administrative state with consideration of Parliament’s
role in its maintenance. Specifically,
I examine what it means to take
procedural fairness seriously throughout the legislative process.
I argue that the Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills
(‘SSCSB’) should use the analytic framework of structured
proportionality to hold ministers accountable for justifying fairness-infringing
laws. This is a novel claim on two levels. Firstly,
no academic work to date has
addressed how the principle of procedural fairness is dealt with in the
legislative process, and the
demands that can and should be made of that
process’ key actors. Moreover, the link I make between structured
proportionality
and legislative justification has not been explored in the
institutional context of Commonwealth Parliament. Hence, although my ultimate
proposal can fairly be described as modest, it carries meaningful implications
– both in terms of its practical potential to
improve legislative
practice, and its contribution to the instantiation of Australian traditions of
political constitutionalism regarding
fundamental common law rights.
Four preliminary points will delimit the scope of my argument. Firstly,
‘procedural fairness’ refers to the hearing rule
of procedural
fairness (that a person is entitled to be heard before a decision affecting
their rights or interests is made) rather
than the more general definition that
includes the bias rule.
Secondly, I
deal only with procedural fairness in administrative
decision-making.
Thirdly, I am
concerned solely with committees that conduct
pre-legislative
scrutiny of
bills. Finally, I employ ‘structured proportionality’ as a broad
analytic framework, defined by the three
core requirements of suitability,
necessity, and proportionality
stricto sensu
. While I refer to various
courts’ and scholars’ perspectives on proportionality, my argument
does not rely on adopting
as exclusively true any particular formulation of the
framework, or precise weighting of its different elements.
Although procedural fairness is a venerable common law principle, it finds
enduring relevance in contemporary lawmaking. The hasty
legislative response to
NZYQ v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
for example,
imposed heavy limitations on the procedural fairness
afforded to irregular
Migration Amendment (Bridging Visa Conditions) Act 2023
natural justice does not apply to decisions to impose monitoring conditions on
Bridging (Removal Pending)
visa-holders;
and an applicant
seeking to have a monitoring condition removed is required to prove a negative
proposition (that they do not pose
a risk to the Australian community), without
any statutory criteria against which to establish their
It may well be wondered
whether this heavy-handed approach affords procedural fairness the importance it
I aim to show that greater respect for procedural fairness in the legislative
process is nevertheless possible. My objective is to
supplement two fields of
scholarship which to date have primarily concentrated on the judiciary:
Australian doctrinal work on procedural
fairness, and theoretical literature
investigating connections between proportionality and justification. By better
recognising Australia’s
parliamentary model of rights protection, my
legislative focus is appropriately attentive to local
To develop my argument, I contend in
that procedural fairness is a
rights-like concept that should be taken seriously as such in the legislative
process. To take procedural
fairness seriously means to afford it a measure of
qualitative priority over more basic legislative considerations. I identify two
key actors: ministers, who control and justify the content of bills; and
scrutiny committees, which play an important oversight role
by suggesting
amendments and seeking justification for drafting decisions. I contend that
ministerial justification of a bill, in
explanatory materials and in
correspondence with committees, is a critical element of taking procedural
fairness seriously in the
legislative process.
With the goalposts erected, I turn in
to an empirical question: do
ministers take procedural fairness seriously? Using a case study – part 6
of the Administrative
Review Tribunal Bill 2024
(Cth) (‘ART
Bill’), concerning review of intelligence and security decisions – I
suggest that reliance on an impressionistic
notion of ‘balance’
between procedural fairness and national security tends to produce anaemic
justification. Finally,
Part IV presents my case for the use of structured
proportionality by the SSCSB. I argue that the rigorous approach required by
proportionality is more likely to promote ministerial justification
of fairness-infringing bills than current practice.
PROCEDURAL FAIRNESS SERIOUSLY
I make two claims in this part – the first normative, the second
descriptive. Firstly, procedural fairness should receive a
qualitative priority in the legislative process, rather than being treated as
just another integer in the rough-and-tumble
of lawmaking. In other words,
procedural fairness should be taken seriously.
My second, descriptive claim is that courts cannot force legislators to take
procedural fairness seriously in this
a reality insufficiently
appreciated in Australian legal scholarship. I argue that taking procedural
fairness seriously requires
ministers to provide justification for
fairness-infringing laws before and during the parliamentary scrutiny
Procedural Fairness Seriously
Procedural fairness has deep salience in the contemporary administrative
state. As noted by Brennan J, a ‘large and increasing
variety of interests
[are] affected by the exercise of statutory powers’, rendering executive
decision-making a defining element
of the individual’s experience of state
This renders the grant of a fair hearing before such powers are exercised a
crucial element of modern good governance, for both instrumental
and intrinsic
reasons. On one level, as Megarry J’s timeless caution regarding
‘open and shut cases’ reminds us,
the grant of a fair hearing often
produces wiser judgments and better
More fundamentally,
procedural fairness is intrinsically important because it recognises the dignity
of the legal subject and their
ability to give an account of their
A person subject to
an administrative decision is a rational being capable of explaining themselves
and deserving of respect, not
These justifications, often intertwined in judicial dicta, have seen
procedural fairness become ‘hallowed by time [and] entrenched
jurisprudence’.
significance is illustrated by the onus of ‘almost nothing’ imposed
on an applicant seeking to demonstrate that a
denial of fairness was material
(and thus constituted jurisdictional
Moreover, fairness falls
under the protective umbrella of the principle of legality – the canon of
construction which dictates
that Parliament must use clear, unambiguous language
to infringe fundamental common law rights and
principles.
As Brendan Lim has argued, the principle of legality is essentially
It attaches to
Australia’s ‘basic common values and aspirations’ and demands
absolute clarity of intention before
courts will countenance their
infringement.
Procedural fairness is clearly a foundational element of Australian legal
practice, the reasons for which have been explored extensively
in existing
scholarship.
For my purposes,
the fundamental importance of procedural fairness supports a specific intuition:
that, because of its intrinsic
value, procedural fairness is entitled to the
sort of special attention commonly associated with rights. It is an aspect of a
well-being that has ‘qualitative priority over
considerations of utility’ but is nevertheless
non-absolute.
‘taking procedural fairness seriously’ as consistent shorthand for
this idea: that procedural fairness is
a rights-like concept that should be
given special priority in legislation over basic utilitarian and other
considerations.
Two important points of clarification are required here. The first is that
many laws do not contain express provisions regarding procedural
fairness. To
apply to a broad array of different administrative decisions, the content of
procedural fairness must necessarily be
flexible. As such, statutory or
contextual factors frequently influence procedural fairness without Parliament
having specifically
turned its mind to the
For example, procedural
fairness may be excluded by virtue of urgency rather than by express provisions
to that effect.
Similarly, the
factual contingencies of allegations made against a person frequently will
determine the notice period required to
enable them to ‘consider the
allegations ... and ... obtain material to rebut them’, rather than
prescribed statutory
The second point is that it would be a mistake to view the search for
legislative intention as invariably leaving courts with a passive,
Parliament’s
intention will frequently be incomplete or unclear, and it will fall to the
courts to perform the requisite exegesis
of that intention.
The result of these two matters is that not every situation in which
white-glove procedural fairness norms do not apply is the result
of a conscious
legislative decision. In most situations, Parliament is content to leave a close
examination of what fairness requires
to the courts. Parliament only makes
explicit decisions to limit procedural fairness in certain circumstances –
often regarding
politically sensitive topics like national security and
When such decisions are made, the principle of legality requires that the
intention to restrict procedural fairness be unavoidably
clear. It is this kind
of decision – where Parliament has sought
to attenuate
procedural fairness – in relation to which it is appropriate to refer to
‘taking procedural fairness
seriously’.
In the next section, I consider how the responsibility for ensuring that this
occurs rests in the hands of ministers and scrutiny
committees, not courts.
B The Two Key
The previous section concentrated primarily on how judges conceptualise
procedural fairness. However, I now show that legislative
power to abrogate
fairness is largely unconstrained by courts. Instead, the two actors who play
central roles in nurturing, or neglecting,
procedural fairness in legislation
are ministers, who oversee the drafting and introduction of bills (along with
associated extrinsic
materials), and scrutiny committees, who perform
independent evaluation of fairness-infringing legislation.
1 Ministers
Courts usually approach procedural fairness in two stages: does procedural
fairness apply in a statutory scheme; and if so, what does
fairness demand in
the circumstances? In the first ‘applicability’ step, courts will
honour an express legislative intention
for procedural fairness to have limited
application (or to be excluded entirely) in a statutory
Moreover, even if the
court finds that a decision-maker is bound by procedural fairness rules, their
character is chameleonic. This
is the second question, that of
‘content’. Here, the precise demands of procedural fairness are
recognised to be flexible
and adaptable to the statutory context – a
context determined by
Parliament.
As such, even if
fairness applies in a statutory scheme, Parliament plays the dominant role in
determining what the rule demands,
including reducing its content to
‘nothingness’.
This reality sits somewhat at odds with how Australian procedural fairness
scholarship concentrates primarily on judicial review of
administrative
Fairness-minded
academics have largely focused their attention on how courts seek to ensure that
procedural fairness is taken seriously,
with very few scholars considering
procedural fairness through a legislative lens. Sarah Moulds’ work on
post-legislative scrutiny
is the major exception. In various articles, she
highlights the value of post-legislative scrutiny for procedural fairness
case studies of the Djokovic visa affair, the Robodebt fiasco and
national security
legislation.
However, Moulds’ work focuses primarily on
-legislative
scrutiny. There has to date been no extended attention given to how Parliament
fairness-infringing laws – ie, the initial legislative
process, and the role played by scrutiny committees. My objective is
this important gap in our understanding of how the principle of procedural
fairness is dealt with in Australia.
Reference to ‘Parliament’ at large,
however, is imprecise. Although bills can be introduced by any member or
in practice it is generally only the government’s bills (or of
which the government approves) that will pass the lower
Within government, the
relevant minister oversees (from a high level) the drafting of a bill by the
Office of Parliamentary Counsel,
and of the associated extrinsic materials by
their department staff, before it is introduced into Parliament. To be sure,
clearly do not themselves draft bills or write explanatory memoranda,
and secretaries and departmental staff play a key role in generating
briefs, including different legislative options. Nevertheless, ministers control
and are ultimately responsible for the drafting
process. In referring to
ministers as key actors, I use the word as a metonym for the entire executive
drafting apparatus over which
the minister has final authority, consciously
conceiving of ‘the minister’ in a broader institutional setting
than as a natural person sitting behind a ministerial desk.
Once a bill is introduced into Parliament, its basic structure and mechanisms
are relatively resistant to
The government will take
minimal account of Opposition or crossbench views unless their votes are
required, and successful committee
amendments tend to be relatively minor and
As such, the
executive dominates the drafting, introduction and passage of law, giving
ministers a critical role in ensuring that
procedural fairness is taken
seriously throughout that
The following section
introduces the other key actor: scrutiny committees.
2 Parliamentary
Scrutiny Committees
The Commonwealth Parliament currently has three scrutiny committees: the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights (‘PJCHR’),
and the Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation
(‘SSCSDL’).
foreshadow detailed discussion below, although the PJCHR already employs
structured proportionality in its scrutiny of bills for
‘compatibility
international human rights are narrower in scope than common law norms of
procedural fairness.
will argue in Part IV that the SSCSB should
require ministers to
provide proportionality-oriented justification of fairness-infringing
legislation. As the SSCSDL does not undertake
pre-legislative scrutiny, which is
the focus of this article, it falls beyond the scope of my
The SSCSB’s non-partisan character is perhaps the defining
characteristic distinguishing it from the PJCHR. For one, the government
not have a casting vote in the
The SSCSB also undertakes
‘technical scrutiny’ of bills and legislative instruments. Since
technical scrutiny does not
assess the wisdom of government policy, the
Committee has a plausible claim to non-partisanship – a factor which
supports its
influence in the legislative
While inquiry-based committees often assess a bill’s substantive policy
merits with input from stakeholders, technical scrutiny
instead focuses instead
on enumerated principles which vary according to each committee’s
The SSCSB’s five
scrutiny principles ‘broadly reflect themes of good governance;
administrative fairness and accountability;
and parliamentary
propriety’.
Parliamentary scrutiny committees are important for my purposes because their
work helps pry the legislature apart from the executive.
The SSCSB’s
independence from the government is consistent with the Senate’s status as
a chamber of ‘review and
reflection’.
Moreover, the
establishment of the PJCHR is one example of a government enacting legislation
accountability.
Like Odysseus
bound to the mast, executive accountability regimes recognise that greater
wisdom often flows from voluntary self-restraint.
Scrutiny committees therefore
limit the extent to which ministers can simply roll legislation through
Parliament. This is not to
suggest that inquiry-based committees do not also
influence the legislative process – indeed, past empirical analysis has
these committees to play an important role in refining legislative
However, these
committees are often prone to divide along party
For example, in both inquiry-based committees which considered the ART Bill, the
Opposition and crossbench attached dissenting reports
or appendices to the
The SSCSB’s non-partisan (or at least, less overtly partisan) approach has
rendered it especially
influential.
Moreover, its enumerated scrutiny principles promote close consideration of
procedural fairness issues, making its work especially
relevant for my
The focus of this
article, therefore, will be on the SSCSB rather than inquiry-based
committees.
Hence, with ministers’ policy choices regarding procedural fairness
largely unconstrained by judicial review, scrutiny committees
assume a crucial
role in ensuring that fairness is taken seriously. The following section
demonstrates that promoting a ‘culture
of justification’ is a chief
means through which the committees perform this function. Before proceeding,
though, it should
be noted that this article’s argument likely applies to
any fundamental common law right that does not overlap with an area
constitutional doctrine. While the common law right to free speech gains partial
protection from legislative infringement via
the constitutionally implied
freedom of political
communication,
common law rights which do not map easily onto the
Constitution
like the freedom to depart and re-enter one’s own
– are in a similar
position to that described above regarding procedural fairness. I have
nevertheless chosen to concentrate
on procedural fairness because, as discussed
, it is a foundational element of Australian legal practice and is
central to controlling the broad statutory powers afforded to the
executive in
the modern administrative state. Focusing an article-length contribution on such
a crucial and basic right allows my
proposal’s practical importance to be
most clearly demonstrated. Hence, while further work could certainly enlarge the
of enquiry by considering the possible benefits of proportionality with
respect to other common law rights, the choice to concentrate
on procedural
fairness is consistent with my relatively modest, and primarily practical,
objectives in the present article.
C Procedural Fairness in
a Culture of Justification
The ‘culture of justification’ is a widely-used term in global
constitutional
It refers to the intuitively compelling idea that government decisions (both
legislative and executive) should be justified to citizens,
even if they are
In the legislative context, justification can be defined as explaining and
defending a law’s substantive wisdom to citizens.
The culture of
justification is a liberal concept in that it argues for legislation built on
persuasion, not coercion.
Scrutiny committees exist in part to promote such a
Their powers can
include requesting further explanation of a law’s wisdom from the relevant
calling for
departmental staff to attend as
and for departments
to produce documents.
functions encourage ministers to explain why a bill should be enacted in its
current state – in other words, to justify
their legislation.
The idea that legislative justification is a core part of taking rights
seriously is widely accepted. For one, justification increases
electoral accountability for rights-infringing decisions, subjecting them to the
‘superintendence of the
It also promotes thoughtfulness, requiring ministers to think deeply and
conscientiously about the moral assumptions that underpin
More fundamentally, justification encourages the reasonable disagreements about
rights that define a pluralist
Robust public
contestation about rights is, in Jeremy Waldron’s view, ‘the
possible sign
... that people take rights
seriously’.
Hence, while ‘taking procedural fairness seriously’ is a fuzzy
concept that is probably impossible to define through
a set of collectively
sufficient conditions, much scholarly work provides good reason to think that
justification is a core element
Committees are especially important in this context because courts play a
very limited role in extracting justification for fairness-infringing
the executive. The most that courts can do is demand clarity of language when
procedural fairness is abrogated, forcing
Parliament to ‘accept the
political cost’ thereof.
Provided clear language is used, though, courts have no power to demand that
ministers justify their legislative proposals.
The position is different where a common law principle coincides with a
constitutionally protected freedom. Take the implied freedom
of political
communication, which overlaps substantially with the common law principle of
free speech.
Courts demand
justification of laws which prima facie burden the implied freedom, requiring
the relevant government to make submissions
on the impugned law’s
legitimate purpose and proportionate character. By contrast, no constitutional
cause of action flows
from legislative restriction of procedural fairness
– meaning judges cannot extract justification from the executive for such
This focuses attention
even more squarely on the legislative process, giving the scrutiny bodies an
extremely important role in mediating
the interaction of procedural fairness and
competing policy objectives.
As such, the justificatory requirements associated with parliamentary
committees’ work cannot merely be given lip service by
Providing justification for fairness-infringing legislation is a crucial element
of taking procedural fairness seriously.
D Three Justificatory
Pathologies
Applying this standard in a meaningful way requires a definition of
‘justification’. I advance a negative standard –
explanation for a decision constitutes justification where it avoids the three
‘pathologies’ identified in this
The crucial starting point is that most policy problems have no single right
answer. The culture of justification is sensitive to
this reality and does not
require governments to locate an illusory ‘best’ decision. A
justifiable decision is simply
one that is rational and so can be understood by
The focus is on
non-arbitrariness, not right answers.
Nevertheless, justification demands robust reason-giving by
decision-makers.
doorman denying me entry to a nightclub. Stony-faced silence (although perhaps
the norm in such a situation) would not
constitute justification; nor,
importantly, would ‘I’m hungry’ or some other irrelevant
consideration. The mere
fact that reasons have been advanced for a decision does
not justify it.
By contrast, suppose the doorman says that I am too drunk to be admitted.
Although I might disagree about whether I am in fact too
drunk, I recognise that
excessive intoxication is a relevant reason to refuse entry to a nightclub, and
is a standard on which minds
might reasonably differ. However, our doorman is
not out of the justificatory woods yet, because a mere statement of conclusion
the reasons grounding his decision. By contrast, if the doorman notes
that I am slurring my words, swaying on my feet and struggling
to maintain eye
following a good-faith assessment of the
facts – irrespective of whether
I, the eager patron, would have made the same assessment.
I draw three points from this example. Firstly, justification of a decision
clearly requires something more than silence. The imposition
of will – no
matter whose – never itself creates a reason justifying that imposition.
Secondly, not every reason for
a decision is a
reason. The
doorman’s hunger could explain him going to buy a cheeseburger on his
break, but does nothing to illuminate why
he has refused me entry. Here,
relevance approximates the idea of ‘reciprocity’ used in other
Reasons for a decision are
relevant insofar as they are intelligible to persons bound by the decision.
Finally, a mere statement of conclusion cannot constitute a reason in the
thick sense that the culture of justification requires.
This requirement
resonates with the administrative law approach to statutory duties to give
reasons. Courts generally demand that
reasons be capable of ‘explain[ing]
in a reasonable and intelligible way the decision-maker’s justification
for its exercise
‘all-embracing ... statement of conclusion’ does not sufficiently
explain how a decision has been
Justification, therefore, avoids these three pathologies – giving no
reasons, giving irrelevant reasons, and giving conclusory
reasons. Although this
triad deliberately omits the Rawlsian view that public reasons must be premised
upon principles of justice
that any reasonable person could accept, it is
sufficient to rest on well-developed scholarly criticisms of John Rawls’
requirement
as irreconcilable with the extent of reasonable disagreement about
justice in a pluralist society.
This Part’s core normative claim was that procedural fairness is a
rights-like concept which requires special attention. At
a descriptive level,
ministers and scrutiny committees play a crucial role in influencing how
procedural fairness is treated in the
legislative process. As such, existing
scholarship’s focus on judicial review can be productively enlarged by a
focus on the
justification given by ministers for their bills. This process
operationalises the special attention which legislative decisions
fairness should attract.
JUSTIFICATORY CASE STUDY
In this Part, I examine a case study of ministerial engagement with
legislative scrutiny’s justificatory requirements. The case
study suggests
that pursuing a vague notion of ‘balance’ between a right and a
competing governmental objective can result
in unsatisfactory justification of
fairness-infringing legislation.
6 of the ART Bill
The ART Bill (which passed into law as the
Administrative Review Tribunal
(Cth) on 3 June 2024) replaced the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(‘AAT’) with the new Administrative Review Tribunal
(‘ART’). The Bill was designed to remedy what the Attorney-General
argued was a terminal decline in public trust in the
AAT caused by political
appointments.
A particularly memorable
headline read: ‘Tribunal Appointments:
“They Should Call It the ATM, Not the
While reception of the ART Bill was positive, at the time of writing no
academic attention has been devoted to part 6 of the
In broad terms, part 6
adjusted the ART’s process to recognise the sensitivity of national
security and law enforcement information
relevant to a
proceeding.
These adjustments exclude the obligation to give reasons for intelligence and
security decisions,
the responsible minister or Director-General of Security to issue a certificate
preventing access to evidence by the applicant
There is no requisite
state of satisfaction for issuing a certificate, and a certificate has mandatory
effect, giving the ART no
discretion as to whether the evidence ought to be
disclosed to the applicant. While part 6 largely replicated the AAT’s
Division procedures, it centralised a regime that previously operated
diffusely across five separate
It is a clear case of fairness-infringing legislation, potentially denying
applicants the opportunity to test and make submissions
on government
Given my focus on promoting transparent reason-giving and robust public
discourse about procedural fairness, a detailed case study
of deficient
justification is more appropriate than a purely theoretical approach, or broader
quantitative analysis. Case study methodology
has been favoured in parliamentary
scholarship by discourse-oriented authors, in whose work Statements of
Compatibility (‘SoC’)
and other justificatory documents are
themselves the object of analysis rather than an independent variable in a
broader consideration
of legislative treatment of
To supplement publicly
available information, I also filed freedom of information requests with the
Attorney-General’s Department
regarding the drafting of part
Since a case study’s explanatory power is necessarily limited, it is
important to locate a ‘critical case’ –
one that is likely to
either clearly confirm or falsify a
hypothesis.
Part 6 is a critical
case for this Part’s hypothesis (that current ministerial justification
for infringing procedural fairness
is unsatisfactory) because it is a highly
charitable account of justificatory practice. The ART Bill was a centrepiece of
the Albanese
Government’s accountability agenda, and the drafting process
involved extensive public and expert
consultation.
introduction, the Bill was then considered by four different parliamentary
committees.
If my hypothesis
concerns an alleged deficiency in justification, then taking justification at
its highest provides the best possible
opportunity for that hypothesis to be
Moreover, part 6 provides the sort of hard case in which the temptation not
to take procedural fairness seriously is greatest. Decisions
the right to procedural fairness, even if it is less administratively efficient
to do so, are easy to justify for the reasons discussed
above. It is when an
exercise of government power
with a protected interest like
procedural fairness that justification is most
significant limitations placed by part 6 on procedural fairness to protect
national security are an excellent case study
for how ministers justify hard
decisions. When push comes to shove, is procedural fairness taken seriously?
I argue in the following section that the Attorney-General’s
justification of part 6 was anaemic, characterised by the three
pathologies of
insufficient justification outlined above. I attribute this to the pursuit of an
imprecise and poorly-defined objective
of finding ‘balance’ between
procedural fairness and important national security interests.
B Executive
Justification of Part 6: Seeking Balance
Two scrutiny committees engaged with the ART Bill: the PJCHR and the SSCSB.
During the scrutiny process, the Attorney-General advanced
substantive
justification for part 6 on two occasions. The first was the Bill’s SoC
– a section in the Explanatory Memorandum
stating whether the Bill is
compatible with human
The second was in response to the SSCSB’s
Scrutiny Digest
raised concerns about the quality of justification provided for part 6 and
requested that the Attorney-General provide ‘a
comprehensive justification
for the rigid approach adopted for decisions made in the intelligence and
security jurisdiction of the
In both the SoC and his correspondence with the SSCSB, the Attorney-General
couched his justification of part 6 in terms of ‘balance’.
metaphor of balancing rights against national security is commonly used and has
been vigorously critiqued on both principled
and pragmatic
More broadly, balance is a shibboleth for ministers making rights-infringing
legislation, a catchphrase to indicate that the relevant
right has been
carefully considered and safeguarded to the extent possible while still
achieving the government
This section’s objective is to advance a novel critique of the balance
metaphor in the context of ministerial justification
of legislation. The problem
is not balance itself. Rather, the absence of a structured approach – a
set of necessary and sufficient
conditions for
appears to make it far too easy to poorly justify legislation.
1 Statement
of Compatibility
Only two paragraphs of the ART Bill’s SoC attempted to justify part
These paragraphs contend that
the limitation of procedural fairness is required to safeguard the public
interest in national security,
and that they are ultimately ‘carefully
balanced’ – a largely conclusory statement that obscures the
Attorney-General’s
underlying reasoning. The sole justification advanced
in support of part 6 was that proceedings in the Intelligence and Security
of the ART.
The President and
Deputy Presidents are all either current or former federal judges, or persons
with substantial expertise relevant
to the ART’s
However, without for a moment impugning the Tribunal’s expertise, its
composition is an irrelevant reason. For one, the High
Court is currently
closely divided on whether it is appropriate for federal judges to have
reference to secret evidence in court
proceedings.
Further, given
that many distinguished administrative lawyers are members of the AAT,
proceedings constituted without the President
or a Deputy President should not
be expected to be less rigorous or considered. Finally, although by training and
culture judges
are reliable independent adjudicators, they also tend to be at
their most deferential when questions of national security are
More generally, the foundation of the adversarial system is the principle
no matter the arbiter’s perceptive powers
, the best decision
will be made when parties have a chance to challenge one another’s
evidence – ‘one story is
good until another is
constitution is therefore an irrelevant reason (much like the nightclub
doorman’s statement of appetite), and
cannot serve as good justification
for a secret evidence regime. The SoC ultimately does little to show that part 6
provides ‘a
carefully balanced framework for people to seek independent
review of such decisions without compromising sensitive
information’.
2 Attorney-General’s
Correspondence with SSCSB
In his correspondence with the SSCSB, the Attorney-General first describes
how the imperatives of national security must be ‘balanced’
procedural fairness – once again invoking this catechism in place of
substantive justification. The responses then
given to the SSCSB’s various
questions about part 6 vary substantially in
A detailed justification is given for the blanket exclusion of an obligation
to give reasons for intelligence and security decisions.
The Attorney-General
sensibly points out that the information relied on in such decisions is
exclusively of a sensitive nature, and
that in some cases giving reasons would
require divulging security information to the very person who had been judged by
the relevant
agency to be a security
By contrast, when asked whether the Bill could be amended to include
additional mechanisms to provide for procedural fairness, the
Attorney-General
responded that the Bill adopts similar procedures to the
Administrative
Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth), and that stakeholders had not raised
concerns about those
provisions.
concerned submissions, however, is irrelevant to justifying the government
having rolled its arm over in drafting
It says nothing about whether legislative provisions strike the
‘appropriate balance’ – only that no one has complained
them. Further, members of civil society may simply have lacked the time and
resources to make submissions; or been wary of
impugning the Security Division
– the only tribunal-based accountability mechanism for organisations like
the Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation – for fear that it would
be marginalised or shuttered.
If ‘the most important reform of the federal system of administrative
review for decades’ is not the time to consider
the wisdom of a law de
novo, when is?
Finally, there was one important decision for which the Attorney-General
justification: the absence of a special advocate regime in
the ART Bill. A special advocate, or special counsel, is a security-cleared
lawyer who is granted access to classified or sensitive material that cannot be
disclosed to the non-government party and their
The special advocate
acts in the interests of the non-government party insofar as they test evidence
placed before the court or tribunal,
but they do not take instructions from that
party, nor communicate with them regarding the secret
While a special
advocate is certainly not a silver bullet against intelligence agency overreach,
these regimes have been adopted
as best practice in several countries grappling
with the difficult balance between national security and procedural
However, when pressed by the SSCSB on why it chose not to adopt this best
practice model, the Attorney-General simply stated that
‘the Government
will not be considering a special advocate scheme in the Tribunal at this
success of special advocate schemes in other contexts, the absence of
justification for this drafting choice is a notable
refusal to engage with the
justificatory requirements of the scrutiny process.
This section has endeavoured to demonstrate the lacklustre quality of
justification advanced by the Attorney-General on behalf of
part 6. Although
some decisions – like the exclusion of an obligation to give reasons
– were more robustly justified,
this was the exception rather than the
rule. For the most part, the arguments made in the SoC and subsequent
correspondence were
conclusory or irrelevant statements about the supposedly
ideal ‘balance’ that part 6 achieves.
By pursuing an impressionistic target with no specific requirements, the
Attorney-General advanced justification that at times lacks
logic, structure,
and intelligibility. With no clear criteria for establishing that a decision is
‘balanced’, it becomes
all too easy to deploy poor-quality
justification. This claim is best demonstrated by considering the
counterfactual. In the next
and final Part IV, I argue that justification would
be improved by the SSCSB applying a clear set of rational conditions to
fairness-infringing
legislation.
IV STRUCTURED
PROPORTIONALITY AND LEGISLATIVE SCRUTINY
Enter the ‘export triumph of German jurisprudence’: structured
proportionality.
Proportionality has spread rapidly as a tool to balance competing rights and
interests, predominantly in relation to judicial review
of legislation. In this
Part, I argue that Senate scrutiny committees should require fairness-infringing
legislation to be justified
using the structured proportionality framework. This
would encourage ministers, who oversee the drafting and justification process,
to provide the sort of justification that I identified above as a condition of
taking procedural fairness seriously.
Although judges and scholars have drawn a strong link between justification
use of structured proportionality, scant attention has
been given to the use of proportionality as a
legislative
Moreover, the only
Australian source to have considered the idea that committees other than the
PJCHR might consistently apply structured
proportionality is the Australian Law
Reform Commission in a 2015 report on traditional rights and
Hence, despite
being modest in practical terms, my proposal presents a novel means of enhancing
parliamentary practice in respect
of a foundational common law principle.
In practical terms, this might mean amending the
Standing Orders and Other
Orders of the Senate
Senate Standing Orders
establishing the committee to define its role with reference to the
proportionality criteria. The SSCSB could also issue
guidance notes requiring
proportionality-oriented justification of
employ proportionality
terminology in its correspondence with ministers, or request that existing
proportionality resources prepared
by the Attorney-General’s Department be
Since the Committee
lacks coercive power to demand
justification, adopting all these tactics
may well be necessary to maximise the chance of ministerial compliance.
A Structured
Proportionality
At its core, structured proportionality is a ‘set of rules determining
the necessary and sufficient conditions’ for a
limitation on a protected
right to be
permissible.
Different formulations of structured proportionality have between three to five
However, they all
share the familiar requirements that a rights-limiting law must be:
1. appropriate:
the means adopted are rationally connected to the
desired objective;
2. necessary: those means are the least-infringing manner of achieving the
objective; and
3. proportionate
stricto senso
: the beneficial effects of infringing
the right outweigh the negative consequences.
The ‘balance’ approach discussed above will often overlap with
proportionality
stricto senso
. As such, I consider a
‘structured’ application of proportionality to require these three
core steps at minimum. The
‘reasonably appropriate and adapted’ test
in Australian constitutional law, for example, does not constitute structured
proportionality.
Importantly, despite the substantial debate it has generated in Australia,
proportionality need not carry controversial theoretical
baggage. While scholars
like Robert Alexy view proportionality as an overarching legal doctrine
connected closely to particular theories
of rights, the High Court in
v New South Wales
explicitly endorsed the view of proportionality as an
analytic tool, not a universal
This distinction seems to have been a disavowal of the slavish application to
every case of each step of the structured test. Since
structured proportionality
has been criticised for its rigidity, the majority may have wished to clarify
that each element can be
afforded varying attention in different factual
matrices. Hence, proportionality ought not require any sweeping ontological
structured proportionality can be relied on simply as a useful
B Proportionality and
Justification
This section develops my central contention: that the SSCSB should use the
analytic framework of structured proportionality to hold
ministers accountable
for justifying fairness-infringing laws. That argument has two constituent
claims: first, that a framework
developed and used in judicial review of
constitutional rights could improve the tenor of ministerial justification;
second, that
proportionality would have a greater impact if applied by both
pre-legislative scrutiny committees, rather than only the PJCHR.
1 Proportionality as
a Justificatory Framework
Comparative constitutional scholars recognise a strong connection between
structured proportionality and legislative justification,
‘[p]roportionality ... is essentially a requirement of
justification’.
relationship is also appreciated in Australian judicial review, with the two
concepts frequently intertwined in the High Court’s
constitutional review
legislation.
I contend that translating court-focused ideas about justification and
proportionality to the parliamentary realm would help to mitigate
justificatory pathologies identified
Firstly, by setting a clear set of requirements, structured proportionality
brings into sharper relief a complete absence of reasons
for a decision. This is
a straightforward proposition – more detailed expectations of the reasons
given in SoCs and ministerial
correspondence will render more obvious the
absence of material addressing those expectations. Take the
Attorney-General’s
refusal to give reasons for not including a special
advocate regime in part 6. While perhaps this refusal is already apparent to
conscientious reader, a one-line response in correspondence that otherwise
advances structured, step-by-step proportionality
analysis would be an extremely
obvious failure of justification. To the extent that ministers wish publicly to
respect parliamentary
committees, requesting structured proportionality analysis
would make it more difficult for ministers to slip their evasion under
Moreover, proportionality helps to prescribe which reasons are relevant in
the sense described above.
serves as a logical ‘argumentation framework’ within which the only
cogent reasons are those which prove that a measure
is suitable, necessary, and
proportionate.
Other reasons are irrelevant, like the fact that part 6 provides for special
composition of tribunals hearing sensitive matters.
Since this justification
does nothing to show that part 6 is the minimally impairing option, or that its
benefits outweigh its costs,
it would find no place in structured
proportionality-style justification. Irrelevant reasons will either be excluded
or, as with
an absence of reasons, will stick out as obviously contorted or
Finally, and most importantly, proportionality eschews conclusory reasoning.
It demands that the reasons for a decision be transparent
and detailed. The
virtue of proportionality in a justificatory context is that it contains no
substantive moral imperatives, but
nevertheless demands candour from ministers
This idea of
transparency has been crucial to the High Court’s endorsement of
structured proportionality in constitutional
review. Justice Susan Kiefel (as
her Honour then was, writing extra-curially) identified conclusory reasoning as
a vice of unstructured,
all-in balancing reasoning that can be remedied through
a more rigorous approach.
Such a ‘refusal to countenance ... hidden grounds’ of reasoning
seems equally desirable in legislating as it is in
By demanding justification, a proportionality approach would better highlight
a bill’s core moral issues – for example,
whether secret evidence
regimes and mandatory ex parte proceedings have any place in a liberal
There is clear
complementarity with the idea, discussed above, that justification is important
because it respects reasonable pluralist
disagreement about rights. A framework
that requires value judgments about right and justice to be articulated drives
the sort of
good-faith debate that deliberative democrats identify as critically
important in the justificatory
There are echoes here with Adrienne Stone’s foundational work on the
implied freedom of political communication, in which she
argued that applying a
proportionality framework inevitably requires making value
judgements.
Although Stone
was critiquing the High Court’s devotion to legalism in articulating the
standard of review to be applied, our
points are similar: proportionality
reasoning is inherently value-laden. It brings to the surface the
‘contestable and contingent’
value judgments that underpin
legislative decisions, rather than permitting ministers to ‘conceal ...
[the] choices that in
2 The Value of a
Consistent Approach
My second claim is that there is value in a consistent application of
structured proportionality by any committee conducting pre-legislative
of a fairness-infringing bill. Since the PJCHR already employs proportionality
in its scrutiny (albeit not usually in a
clearly structured manner), I must
suggest reasons as to why this practice has been insufficient to promote
substantive justification
of bills that abrogate the right to procedural
fairness. There are two broad answers: the PJCHR’s relatively narrow remit
procedural fairness, and the unique attributes of each scrutiny
Firstly, the PJCHR’s orientation towards international human rights
norms does not cover the full range of administrative decisions
administrative law rules of procedural fairness apply. There are four provisions
of the international human rights instruments
within the PJCHR’s remit
that implicate procedural
fair trial and fair
hearing rights;
guarantees in criminal
proceedings;
procedural rights regarding the expulsion of
and the right to
challenge the lawfulness of
The broadest of these fairness-related rights is article 14(1) of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
’), which relevantly provides for equality before
courts and tribunals and fair hearings in ‘suits at law’. However,
‘suit at law’ has historically been interpreted to exclude many
administrative decisions or
Similarly, although article 9(4) of the
provides for a right to
challenge the lawfulness of detention in a court, such a challenge is a much
narrower concept than merits
review of a preventative detention order through
The upshot is that international human rights concerning procedural fairness
are almost certainly narrower than administrative law
norms, even if the precise
difference is presently
Proportionality
scrutiny by the PJCHR, therefore, is likely too narrowly framed to call
ministers to account for
infringements of procedural fairness in the
thicker administrative law sense discussed in Part II. This might help explain
PJCHR’s report on the ART Bill was merely advisory, but the SSCSB
sought further justification from the Attorney-General. If
proportionality is likely to produce better justification, it seems desirable
that all pre-legislative scrutiny of fairness-infringing
bills employs the
methodology – not just that undertaken by the PJCHR.
This leads to my second point: that each committee is likely to contribute to
the justificatory process in a different way. The outcome
of my proposal is not
that we now twin PJCHRs, but that we have two committees – each with
different ‘membership, functions,
powers [and] priorities’ –
scrutinising a bill using the sophisticated analytical tool of
proportionality.
As discussed
above, the SSCSB is known generally to operate in a more bipartisan manner than
the PJCHR, meaning its suggested amendments
tend to garner broader support in
Parliament.
Both committees
would bring their own brand of influence and expertise to bear on encouraging
ministers to take procedural fairness
seriously through use of structured
proportionality.
Further, since they lack coercive powers, committees are more likely to have
an incremental, normative impact on departmental practice
pre-introduction stage than they are to win a post-introduction showdown with
the government. With this in mind, consistency
conceivably makes
ministers’ jobs
, not harder. If expectations of the
justification required for fairness-infringing legislation are consistent
between committees,
the requirements of the minister and their staff are clearer
and more uniform across interaction with both
committees.
As in life more
generally, being provided with a clear set of expectations almost invariably
makes it easier to perform a task correctly.
A clear, consistent requirement of
proportionality analysis from all committees would be one way to influence
pre-introduction practice
by ministers and departments.
These reasons help to answer the objection that it might be just as easy to
ignore multiple committees as it is to ignore the PJCHR.
This objection depends
to an important degree on what my proposal is
By all accounts,
it replaces a system in which committees are largely unsuccessful at causing
procedural fairness – and rights
more generally – to be taken
My argument is a
modest expansion of the way proportionality is already used by Parliament, but
seems likely to entice at least
greater degree of executive buy-in
than has occurred to date.
At this point, it is appropriate to acknowledge the optimistic account of
government implicit in my argument. A sceptic may well have
some unanswered
questions. Will devious politicians learn and mimic, like lyrebirds, the
language of proportionality to couch their
decisions in ‘a justification
that [merely]
intelligible’?
Surely ministers would endeavour to evade justifying their bills to avoid
increasing their electoral risk exposure? This sceptic
might subscribe to what
Judith Shklar famously called the liberalism of fear: the apprehension that
‘agents of government will
behave lawlessly and brutally in small or big
ways most of the time unless they are prevented from doing
I am sympathetic to this view, especially as it might from time to time
reflect the illiberal tendencies of recent Australian
governments.
Nevertheless, an
article about legislation would not get very far on a view of legislators as
essentially power-hungry and
I instead follow a
more optimistic path, answering Waldron’s clarion call for faith in the
dignity of legislation.
account of ministers is not as ‘rash and inexperienced
work[people]’,
conscientious, well-meaning individuals who genuinely wish to provide strong
justification for law but sometimes come up short.
Such behavioural change will
inevitably take time and proceed unevenly, but the strong liberal tradition of
executive self-accountability
discussed above gives us reason to think that
change is possible. Hence, while my perspective may be optimistic, it is not
My conclusion thus arrives in the same place as critics of balance who favour
proportionality, but takes a very different
The exercise of
balancing is not in itself a problem – after all, proportionality is
essentially a formalised, structured approach
to balancing competing interests.
The issue is rather that a search for balance is illusory if there is no way to
assess whether
the destination has been reached. In place of balance, I have
argued that application of structured proportionality by the SSCSB
would promote
better ministerial justification of legislation. The following section considers
three objections to this argument.
C Objections
to Structured Proportionality in the Legislative Context
There is no need to open Pandora’s box by attempting to defend
structured proportionality against any possible objection. I
suspect that it is
relatively uncontroversial to assume that there is a justifiable case for
using proportionality to analyse legislation that infringes
justiciable rights. I have already considered above the objection that
proposal is unlikely to result in meaningful improvement to the status quo.
Here, I highlight three further objections to my claim
that the SSCSB should
encourage ministers to justify their decisions in proportionality terms: one
practical objection regarding
the risk of increasing committee partisanship, and
two related to what some commentators view as the highly legalistic nature of
structured proportionality reasoning,
1 Partisanship
The first objection is that applying structured proportionality could
undermine the ‘technical scrutiny’ methodology that
underpins the
SSCSB’s non-partisan approach. If structured proportionality requires
ministers to be explicit about the value
judgments underpinning government
policy, its application by scrutiny committees could spark open political
disagreements. Such disagreements
would pierce the veil of non-partisanship that
has allowed the SSCSB to remain consistently
influential.
While it is impossible to predict committee members’ future conduct,
technical scrutiny is deeply entrenched in committees’
culture, and has
proven capable of adapting over time. Technical scrutiny is not a formal
requirement – the words appear nowhere
Senate Standing
. Rather, the approach has been developed and embraced by successive
members over many decades.
Moreover, technical scrutiny is not a fragile relic that would be destroyed by
any slight alteration. The
Senate Standing Orders
allow committees
flexibility, in that they do not prescribe a specific method of scrutiny.
Despite the Senate committees having used
this flexibility to take an
increasingly ‘robust approach’ to their work, the ethos of technical
scrutiny has stood the
In recent years, it has been explicitly recognised that the technical approach
is ‘vitally important’ to the SSCSB’s
ongoing influence in the
legislative process.
in contrast to the PJCHR, the SSCSB does not consider the binary
‘compliance/non-compliance with human rights’
distinction that could
encourage division along party lines. With technical scrutiny’s provenance
and durability in mind, ‘extravagant
use’ of structured
proportionality to agitate political issues, in a manner that undermines the
SSCSB’s influence and
non-partisanship, seems
2 Epistemic
Alternatively, we might be sceptical of proportionality on epistemic grounds.
One formulation of this objection is that proportionality
fosters a ‘cult
of rationality’, a mistaken belief that ‘weighing and balancing
brings us (closer) to what is really
Legalistic methods
of reasoning should not be relied on as panacean solutions to any moral or
practical quandary, because they privilege
the ‘technicalia of legal
argument’ over important moral and political
principles.
However, structured proportionality is only vulnerable to this objection so
long as it is tethered to the mores of legal argumentation.
It is true, for
example, that adherence to precedent – an accrual of datapoints that must
be cited, analogised and distinguished
– can exert an ossifying effect on
proportionality analysis. However, this is a wholesale criticism of the common
law method,
not of proportionality. It seems epistemically uncontroversial for a
committee to note that a legislative proposal is inconsistent
approaches to an issue, so long as this forms only one part of its overall
assessment of a case.
Robert Oppenheimer described it, ‘analogy is inevitable in human
Hence, freed
from the contingencies of common law method, proportionality’s general
applicability seems significantly less
contentious.
Waldron has advanced a different formulation of the epistemic objection,
criticising overreliance on judicial modes of reasoning in
relation to
Judges, he argues,
have no particular skill for deliberating about rights in the way that a
Herculean account of the judicial enterprise
In this way, Waldron
problematises the idea that ‘juridifying issues of principle improves the
tenor of public
However, this opposition to the exaltation of judges as moral reasoners stems
in large part from the concept of constitutionally enshrined,
justiciable rights
– the idea that, to be meaningful, rights debates must centre around
judges ‘quibbling about how to
interpret ... some sacred
The tension
seems to fall away when we consider
legislatures
thinking about rights,
even if they are applying modes of reasoning that originated in courts. I
suspect Waldron’s suspicion
regarding rights to be closely tied to his view of judicial review as
fundamentally illegitimate,
rather than a blanket belief that any technique of
legal reasoning is epistemically
The point of addressing Waldron’s epistemic objection in this somewhat
oblique way is not to score cheap points. Rather, I wish
to show that thinking
legislative
contexts mitigates many of the
criticisms levelled at proportionality in the
realm. In other
words, by not claiming a universal explanatory value for proportionality, it is
largely possible to avoid what is
now a rather sterile theoretical debate.
Although this does not dismiss the more formal epistemic objections to
proportionality (for
incommensurability)
is possible here is to advert to other scholars’ well-argued positions
supporting proportionality’s rationality
and logical
3 Capability
One final objection requires attention: that legalistic proportionality
be applied by those who are not legally trained. This
objection proceeds on a Cokean view of the law as a hierophantic exercise in
‘artificial reason’ entirely inaccessible to those unversed in its
As such, the
faculties of legal reasoning required to apply the proportionality framework
mean that it could not be meaningfully
applied by ministers and committees to
the project of legislative justification.
Specifically in the case of the ART Bill, the point is moot because the Bill
originated in the Attorney-General’s Department
(in which many staff are
highly legally trained). To confront the objection more generally, however,
proportionality does not carry
as much ‘legalistic’ baggage as might
initially be suspected. As a frame for applied reasoning about rights,
proportionality
provides practical grounding for debates that (as the
theoretical perspectives alluded to throughout this article demonstrate) could
otherwise easily proceed at a completely inaccessible level of
abstraction.
Proportionality,
argues Mattias Kumm, is ‘largely an exercise of general practical
reasoning’ rather than cabalistic
For example, the necessity requirement – that the
least-rights-infringing means of achieving the relevant governmental objective
be adopted – derives from the economic concept of Pareto
optimality.
Similarly, Alexy
uses the foundational microeconomic concept of diminishing marginal utility to
different rights and government
objectives.
While it should
not be thought of as a general policy tool, proportionality nevertheless shares
practical reasoning structures with
methods of policy analysis. Its broad,
factually-oriented questions eschew the ‘interpretative
that plague
other areas of law in favour of empirical, factual
An objector who remains unconvinced of proportionality’s relative
practicality must also confront empirical evidence that both
legislatures and
lay-people are eminently capable of understanding and applying proportionality
Hence, even if
proportionality is a legalistic frame of analysis, it seems inappropriately
pessimistic to place such reasoning beyond
the capacity of ministers and
committees.
The concerns considered here are certainly not exhaustive. Perhaps imposing
greater justificatory demands on government would undesirably
clog the arteries
of legislative efficiency. These objections are, however, left for another day.
My goal in this section has been
to demonstrate how a non-dogmatic view of
proportionality allows it to be seen for what it is: a valuable tool for
justifying decisions,
both in courts
legislatures.
V CONCLUSION
I have argued that procedural fairness ought to be taken seriously in the
legislative process. For this to occur, the SSCSB should
employ structured
proportionality to hold ministers accountable for justifying fairness-infringing
legislation. This will not only
improve parliamentary scrutiny processes but
also will have a positive impact on ministerial attention to justification in
the pre-introduction
In relation both to domestic work on procedural fairness and comparative
literature on justification and proportionality, I contend
that a much greater
focus on legislation is required in the Australian context. If strong courts
tasked with enforcing justificatory
obligations emanated in part from
Europe’s deep post-bellum suspicion of populism, a legislative emphasis is
consistent with
the ascendancy of popular sovereignty in Australian
constitutionalism.
of thinking about immutable values like procedural fairness and reason-giving
are required as the common law tradition
finds its way in the world of
contemporary administrative governance.
I have endeavoured to avoid the universalising claims that sometimes rally
critics against proportionality. More broadly, no matter
our aspirations for the
legislative process, realpolitik must inevitably temper lofty idealism.
Nevertheless, structured proportionality
could be expected to result in
significantly better justification of fairness-infringing legislation. If we are
to be ruled by thoughtful
law, law that take procedural fairness seriously, then
proportionality should be given a part to play.
* BPPE/LLB (University Medal) (ANU). This article originated as a supervised
Honours thesis in Law, and I am grateful to Professor
Leighton McDonald for his
patient assistance and mentorship. I also benefited greatly from the suggestions
of other scholars, practitioners,
and friends, as well as the two anonymous
reviewers. I thank all of them for their generosity and insight.
Nicomachean
, tr Roger Crisp (Cambridge University Press, rev ed, 2014) 85
<https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600514>.
Costa (Oxford University Press, 1973) 29
<https://doi.org/10.1093/actrade/9780198721352.book.1> [tr author].
Arthashastra
, tr LN Rangarajan (Penguin Books, 1992) 352.
BVD17 v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] HCA 34
(2019) 268 CLR 29
The situation differs in
Chapter III courts due to limitations stemming from the principle in
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 189 CLR 51.
International Finance Trust Co Ltd
v New South Wales Crime Commission
(2009) 240 CLR 319
, 348 (French CJ).
This restricted definition is
appropriate for my legislative focus because, while it is theoretically possible
for Parliament to
exclude the bias rule in statutes, such exclusions are very
uncommon: Robin Creyke et al,
Control of Government Action: Text, Cases and
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 5
Cf in judicial
decision-making.
(2023) 280 CLR 137.
Migration Amendment (Bridging Visa Conditions) Act 2023
Bridging Visa Conditions Act
’) was enacted in just two
Bridging Visa Conditions
(n 8) sch 1 item 4, inserting
Migration Act 1958
Migration Act
Bridging Visa Conditions
(n 8) sch 1 item 4, inserting
Migration Act
76E(3)–(4).
See, eg, concerns raised in
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills, Parliament of Australia,
Scrutiny Digest
(Digest No 15 of 2023, 29 November 2023) 18–20. The
High Court has recently held in
YBFZ v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship
and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 40
(2024) 99 ALJR 1
that certain elements of the
Bridging Visa Conditions Act
(n 8) were unconstitutional. However, this
decision was based on the punitive nature of visa conditions and the associated
Chapter III jurisprudence, rather than the absence of procedural
fairness in the Act.
George Williams and Lisa
Burton, ‘Australia’s Exclusive Parliamentary Model of Rights
Protection’
(2013) 34(1)
Statute Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.1093/slr/hms048>. On attention to local context in
comparative public law, see, eg, Cheryl Saunders, ‘Towards
Constitutional Gene Pool’
(2009) 4(3)
National Taiwan University Law
Beyond insisting that
derogations be irresistibly clear: see below n 22 and accompanying text.
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
159 CLR 550
John v Rees
Osborn v The
Parole Board
[2013] UKSC 61
[2014] AC 1115
, 1149 (Lord Reed JSC).
Jeremy Waldron, ‘How
Law Protects Dignity’
(2012) 71(1)
Cambridge Law Journal
<https://doi.org/10.1017/S0008197312000256>.
(Brennan J).
See especially
v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 26
(2022) 276 CLR 80
, 123 [93] (Edelman J).
Potter v Minahan
[1908] HCA 63
(1908) 7 CLR 277
, 304 (O’Connor J) (‘
Brendan Lim, ‘The
Normativity of the Principle of Legality’
[2013] MelbULawRw 17
(2013) 37(2)
University Law Review
Stephen Gageler,
‘Legislative Intention’
[2015] MonashULawRw 1
(2015) 41(1)
Monash University Law
, 16. Not every administrative law norm rises to this level of
importance. For example, there is no general right to receive reasons
administrative decision:
Public Service Board (NSW) v Osmond
, 662 (Gibbs CJ). Similarly, the non-fettering principle does not create
a right to have one’s case considered completely from
first principles:
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs [No 2]
(1979) 2 ALD
In addition to preceding
citations, see Ian Holloway,
Natural Justice and the High Court of Australia:
A Study in Common Law Constitutionalism
(Ashgate, 2002).
Jeremy Waldron,
‘Rights in Conflict’ (1989) 99(3)
<https://doi.org/10.1086/293094>. In other words, procedural fairness is
‘resistant to trade-offs, but not completely
so’: James Griffin,
On Human Rights
(Oxford University Press, 2008) 76
<https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199238781.001.0001>.
Jules L Coleman,
‘Taking Rights Seriously, by Ronald M Dworkin’
(1978) 66(4)
California Law Review
, 913 <https://doi.org/10.2307/3479972>.
To be clear, despite adapting Roland Dworkin’s terminology, I do not
his account of rights as ‘trumps’.
(Mason J), 612 (Brennan J).
South Australia
[2004] FCAFC 164
(2004) 136 FCR 259
, 285 (Finn J);
Re Hatfield and Comcare
[2010] AATA 848
, [65]–[66] (Senior Member Creyke).
Ansell v Wells
[1982] FCA 186
(1982) 43 ALR 41
, 62 (Lockhart J).
See Gageler (n 22) 7
Migration Act
(n 9) vol 1 pt 2 div 3 sub-div AB.
This also refers to
amendments designed to preclude creative judicial interpretation. For example,
amendments to the
Migration Act
(n 9) were introduced immediately
following the High Court’s decision against the Commonwealth in
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Miah
’). These amendments, which purported to
exhaustively codify applicants’ right to procedural fairness, were
a response’ to
Saeed v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2010] HCA 23
(2010) 241 CLR 252
, 263 [26] (French CJ, Gummow,
Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel JJ).
Provided clear language is
used: see, eg,
Leghaei v Director-General of Security
[2007] FCAFC 37
(2007) 241 ALR 141
145–7 [43]–[55] (Tamberlin, Stone and Jacobson JJ). But see the High
Court’s interpretive approach in
(Brennan J). See also
National Companies and Securities Commission v News
[1984] HCA 29
(1984) 156 CLR 296
, 326 (Brennan J); Mark Aronson, Matthew Groves
and Greg Weeks,
Judicial Review of Administrative Action and Government
(Thomson Reuters, 6
ed, 2016) 512.
See cases cited in
Leghaei v Director-General of Security
[2005] FCA 1576
, [51]–[54]
(Madgwick J) (‘
Leghaei FCA
’). See above Part II(A) for
further discussion of express provision for procedural fairness and judicial
interpretation.
See, eg, Anthony Gray,
‘The Common Law and the
Constitution
as Protectors of Rights in
(2010) 39(2)
Common Law World Review
156 <https://doi.org/10.1350/clwr.2010.39.2.0201>; Robert Lindsay,
‘Natural Justice: Procedural Fairness
“Now We See through a Glass
[2010] AIAdminLawF 22
[2010] (63)
; Matthew Groves,
‘Exclusion of the Rules of Natural Justice’
[2013] MonashULawRw 11
(2013) 39(2)
University Law Review
; Matthew Groves, ‘The Unfolding Purpose of
(2017) 45(4)
Federal Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.1177/0067205X1704500408>; Nicholas Chen,
‘Procedural Fairness in Judicial Review of Migration Decisions:
Evolution of a Fundamental Common Law Principle’ (JSD Thesis, University
of Sydney, 2015).
On Djokovic, see Sarah
Moulds and Anja Pich, ‘Reviewing Executive Decision-Making in Emergencies:
Time to Consider a More
Systematic Approach to Post Legislative Scrutiny in
[2022] UTasLawRw 9
(2022) 41(2)
University of Tasmania Law Review
66–71, 77–8. On Robodebt, see Sarah Moulds, ‘Democratic and
Judicial Review of Enacted Laws in Australia: A Case
Study of the Rights
Scrutiny Work of Australian Parliamentary Committees’ (2021) 51(hors
Revue générale de droit
<https://doi.org/10.7202/1085789ar>. On national security, see Sarah
Committees of Influence: Parliamentary Rights Scrutiny and
Counter-terrorism Lawmaking in Australia
(Springer, 2020) ch 5
<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-4350-0> (‘
Committees of
Putting aside edge cases of
minority government.
Julie Debeljak and Laura
Grenfell, ‘Diverse Australian Landscapes of Law-Making and Human Rights:
Contextualising Law-Making
and Human Rights’ in Julie Debeljak and Laura
Grenfell (eds),
Law Making and Human Rights: Executive and Parliamentary
Scrutiny across Australian Jurisdictions
(Thompson Reuters, 2020) 1, 3.
See Moulds,
of Influence
(n 36) 169–70.
Noting, however, the
varying role the Senate will play depending on seat distribution: Andrew Gibbons
and Rhonda Evans, ‘The
Executive Lawmaking Agenda: Political Parties,
Prime Ministers, and Policy Change in Australia’ (2023) 51(2)
Studies Journal
307, 311–12
<https://doi.org/10.1111/psj.12503>.
The SSCSDL was known as the
Senate Standing Committee on Regulations and Ordinances until 2019.
Human Rights
(Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act 2011
See Part IV(B)(2).
The SSCSDL scrutinises
delegated legislation after it has already been enacted by the executive and
taken legal effect. Since its
recommendations concern the disallowance of this
existing delegated legislation, rather than the passage of a bill, the
role does not constitute pre-legislative scrutiny.
Senate, Parliament of
Standing Orders and Other Orders of the Senate
(July 2025)
ords 24(4), (6)
<https://www.aph.gov.au/-/media/05_About_Parliament/52_Sen/523_PPP/Standing_Orders_2015/StandingOrders.pdf>
Senate Standing Orders
’). Cf Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 26 July 2022, 30–1 (Anthony Burke,
Leader of the House).
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into the Future
Role and Direction of the Senate Scrutiny of Bills Committee
(Final Report,
May 2012) 20–3 (‘
Future Role and Direction
’). Partisan
politics tend to intrude more obviously into the PJCHR’s work, perhaps
owing to the value-laden nature of
human rights and the casting vote held by the
government Chair. On the growth of partisanship in PJCHR, see Adam Fletcher,
Australia’s Human Rights Scrutiny Regime: Democratic Masterstroke or
Mere Window Dressing?
(Melbourne University Press, 2018) ch 4
<https://doi.org/10.2307/jj.5371947> (‘
Democratic Masterstroke or
Mere Window Dressing?
I follow Moulds in using
the term ‘inquiry-based committees’ to refer to committees such as
the House Standing Committee
on Social Policy and Legal Affairs, and the Senate
Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee: see Moulds,
Committees of Influence
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills, Submission No 150 to Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Traditional Rights and Freedoms: Encroachments by Commonwealth
(3 December 2015) 1. The principles are contained in
Senate Standing
(n 45) ord 24.
Australian Senate Practice: As Revised by Harry Evans
, ed Rosemary Laing
(Department of the Senate, 14
ed, 2016) 35.
See further
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Administrative
Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
Freedom of Information Act
See, eg, Moulds,
Committees of Influence
Sarah Moulds,
‘Committees of Influence: The Impact of Parliamentary Committees on Law
Making and Rights Protection in Australia’
[2019] AIAdminLawF 21
[2019] (97)
, 34 (‘The Impact of Parliamentary Committees’); Sarah Moulds,
‘Parliament: The House of Representatives’
in Mark Evans, Patrick
Dunleavy and John Phillimore (eds),
Australia’s Evolving Democracy: A
New Democratic Audit
(LSE Press, 2024) 231, 243
<https://doi.org/10.31389/lsepress.ada.k>. See also George Williams and
Daniel Reynolds, ‘The
Operation and Impact of Australia’s
Parliamentary Scrutiny Regime for Human Rights’
(2015) 41(2)
University Law Review
House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Social Policy and Legal Affairs, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into the
Administrative Review Tribunal Bill 2023
Administrative Review Tribunal (Consequential and Transitional Provisions No 1)
(Report, February 2024); Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
Legislation Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Administrative Review
Tribunal Bill 2023
[Provisions] and Related Bills
(Report, May 2024).
Dennis Pearce,
‘Rules, Regulations and Red Tape: Parliamentary Scrutiny of Delegated
Legislation’ (Papers on Parliament
No 42, Department of Senate, Parliament
of Australia, December 2004) 88; Lorne Neudorf, ‘Strengthening the
Parliamentary Scrutiny
of Delegated Legislation: Lessons from Australia’
[2019] (Winter)
Canadian Parliamentary Review
While acknowledging the
crude character of this measure, I note that the SSCSB’s scrutiny digest
concerning the ART Bill and
its associated bills refers to procedural fairness
nearly 10 times more frequently than the reports of the inquiry-based committees
(1.25 references per page, compared to 0.13 and 0.14 references per page
respectively in the reports: see above n 53).
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
, 562 (Brennan CJ, Dawson,
Toohey, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ) (‘
further Adrienne Stone, ‘Expression’ in Cheryl Saunders and Adrienne
Stone (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of the Australian
Constitution
University Press, 2018) 952
<https://doi.org/10.1093/law/9780198738435.003.0040>.
Momcilovic v The Queen
(2011) 245 CLR 1
, 178 [444] (Heydon J), citing
contemporary discussion of the possible existence of an implied freedom of
re-entry to Australia for citizens is provided
in Benjamin Durkin, ‘No
Place Like Home? Alienage, Popular Sovereignty and an Implied Freedom of Entry
into Australia under
Constitution
(2024) 52(2)
Federal Law
<https://doi.org/10.1177/0067205X241255445>.
A term coined in Etienne
Mureinik, ‘A Bridge to Where? Introducing the Interim Bill of
(1994) 10(1)
South African Journal on Human Rights
<https://doi.org/10.1080/02587203.1994.11827527>.
See Kai Möller,
‘Justifying the Culture of Justification’
(2019) 17(4)
International Journal of Constitutional Law
<https://doi.org/10.1093/icon/moz086>.
Mureinik (n
See Daniel Reynolds,
Winsome Hall and George Williams, ‘Australia’s Human Rights Scrutiny
[2020] MonashULawRw 8
(2020) 46(1)
Monash University Law Review
Senate Standing
(n 45) ords 24(1)(d)–(f).
House of Representatives,
Parliament of Australia,
Standing Orders
(2 August 2022) ord 236
<https://www.aph.gov.au/-/media/05_About_Parliament/53_HoR/532_PPP/Standing_Orders/full_SOs_2Aug2022.pdf>.
Michael James, Cyprian
Blamires and Catherine Pease-Watkin (eds),
The Collected Works of Jeremy
Bentham: Political Tactics
(Oxford University Press, 1999) 29–30
<https://doi.org/10.1093/actrade/9780198207726.book.1>. On
‘publicity’,
see Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson,
Democracy and
Disagreement
(Belknap Press, 1996) ch 3.
Jeremy Waldron,
‘Clarity, Thoughtfulness, and the Rule of Law’ in Geert Keil and
Ralf Poscher (eds),
Vagueness and Law: Philosophical and Legal
Perspectives
(Oxford University Press, 2016) 318, 327–8
<https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198782889.003.0016>. See also
Thoughtfulness and the Rule of Law
(Harvard University
Press, 2023) <https://doi.org/10.4159/9780674294851>.
Samantha Besson,
Morality of Conflict: Reasonable Disagreement and the Law
(Hart Publishing,
2005) ch 1 <https://doi.org/10.5040/9781472563491>.
Jeremy Waldron,
Disagreement
(Oxford University Press, 1999) 311 (emphasis added)
<https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198262138.001.0001>.
‘Justification’
is defined below at Part II(D).
R v Secretary of State for the Home
Department; Ex parte Simms
[1999] UKHL 33
[2000] 2 AC 115
, 131 (Lord Hoffman).
Ibid 125 (Lord Steyn).
Cf restriction of fairness
in Chapter III courts: see above n 5.
Mattias Kumm, ‘The
Idea of Socratic Contestation and the Right to Justification: The Point of
Rights-Based Proportionality
(2010) 4(2)
Law and Ethics of
Human Rights
(‘Socratic Contestation’)
<https://doi.org/10.2202/1938-2545.1047>.
This idea does not require
endorsing any particular theory of public reason: ibid 160.
Janina Boughey, ‘The
Culture of Justification in Administrative Law: Rationales and
Consequences’ (2021) 54(2)
University of British Columbia Law
Gutmann and Thompson (n
5) ch 2; Rainer Forst,
The Right to
Justification
, tr Jeffrey Flynn (Columbia University Press, 2011) 6.
Steven Rares,
‘Judicial Review of Administrative Decisions: Should There Be a
-Century Rethink?’
(2015) 22(3)
Australian Journal of
Administrative Law
, 161. See also
Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship v Li
[2012] HCA 61
(2013) 249 CLR 332
, 367 [76] (Hayne, Kiefel and Bell
Re Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; Ex parte Palme
[2003] HCA 56
216 CLR 212
, 244 [111] (Kirby J).
John Rawls,
(Columbia University Press, 1993) ch 6. Cf Simon Caney,
‘Anti-perfectionism and Rawlsian Liberalism’
(1995) 43(2)
Political Studies
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9248.1995.tb01710.x>; Michael J Sandel,
‘Political Liberalism’
(1994) 107(7)
Harvard Law Review
1782–9 <https://doi.org/10.2307/1341828>.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates,
House of Representatives, 7 December 2023, 9198
(Mark Dreyfus, Attorney-General).
Michael Pelly,
‘Tribunal Appointments: “They Should Call It the ATM, Not the
Australian Financial Review
(online, 7 April 2022)
<https://www.afr.com/politics/tribunal-appointments-they-should-call-it-the-atm-not-the-aat-20220405-p5aayz>.
On the ART Bill generally,
see Matthew Groves and Greg Weeks, ‘Editorial: The Proposed Administrative
Review Tribunal’
(2023) 30(4)
Australian Journal of Administrative
; Jason Donnelly, ‘Towards a Progressive Future: The Advent of
the Administrative Review Tribunal and Its Transformative Impact
Administrative Law’
(2023) 30(4)
Australian Journal of Administrative
See also posts in the AUSPUBLAW blog on the Bill:
(Website) <https://www.auspublaw.org>.
Administrative Review
Tribunal Bill 2023
(Cth) cl 156(2) (‘ART Bill’). See also
National Security Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
(definition of ‘national security information’).
ART Bill (n
3) cl 136(2).
Ibid cls 158–9,
Explanatory Memorandum,
Administrative Review Tribunal Bill 2023
See, eg, Simon Rice,
‘Allowing for Dissent: Opening Up Human Rights Dialogue in the Australian
Parliament’ in Julie
Debeljak and Laura Grenfell (eds),
Law Making and
Human Rights: Executive and Parliamentary Scrutiny across Australian
(Thompson Reuters, 2020) 99; Dominique Dalla-Pozza,
‘Refining the Australian Counter-terrorism Legislative Framework: How
Deliberative
Has Parliament Been?’
(2016) 27(4)
Public Law Review
Cf Daniel Reynolds and George Williams, ‘Evaluating the Impact of
Australia’s Federal Human Rights Scrutiny Regime’
in Julie Debeljak
and Laura Grenfell (eds),
Law Making and Human Rights: Executive and
Parliamentary Scrutiny across Australian Jurisdictions
(Thompson Reuters,
Limited further information
was made available: see below n
Bent Flyvbjerg, ‘Case
Study’ in Norman K Denzin and Yvonna S Lincoln (eds),
The Sage Handbook
of Qualitative Research
(SAGE Publications, 4
ed, 2011) 301,
‘A New System of
Federal Administrative Review’,
Attorney-General’s Department
<https://www.ag.gov.au/legal-system/new-system-federal-administrative-review>.
Two scrutiny committees
(the PJCHR and SSCSB) and two inquiry-based committees (the House Standing
Committee on Social Policy and
Legal Affairs and the Senate Standing Committee
on Legal and Constitutional Affairs).
David Dyzenhaus,
‘Proportionality and Deference in a Culture of Justification’ in
Grant Huscroft, Bradley W Miller and
Grégoire Webber (eds),
Proportionality and the Rule of Law: Rights, Justification, Reasoning
(Cambridge University Press, 2014) 234, 254
<https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107565272.015>.
SoCs are required under the
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills, Parliament of Australia,
Scrutiny Digest
(Digest No 2 of 2024, 7 February 2024) 11.
A dichotomy drawn by Lucia
Zedner, ‘Securing Liberty in the Face of Terror: Reflections from Criminal
(2005) 32(4)
Journal of Law and Society
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6478.2005.00336.x>. In Australia, see
Christopher Michaelsen, ‘Balancing Civil Liberties
against National
Security? A Critique of Counterterrorism Rhetoric’
[2006] UNSWLawJl 1
(2006) 29(2)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
; Christopher Michaelsen,
‘The Proportionality Principle, Counter-terrorism Laws and Human Rights: A
German–Australian
Comparison’
(2010) 2(1)
City University of Hong
Kong Law Review
Other notable contributions include Ronald Dworkin,
‘The Threat to Patriotism’ (2002) 49(3)
New York Review of Books
44; Jeremy Waldron, ‘Security and Liberty: The Image of Balance’
(2003) 11(2)
Journal of Political Philosophy
<https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9760.00174> (‘Security and
See, eg, balancing
protecting the public from infectious diseases against infected
individuals’ freedom of movement in Explanatory
Memorandum,
Public Health
and Wellbeing Bill 2008
(Vic) 25–6. See also balancing the public interest
in gathering evidence of offences against individuals’ bodily autonomy
Explanatory Note, Police Powers (Internally Concealed Drugs) Bill 2001 (NSW)
Explanatory Memorandum,
Administrative Review Tribunal Bill 2023
ART Bill (n
3) cls 205–7.
The High Court split 4:3
on this issue in
SDCV v Director-General of Security
[2022] HCA 32
(2022) 277 CLR
Leghaei FCA
(n 34) [90] (Madgwick J); Waldron, ‘Security and Liberty’ (n
Pontifical Society
for Propagation of the Faith v Scales
[1962] HCA 19
(1962) 107 CLR 9
, 20 (Dixon CJ).
Explanatory Memorandum,
Administrative Review Tribunal Bill 2023
Letter from Mark Dreyfus
to Dean Smith, 15 March 2024, 2–3
<https://www.aph.gov.au/-/media/Committees/Senate/committee/scrutiny/scrutiny_digest/2024/ministerial_responses_d5_24.pdf>
(‘Attorney-General’s Response’).
For example, despite
’s serious implications for procedural fairness, very little
guidance was sought by the Attorney-General from his Expert Advisory
was discussed at only 1 of the Group’s 11 meetings: Letter from Joanna
Virtue to Henry Palmerlee, 2 May 2024, 2 (copy on file
with author). This letter
was produced following a freedom of information request.
I am grateful to
Dominique Dalla-Pozza for this point.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates,
House of Representatives, 7 December 2023, 9198
(Mark Dreyfus, Attorney-General).
See John Ip, ‘The
Rise and Spread of the Special Advocate’ [2008] (Winter)
John D Jackson,
‘In a World of Their Own: Security-Cleared Counsel, Best Practice, and
Procedural Tradition’ (2019)
Journal of Law and Society
S115, S117 <https://doi.org/10.1111/jols.12186>.
John Jackson,
Advocates in the Adversarial System
(Routledge, 2019) chs 3–4
<https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315278773>. See further discussion by French
Assistant Commissioner Michael James Condon v Pompano Pty Ltd
(2013) 252 CLR 38
, 66–70 [55]–[65].
Attorney-General’s
Response (n
Matthias Jestaedt,
‘The Doctrine of Balancing: Its Strengths and Weaknesses’ in
Matthias Klatt (ed),
Institutionalized Reason: The Jurisprudence of Robert
(Oxford University Press, 2012) 152, 153
<https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199582068.003.0007>.
Notable exceptions
include Nicholas Emiliou,
The Principle of Proportionality in European Law: A
Comparative Study
(Kluwer Law International, 1996) 134–9; Brian F
Fitzgerald, ‘Proportionality and Australian Constitutionalism’
[1993] UTasLawRw 16
(1993) 12(2)
University of Tasmania Law Review
; Richard Ekins,
‘Legislating Proportionately’ in Grant Huscroft, Bradley W Miller
and Grégoire Webber (eds),
Proportionality and the Rule of Law:
Rights, Justification, Reasoning
(Cambridge University Press, 2014) 343
<https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107565272.020>.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Traditional Rights and Freedoms: Encroachments by Commonwealth
(Report No 129, December 2015) 44–50.
A practice already
adopted by the PJCHR: Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights, Parliament
of Australia,
Expectations for Statements of Compatibility
(Guidance Note
No 1, November 2021) 1.
Assessing Compatibility with Human Rights’,
Attorney-General’s
<https://www.ag.gov.au/rights-and-protections/human-rights-and-anti-discrimination/human-rights-scrutiny/tools-assessing-compatibility-human-rights>.
Aharon Barak,
Proportionality: Constitutional Rights and Their Limitations
University Press, 2012) 3 <https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139035293>
Proportionality
In addition to the three
core steps, some formulations include
identification of the right infringed
and the requirement for a
legitimate governmental objective
Court includes these steps in its application of structured proportionality.
6) 562 (Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey,
Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ).
[2015] HCA 34
(2015) 257 CLR 178
[72] (French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ). The ‘express or ritual
invocation’ of ‘all or any of the steps
of structured
proportionality’ was also recently rejected by a majority of the High
Babet v Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 21
, [49] (Gageler CJ and Jagot
J, Gordon J agreeing at [72], Beech-Jones J agreeing at [242]). Cf Robert Alexy,
A Theory of Constitutional Rights
, tr Julian Rivers (Oxford University
Press, 2002) ch 3.
Moshe Cohen-Eliya and
Iddo Porat, ‘Proportionality and the Culture of Justification’
(2011) 59(2)
American Journal of Comparative Law
<https://doi.org/10.5131/AJCL.2010.0018>. See also Moshe Cohen-Eliya and
Iddo Porat,
Proportionality and Constitutional Culture
University Press, 2013) ch 6 <https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139134996>;
Matthias Klatt, ‘Proportionality
and Justification’ in Ester
Herlin-Karnell, Matthias Klatt and Héctor A Morales Zúñiga
Constitutionalism Justified: Rainer Forst in Discourse
University Press, 2019) 159
<https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190889050.003.0008>; Möller (n 59)
In recent cases, see
Clubb v Edwards
[2019] HCA 11
(2019) 267 CLR 171
, 202 [74] (Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane
Palmer v Western Australia
[2021] HCA 5
(2021) 272 CLR 505
, 596 [262] (Edelman J)
Farm Transparency International Ltd v New
South Wales
(2022) 277 CLR 537
, 624 [271] (Gleeson J).
See further Kumm,
‘Socratic Contestation’ (n
Alec Stone Sweet and Jud
Mathews, ‘Proportionality Balancing and Global Constitutionalism’
(2008) 47(1)
Columbia Journal of Transnational Law
, 88–9. See
further Vicki C Jackson, ‘Constitutional Law in an Age of
Proportionality’
(2015) 124(8)
Yale Law Journal
David M Beatty,
‘In Praise of Casuistry: Making Hard Cases Easier’ in Vicki C
Jackson and Mark Tushnet (eds),
Proportionality: New Frontiers, New
(Cambridge University Press, 2017) 273, 286
<https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316691724.013>.
Justice Susan Kiefel,
‘Proportionality: A Rule of Reason’
(2012) 23(2)
4) 598 [266] (Edelman J).
‘[T]hat evidence
of guilt must be secret is abhorrent to free men’:
United States ex rel
Knauff v Shaughnessy
[1950] USSC 9
, 551 (Jackson J) (1950).
See above nn
Adrienne Stone,
‘The Limits of Constitutional Text and Structure: Standards of Review and
the Freedom of Political Communication’
[1999] MelbULawRw 26
(1999) 23(3)
University Law Review
Cheryl Saunders and
Adrienne Stone, ‘The High Court of Australia’ in András
Jakab, Arthur Dyevre and Giulio Itzcovich
Comparative Constitutional
(Cambridge University Press, 2017) 36, 72
<https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316084281.004>.
International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
, opened for signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS 171
(entered into force 23 March 1976) art 14(1).
Ibid arts 14(3),
Ibid art 13.
Ibid art 9(4).
‘Australian Administrative Law: The Human Rights Dimension’ in
Matthew Groves and HP Lee (eds),
Australian Administrative Law: Fundamentals,
Principles and Doctrines
(Cambridge University Press, 2007) 50, 59
<https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139168618.006>.
ART Bill (n
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) div 105.
Moulds, ‘The
Impact of Parliamentary Committees’ (n
Adam Fletcher,
‘Human Rights Scrutiny in the Federal Parliament: Smokescreen or
Democratic Solution?’ in Julie Debeljak
and Laura Grenfell (eds),
Making and Human Rights: Executive and Parliamentary Scrutiny across Australian
(Thompson Reuters, 2020) 31, 59–63.
See generally Bryan
Horrigan, ‘Improving Legislative Scrutiny of Proposed Laws to Enhance
Basic Rights, Parliamentary Democracy,
and the Quality of Law-Making’ in
Jeffrey Goldsworthy, Tom Campbell and Adrienne Stone (eds),
Protecting Rights
without a Bill of Rights: Institutional Performance and Reform in Australia
(Routledge, 2006) 61, 87–8
<https://doi.org/10.4324/9781351151245-4>.
Vicki C Jackson (n
Lisa Burton Crawford,
Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act 2011
(Cth): A Failed
Human Rights Experiment?’ in Matthew Groves, Janina Boughey and Dan
Meagher (eds),
The Legal Protection of Rights in Australia
Publishing, 2019) 143, 161
<https://doi.org/10.5040/9781509919857.ch-008>.
Mordechai Kremnitzer,
‘Is Proportionality an Effective Protector of Human Rights?
Proportionality and Constitutional Culture
by Moshe Cohen-Eliya, Iddo
Porat: A Critique’ (2014) 10(1)
Jerusalem Review of Legal Studies
111, 121 (emphasis added) <https://doi.org/10.1093/jrls/jlu009>.
Judith N Shklar,
‘The Liberalism of Fear’ in Nancy L Rosenblum (ed),
and the Moral Life
(Harvard University Press, 1989) 21, 28
<https://doi.org/10.4159/harvard.9780674864443.c2>.
George Williams,
‘The Legal Assault on Australian Democracy’ (2016) 16(2)
Queensland University of Technology Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.5204/qutlr.v16i2.651>; Fletcher,
Masterstroke or Mere Window Dressing?
But see Michael T Hayes,
Lobbyists and Legislators: A Theory of Political Markets
University Press, 1981); Kremnitzer (n
Jeremy Waldron,
Dignity of Legislation
(Cambridge University Press, 1999)
<https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511621987>.
William Blackstone,
Commentaries on the Laws of England
, (Clarendon Press, 1765) vol 1,
See above n
On the importance of
technical scrutiny, see Pearce (n
Clerk of the Senate,
Submission No 20 to Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills,
Inquiry into the Future Direction and Role of the Scrutiny of Bills
(6 April 2010) 2.
Future Role and
Ibid 22. See further
Senate Standing Committee on Regulations and Ordinances, Parliament of
Parliamentary Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation
Amalgamated Society
of Engineers v Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd
(1920) 28 CLR 129
, 151 (Knox CJ,
Isaacs, Rich and Starke JJ).
Mark Antaki, ‘The
Rationalism of Proportionality’s Culture of Justification’ in Grant
Huscroft, Bradley W Miller
and Grégoire Webber (eds),
Proportionality
and the Rule of Law: Rights, Justification, Reasoning
(Cambridge University
Press, 2014) 284, 285, 292 (emphasis omitted).
Christopher F Zurn,
Deliberative Democracy and the Institutions of Judicial Review
University Press, 2007) 184 (emphasis omitted).
On preventing
legislatures from being dominated by court-like reasoning, see Mark Tushnet,
Constitution
Away from the Courts
(Princeton University Press,
1999) 63–5 <https://doi.org/10.1515/9781400822973>.
Robert Oppenheimer,
‘Analogy in Science’ (1958) 2
Centennial Review of Arts and
Jeremy Waldron,
‘Judges as Moral Reasoners’
(2009) 7(1)
International Journal of
Constitutional Law
<https://doi.org/10.1093/icon/mon035>. Cf J Raz,
‘Disagreement in Politics’
(1998) 43(1)
American Journal of
Jurisprudence
, 46 <https://doi.org/10.1093/ajj/43.1.25>.
See Ronald Dworkin,
‘Hard Cases’
(1975) 88(6)
Harvard Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.2307/1340249>.
Richard A Posner,
‘Review of Jeremy Waldron,
Law and Disagreement
Columbia Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.2307/1123477>.
Disagreement
Jeremy Waldron,
‘The Core of the Case against Judicial Review’
[2006] YaleLawJl 35
(2006) 115(6)
Law Journal
, 1348 <https://doi.org/10.2307/20455656>.
See especially Francisco
J Urbina, ‘A Critique of Proportionality’
(2012) 57(1)
Journal of Jurisprudence
<https://doi.org/10.1093/ajj/57.1.49>.
See, eg, Barak,
Proportionality
Prohibitions del
[1607] EWHC J23
; (1607) 12 Co Rep 64;
, 1343 (Coke LCJ).
See Jestaedt (n
Mattias Kumm,
‘Constitutional Rights as Principles: On the Structure and Domain of
Constitutional Justice’
(2004) 2(3)
International Journal of
Constitutional Law
<https://doi.org/10.1093/icon/2.3.574>.
Murphy v Electoral
Commissioner
[2016] HCA 36
(2016) 261 CLR 28
, 73–4 [109]–[110] (Gageler
David M Beatty,
Ultimate Rule of Law
(Oxford University Press, 2004) 170
<https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199269808.001.0001>.
Jamal Greene,
‘Foreword: Rights as Trumps?’
(2018) 132(1)
Harvard Law
On legislatures, see
Sweet and Mathews (n
Aharon Barak, ‘Human Rights in Israel’
(2006) 39(2)
, 19 <https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021223700012991>. On
lay-people see Henry Palmerlee, Ron Levy and Kate Ogg, ‘Mini-Public
Adjudication of Human Rights Disputes: An Empirical Evaluation’ 53
Federal Law Review
(forthcoming).
Jed Rubenfeld,
‘Unilateralism and Constitutionalism’
(2004) 79(6)
University Law Review
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (235 KB)
PDF format (405 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter