URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMelbLRS/2018/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Khaitan, T --- "Directive Principles and the Expressive Accommodation of Ideological Dissenters" [2018] UMelbLRS 4
Directive principles and the expressive accommodation of ideological
Tarunabh Khaitan
This article argues, using India as a case study, that constitutional
directives can be a useful tool for the expressive accommodation
of ideological
dissenters who would otherwise lose out in constitutional negotiations in deeply
divided societies. Under certain
conditions, these directives can be useful in
getting populist illiberal groups to sign up to a (broadly) liberal
constitution. Framers
of the Indian constitution successfully accommodated some
such groups using constitutional directives, and tempered this accommodation
through strategies of containment and constitutional incrementalism. Such
calibrated accommodation can give dissenting groups enough
(and genuine) hope of
future political victories, without going so far that their opponents in turn
leave the constitutional negotiation
table. By focusing on the accommodational
needs of ideological dissenters, this article adds to existing literature on
constitutional
consensus-building techniques, which has largely focused on
political insurance for ethnocultural minorities. It also highlights
function of constitutional directives, which have hitherto been considered at
best to be interpretive aids in constitutional
adjudication, and at worst as
constitutional dead weight.
1. Introduction
Constitution-making in deeply divided
societies—where the transaction cost of securing consensus over key
decisions is extremely
high—poses a dilemma. On the one hand, the usual
aspiration to create an enduring constitution demands a broad consensus over
contents. On the other hand, its very potential endurance signals to groups that
believe they have lost out in the constitutional
negotiation that their loss
might be permanent, encouraging intransigence. The literature on accommodation
of intransigent groups
in such societies has largely focused on ethnocultural
minority groups that fear being permanently locked out of power under a
majoritarian
democratic constitution. This literature treats constitution-making
as an elite- driven process of interest-bargaining, where the
minority group
seeks political insurance in form of power-sharing arrangements, decisional
vetoes, or legal disabilities on majoritarian
decision-making.
Ethnocultural minorities are not, however, the only groups threatened by liberal
democratic constitutions. While liberal constitutions
tend to provide the widest
latitude to future governments of different ideological make-ups, certain
ideological groups—especially
those whose political agendas sit
uncomfortably with the liberal commitment to individual human rights—also
have reasons to
withhold consent. These groups typically care about religious or
economic ideologies (religious establishment, state socialism, etc.)
which often
concern the very identity of the state itself. The distinction between
ideological and ethnocultural groups is, admittedly,
not entirely neat, but it
is nonetheless a useful heuristic. In this article, I will show that (i) the
accommodational needs of ideological
dissenters are different from ethnocultural
minorities, and (ii) one of the ways to secure their consent for a
Associate Professor & Hackney Fellow, Wadham College, Oxford
& Associate Professor & Future Fellow, Melbourne Law School.
t.khaitan@unimelb.edu.au.
grateful to all those friends, colleagues, workshop participants, and reviewers
who commented on various drafts of this article.
Usual disclaimers apply.
Special thanks to Ira Chadha-Sridhar for excellent research assistance.
broadly liberal democratic constitution while also keeping their ideological
opponents on board is the contained and incrementalized
accommodation
of their ideological agenda in the form of constitutional
“directive principles.”
Directive principles are expressive constitutional directives to the political
organs of the state to programmatically secure certain
transformative goals.
Constitutional texts typically describe them as “not enforceable by any
court” but “nevertheless
fundamental in the governance of the
They are called by various names, including
directive principles of state policy, directive principles of social policy,
fundamental
principles of state policy, fundamental objectives, national
objectives, or some combination thereof. I will refer to them as directive
principles, constitutional directives, or simply directives.
Although the South African
Constitution
famously rejected directive
principles as inadequate for its transformative agenda, they
have—alongside preambles—been
rather popular with framers seeking to
enshrine transformative ideals in their constitutions elsewhere. Despite this,
they have largely,
and surprisingly, been overlooked by international and
comparative constitutional law scholarship.
What little scholarly attention they have received has often been critical.
Largely because of their non-justiciable character, they
have been characterized
at best as provisions with a “mere moral appeal”
“no practical implication,”
at worst as “design
Their offhand dismissal by scholars—in thrall of
a narrow imagination of constitutions as judicially enforced supreme
at odds with their persistent popularity with framers of
constitutions. If they are so useless, why have over thirty-one constitutions
adopted them in some form or the other,
and even amended them
subsequently?
When it is not dismissive, existing scholarship
INDIA CONST. art 37. Some scholars find the bar on
“enforcement” to be compatible with judicial cognizance of directive
principles that falls short of enforcement: Joseph Minattur,
Unenforceable Directives in the Indian
Constitution
, (1975) 1 SCC (J.) 17.
Without disputing this doctrinal claim, I will use the terms
“enforceability” and “justiciability”
interchangeably.
The term “directive
” is not intended
to track the familiar debate concerning the distinction between rules and
principles: RONALD DWORKIN, TAKING
RIGHTS SERIOUSLY: NEW IMPRESSION WITH A REPLY
TO CRITICS Ch.2 (2004).
OLOWU, AN INTEGRATIVE RIGHTS-BASED APPROACH TO HUMAN DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA
96–98 (2009)
JAFFRELOT, DR AMBEDKAR AND UNTOUCHABILITY: ANALYSING AND FIGHTING CASTE 112
Jeffrey Usman,
Non-Justiciable Directive Principles: A
Constitutional Design Defect
, 15 MICH. ST. INT'L L. REV. 643 (2007).
Okere, who rues the absence of even a
Conseil Constitutionnel
Fundamental Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy Under
the Nigerian
Constitution
32 INT'L & COMP. L.Q. 214
, 221 (1983).
These include the constitutions of: Ireland (1937), India (1950),
Qatar (provisional constitution, 1970), Bangladesh (1972), Tanzania
(1977), Sri
Lanka (1978), Nigeria (1979), Jammu and Kashmir (1984), Nepal (1990), Namibia
(1990), Sierra Leone (1991), Zambia (1991),
Papua New Guinea (1991), Tibet
(constitution of the government in exile, 1991), Ghana (1992), Lesotho (1993),
Uganda (1995), Ethiopia
(1995), Gambia (1996), Eritrea (1997), Thailand (1997),
Sudan (1998), Western Cape (1998), Nigeria (1999), Somaliland (2001), Swaziland
(2005), Thailand (2007), Nepal (interim constitution, 2007), Bhutan (2008),
South Sudan (2011), and Nepal (2015). This list does
not include possibly
comparable directives in some European jurisdictions (“state tasks”)
like Germany and Austria.
See generally
KARL-PETER SOMMERMANN,
STAATSZIELE UND STAATSZIELBESTIMMUNGEN (1997). While Jennings claims that
Ireland itself borrowed its directives
from Republican Spain: IVOR JENNINGS, THE
APPROACH TO SELF-GOVERNMENT 19 (1958), Walsh suggests, perhaps more reliably,
inspiration might have come from provisions (such as article 151)
concerning “Economic Life” in the Weimar constitution:
Rachel Walsh,
Private Property Rights in the Drafting of the Irish
Constitution
Communitarian Compromise
, 33 DUBLIN UNIV. L.J. 86, 95 (2011). Also excluded
from the list are “positive rights” in communist
constitutions—such
as the right to work under article 40 of the
Constitution
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 1977—which were
also typically non-justiciable. On environmental “directive
principles” generally,
DAVID BOYD, THE ENVIRONMENTAL RIGHTS
REVOLUTION ch. 3 (2012).
INDIA CONST. arts. 38(2), 39(f), 39A, 43A, 43B, and 48A.
, From “Niti” to “Nyaya,”
We The People: A Symposium on the Constituion of India, After 60 Years,
(Nov. 2010),
available at
http://www.india-seminar.com/2010/615/615_amit_sibal.htm.
has focused mostly on what courts have managed to do with these supposedly
non-justiciable constitutional provisions, especially
in relation to fundamental
rights—briefly, courts have used them as interpretive tools, as a source
of unspecified fundamental
rights, and as a reason to defer to a law or policy
whose constitutionality is under attack.
But if we are to permit
some idealism, creativity, and thoughtfulness to the makers of these
constitutions, predominantly from the
global South, better explanations are
likely to be found beyond the legalistic confines of constitutional scholarship
dominated by
the American experience.
In this article, I will argue, using India as a case study that constitutional
directives can be a useful tool for the contained,
incrementalized, and
expressive accommodation of ideological dissenters who would otherwise lose out
in constitutional negotiations
in deeply divided societies. They have an
instrumental value at the very moment of constitutional founding, inasmuch as
secure the buy-in of dissenting groups for the constitutional project,
and generate a broad consensus over the document as a whole,
without giving in
so much to the dissenters’ demands that the majority rejects the
accommodation. The two consent- seeking
strategies that can be seen in the
relevant type of Indian directives (that I will label “deeply contested
directives”)
containment
constitutional
incrementalism
. These strategies give enough (and genuine) hope of future
victories to the dissenting groups to keep them on board, without accommodating
them so much that their opponent groups in turn leave the constitutional
negotiation table. As one of the most enduring examples
of post-colonial
constitutions, the contained and incrementalist accommodation of the dissenters
in the Indian constitution might
well be key to its remarkable survival.
The inquiry will be conducted by paying close attention to the political
speeches and interventions made by representative players
in the debates of
India's constituent assembly. Two caveats: first, I do not wish, in this
article, to get into the potential role
that the framers' original intent might
have on constitutional interpretation by future generations. All I wish to do is
and defend some of the positions adopted by some key drafters. What
weight, if any, the original intentions of the framers deserve
from us today is
a separate question. Second, I am not suggesting that directive principles
necessarily played a similar role outside
India, or even that all Indian
directives played such a role. The Indian example is meant to reveal one (of
possibly several) functions
perform: securing the consent of
ideological dissenters. Whether they played a similar role elsewhere is a matter
for another study.
This study of one of the most enduring post-colonial
constitutions brings together the growing scholarly interest in three distinct
issues: the longevity of national constitutions, political/non-legal
constitutionalism and constitution-making in deeply divided
will clarify the nature of ideological groups in deeply divided
societies, and distinguish them from ethnocultural minorities. It
hypothesize that these groups are politically optimistic, and therefore seek
expressive recognition of their agendas rather
than political insurance through
constitutionally guaranteed power-sharing.
will first analyze the
nature of directive principles generally and identify their key conceptual
features: these directives are
constitutional, directive and directional,
political, programmatic, transformative, and expressive.
will provide
the historical context of the late 1940s in which India framed its
Constitution
It will identify the chief characteristics of the largely
P. K. Tripathi,
Directive Principles of State Policy: The
Lawyer's Approach to Them Hitherto, Parochial, Injurious and
Unconstitutional
, (1954) 17 SCC (J.) 7; Upendra Baxi,
Principles and the Sociology of Indian Law: A Reply to Dr Jagat Narain
J. INDIAN L. INST. 245 (1969); Jagat Narain,
Judicial Law Making and the
Place of Directive Principles in Indian
Constitution
, 27 J. INDIAN L. INST.
198 (1985); Bertus de Villiers,
Directive Principles of State Policy and
Fundamental Rights: The Indian Experience
8 S. AFR. J. HUM. RTS. 29
(1992); M. P. Singh,
The Statics and the Dynamics of the Fundamental Rights
and the Directives Principles: A Human Rights Perspective
, 2003 SCC (J.) 1
(2003); Gautam Bhatia,
Directive Principles of State Policy
THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF THE INDIAN
CONSTITUTION
(Sujit Choudhry, Madhav
Khosla, & Pratap Bhanu Mehta eds., 2016).
liberal–democratic–secular Draft
Constitution
. Drawing upon the
debates in the constituent assembly that finalized the constitution, it will
also identify and explain the three
main dissenters: groups whose hopes,
aspirations, and ideals found little, if any, place in the draft document. These
loosely be called socialists, Gandhians, and cultural nationalists.
will then give an overview account of the directives found in the
Constitution
, and classify them on the basis of the degree of
(dis)agreement that surrounded them. The directives in the first
category—mostly
concerning basic social guarantees—are the
uncontested directives; the second category includes the partially contested
directives—
primarily requiring distributive justice— whose goals
were accepted by almost everyone but the means to secure these goals
seriously contested; and the third category includes the deeply contested
directives.
will discuss the two strategies that qualified the
accommodation of the dissenters' agendas: containment and constitutional
incrementalism.
The three containment tools used by the framers were dilution,
instantiation, and qualification. There are reasons to think that
constitutional containment of the radical agendas has played some role in their
future political containment too. Constitutional
incrementalism was secured by
the deferral of the realization of the directives to future politics. The
section will also explain
that the directives are not just incrementalist in the
constitutional sense: at least Ambedkar thought that the duties they impose
ought to be realized in a politically incrementalist fashion. These strategies
represent a fine balancing act that maintained the
overall normative coherence
of the Draft
Constitution
while providing limited and deferred, but genuine,
accommodation to the dissenters, thereby securing a broad consensus over the
Constitution
of 1950. The concluding
will briefly discuss the
afterlife of the contested directives and suggest that the dissenters’
hope of future political realization
will be vindicated somewhat, albeit in a
contained and incremental manner.
2. Securing dissenters’ consent
Constitutional theorists have started paying attention
to constitution-making in deeply divided societies relatively recently.
A defining feature of such societies is very high decision costs, which
Dixon and Ginsburg describe as “a form of transaction
costs” that
include “the costs of deliberating, negotiating and finalizing an
agreement.”
Given these high transaction costs in such
societies, drawing up a constitution that simultaneously satisfies normative
legitimacy constraints
(that, in the liberal conception, for example,
rest on the centrality of individual freedom) and sociological
constraints
(that require sufficient popular allegiance to a constitution to
ensure the survival of a political community) can be extremely hard.
The stability constraint, our primary concern here, requires
“self-enforcement” as a feature of successful constitutions,
the constitutional bargain must have a stake in the
successful implementation of the document for it to endure. Even though
constitutional
bargains may have relative winners and losers, they will endure
to the extent that parties believe they are better off within the
constitutional bargain than in taking a chance on, and expending resources in,
negotiating a new one.”
Tools that reduce decision costs can be categorized into two distinct sets: one
deals with power-sharing and institutional design
concerns of ethnocultural
minorities; another addresses
See generally
SUJIT CHOUDHRY, CONSTITUTIONAL
DESIGN FOR DIVIDED SOCIETIES: INTEGRATION OR
ACCOMMODATION? (2008).
Rosalind Dixon & Tom Ginsburg,
Deciding Not to Decide:
Deferral in Constitutional Design
, 9 INT’L J. CONST. L. 636, 642
Sujit Choudhry,
Citizenship and Federations: Some Preliminary
Reflections
THE FEDERAL VISION 382–383 (Kalupso Nicolaidis
& Robert Howse eds., 2001).
ZACHARY ELKINS, TOM GINSBURG, & JAMES MELTON, THE
ENDURANCE OF NATIONAL CONSTITUTIONS 7
disagreements over the values, ideology, identity, and goals of the putative
state. The two are obviously interrelated, for institutional
choices (such as
whether to devolve state power to villages) often reflect the values of the
state. Even so, it is helpful to distinguish
institutional and ideological
disagreements.
The first set of tools, better-developed in the literature, primarily relates to
the institutional arrangements of the future state,
and whether each warring
tribe can be sufficiently reassured that it will wield adequate power and
influence in the state being constituted.
Tools that secure political insurance
for salient ethnocultural groups include consociation, centripetalism,
federalism, and so on.
These institutional structures may include
procedures for resolving ideological disputes over value politically when the
constitution
becomes operational. But they are usually not equipped to deal with
such disagreements during the framing of the constitution itself.
groups are interested in winning not just ideological battles in the future but
also some constitutional endorsement of
their positions to begin with,
institutional tools will be important but insufficient to address disagreements
over values in deeply
divided societies. Thus, the
second—underexplored—toolbox relates not so much to institutional
power- sharing but mostly
to the disagreements over normative values that
constitutions (as mission statements) endorse (or fail to endorse). Divergent
are invested not only in their share of power in the future state but
also in the moral identity of that state: they worry about
what this state will
be like, what symbols will represent it, what values it will cherish, and what
goals it will pursue. Ideological
disagreements concerning the relationship
between the state and religion or the economic character of the state
(capitalist, socialist,
communist) have been especially divisive in many
contexts. These ideological demands are not presented as interest- bargaining
social groups. Instead, they claim to speak for the “people”
or the “nation” as a whole. Their accommodation
isn’t, then, a
zero-sum game, and they tend to focus on expressive recognition of their
ideological agenda rather than a guaranteed
share in state power. This is in
part because, unlike ethnocultural minorities who are politically pessimistic
under winner-takes-all
majoritarian decision-making rules, ideological
dissenters—especially of a
populist orientation—tend to be political optimists under conditions of
One might think that ideological groups can be accommodated by simply minimizing
the ideological commitments that a constitution
makes. This is almost impossible
in societies where a procedural liberal democratic framework is itself viewed as
partisan (usually
seen as siding with capitalism and secularism), rather than
one that merely provides a level playing field for other ideologies to
out. At any rate, very few constitutions can get away with simply constituting
an institutional framework and ignoring
all normative and expressive questions.
Even the minimalist US
Constitution
had to grapple with the morally divisive
issue of slave trade, dealt with through a classic deferral tool: freezing the
for twenty years and passing the problem on to Congress.
The problem is more acute for constitutions with transformative agendas.
How can they secure the consent of dissenting ideological
groups? In day-to-day
politics, losers’ consent is critical for the normal functioning of any
democratic polity, especially
if rebellion or civil war is to be averted.
This is usually avoided by the promise that political losses (and
victories) are transient and reversible. But ideological dissenters
constitutional defeats as permanent, whereas securing the consent of at
See generally
John McGarry, Brendan O’Leary, &
Richard Simeon,
Integration or Accommodation? The Enduring Debate in Conflict
CONSTITUTIONAL DESIGN FOR DIVIDED SOCIETIES:
INTEGRATION OR ACCOMMODATION? 42 (Sujit Choudhry ed., 2008). Only recently have
taxonomical nuance in the political insurance literature: see generally,
Rosalind Dixon and Tom Ginsburg,
The Forms and Limits of Constitutions as
Political Insurance
, 15(4) INT’L J. CONST. L. 988, 989 (2017), who
distinguish between political insurance against reduced political power, reduced
policy influence and individual persecution. In this framework, constitutional
directives may be seen as providing political insurance
with respect to policy
U.S. CONST. art.1, § 9.
CHRISTOPHER ANDERSON ET AL., LOSERS' CONSENT: ELECTIONS AND
DEMOCRATIC LEGITIMACY 6 (2005).
the salient ideological groups for the constitution is essential if the
constitutional state is to have any chance of taking off
and if the constitution
is to become self-enforcing and therefore stable.
By highlighting the distinctive nature of ideological dissenters, using Indian
as a case study, this article will address a major
gap in the literature on
dealing with disagreement in the constitution-making process. It will show that
politically optimistic ideological
groups mainly seek expressive recognition of
their agendas in the constitution. While they would have preferred a wholesale
of their ideology by the constitution, failing that, even a limited
constitutional recognition of their agenda and a guarantee that
the constitution
would not stand in the way of the political implementation of these agendas
might sometimes be sufficient to get
them on board. A constitution has several
expressive tools, chief among them are preambles and recitals. But preambular
recognition
carries with it a salience that might irritate the ideological
majority a little too much. Directive principles—a more calibrated
expressive tool—were successfully used by the Indian framers instead to
secure the consent of ideological dissenters to the
liberal draft constitution,
without losing the support of the majority in the constituent assembly.
3. What are directive principles
Directive principles are expressive constitutional
directives primarily addressed to the political organs of the state to
programmatically
secure certain social, political or economic goals of a
“transformative” character. These features are not meant to
distinguish
directives from rights, at least not sharply. Fundamental rights can
also be expressive, programmatic, and transformative. It may
well be that the
distinction between rights and directives is a matter of degree rather than
us examine some of the key features of
constitutional directives.
First, directive principles are
constitutional
. There are no doubt
examples of comparable directives contained in legislation, which may or may not
have a constitutional character,
but in this article, I am
particularly interested in the reasons that framers of big-C constitutional
codes have for incorporating
directive principles. This feature also
distinguishes them from mere moral or political norms, at least in the sense
that directives
are posited social facts that can be found in constitutional
Given the expressive importance of a big-C
Constitution
in most jurisdictions that have them, their constitutional status must give
directives a certain salience.
Second, these are
. Through them, framers intend to impose
certain duties on the political organs of the state. They are
“directive” in
two different senses: in the first sense they are
or imperatives addressed to the legislature. In the second
sense, they determine the
direction of travel
for the future state's
policy, although—depending on the level of abstraction in which the
directive is specified—this
can leave a very broad or relatively little
discretion with the future policymaker.
Third, these directives are primarily addressed to the
of the state, i.e. the executive and the legislature.
feature is connected to their supposed non-
See generally
United Kingdom Child Poverty Act (2010).
ALON HAREL, WHY LAW MATTERS 154 (2014). Harel has a broader
understanding of what he terms “constitutional directives,”
suggests that they may be found in other social facts too, such as conventions,
practices, and institutional history. This
may well be true, but here I am
interested only in those posited in constitutional documents as directives.
Constitutions as Mission Statements
SOCIAL AND POLITICAL FOUNDATIONS OF CONSTITUTIONS 87 (Denis J. Galligan
& Mila Versteeg eds., 2015).
note 17, at
180 (“to the extent that the legislature fails to honour these directives,
it is subjected to effective condemnation.”).
I do not deny that courts too are/can be political. But, usually,
they are political in a different—attenuated—
enforceability by courts. In most constitutions that contain them, their
non-justiciability is expressly provided for in the text.
constitutions, such exclusion may be through implication or convention.
Non-justiciability is a key reason for the controversy surrounding
directive principles, and for their rejection in the South African
Constitution
which opted instead for justiciable rights. Many courts have found ways to do
something with these principles, even when they are
prohibited from
“enforcing” them. But the key design feature of the directive
principles is that they are primarily addressed
to the legislature and the
Fourth, they are
programmatic
rather than being exclusively performative.
A performative act is one that may be performed simply by an utterance. For
example, saying
“I promise to do x” is (in ordinary circumstances)
the same as actually promising to do x. Some legal systems recognize
utterance of “talaaq” as performing the act of divorce. A
constitution that declares that “all existing laws
of the previous regime
shall continue to have the force of law” confers on them legal validity
simply by saying so.
Programmatic acts are different, even though they may have a performative
dimension. Mere utterance does not secure their realization.
There is a time lag
between the (performative) adoption of the goal and its realization. Sometimes
this gap may be short: a constitution
may require Parliament to pass a law
outlawing a certain practice, and it may be that Parliament does so in very
little time. A program
to set up a new administrative machinery might take
longer. Social transformation of the sort that directive principles seek is
programmatic
in a more complicated sense: as we will see while discussing
political incrementalism, they typically require sustained, multi-pronged
multi-stepped effort over a long period of time. As Naziruddin Ahmad put it in
the context of the language directive, “You
cannot make a language
suitable for a modern world by legislative vote.”
verbs such as “strive,” “direct,” “take
steps,” “make effective provisions for,”
“endeavor,” and “promote” confirm the programmatic
character of directive principles.
Fifth, as already seen, directive principles set out a
transformative
agenda for the state being constituted. “Transformative”
constitutionalism is a neologism coined by Karl Klare to describe
Constitution
By transformative constitutionalism, I mean a long-term project of
constitutional enactment, interpretation, and enforcement committed
transforming a country’s political and social institutions and power
relationships
in a democratic, participatory, and egalitarian direction
Transformative constitutionalism connotes an enterprise inducing large-scale
social change through nonviolent political process
grounded in law. I have in
mind a transformation vast enough to be inadequately captured by the phrase
“reform,” but
something short of or different from
“revolution” in any traditional sense of the word.
With Klare, I use the term “transformative constitutionalism” to
signify a constitutionally mandated change of a large
scale to be brought about
using legal–political means (i.e. means that are compliant with the rule
of law). My use of the term,
however, diverges from Klare’s in two
respects. First, I use the term “transformative” in a literal and
value-neutral
sense. For Klare, as the emphasized words in the quote above
suggest, transformative constitutionalism must seek what he calls
“‘postliberal” democratic and egalitarian ideal. But
On the status of the Ghanaian and Ethiopian Constitutions which do
not have a non-justiciability clause,
Abdi Jibril Ali & Kwadwo
Appiagyei-Atua,
Justicieability of Directive Principles of State Policy in
Africa: The Experiences of Ethiopia and Ghana
, 1 ETHIOPIAN J. HUM. RTS. 1
9 (India) CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES (CAD), 12th Nov., 1949,
1330–1331 (Ahmad).
Karl Klare,
Legal Culture and Transformative
Constitutionalism
14 S. AFR. J. HUM. RTS. 146
, 150 (1998) (emphasis
transformative efforts could and, as we will see in the Indian example, did
travel in different directions. While I mostly agree
substantively with
Klare’s democratic and egalitarian ideal, it is unwise to restrict the
concept of constitutional transformation
to what one might consider
“desirable” transformation: that task should be left to qualifying
adjectives.
Second, Klare writes in the context of the South African constitution, which
expressly rejected non-justiciable directive principles
in favor of a more
rights-based and judiciary-led transformation.
My use of the term
remains agnostic with regard to the constitutional mechanism constructed to seek
such transformation, as it does
with respect to the direction of the
transformation. In fact, Weis claims that at least some of the
“rights” guaranteed
in the South African
Constitution
are actually
better understood as directive principles.
Furthermore, directive
principles have tended to include a broader transformative agenda than social
rights: to use Rawlsian terminology,
social rights have mostly been restricted
to “constitutional essentials” required by his “first
of justice, including the right to food, shelter, education,
and so on. Directive principles, on the other hand, also tend to include
redistributive agendas seeking to reduce income and wealth inequalities,
required by the “difference principle” of justice.
such, I take transformative constitutionalism to mean a constitutional mandate
to transform a society, economy, and polity on a
large scale through
legal–political means.
On this understanding, directive principles clearly qualify as tools in the
service of transformative constitutionalism. They are
not the only tool, as the
South African example demonstrates. They may not even be the best tool for the
purpose, although their
relative efficacy in securing the constitutionally
mandated transformation is not a question this article is concerned with.
Finally, and importantly for our purposes, directives perform an
function. A directive’s endorsement of an agenda bestows upon it a
degree of symbolic constitutional legitimacy. Constitutions
are expressive
documents generally, and several parts—such as preambles, recitals, and
rights—have especial expressive
salience. The expressive role of
constitutional directives has been highlighted by scholars relatively
What hasn’t been especially noted is that the
expressive salience of different parts of a constitution may well be different.
Generally speaking, directives are a unique halfway house: constitutionally
embedded but with a lower expressive salience than agendas
and values endorsed
by preambles and fundamental rights. The symbolism of preambles and fundamental
rights go to the heart of the
character and identity of the state, in a manner
that is not necessarily true of mutually contradictory directive principles.
calibrated expressivism makes directives an especially useful tool for
recognizing even those agendas that might be against the spirit
constitution as a whole.
On the debate regarding whether to include such directives,
D. M. Davis,
The Case Against the Inclusion of Socio-Economic Demands in
a Bill of Rights Except as Directive Principles
8 S. AFR. J. HUM. RTS. 475
(1992); Bertus de Villiers,
Socio-Economic Rights in a New
Constitution
Critical Evaluation of the Recommendations of the South African Law
3 J. S. AFR. L. 421(1992).
On other scholars who have focused on
the role of courts in exploring transformative constitutionalism,
TRANSFORMATIVE CONSTITUTIONALISM: COMPARING THE APEX COURTS OF BRAZIL, INDIA
AND SOUTH AFRICA (Oscar Vilhena, Upendra Baxi, &
Frans Viljoen eds., 2013);
CONSTITUTIONALISM OF THE GLOBAL SOUTH: THE ACTIVIST
TRIBUNALS OF INDIA, SOUTH AFRICA, AND COLUMBIA (Daniel Bonilla Maldonado ed.,
2013); Gautam Bhatia, EQUAL MORAL MEMBERSHIP: NAZ FOUNDATION
REFASHIONING OF EQUALITY UNDER A TRANSFORMATIVE
CONSTITUTION
1 IND. L. REV. 115
Constitutional Directive Principles
J. LEGAL STUD. 916
, 921 (2017).
JOHN RAWLS, JUSTICE AS FAIRNESS 47–48 (2001) [RAWLS,
JUSTICE]; JOHN RAWLS, POLITICAL LIBERALISM 228–229 (1993) [hereinafter
RAWLS, POLITICAL LIBERALISM].
note 19, at 85.
note 17, at 170-171. Bagehot called the expressive provisions of a
constitution its ‘dignified’ parts, and thought they
were essential
for a constitution to
authority: WALTER BAGEHOT, THE ENGLISH
CONSTITUTION
7 (Miles Taylor ed., 2001).
4. India at its founding: a deeply divided society
It is sometimes assumed that the founding of India and
its early post-independence politics rested on a broad consensus within its
governing elite, framed by a liberal, multicultural, democratic, secular,
planned-economy vision of Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first
prime minister.
While Nehru did embody these ideals, no such consensus actually existed
among the ruling elite, which is unsurprising given the almost
proverbial scale
of India’s diversity. Churchill had once remarked that “India is an
abstraction . . . It is no more
a united nation than the Equator.”
The constituent assembly, even though largely made up of Congress Party
members and the rump of the Muslim League that stayed behind
after Partition,
was ethnoculturally diverse and ideologically a deeply divided body.
This was in part due to the diversity and division within the Congress
itself, and because of its policy of accommodating on the party's
candidacy of party outsiders who represented minorities or possessed technical
It therefore represented most of the influential shades
of Indian public opinion. The Indian polity at its founding witnessed deep
disagreements—not only in the sense that the dissenters were politically
significant but also that the dissent concerned fundamental
matters and was
strongly felt, strongly enough to potentially get in the way of their accepting
the constitution. I use the term
“deeply divided society,” at least
in the context of framing a constitution, as one which has several politically
significant
groups with mutually incompatible, even hostile, agendas that
consider holding out or walking out of the constitutional negotiation
feasible option, and whose exercise of that option could seriously undermine the
perceived legitimacy of the constitution in
the population generally. The
transaction cost of agreeing upon a constitution is, therefore, very high.
Our narrative of a divided India framing its constitution starts in the middle:
when Dr. Ambedkar—a key architect of India's
Constitution
Minister in Nehru’s interim cabinet, and a prominent leader of the
so-called untouchable castes—formally placed
Constitution
before the constituent assembly on the November 4, 1948, eight months after its
release for public comment.
Various aspects of the DC had been
drafted in different sub-committees of the assembly, and then finalized into one
document by the
drafting committee, under Ambedkar's chairpersonship. The
document had drawn upon a long history of proto-constitutional thinking
India, primarily in the Congress Party, leading up to independence in August
; and on comparative constitutional practices, mainly from
Western democracies.
The DC was, on the whole, a liberal, secular,
egalitarian, democratic, quasi-federal document, with entrenched civil and
rights, limited minority protections (non-discrimination, religious
freedom, and cultural autonomy, but without special political
representation),
and social and redistributive directives to
the state to achieve “economic
Rahul Sagar & Ankit Panda,
Pledges and Pious Wishes: The
Constituent Assembly Debates and the Myth of a “Nehruvian”
, 14 INDIA REV. 203 (2015). On the debates generally,
THE INDIAN CONSTITUTENT ASSEMBLY: DELIBERATIONS ON DEMOCRACY (Udit Bhatia
ed., 2018).
WINSTON CHURCHILL, CHURCHILL IN HIS OWN WORDS 163 (Richard
Longworth ed., 2008).
James Chiriyankandath, “
Creating a Secular State in a
Religious Country”: The Debate in the Indian Constituent Assembly
COMMONWEALTH & COMP. POL. 1, 5 (2000).
GRANVILLE AUSTIN, THE INDIAN
CONSTITUTION
: CORNERSTONE OF A NATION
12–14 (1966). Ambedkar himself, a political opponent of the Congress, was
elected with Congress’s
support after he lost his seat due to the
country's partition.
7 CAD, 4th Nov., 1948, 31.
Constitutional Antecedents
HANDBOOK OF THE INDIAN
CONSTITUTION
17 (Sujit Choudhry, et al. eds., 2016).
Chiriyankandath,
note 29, at 6.
A Nation on the Move”: The Indian
Constitution
Writing and Cosmopolitanism
, 13 LIFE WRITING 237, 241 (2016). Majeed
describes the Indian
Constitution
as a “cosmopolitan and transnational
On group rights and liberalism in the Indian constituent assembly
in particular,
ROCHANA BAJPAI, DEBATING
DIFFERENCE: GROUP RIGHT AND LIBERAL DEMOCRACY IN INDIA 76 (2011). Special
political representation was
democracy.”
It sought to forge a common national identity for
Indian citizens based on the
principle, i.e. citizenship tied to
the land rather than to ethnicity. As Jayal explains, "In the absence of a
singular ethnocultural
basis for nationhood, the Indian nation was substantially
a political entity under construction."
While the place of
liberalism in Indian political thought is complicated and seriously
the DC opted for liberal institutions such as
fundamental human rights, common citizenship, and state secularism. I will refer
the group of influential members of the assembly—such as Ambedkar,
Nehru, and Gopalaswamy Ayyangar—who were senior politicians
involved in
various sub-committees of the assembly, as the
of the DC. To
the extent that this is an ideologically coherent group, they were pragmatists
who subscribed to democratic constitutionalism.
The DC got an extremely hostile reception from three powerful groups in the
cultural nationalists
It became clear quickly that these three challengers had to be carried along if
the constitution were to be acceptable to all. The
labels I have stuck on the
dissenting groups are rather loose, and not unproblematic. Like the
“defenders,” these “groups”
are, by no means, insular,
and many members straddle multiple ideological worlds. Even so, the labels are a
useful heuristic. Each
of them had a strong presence within the broad church
that Congress was, but socialists and the cultural nationalists were also
influential
outside the Congress Party. The socialists benefited from the global
political turn leftward after World War II that intensified
with the start of
the process of decolonization around the same time. Gandhians sought reflected
glory the immense personal aura
of the recently assassinated Father of the
Nation who was instrumental in securing India’s independence. Cultural
nationalists
hoped to find their strength in the Hindi-speaking Hindu majority
of the partitioned country. Although it is difficult to say how
far they would
have been willing to go to stall the constitutional process, and how successful
they might have been in challenging
Nehru’s charismatic appeal, they seem
to have had sufficient mischief-making power to merit accommodation. To an
assembly that
had witnessed the devastating impact of the Muslim League’s
boycott of its proceedings before Partition which was followed
by the terrible
events around Partition, keeping everyone else on board must have been a
particularly pressing concern.
Let us start with the
. These members of the assembly, like D.
S. Seth and K.
T. Shah, leaned further left of an already Fabian/Laski-ite majority in the
and would have preferred a full-blown socialist
constitution. The Socialist Party had (after some equivocation) boycotted the
because the latter wasn’t elected on universal suffrage,
so the “socialists” we discuss here are the those who belonged
to other parties and wanted not just a socialist government
but also a socialist
constitution. Their key demands included a constitutional mandate for the
nationalization of the means of production,
prohibition of private
generally denied to religious and linguistic minorities but was provided for the
so-called Untouchable castes and certain indigenous
"By parliamentary democracy we mean 'one man, one vote' . . . it
is also the desire that we should lay down as
our ideal economic democracy . . . , whereby, so far as I am concerned, I
understand to mean, 'one man, one value'": 7 CAD, 19th
Nov., 1948, 494
(Ambedkar). The reports actually say “vote” rather than
“value,” but this must be a mistake.
This was confirmed by H. V.
Kamath’s speech, which quotes him: "Dr. Ambedkar said that to his mind,
political democracy means
one man, one vote; economic democracy means one man,
one value." 7 CAD, 23rd Nov., 1948, 33 (Kamath).
GOPAL JAYAL, CITIZENSHIP AND ITS DISCONTENTS: AN INDIAN HISTORY 52 (2013).
CHRISTOPHER
BAYLY, RECOVERING LIBERTIES: INDIAN THOUGHT IN THE AGE OF LIBERALISM AND EMPIRE
(2012); Partha Chatterjee,
Secularism and Tolerance
AND ITS CRITICS 350 (Rajeev Bhargava ed., 1998);
note 34 at, 96.
Valerian Rodrigues,
Good Society: Rights, Democracy and
AMBEDKAR IN RETROSPECT 144 (Sukhdeo Thorat & Aryama
eds., 2007). AUSTIN,
note 31, at 42.
note 30, at 41.
monopolies, co-operative organization of industry and agriculture, and other
such socialist economic policies.
They also wanted the right to
work and education to be recognized as fundamental rights rather than directive
principles.
The strength of this feeling was reflected in K. T.
Shah’s amendment to draft article 1, seeking to describe India as a
Since the DC already contained some of their
agenda as directive principles, the other two groups had stronger reasons to
feel comprehensively
excluded from the DC.
coalesced around Mahatma Gandhi's anti-modern localist vision
of a radically decentralized India: a union of autonomous, communitarian,
simple, and autarkic village republics, where the slaughter of
cows—revered by the Hindus—and alcohol consumption would
prohibited, and small-scale cottage industry and subsistence farming would
ensure economic self-sufficiency.
The DC, on the other hand,
envisaged a powerful center, with relatively weak states and no provision for
local government. The Nehruvian
vision of a strong, cosmopolitan state with a
centrally planned economy—that the DC facilitated— was particularly
odds with the Gandhian ideal of an anti-modern, anti-state autarky. As
Mahavir Tyagi lamented, “I see nothing Gandhian in this
Constitution
Ambedkar's tactless description of the village
as "a sink of localism, a den of ignorance, narrow-mindedness and
communalism"
drew much hostility from the three dissenting groups,
which made common cause on the localism question.
socialist K. T. Shah who moved to amend article 1 to require the establishment
of village “panchayats” (units
of local rural government) within ten
years of the constitution.
The majoritarian
cultural nationalists
imagined Indian nationhood in
emphatically Hindu terms and made strong assimilationist demands on minorities.
Although the main cultural
nationalist party—the
—was nominally absent from the assembly, three of its members
were elected on other platforms, including two on the Congress
Their meager numbers made little difference though, as the Congress itself
had staunch cultural nationalists like Purushottam Das
Tandon within its ranks.
They agitated for an “indigenous” name for the country
(“Hindustan” or “Bharat”),
language (Hindi), a national script (“Devanagari”), a national
anthem (“Vande Mataram”), a national
flag (“Sudarshan”),
and a uniform civil code (to replace religion-based “personal
laws”), all of these framed
in majoritarian terms.
S. L. Saksena moved an amendment to enshrine a whole new Chapter 1A to the DC,
which was essentially a Hindu—Hindi
majoritarian cultural manifesto for
the identity of the new state.
The cultural nationalist sentiment
was best captured by Seth Govind Das, who thundered: "we have accepted our
country to be a secular
state; but we never
7 CAD, 5th Nov., 1948, 399 (K. T. Shah); 7 CAD, 19th Nov., 1948,
486 (D. S. Seth); 7 CAD, 22nd Nov., 1948,
506–508 (K. T. Shah).
7 CAD, 5th Nov., 1948 (D. S. Seth).
7 CAD, 5th Nov., 1948, 399. This goal will be realized by the 42nd
Amendment to the
Constitution
in 1976, under Indira Gandhi’s
premiership.
7 CAD, 9th Nov., 1948, 359–362 (Mahavir Tyagi).
7 CAD, 9th Nov., 1948, 360.
7 CAD, 4th Nov., 1948, 39 (Ambedkar).
For examples of the backlash,
7 CAD, 5th Nov., 1948,
219 (H. V. Kamath); 7 CAD, 22nd Nov., 1948, 523 (Seth Govind Das); 7 CAD, 5th
Nov., 1948, 213 (S. L. Saksena).
7 CAD, 5th Nov., 1948, 426 (K. T. Shah).
AUSTIN, supra note 30, at 15.
7 CAD, 8th Nov., 1948, 342 (Govind Malviya).
7 CAD, 5th Nov., 1948, 222–223 (Seth Govind Das); 7 CAD, 6th
Nov., 1948, 275–279 (Thakur Das Bhargava). The nationalists
were divided
on the Uniform Civil Code: some, like K. M. Munshi supported it: 7 CAD, 23rd
Nov., 1948, 546–548 (K. M. Munshi).
But several Hindu nationalists would
later strongly oppose Ambedkar’s efforts to reform Hindu family law,
leading to his resignation
as Law Minister in 1951: ANUPAMA RAO, THE CASTE
QUESTION: DALITS AND THE POLITICS OF MODERN INDIA 168 (2009); JAFFRELOT
note 4, at 114– 117.
7 CAD, 5th Nov., 1948, 415.
thought that that acceptance implied the acceptance of the continued existence
of heterogenous cultures . . .We do not want it to
be said that there are two
cultures here."
The battle lines were drawn early, as soon as the assembly began debating
Ambedkar's motion. Each of these influential dissenting
groups found little to
be pleased about, and wrecking amendments were moved to the very first
provisions of the DC. They were all
acutely aware of the defenders' Achilles'
heel: the assembly was constituted by indirect elections on a franchise limited
by property,
tax, and education, in the dying days of the colonial empire,
rather than through direct universal adult suffrage. This made it easy
to portray the DC as "imported from outside and built from the above
downwards,"
and reflecting attitudes "typical of the urban
Each of these populist groups claimed to speak for the
people, or, at least, the “real” people of India—the poor
you were socialist, the villagers if you were Gandhian, and North Indian Hindus
if you were a cultural nationalist. The transaction
cost of settling
India’s constitution was extremely high.
Even so, these groups did agree with the defenders on two things. First, almost
all members of the constituent assembly signed up
to democracy, and were united
in their strong preference for politics over violence as the mechanism for
resolving their disputes.
Gandhi’s successful non-violent struggle against
the colonial Empire must have strengthened the ideological aversion to organized
political violence. Post-partition bloodshed did not leave much appetite for
more. The belief of the dissenters that they had the
“people” behind
them might even have encouraged them to accept programmatic directives in a
democratic constitution,
on the assumption that the political realization of
their respective agendas would be relatively straightforward as long as the
constitution
permitted (or, better still, directed) such realization. The main
exception to this consensus against violence was the Communist
Party of India,
which—although (just about) represented in the constituent
assembly—launched an armed insurrection in
1948, but withdrew it in 1950
to fight the first general elections.
Second, given the appalling living conditions of the majority of the people in
the country, they understood the burden of the expectations
they all carried,
and instinctively knew that the new constitution had to be transformative if it
had to have any durability or legitimacy.
Indeed, writing
pseudonymously almost a decade before he would actually become prime minister,
Jawaharlal Nehru was reflective enough
to see his own popularity as a threat to
India's first prime minister knew full well that
democracy must deliver real social transformation if India was to avoid populist
authoritarianism: a fear his daughter Indira Gandhi would realize disastrously,
if briefly, a few decades hence. The great storyteller
Manto passed a
devastating verdict on the reform-oriented Government of India Act 1935: "What
new constitution? It's the same old
constitution, you fool."
framers could not afford a similar assessment of the constitution they were
The political context of the late 1940s postcolonial India was also relevant:
Mahatma Gandhi had recently been assassinated by a
Hindu nationalist,
post-Partition religious riots had seen mass population transfers and the murder
and rape of millions of people
across India and Pakistan, the new nation-states
had already been to war over Kashmir, the fear of a Communist
9 CAD, 12th Sept., 1949, 1328.
7 CAD, 5th Nov., 1948, 212 (D. S. Seth).
7 CAD, 5th Nov., 1948, 219 (H. V. Kamath).
RAMACHANDRA GUHA, INDIA AFTER GANDHI: THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD'S
LARGEST DEMOCRACY (2008).
7 CAD, 23rd Nov., 1948, 533 (H. V. Kamath): "If political
democracy is allowed to evolve, to grow, into economic, social democracy,
we would not have strife, we will not have wars, we will not have a totalitarian
form of Government."
The Rashtrapati
, 62 MOD. REV. (CALCUTTA) 546
(Nov. 1937).
Saadat Hasan Manto,
Constitution
DAWN: FIFTY SKETCHES AND STORIES OF PARTITION 165, 175 (1997).
uprising was rife,
Cold War between the USA and the USSR had begun
on the heels of the disastrous World War II,
and a few of the 562
semi-autonomous princely states were toying with independence. All this at a
time when the colonial state had
partitioned the country on religious lines and
transferred power in such a remarkable hurry and with such unconscionably meager
preparation
that any new indigenous administration would have had enough on its
plate even without the accompanying litany of horrors.
This is the
context in which bitterly divided Indians decided to write up a constitution,
adopting universal adult suffrage for a
huge, illiterate, and extremely poor
population with vast cultural, linguistic, and religious diversity. As
politicians dealing with
day-to-day problems, the members of the assembly would
have been well aware of the challenges that faced India—although acutely
aware of its distinct roles,
the constituent assembly doubled up as
independent India’s interim legislative assembly and supplied its interim
headed by Nehru. They hoped not only that the constitution would
but also that it would secure a state that would strive
towards their respective partisan utopias.
5. Directive principles in the Indian
Constitution
Directive principles emerged as a potential tool to
secure the consent of the three dissenting groups—socialists, Gandhians,
and cultural nationalists—soon after the assembly started its
consideration of the DC. As early as November 5, a day after
the discussion on
the DC began, Ambedkar assured the socialists that much of their agenda was
already contained in the chapter on
directive principles
Ananthasayanam Ayyangar—another prominent leader not to be confused with
Gopalaswami
Ayyangar—argued on the same day that the faction-ridden
village life needed to be gradually prepared for democratic principles,
requesting the withdrawal of decentralization amendments in lieu of a promise
that he himself would move an amendment to that effect
as a directive
That the directives could have been a conscious strategy of the defenders to
accommodate the dissenters is also hinted at by another
fact: in its eight
sessions between November 4 and November 18, 1948, the Assembly considered the
motion re the Draft
Constitution
and the four introductory articles constituting
the state. During these eight sessions, the hostility of the three groups to the
DC had become more than apparent. Towards the end of the session on November 18,
1948, the Vice President who was chairing the session,
declared that the
discussion on the following day—November 19—would open with the
consideration of
of the DC containing the directives, rather than the
structurally prior
and III relating to citizenship and fundamental
rights, respectively. Some members understandably protested against this sudden
inexplicable change of schedule. Whether this change in schedule was
designed to get the hostile groups on board before moving on
7 CAD, 22nd Nov., 1948, 522 (T. Prakasam): "Let me tell you above
all that Communism—the menace the country is facing . . .
Communism can be
checked immediately if the villages are organized in this manner and if they are
made to function properly."
7 CAD, 23rd Nov., 1948, 531 (M. Tyagi): "In Russia, they say,
there is already achieved economic democracy, but this economic democracy
Russia has concentrated all power in the hands of the State, with the result
that the State has become autocratic."
On the immediate political and economic context
AUSTIN, supra note 30, at 43f.
As a member referred to “the government” when the
house sat as the constituent assembly, another member was quick to chide
“What has this House got to do with the Government?” 7 CAD, 19th
Nov., 1948, 490 (T.
T. Krishnamachari).
This hope wasn’t shared by all. In fact, Nehru himself
thought that this
Constitution
would be temporary: “I do think that [at]
some time or other in the future we may have to summon our own proper
revolutionary
Constituent Assembly”: DOROTHY NORMAN, NEHRU, FIRST SIXTY
YEARS 235 (1965).
7 CAD, 5th Nov., 1948, 402 (Ambedkar).
7 CAD, 5th Nov., 1948, 428 (M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar).
the other parts of the constitution is unclear from the debates, but we have
good reasons to speculate.
India borrowed the concept of directive principles from the Irish
Constitution
and the International Bill of Rights drafted by Hersch Lauterpacht in
Most of the directive principles in the Indian
Constitution
are to be found in chapter IV of the document. Some, however, such as the
directive to promote the spread and enrichment of Hindi
language, may be found
Most of the directives—as originally enacted in
Constitution
— can be classified into three categories based on
the degree of agreement surrounding their content in the assembly debates.
directives—concerning foreign policy in the Cold War world,
protection of national monuments,
and separation of the lower
judiciary and the executive
—are not included in the
classification that follows as they are not directly relevant to the account in
this article.
The agreement-sensitive classification that follows tracks the degree of
consensus around specific directives, rather than disagreement
over the status
and place of directive principles generally. Some members were against the whole
idea of directive principles: either
because they (or at least the less
controversial ones initially proposed in the DC) were "obvious truths" that did
not need legislating
or because they were "certain principles of a
particular school of thought" and therefore "contrary to the principles of
parliamentary
democracy,"
or because they should have been
guaranteed as fundamental rights instead.
We will ignore this sort
of meta-disagreement.
An agreement-sensitive classification results in three categories of directives:
uncontested directives
, over which there was almost no
disagreement. The second category— the
partially contested
—saw broad agreement over the general goal of achieving
social, economic, and political justice but deep disagreement over the
means to secure that. In the final category were the
deeply contested
, the legitimacy of whose very goals were seriously disputed, and
almost all of which were later additions to the DC.
interesting to note that Weis identifies three distinct reasons why framers
might wish to shield constitutional norms from judicial
enforcement: resource
constraints, information constraints, and deep moral disagreements,
which seem to correlate neatly with the uncontested, the partially
contested, and the deeply contested directives, respectively.
The first class of these directives (the uncontested directives) includes those
over which there was no or negligible disagreement
in the assembly: neither were
the stipulated goals disputed, nor was there any serious debate over the means
for securing them. These
directives were contained in the DC and made it to the
final document more or less unscathed. The most important set of directives
this category relate to a basic social minimum, or what Rawls
note 36, at 145.
INDIA CONST. art. 351.
art. 350A directing the
state to endeavor “to provide adequate facilities for instruction in the
mother-tongue at the primary
stage of education to children belonging to
linguistic minority groups.”
INDIA CONST. art. 51.
INDIA CONST. art. 49.
INDIA CONST. art. 50.
7 CAD, 5th Nov., 1948, 225 (Naziruddin Ahmad).
7 CAD, 19th Nov., 1948, 488 (Mahboob Baig Sahib Bahadur).
K. T. Shah,
Minutes of Dissent to the Report of the
Sub-Committee on Fundamental Rights, April 17-20, 1947
FRAMING OF INDIA'S
CONSTITUTION
: SELECT DOCUMENTS § 2, 191, 192 (B. Shiva
Rao ed., 1967); 7 CAD,
19th Nov., 1948, 473 (Kazi Syed Karimuddin).
For another classification of the Indian directives,
Bertus de Villiers,
Socio-Economic Rights in a New
Constitution
Evaluation of the Recommendations of the South African Law Commission
J.S. AFR. L. 35
–37 (1992).
note 24, at 935.
called constitutional essentials. These included the right to livelihood,
equal pay for equal work for men and women,
right to work and
unemployment benefit,
maternity relief,
and free and compulsory education for children.
The main debate on these provisions was over their status, with several
members demanding that they be enacted as immediately enforceable
fundamental
The main reason for enacting them as directives was that
some lawyers prevailed in convincing the drafting committee that guaranteeing
them as rights was not “practicable” as they are "not normally
either capable of, or suitable for, enforcement by legal
This category includes the directives that the Indian Supreme Court would
later go on to read into the fundamental right to life guaranteed
under article
The second category mostly contains directives relating to distributive justice
(the partially contested directives). For this category,
there is a broad
agreement in the assembly over a general aim that the state should seek,
encapsulated in article 38: "The State
shall strive to promote the welfare of
the people by securing and protecting as effectively as it may a social order in
which justice,
social, economic and political, shall inform all the institutions
of the national life."
Article 38 may even be considered the master directive, its abstract pursuit of
welfare and justice never contested. Every transformative
visionary believed
that their route would lead to this ultimate utopia. It might even be seen as
having some controlling impact on
how all other directives were justified in the
assembly, i.e. as particular manifestations of this overall goal. But beyond
agreement over the abstract goal of socio-economic justice, there were deep
divisions over the appropriate means that would get us
A few further distributive justice directives, slightly more specific, also make
it to the final text: one to secure that “ownership
and control of the
material resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the
common good,”
another to prevent “the concentration of
wealth and means of production to the common detriment,”
third to “endeavour to secure . . . a living wage . . . and, in
particular, . . . promote cottage industries on an individual
or co-operative
The reference to cottage industries was a later
addition following a floor amendment. Viewed on their own they may sound
socialistic,
but these directives did not include some of the more specific and
far-reaching socialist demands (nationalization of resources,
prohibition of
private monopolies, co-operative farms and industry, explicit adoption of state
socialism).
Given that context, these were relatively weak or open-ended means of securing
distributive justice. Ambedkar steadfastly opposed
all socialist attempts to
specify the means of achieving economic democracy. In the quote that follows, he
emphasized that the route
to economic democracy must be ascertained through
political democracy. He asked rhetorically:
INDIA CONST. art. 39(a).
INDIA CONST. art. 39(d).
INDIA CONST. art. 41.
INDIA CONST. art. 42.
INDIA CONST. art. 43.
INDIA CONST. art. 45, as originally enacted; since translated into
a fundamental right in article 21A in 2002.
, 7 CAD, 19
Nov., 1948, 480
(K. T. Shah).
Notes on Fundamental Rights, Sept 2, 1946
note 74, at 21, 33.
note 37, at
Tarunabh Khaitan & Farrah Ahmed,
Constitutional Avoidance
in Social Rights Adjudication
35 OXFORD J. LEGAL STUD. 607
INDIA CONST. art. 39(b).
INDIA CONST. art. 39(c).
INDIA CONST. art. 43.
7 CAD, 19th Nov., 1948, 486–487 (D. S. Seth); 7 CAD, 19th
Nov., 1948, 491 (Hussain Imam); 7 CAD, 22nd
Nov. 1948 506–508 (K. T. Shah);
at 516–518 (Jadubans
. . . having regard to the fact that there are various ways by which economic
democracy may be brought about, we have deliberately
introduced . . . language
that . . . is not fixed or rigid. We have left enough room for people of
different ways of thinking . .
. to strive in their own way, to persuade the
electorate that it is the best way of reaching economic
The third category of directives (the deeply contested directives) were those
whose goals themselves were vehemently contested. Most
of these directives were
later additions to the DC, through amendments from the floor, as concessions
that the defenders made to
various dissenting groups. These included a directive
to “take steps to organise village panchayats . . . as units of
self-government,”
to “endeavour to secure . . . a
uniform civil code,”
to improve public health and “in
particular . . . endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption .
. . of intoxicating drinks,”
to “organise agriculture
and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and . . . in particular,
take steps for . . . prohibiting
the slaughter of cows,”
to “promote the spread of the Hindi language, to develop it” by
assimilating Hindustani, Sanskrit, and other Indian
Most of the advocates of these divisive directives belonged to one of the three
populist groups that lost out overall in the constitutional
bargain: Gandhians,
socialists, and cultural nationalists. These directives acknowledged and
accommodated some of their agendas in
the constitution and thereby mitigated
their opposition to the DC. This accommodation was, however, a qualified one: it
incrementalist
. The next section will show
6. Incrementalism and containment
The obvious way to secure the consent of any dissenting
group is through accommodation of their normative agenda. As we saw in the
previous section, this is exactly what the framers of the Indian
Constitution
did, by incorporating some of the key socialist, Gandhian, and cultural
nationalist demands as directive principles in the constitution.
straightforward accommodation in the face of deep disagreement creates a new
problem as it solves another, because accommodation
of one group is likely to
anger another. Taking everyone along requires a fine balancing act, one that
offers enough sops to the
dissenters, but not so many that their detractors in
turn feel tempted to jump ship. Furthermore, the defenders’ conception
legitimacy constraints would also place limits on how far they can go with
accommodating illiberal dissenters. Possibly for this
reason, the framers
resisted all attempts to incorporate these radical agendas in the preamble or
the opening provisions of the constitution,
recognizing them in the expressively
less salient directives instead. The framers also used two key techniques to
achieve a balanced
accommodation:
containment
constitutional
incrementalism
. Containment is a strategy of deradicalization: even as the
agendas of the dissenters were accommodated, the defenders defanged and
contained them as far as they were able to. The key containment tools they used
were dilution, instantiation, and qualification.
Constitutional incrementalism
is a strategy of deferral: while the agenda is accommodated, its realization is
postponed to a future
date, thereby reducing the tension somewhat. Both tools
seek to reduce the high decision costs associated with constitution-making
deeply divided context. I do not claim that either tool is exclusive to
directive principles. My claim in what follows is simply
that the contested
directives in India tended to be contained, and that directive principles, by
virtue of being directive
principles, generally entail
constitutional
7 CAD, 19th Nov., 1948, 494 (Ambedkar).
INDIA CONST. art. 40.
INDIA CONST. art. 44.
INDIA Const. art. 47.
INDIA CONST. art. 48.
INDIA CONST. art. 351.
incrementalism (even though there may be other tools to achieve such
incrementalism). The following subsections will examine each
of these tools in
some detail.
6.1. Containment
Although these bitterly divisive directives did make
their way into the constitution, the defenders—chiefly Ambedkar—made
a number of strategic interventions to contain them, take the sting out
somewhat, and move each radical agenda somewhat closer to
the center ground. The
containment
tools they used were
instantiation
qualification
was used with respect to the Gandhian directive concerning
village panchayats. Many members wanted the directive to specify not only
localist goal of rural self-government but also the autarkic objective of
self-sufficiency.
Fully conscious of the backlash that followed his
remarks about villages while introducing the DC, Ambedkar lost no time in
to the most diluted amendment that sought self-governing panchayats,
without any mention of self-sufficiency.
The demand for a directive
to promote co-operative cottage industries was diluted by Ambedkar adding
“individual or” before
the phrase “co- operative,” to
permit both forms of organizations.
The relevant part of the
diluted directive finally required that “the State shall endeavour to
promote cottage industries on
individual or
co-operative basis in
rural areas.” Dilution was also used in provisions other than directives
too. Ayyangar, for example, moved
for the recognition of Hindi not as a
“national” language— as the cultural nationalists
demanded—but rather
as an “official” language of the
Instantiation
was another strategy that Ambedkar used frequently to
temper the radicalism of a demand. He did so by adding the radical demand as
instance of a more general (and more generally accepted) principle, thereby
giving the broader acceptable principle a controlling
role in determining the
meaning of the particular contested directive. He killed an attempt to introduce
a self-standing directive
on alcohol prohibition by successfully cutting a deal
to have it introduced as a particular instance of another general directive,
that required the state to raise nutritional standards and public
joining the two directives with a cleverly introduced "in
particular" at the last minute.
The instantiated directive that
became article 47 finally read: “The State shall regard the raising of the
level of nutrition
and the standard of living of its people and the improvement
of public health as among its primary duties and,
in particular
State shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption . . . of
intoxicating drinks . . .” (emphasis added).
Similarly, the socialist demand for the promotion of cooperative cottage
industries in villages was tempered by making it a particular
and illustrative
instance of the general directive to secure a living wage and decent standards
The compromise formulation Ambedkar agreed upon with
Thakur Das Bharagava made the prohibition of cow slaughter a particular means
seeking the general organization of agriculture and animal husbandry “on
modern and scientific lines.”
His acceptance of these
instantiated directives facilitated the withdrawal of far more radical and
self-standing versions of these
objectives, and the controlling instantiation of
these goals nested within broader—uncontroversial—goals left some
for the dissenters. On this reading, instantiation entailed
particularization
7 CAD, 22nd Nov., 1948, 521–522 (T. Prakasam); 7 CAD, 22nd
Nov., 1948, 525 (V. Subramanian); 7 CAD,
22nd Nov., 1948, 525 (L. Krishnaswamy Bharati).
7 CAD, 22nd Nov., 1948, 520 (K. Santhanam).
7 CAD, 23rd Nov., 1948, 535 (Ambedkar).
9 CAD, 12th Sept., 1949, 1318 (N. Gopalaswami Ayyangar).
7 CAD, 22nd Nov., 1948, 501 (Ambedkar).
7 CAD, 22nd Nov., 1948, 566 (Ambedkar).
7 CAD, 23rd Nov., 948, 530 (T. A. Ramalingam Chattier); 7 CAD,
22nd Nov., 1948, 535 (Ambedkar).
7 CAD, 24th Nov., 1948, 568 (Bhargava and Ambedkar).
comprehensive radical agendas were boiled down to single, specific, demands
which would be difficult to expand upon or generate general
principles.
Instantiation might in fact explain Ambedkar's odd understanding of the nature
of the political duty that the alcohol prohibition
directive imposed. Throughout
the debates on the uncontested directives, Ambedkar had unwaveringly insisted
that although not justiciable,
the political duties imposed by these directives
were real and the state had no option but to act: "It is the intention of this
that in future both the legislature and the executive should not merely
pay lip service to these principles enacted in this part,
but that they should
be made the basis of all executive and legislative action."
But when it came to the prohibition directive, he surprisingly said this in
response to the liberal objections of Professor Khardekar:
There is . . .
no compulsion on the State to act
on this principle.
Whether to act on this principle and when to do so are left to the State and to
public opinion. Therefore, if the
State thinks that the time has not come for
introducing prohibition or that it might be introduced gradually or partially,
these Directive Principles it has the full liberty to
The part of this statement that suggests that the state has the liberty to
decide when and how to act is in keeping with the partial
deferral account that
I will provide in the next subsection. But, the claim—that it is also open
to the state to decide
to act at all— seems surprising. It
is clearly at odds with his earlier, and oft-repeated, claims about the nature
of directive
principles. It is true that Ambedkar is primarily a politician, and
we need not expect him to always be coherent or consistent. Even
so, we can read
the two claims coherently if we accept that instantiation relegates the
instantiated directive to be applicable only
if, when, and to the extent that it
serves the controlling general directive, which remains the primary duty of the
This reading is further supported by the manner in which the cow slaughter
debate proceeded in the assembly. The directive on cow
slaughter prohibition was
controlled by a general directive to organize agriculture on scientific lines.
Speaking in support of the
directive, Thakur Dass Bhargava insisted that he did
"not appeal to you in the name of religion; I ask you to consider it in the
light of economic requirements of the country," mainly a secure supply of
In response, Syed Muhammad Saiadulla decried the hypocrisy
of the Hindu nationalists using pseudo-scientific arguments to support
directive, asking them to come out openly by declaring their real religious
motives upfront.
The fact that Bhargava and others felt
constrained to offer “scientific” reasons for prohibiting
cow-slaughter suggests
an acceptance of the controlling nature of the general
directive to which the directive on the prohibition of cow slaughter was
instantiated.
If this reading is correct, as I think it is, the framers accepted that the
state's latent duty to prohibit the consumption of alcohol
may kick in only if
alcohol consumption becomes a threat to public health and nutritional standards;
cow slaughter prohibition is
required only when doing so is in service of
organizing agriculture on scientific lines; cooperative cottage industries need
only if they help secure a living wage and a decent standard of living.
Instantiation may have the potential to substantially transform
the nature of
the political duty a directive imposes.
7 CAD, 10th Nov., 1948, 476 (Ambedkar).
19th Nov., 1948, 490 (K. Hanumanthaiya).
7 CAD, 24th Nov., 1948, 566 (Ambedkar) (emphasis added). In this
speech, Ambedkar appears to have confused B. H. Kha
dekar with another
assembly member H. J. Kha
dekar—the liberal objections against
alcohol prohibition were raised by the former.
7 CAD, 24th Nov., 1948, 570 (T. D. Bhargava).
7 CAD, 24th Nov., 1948, 578 (S. M. Saiadulla).
The third containment strategy—
qualification
—is most obvious
in the language directive. The cultural nationalists wanted Hindi as the
national language and the Muslim minority
wanted Hindustani—a composite
language comprising Hindi and Urdu. Some nationalists even wanted the classical
language Sanskrit
to be revived as a spoken language and adopted as a national
one. So divisive was the issue that Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, a prominent
Congress politician, had resigned from the drafting committee after it opted for
Hindi as the official language.
The compromise Munshi-Ayyangar
formula concerning language policy included what became article 351: a rather
complicated directive,
requiring the union to “promote the spread of the
Hindi language, to develop it so that it may serve as a medium of expression
all the elements of the
composite culture
of India, and to secure its
enrichment by assimilating . . . the forms, style and expressions used in
and in the other languages of India . . ., and by drawing . .
. for its vocabulary, primarily on
and secondarily on other
languages.”
The qualification of the support for Hindi with
references to India's composite culture and Hindustani were partly in response
Azad’s resignation,
and allowed secularists like Nehru to
reluctantly endorse it.
These containment tools therefore allowed the framers to walk a fine line that
the context necessitated. Combined with incrementalism,
the effect was one of
containing the radicalism of the populist demands not just at the constitutional
moment but well into the political
future. There were reasons to believe that
the content of the constitutionalized directives would come to control the
manner in which
the demands can be articulated and the reasons for which they
could be justified—for example, by inextricably linking the prohibition
cow slaughter to modern and scientific agriculture. Understood thus, containment
gave something to the winners too, while accommodating
the dissenters.
6.2. Incrementalism
A key technique to reduce decision costs in deeply
divided societies is
constitutional incrementalism
. The key to
incrementalist negotiation is that each group tests the incremental or marginal
value of the proposal on the table: not
whether the proposal is ideal
objectively, but whether it is better than a plausible alternative.
Under an incrementalist approach, "The test of a 'good' policy is
typically that various analysts find themselves directly agreeing
on a policy
(without also agreeing that it is the most appropriate means to an agreed
objective)."
The idea of seeking political objectives through
multiple small steps, characterized as "muddling through" by Charles Lindblom,
echoes in the later works of several other theorists.
Incrementalism ensures that the winner does not take all, and that the
losers are left with enough (either now or in the future) to
agree to endorse
the package. It should be obvious that incrementalism can be key to meeting the
stability constraints for constitutions
in deeply divided societies.
To the extent that constitutionalization usually comes with entrenchment and
incrementalism requires a step-by-step approach to change,
constitutional
incrementalism may
9 CAD, 13th Sept., 1949, 1456 (Azad). There was another
linguistic battle between Hindi and English as the preferred official language:
this was resolved through a “by-law” provision to be discussed in
the next subsection.
INDIA CONST. art. 351 (emphasis added).
9 CAD, 13th Sept., 1949, 1456 (Azad).
9 CAD, 13th Sept., 1949, 1411 (Nehru).
Charles Lindblom,
The Science of “Muddling
19 PUB. ADMIN. REV. 79
, 83 (1959).
POLITICAL LIBERALISM,
note 25, at 89f.
note 112, at 81.
CASS SUNSTEIN, DESIGNING DEMOCRACY: WHAT CONSTITUTIONS
DO 64f (2001); HANNA LERNER, MAKING CONSTITUTIONS IN DEEPLY DIVIDED SOCIETIES
2011); JEFF KING, JUDGING SOCIAL RIGHTS 289f (2012); Dixon & Ginsburg,
note 10. Some of the literature specifically deals with
transitional societies: RUTI G. TEITEL, TRANSITIONAL JUSTICE 196 (2000).
seem oxymoronic. It is not so. What constitutional incrementalism seeks to do is
to transfer at least some of the decisional weight
away from the present to the
future, and away from the constitution to politics: i.e. adopting at least a
two-step approach rather
than doing all the heavy lifting at once. As Lerner
puts it: "All constitutional strategies included in the incrementalist toolbox
are intended to defer to the future controversial choices regarding the
foundational aspects of the constitution in order to permit
some form of
agreement on a constitution to be reached."
As long as current
losers believe they are likely to succeed in the future even as they lose right
now, they may consent to an incrementalist
settlement.
Another apparent contradiction may lie in using an “incrementalist”
device to seek “transformation.” However,
as Lindblom explained,
"incrementalism in politics is not, in principle, slow moving. It is not
necessarily, therefore, a tactic
of conservatism. A fast-moving sequence of
small changes can more speedily accomplish a drastic alteration of the
than can an only infrequent major policy change . . . incremental change
patterns are, under ordinary circumstances, the fastest method
available. . . . They do not rock the boat, they do not stir up the great
antagonisms and paralyzing schisms as do proposals
for more drastic
This, of course, may not always be the case. But at least
sometimes, not only is incrementalism not in tension with transformative
constitutionalism, it may even be the most efficient way of securing it.
Indeed, the larger the scale of the transformation sought, the larger is
the gap between the status quo and the end goal. The sheer
impossibility of
bridging this gap immediately would give reasons even to the staunchest
advocates of the transformation to accept
some deferral. For example, on the
debate on official language, most Hindi- nationalists accepted that
time was required to get an administration that has transacted mostly in
English to switch to Hindi, and also for residents of non–Hindi-speaking
states to learn the language.
Thus, far from being in tension with
incrementalism, transformative constitutionalism seems to demand
Dixon and Ginsburg provide an excellent account of a classic constitutional
incrementalist tool: "by-law" clauses, through which
"constitution-makers
self-consciously choose not to bind their successors"; instead they "explicitly
delegate certain constitutional
questions to future legislatures."
By “deciding not to decide,” they reduce the decision costs
and potential error costs at the time of framing the constitution.
Dixon and Ginsburg don't use the label “incrementalism,” they locate
“by-law” clauses in the same
family of decision-cost-reducing tools
such as easy amendability, vagueness, and “sunset”
provisions.
Lerner adds ambiguity, opaqueness, and internal
contradiction to this list of deferral tools.
All these tools
of current, constitutional, controversies to future,
political, ones.
Framers of the Indian
Constitution
understood the value of deferral. Nehru
explicitly pleaded for the deferral of the language controversies before the
I would not have thought that this [linguistic reorganization of states] was a
question of that primary importance, which must be
settled here and now today.
It is eminently a question which should be settled in an atmosphere of good-will
and calm and on a rather
scholarly discussion . . . when heat and passion are
there, the mind is clouded . . . treat
note 114, at 39.
Charles Lindblom,
Still Muddling, Not Yet Through
ADMIN. REV. 517
, 520 (1979).
Jeff King's advocacy of judicial incrementalism
in the judicial enforcement of social rights in constitutions that permit them
9 CAD, 13th Nov., 1949, 1443 (Purushottam Das Tandon).
Even in the South African
Constitution
with judicially
enforceable social rights, Jeff King describes the Constitutional Court's
approach to these rights as incrementalist.
accompanying note 114.
Dixon & Ginsburg,
10, at 637.
note 114, at 39.
it as a thing which should be settled not in a hurry when passions are roused,
but at a suitable moment when the time is ripe for
it. The same argument . . .
applies to this question of [official] language . . . if in trying to press for
a change, an immediate
change, we get wrapped up in numerous controversies and
possibly even delay the whole
Constitution
, . . . it is not a very wise step to
take . . . Because it is vital, it is also an urgent matter; and because it is
vital, it is
also a matter in which urgency may ill- serve our
The assembly listened by enacting a slew of by-law clauses. Article 3 of the
constitution provided that "Parliament may by law" reorganize
states, normally
after consultation with the states concerned. Article 343 recognized Hindi as
the "official language" of the union,
but provided for the continuation of
English for a period of fifteen years which may be extended by parliament "by
law." As it happened,
after considerable heat and passion in struggles waged on
the streets in the 1950s, parliament did reorganize the states six years
the constitution came into force, and it did extend the use of English as an
official language before the sunset clause expired.
What is pertinent to note is
that the constitution did not require parliament to do any of this: these
“by-law” clauses
were constitution permissions, not mandates. We
could describe this as a
deferral: a future parliament had the full
power to decide whether to act and how to act. The constitution merely settled
the default
position if parliament did nothing. On the organization of states,
the constitutional default was the continued existence of the
existing state
boundaries. On official language, the constitutional default was the expiry of
English's status as an official language
after fifteen years. But beyond setting
a default, the constitution did not direct parliament in any manner. The
determination of
whether and how was left to politics. Even the question of when
to act was left entirely open on the reorganization question, although
constitution did set parliament a deadline of fifteen years with respect to the
official language question.
By-law clauses were not the only deferral tool used in the Indian
Constitution
Chiriyankandath explains how
was used to adopt multiple
variants of secularism in the Indian
Constitution
, so that most groups felt able
to sign up to their own interpretations.
Abstraction
specifically adopted while specifying distributive justice goals. Ambedkar
resisted most specification attempts by the socialists
by insisting that the
clauses "have been drafted in general language deliberately for a set
; that purpose evidently being to secure what Sunstein
would call an “incompletely theorized agreement” between divided
contradiction
was used: some of the socialist
directives were in tension with the right to property,
Hindu-majoritarian directives potentially contradicted freedom of trade
and freedom of religion.
These tensions were noted in the
Assembly debates, and would be fertile battleground for continuing legal and
political debates for
decades after independence.
easy amendability
enshrined in article 368 was itself a
7 CAD, 8th Nov., 1948, 320–321.
Prakasam, welcoming the compromise directive on panchayats which allowed them to
proceed "without interrupting the progress of
Constitution
at this stage." 7
CAD, 22nd Nov., 1948, 521–522.
Chiriyankandath,
7 CAD, 22nd Nov., 1948, 519 (Ambedkar).
note 114, at 50: where parties
agree to constitutional practices even though they have different underlying
reasons for supporting
Former article 19(1)(f), since relegated to a mere
“constitutional” (rather than a fundamental) right in article 300A.
INDIA CONST. arts. 19(1) (f), 300A.
INDIA CONST. art. 19(1)(g).
INDIA CONST. art. 25.
note 36, at 158f.; Bhatia,
note 8; Namita Wahi,
THE OXFORD HANDBOOK
OF THE INDIAN
CONSTITUTION
943 (Sujit Choudhry, Madhav Khosla, & Pratap
Bhanu Mehta eds., 2016); Flavia Agnes,
Personal Laws
OXFORD HANDBOOK OF THE INDIAN
CONSTITUTION
903 (Sujit Choudhry, Madhav
constitutional incrementalist device.
For most matters that did
not affect the states, the future parliament—elected directly on universal
franchise—was vested
with the constituent power to amend the constitution
through a simple majority. Nehru explicitly recognized this as necessary in
to make up for the democratic deficit in the constituent assembly.
Losing groups knew they had the opportunity to revisit aspects of the
constitutional settlement. This is indeed what happened. Many
of the socialist
demands, for example, would be satisfied by the 42
Amendment to the
Constitution
in 1976, and the Gandhian localist agenda would be
constitutionalized by the 73
Amendment in 1992.
What makes directive principles,
qua directive principles
, a deferral
device? A few scholars have recently mentioned their role as deferral tools in
the Indian context, most of them incidentally.
Lerner identifies a
reason why directive principles,
, are a deferral tool— she
claims it is down to their non-justiciability. Even as she makes this
connection, a clear explanation
for the same is not forthcoming. Although
non-justiciability is important, it is in fact the
programmatic
of directives which really explains the inherent incrementalism of such
principles. Recall that this feature acknowledges
that there will be a time lag
between the adoption of a directive and its ultimate realization. It is true
that some directives can
be realized relatively quickly: a uniform civil code
can simply be legislated. But we are not, for the moment, speaking of
incrementalism
generally but of
constitutional incrementalism
particular. All that this requires is the deferral of a problem from the current
constitutional domain to a future (in this case,
political) domain.
Constitutional incrementalism entails
two steps in
problem-solving: a constitutional recognition of the problem and a subsequent
political resolution of the same. This
is exactly what the deeply divisive
directives achieved. By enshrining the prohibition of cow slaughter and alcohol
consumption,
the enactment of a uniform civil code, and the accommodation of the
cooperative and other socialist agendas as directives, the constitution
that these issues will remain on the political agenda of the future state. But
by recognizing them
as directives
, the framers simultaneously avoided
having to make a costly political decision on these divisive questions at a
fraught constitutional
moment. These issues had to be addressed, but not now; by
future politics rather than by the present constitutional text.
Having said that, directive principles do not just envisage
constitutional
incrementalism, they also require
incrementalism. The
political duty they impose is akin to “progressive realisation” duty
recognized with respect to social
rights in the South African
Constitution
The use of programmatic verbs such as
“strive,” “direct,” “take steps,” and
“make effective
provisions for” by the Indian directives suggests
that they expect the future political realization of these directives to
a multi-step process rather than a single-step event. As such, they also demand
political incrementalism. Remember that these
steps can be
Khosla, & Pratap Bhanu Mehta eds., 2016); Shraddha Chigateri,
Negotiating
the “Sacred” Cow: Cow Slaughter and the Regulation of Difference in
DEMOCRACY, RELIGIOUS PLURALISM AND THE LIBERAL DILEMMA OF
ACCOMMODATION (Monica Mookherjee ed., 2011).
The Supreme Court put major constraints on Parliament’s
amendment power in Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, (1973) 4
7 CAD 8th Nov., 1948, 323 (Nehru): “while we, who are
assembled in this House, undoubtedly represent the people of India, nevertheless
I think it can be said, and truthfully, that when a new House, by whatever name
it goes, is elected in terms of this
Constitution
, and every adult in India has
the right to vote—man and woman— the House that emerges then will
certainly be fully representative
of every section of the Indian people. It is
right that House elected so—under this
Constitution
of course it will have
the right to do anything—should have an easy opportunity to make such
changes as it wants to.”
Lerner's account is, relatively speaking, the most developed in
this regard:
Hanna Lerner,
The Indian Founding: A Comparative
Perspective
THE OXFORD HANDBOOK OF THE INDIAN
CONSTITUTION
(Sujit Choudhry, Madhav Khosla, & Pratap Bhanu Mehta eds., 2016). In a
public lecture in Melbourne in April 2016, Sudhir
Krishnaswamy also referred, in
passing, to directive principles as deferral devices.
S. AFR. CONST. §§ 26(2), 27(2), etc.
taken in quick succession or over a longer period: what is key is that the
character of the third step depends on the success (or
otherwise) of the second,
the fourth on the third, and so on. In the debates, Ambedkar clearly envisaged
that the nature of the political
duty being imposed was programmatic. Even on
the question of the uniform civil code, he reassured the dissenting minorities
by suggesting
that it should be pursued in a programmatic manner:
Article 35 . . . merely proposes that the State shall
a civil code for the citizens of the country. It does not say that after the
Code is framed the State shall enforce it upon
all citizens merely because they
are citizens . . .
in the initial stage
the application of the Code may
be purely voluntary. Parliament may
feel the ground
by some such method .
Notice especially the reference to parliament “feeling the ground”
with a voluntary code first, and implying it should
push ahead only after
evaluating its reception. In fact, he may even be implying a duty on the state
to constantly evaluate whether
the original reasons responsible for the deferral
of the directive in the first place continue to obtain. So, if the reason for
was resource constraints, the realization duty applies in proportion to
available resources, and when that reason is no longer operative,
the state's
duty to realize the directive becomes fully manifest. On information-sensitive
directives concerning the economic organization
of the state, Ambedkar was of
the view that it was up to each ideological group "to persuade the electorate
that it is the best way
of reaching economic democracy."
test he laid down for making decisions in the context of information scarcity
was a democratic one, and therefore reversible
when a different ideological
party came to power. With respect to deeply divisive directives, there is some
suggestion in his advice
to “feel the ground” that a mere
majoritarian political decision will not do, and that the views of the
dissenting minority
will be key. In fact, the president of the assembly,
Rajendra Prasad, opened the language debate by reminding members “that
will not do to carry a point by debate in this House. The decision of the House
should be acceptable to the country
was supported by Gadgil, who said of the language directive that the "Hindi
people [have to] . . . win over the rest by propaganda,
not in an aggressive
manner but in a persuasive manner."
So, directive principles are
incrementalist in the constitutional as well as the political sense.
The second feature of their character as deferral tools is that they envisage
rather than
deferral. To understand the distinction,
consider some of the possible questions one could ask in relation to a practical
to act on the relevant issue at all?
should the action seek to achieve?
we know that,
should one go about achieving it?
would be a good time to act?
I am not suggesting that most, or even any, administrators actually decide in
this way. Lindblom was probably right in suggesting
that this means–end
separation is not how decision- making actually works in practice.
The suggestion simply is that because the
separation of
these stages in decision-making is possible, it is open to a constitution-maker
to defer some, but not all, of these
questions to a future legislature. A full
deferral entails the deferral of all of these questions to the future, whereas a
deferral settles some of these questions constitutionally but leaves
others for politics to sort out later.
7 CAD, 23rd Nov., 1948, 551 (Ambedkar) (emphasis added).
7 CAD, 19th Nov., 1948, 494 (B. R. Ambedkar).
9 CAD, 12th Nov., 1949, 1312 (emphasis added).
9 CAD, 13th Sept., 1949, 1371 (N.V. Gadgil).
Directive principles do not postpone all decisions relating to their subject
matter: they are “directives” both in the
sense of being
to the legislature as well as in the sense of being
directional
, i.e. charting the direction of travel. The
question is clearly deferred; usually so is the
question. On the
other hand, subject to the remarks made with reference to the instantiated
directives in the previous subsection
and political incrementalism in this one,
questions are not deferred. As
Ananthasayanam Ayyangar told the assembly in relation to rural decentralization,
"The only question
is about the method and pace with which this object should be
As such, directive principles are tools of
deferral. This partial deferral is an especial feature of directive
principles.
This characterization militates against a more cynical reading of the role that
directive principles played in India. Jaffrelot is
one of the adherents of such
cynicism, who more or less views these principles as a constitutional dustbin
for irritating ideas:
Ambedkar accepted an emphatic reference to the village in a section of the
Constitution
whose articles had no practical implication. In this manner he
succeeded in defusing a very strong Gandhian demand that could have
the overall framework of his project. In the same manner he sealed the fate of
many other Gandhian propositions.
Even though some members in the assembly were similarly cynical about directive
principles,
this reading cannot be correct. The three key
dissenting groups in the Indian constituent assembly—Gandhians,
socialists, and
cultural nationalists—did know that they were settling for
far less than their ideal solutions. But their representatives were
people. The ideological battles over directive principles in the assembly would
hardly have been as fierce as they were had
they thought they were fighting for
nothing. Indeed, if Ambedkar himself thought that directive principles
“had no practical
implication,” he would not have bothered to
incorporate his own cherished ideals—distributive justice, free primary
and promotion of the interests of the “lower” castes as
directive principles. Incrementalism is not meant to pull the
wool over the eyes
of dissenters. Because they marked out a zone for legitimate political contest
where legal interference will be
minimal, accepting the contested directives
wasn’t a risk-free strategy for defenders—we will see in the next
that some of these contested directives would be realized in independent
7. Conclusion
The framers successfully negotiated a constitution that
deeply divided groups could sign up to. In part, they did so by accepting
of the transformative agendas of the groups that lost out in the constitutional
bargain as expressive directive principles.
But these agendas were, first,
contained through tools such as dilution, instantiation, and qualification.
Second, they were made
subject to both constitutional and political
incrementalism.
Not everyone was satisfied with the outcome, of course. The very tool of
accommodating disagreement through containment and incrementalism
was attacked.
Lari, a Muslim member, did not like the ambiguity that incrementalist strategies
engendered: "It is for the majority
to decide one way or the other . . . if the
House is of the opinion that slaughter of cows should be prohibited, let it be
in clear, definite and unambiguous words. I do not want that there
should be a show that you could have this thing although the intention
otherwise."
7 CAD, 5th Nov., 1948, 429 (M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar).
note 4, at 112.
7 CAD, 19th Nov., 1948, 492 (Hussain Imam): "these principles
have been brought in just to silence criticism and to have a good sign-board
that we have good intentions, without having any intention of following those
directions. . . ."
7 CAD, 24th Nov., 1948, 577 (Z. H. Lari)
These calls for sincerity and ideological purity were, however, rare. Most
dissenters, like Seth Govind Das, were sufficiently mollified:
". . . we are not
fully satisfied with [only partial recognition of Bharat, cow-protection and
Hindi as the national language]. .
. But the fact that these three things have
found place in this
Constitution
is a matter of gratification."
And they had good reasons to be mollified. They were able to hold out hope
will be another opportunity to battle the issue out at the implementation stage.
Advocates were satisfied that the issue would remain
on the political agenda.
Given the support the defenders had in the assembly, this was the best they
could have achieved, short of
violent means (which, in turn, would have been
very expensive politically). On the other hand, because implementation was
to be incremental, dissenting minorities could frustrate, delay, or
negotiate accommodations in attempts to realize the contested
directives.
Ultimately, all but one member of the assembly signed the final constitutional
What also helped was that each of the three populist groups was
characteristically optimistic about its political fortunes—if
federal level, then at least in the states. Gandhians believed that the vast
majority of Indians who lived in the villages
would endorse their radical
localist agenda.
Socialists could be forgiven for thinking that
the mostly poor population would endorse socialism in the polls. Cultural
nationalists,
with their Hindu–Hindi majoritarian agenda, must have
thought that they would have the support of enough voters for victory
first-past-the-post electoral system. So confident they were that Dhulekar even
mocked the cosmopolitan defenders in the language
debate: "Are they afraid of
democracy?"
That the democratic optimism of each of these groups
was going to be complicated but not entirely frustrated, by the radical
of India's electorate would not be discovered until later. At the time
of the Constitution's framing, India had never been to polls
on the basis of
universal adult franchise. No one really knew what lay in store for them
politically, so the negotiators in the assembly
can be said to have been
operating behind a kind of Rawlsian veil of ignorance.
even suggest that ironically, had the assembly been elected on such franchise,
some groups might have been wiser, and possibly
more intransigent, if their poor
performance had wiped out their democratic optimism before the constitution was
adopted. There might
even be a general lesson here: that creating constituent
assemblies through snapshot direct winner-takes-all elections may actually
bad thing for democracy. This consideration also suggests a possible
qualification to the applicability of the argument of this
article to other
constitutional contexts: directive principles are likely to be sufficient solace
only to those dissenting groups
which believe they have the prospects of winning
some political power in the putative state (or, at least, in some of its federal
units), groups that can hope to draw upon the constitutional directives to
support their controversial political agenda.
The details of how these hopes and fears were borne out is a matter for another
article. Briefly, though, the Congress Party would
turn even more socialist for
a decade or so under Indira Gandhi in the 1970s. Limited rural decentralization
would take place in
the early 1990s, but accompanied with guaranteed political
participation for the lower castes and women in local government. That
period would witness the beginning of the end of state socialism, and economic
liberalization would become the dominant state
policy. Cultural nationalists
would become politically powerful (and even form governments at the federal
level) from the late 1990s
onward and well into the present. Limited
implementation of the directives relating
11 CAD, 17th Nov., 1949, 613 (Seth Govind Das).
11 CAD, 17th Nov., 1949, 617 (K. Hanumanthaiya): "Though our
constitution-makers have not adopted the course of decentralisation,
have faith in the people of India. They will be able to assert themselves in
times to come . . . ."
9 CAD, 13th Sep., 1949, 1350 (Dhulekar).
JOHN RAWLS, A THEORY OF JUSTICE 136f (1971).
Andrew Arato & Zoltán Miklósi,
Constitution
Transitional Politics in Hungary
FRAMING THE STATE IN TIMES OF
TRANSITION 350, 375 (Laurel Miller ed., 2010).
to cow slaughter and alcohol prohibition would happen in some states. Although
several aspects of religious personal laws would be
reformed incrementally,
India does not yet have a uniform civil code. Most of these contested directives
remain extremely polarizing
to this date, and very much on the political agenda.
With regard to the uncontested directives, the Congress- led government would
put the rudiments of a welfare state in place over a decade starting 2004,
finally implementing some of the social directives concerning
food security,
education and employment through rights-based legislation.
It seems that the acceptance of directives by the dissenting groups wasn’t
necessarily, from their partisan viewpoint, a mistake.
To put the point
differently, dissenters under the DC may not have been losers under the
constitution that was ultimately adopted.
By carving out a sphere for legitimate
politics over their (contained) agendas, the dissenters were given a significant
concession.
What is clear is that directive principles accommodated divergent,
even mutually incompatible, voices within the constitutional framework.
reason, Lakshminarayan Sahu, called the constitution a “mixture,” an
“unnatural product” that lacked
“daring,” and predicted
that it would last no more than two or three years.
However, its
very polyphony
may well have facilitated the surprising—if
occasionally wobbly—longevity of India's post-colonial constitution.
Sanjay Ruparelia,
India’s New Rights Agenda: Genesis,
Promises, Risks
, 18(3) PACIFIC AFFAIRS 569 (2013).
11 CAD, 17th Nov., 1949, 613–614 (L. Sahu).
Aditya Nigam,
A Text Without Author: Locating Constituent
Assembly as Event
, 39 ECON. & POL. WKLY. 2107
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.75 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter