URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlLegHist/2004/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:33:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Douglas, Heather --- "Assimilation, Lutheranism and the 1950s Justice of Kriewaldt" [2004] AUJlLegHist 12; (2004) 8(2) Australian Journal of Legal History 285
ASSIMILATION, LUTHERANISM AND THE 1950S JUSTICE OF
HEATHER DOUGLAS*
INTRODUCTION
Justice Kriewaldt was the only judge of the Northern Territory Supreme Court
from 1951 until his death in 1960. The judge’s
work has been described as
standing as ‘a bench-mark of fairness and justice in the administration of
justice to Aboriginals’,
supported the assimilation policy of the
In hindsight it is possible to conclude
that during his nine-year period on the bench Kriewaldt was concerned with how
the application
of the law could support the assimilation policy. His limited
general writing, his judgments and the regular newspaper coverage of
decisions during the period give some indication of his understanding of the
policy of assimilation and his view of the role
of the law in the implementation
of the policy.
In spite of the continuing
relevance of his judgments, to date there has been very little analysis of
Kriewaldt’s understanding
assimilation.
It is the way in which Kriewaldt
interpreted the meaning of the policy of assimilation and how it should be
supported through the
application of the law that I propose to examine in this
After providing a brief discussion of the policy of assimilation as
background, this paper will proceed in three parts. In the first
part I will
examine Kriewaldt’s belief that the policy of assimilation was concerned
with the uplift of Aboriginal people.
Part two will explain how Kriewaldt
interpreted and applied the law in order to support the policy. Finally, part
three will discuss
Kriewaldt’s understanding of the ultimate aim of the
policy, that it would result in a ‘single Australian community’.
WHAT IS ASSIMILATION?
The time at which a policy of assimilation made its way into discourse about
Aboriginal people varies. Most discussions about the
policy of assimilation
recognise that such a policy existed in varying ways in Australia well before
McGregor suggests that the heyday
of the assimilation policy was roughly the middle third of the twentieth
However, the policy gained solid
ground throughout the 1950s in the Northern Territory as a result of explicit
and formal government
recognition. The policy was encapsulated in a formal
government statement in 1963. By that stage the objectives of assimilation were
said to be that:
The policy of assimilation means that all Aborigines and part-Aborigines will
attain the same manner of living as other Australians
and live as members of a
single Australian community enjoying the same rights and privileges, accepting
the same responsibilities,
observing the same customs and influenced by the same
beliefs, hopes and loyalties as other Australians.
Further, the formal government position on assimilation in 1963 was not that
Aboriginal culture should be suppressed but that over
generations cultural
readjustments would be made.
In spite of the
apparent simplicity of the definition quoted above, the term assimilation is a
complex one to define. In the 1950’s
it had no single meaning and was
influenced by a range of intellectual
By the time Kriewaldt reached the bench in 1951 few people maintained the
view that Aboriginal people were a dying
The predictions had changed. The
underlying assumption shared by the influential anthropologist, A P Elkin, the
Commonwealth Minister
for Territories, Paul Hasluck and Kriewaldt was that
Aboriginal people were not going to die out but had to be found a place in the
Assimilation was the short hand
term for the vision of how Aboriginal people would be found a place in that
Recent debate about the assimilation policy has focussed on the coercive
practices that saw authorities compel Aboriginal people to
abandon familial,
social and cultural practices in order to integrate with white society. The most
atrocious example of these practices
was the removal of children from their
However, some of those involved in
the implementation of the policy in the 1950s saw assimilation as a policy
focussed on a social
expectation that Aboriginal people would forego or lose
their cultural separateness as they increasingly learned about and interacted
with white society.
In this sense it was
understood as a policy of social integration. Participants in the debate varied
in terms of how such a policy
might best be supported and implemented. Both
Hasluck and Elkin explicitly articulated their aims for assimilation and ideas
how it might be achieved. Generally their respective versions included an
interpretation of the components noted in the 1963 statement
quoted above. For
Elkin, Hasluck and, as I demonstrate below, Kriewaldt, assimilation assumed that
the lifestyles of Aboriginal people
would change. Elkin and Hasluck explicitly
intended that training, education and regulation would impact on the manner of
of Aboriginal people in order to encourage (or coerce) Aboriginal people
to live like ‘other Australians’. For the purposes
of understanding
assimilation, ‘other Australians’ in the definition of assimilation
quoted previously, was a term, which
essentially meant white people. Ultimately
the policy sought to result in a national community, or the unity of a single
Anderson’s concept of the nation as an ‘imagined community’
may be helpful in understanding the vision of community
which underlies an
understanding of the assimilation policy. Anderson argues that nations are
imagined political communities and
that they are imagined because, in even the
smallest nation, the members do not know each other ‘yet in the minds of
the image of their
communion’.
For Anderson such
communities are imagined because, regardless of actual inequality and
exploitation, the imagined community is conceived
of as a ‘deep and
horizontal comradeship’.
This concept
of imagined community can be understood as the ‘single community’
aimed for by the policy of assimilation.
In this vein Rowse has suggested that
assimilation was attractive precisely because it appealed to notions of national
It is clear that assimilation was
generally conceived of in a positive sense as a nation-building policy. However
ultimately the
implementation of the policy operated to strip Aboriginal people
of their Aboriginal identity in exchange for the single identity
of the nation.
For example, pursuant to the
Welfare Ordinance
1953-1957 (NT) (the
cornerstone legislation of the 1950s policy, hereinafter referred to as the
Welfare Ordinance
), unless Aboriginal people were judged to be wards
under this legislation they were, for all practical purposes, effectively part
of the white community of ‘equals’. Non-wards were essentially
required to cut ties with their relatives and friends
Williams has emphasised that
significant characteristics expressed in the policy of assimilation are
egalitarianism and homogeneity,
the kind of ‘horizontal comradeship’ to which Anderson refers.
Those Aboriginal people who were wards were not part of the imagined
community (the nation) they were outsiders to the nation and
had protected
status. Thus, where the moral aim of the assimilation policy was a positive one
of uplift, the practical aim was to
draw Aboriginal people (wards) into the
(imagined) community as (imagined) equals. Essentially this drawing in would
occur when it
became possible to recognise wards as being no longer Aboriginal
people, or alternatively when they behaved like white people. According
this approach continued the colonisation process of elimination, the elimination
being ideological rather than material.
Thus this vision of the single community of assimilation can be seen as a
movement away from the previous colonial preoccupation
with the physical, that
is distinction by blood and elimination via breeding, to distinction by
behaviour and elimination by administration.
Others have discussed the views of Elkin and Hasluck in
Below I discuss Kriewaldt’s
writings in an attempt to ascertain his understanding of the assimilation policy
and his perception
of his role as a judge in implementing and supporting it.
PART ONE – A POLICY OF UPLIFT
Ultimately Kriewaldt held the view that assimilation would improve the lives
of Aboriginal people. For reasons that are discussed
below, Kriewaldt’s
narrative of assimilation needs to be told against the backdrop of his Lutheran
background. Wolfe has suggested
that the rhetoric of assimilation was always
couched as improvement and that this recapitulated the missionary project of
and civilising.
Implicitly, at
least, Kriewaldt’s story of assimilation grew out of his experiences of
the Australian Lutheran missions’
approach to Aboriginal people. Kriewaldt
was a practicing Lutheran throughout his life and retained a strong interest in
the Lutheran
church. While he was on the
he always kept a statue of Martin
Luther in his Northern Territory chambers beside his Namatjira
In an early draft of his major
published paper Kriewaldt felt compelled to assert his commitment to the
Lutheran church, he said:
[t]hose who know me and my family background will be aware of my personal
bias; for the sake of the general reader I disclose that
I am the son of the
manse and that my brother (a clergyman) is the Chairman of the Lutheran Koonibba
Aboriginal Mission Board of
Kriewaldt’s father was a Lutheran
originally based in Wisconsin in the
United States. He later came to Australia as a missionary in the 1890s, living
with his family,
first in Adelaide, and then in Victoria. Justice Kriewaldt was
named after an important Lutheran Church reformation leader, Martin
Chemnitz and
was educated at exclusive Lutheran schools;
in Adelaide and,
after his father died,
in the USA. The judge belonged to the
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australia
(ELCA) the more conservative
branch of the Lutheran Church in Australia at the
He was at one stage president of the
Australian Lutheran League
and was later elected to the
Council of the Lutheran Church in Australia
, ‘one of the highest
positions [in the church] that a lay person can aspire
According to his son, Justice
Kriewaldt’s Lutheran heritage was a strong influence on the way in which
he thought about Aboriginal
people. Consistently with Kriewaldt’s
son’s view a magistrate interviewed shortly after Kriewaldt’s death
that because of the judge’s deep commitment to the church and
associated ‘missionary spirit’ Kriewaldt ‘considered
native Aborigine as the white man’s burden, that at all times they were
the white man’s cross ... Kriewaldt was a
missionary not a
In a similar vein, towards
the end of his life he referred to his faith saying that ‘[a]ll my life
the duty of Christians towards
heathens, and the duty of the more fortunate
towards the less fortunate has been impressed upon
This statement could be
understood as referring to the duty of white Christians, like the judge, to
black heathens, such as those
who appeared before him in the court. It supports
the views of the interviewed magistrate that Kriewaldt believed that flowing
his Christian ethic was a duty towards Aboriginal people.
Ahead of official government policy on assimilation, mission aims had been
focussed on a concept of
of Aboriginal people.
By the time that Kriewaldt arrived in the Northern Territory in 1951 Pastor F W
Albrecht was well known in
the Australian community for his outspoken views on
Aboriginal people’s welfare.
Essentially Albrecht had been lobbying government since 1926 for the
assimilation policy reforms instituted by Hasluck in the 1950s.
From 1926 to
1951 Albrecht had been a missionary at
Hermannsberg.
In 1952 Albrecht returned
from a sabbatical in Germany to be based in Alice Springs where he focussed on
working with the estimated
14,000 Aboriginal people living on the cattle
stations in the Northern Territory
built up the Lutheran ministry in Alice Springs. Kriewaldt was aware of the work
of F W Albrecht and engaged with his arguments
Kriewaldt was in close contact
with the Hermannsberg mission and was a friend of F W Albrecht’s son, Paul
Albrecht, who was
also a pastor based at Haasts
On a number of occasions during the
1950s Kriewaldt made the long journey to Hermannsberg to meet with fellow
Lutherans and attend
church services there.
Apparently this was a significant undertaking requiring a high degree of
commitment and a police escort was required to travel with
him over one hundred
kilometres into the desert.
Throughout his
period on the Northern Territory bench he continued to demonstrate a strong
commitment to the Lutheran Church.
Kriewaldt never clearly articulated, in any published material, how he
understood what it meant to be a Lutheran, and what the associated
‘personal bias’ entailed. Lutheran theology is underpinned by a
theory that there are two kingdoms, one is the kingdom
of god and the other is
the kingdom of the world.
The two kingdoms
are closely related and obedience to god and to the institutions of society are
concurrently required. Neither authority,
church or secular government, should
dominate the other.
Although the two
kingdoms interact they also remain distinct. Thus, as christians are understood
as citizens of two worlds with two
different and independent sets of rules to
follow, this creates a tension in daily
While other Christian denominations
recommended a more cloistered and contemplative life, Luther preached that it
was important to
work in the kingdom of the
Thus Lutherans have consistently
emphasised vocation and industry.
Luther, educators, magistrates and the judiciary had important functions in the
It seems consistent with this
theological outlook that Kriewaldt would have approached his judicial position
as a vocational calling.
Henson comments that Lutheran religious faith was strongly influenced by:
‘... pietism, which emphasized obedience to God in
all aspects of daily
life, a personal devotional life nourished by bible reading and prayer, and the
strong imperative to bring Christian
Gospel to every race and
Although the sacraments are
important to Lutheran faith there is a relaxed approach to how they are carried
out as long as the basis
of them is sound.
This adaptable approach has important ramifications for evangelism as sacraments
can be carried out in difficult and under-resourced
conditions – for
example in remote areas such as Central Australia. Hill agrees that Lutherans
are pious and also adds that
Lutheran stoicism may be understood
to spring from the background of persecution that Lutherans have frequently
experienced both
around the birth of their church and on many subsequent
occasions including in Australia during the twentieth
Kriewaldt had himself experienced
such persecution.
The Lutheran emphasis on
religious piety is attributable to Luther’s preaching in support of
devotion and virtue as a reaction
against the practice of indulgences. Perhaps
particularly importantly in the context of this analysis, commentaries on
Lutheran faith
emphasise the importance of evangelism to the Lutheran
Lutheran sources frequently refer
to the mandate allegedly given to the disciples by Jesus:
... and you shall be my witness in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria
and to the end of the earth and the ‘great commission’;
therefore and make disciples of all nations baptizing them in the name of the
father and of the Son and of the Holy
Thus Lutherans believe that all people should be able to share in the
Lutheran faith regardless of their race.
F W Albrecht, like other Lutheran missionaries before him, sought to
evangelise Aboriginal people to the Lutheran faith. This was
understood to be an uplifting process. The practical ramifications of this aim
were that Aboriginal people needed to become
settled (rather than nomadic). Such
changes required that the missions provide food, which in turn required that
Aboriginal people
work to assist in its production. For Albrecht, if the price
of evangelisation was, at least partly, the restructuring of Aboriginal
life, then the missions had a responsibility to help ensure that Aboriginal
people could survive in this new way of living.
Henson suggests that this was
fundamentally an articulation of the assimilation
Ultimately the policy of
assimilation was a policy about civilising which was linked to the
missionaries’ concern with the
Christianising of Aboriginal people. Others
have written about the link between Christianising and assimilation. For
example, Woolmington
points out that the accepted view of the nineteenth century
missionaries was that Aboriginal people had to be civilised before they
accept the gospel.
Historically, because of
its connection to Christianity, civilising was an ‘improving and
elevating’ process.
Given his personal commitment to the Lutheran Church, it is likely that
Kriewaldt largely shared Albrecht’s vision for Aboriginal
At the same time he was also highly
influenced by Elkin’s anthropological
The two approaches were not
incompatible. It is clear from Kriewaldt’s writing that he accepted the
policy of assimilation.
He commented, that:
[t]he white man had decided to use the law as a civilising medium on
aborigines. The only alternative would mean giving up attempts
to assimilate the
natives and relegating them to live on
reservations.
Kriewaldt’s eventual preparedness to conform explicitly to prevailing
government policy is consistent with the approach of the
Lutheran two kingdoms
theory. Luther saw law and government as blessings which should be
In many of his judgments Kriewaldt
tried to articulate the best way to apply the law to reflect the aims of the
government assimilation
Throughout the 1950s the principle forms of regulation governing the lives of
Aboriginal people in the Northern Territory were the
Ordinances. Kriewaldt was
aware of the controversies surrounding the passage of the various reincarnations
Aboriginals Ordinance
Welfare Ordinance
and had made a
point of following the debate surrounding
Welfare Ordinance
government extraordinary levels of control over Aboriginal people. Kriewaldt had
the chance to attack the
Welfare Ordinance
(and arguably in that process
to attack the policy of assimilation) in
Namatjira’s
case where the
key argument of the appellant was essentially a constitutional one. Albert
Namatjira, by virtue of his level of assimilation,
was not subject to the
Welfare Ordinance
, and unlike wards was allowed to drink alcohol. He had
illegally supplied alcohol to a relative who was a ward. Namatjira’s
counsel questioned the process of declaring Aboriginal people to
be wards and argued that the
Welfare Ordinance
was ultra vires because it
was not a law for the peace, order and good government of the Northern
Given his position as a Supreme
Court judge it is no surprise that although Kriewaldt appeared to accept the
questionable processes
that led to wardship, he did not ultimately accept the
defence proposition.
The underlying
conservatism of his Lutheran beliefs would also have suggested that he would
tend towards support for the legislation.
In any event, it was his view that when the
Welfare Ordinance
it was concerned with ‘the protection and advancement’ of Aboriginal
people and with their welfare while they
assimilated.
Thus Kriewaldt found that the
new Ordinance was constitutionally valid and that it was concerned to assist in
the uplifting and civilising
of Aboriginal people.
The 1957 shift from the
Aboriginals Ordinance
reflected a change in thinking about Aboriginal people. In theory,
no longer were Aboriginal people to be identified as a result
of the percentage
of Aboriginal blood they possessed or their racial ancestry; from 1957 they were
categorised according to the level
of civilisation they had attained, once they
had attained a manner of living resembling white
(i.e. once civilised) they would no
longer need the protection of wardship (i.e. white intervention). In 1957
Kriewaldt was able
to recognise three classes of Aboriginal people in need of
protection:
[t]here was a small proportion [who] had not had any or very little contact
with white civilisation ... a small proportion who had
substantially adopted a
way of life more nearly resembling that of white persons than the way of life
their ancestors followed ...
[Finally] there was an overwhelming majority who,
although affected by white people, still retained a good deal of the outlook on
life of their ancestors and followed their manner of
After finding that the
Welfare Ordinance
was designed to help and
guide Aboriginal people he noted that; ‘... nearly all Australian
Aborigines stand in need of some
special care and attention, [this] would seem
to be the unanimous opinion of five out of six state
legislatures’.
He accepted that
Aboriginal people in the 1950s Northern Territory were in need of
white guidance. Only those Aboriginal people who had substantially
white lifestyle would escape wardship, although Kriewaldt accepted that this
decision was apparently completely
discretionary.
The set of categories noted
above reflects Kriewaldt’s acceptance that there would be an inevitable
shift towards a situation
where the lives of Aboriginal people resembled the
lives of white people, that is where Aboriginal people would be assimilated.
Namatjira’s
case, Kriewaldt determined that the
was a positive force that supported the ‘advancement’
of Aboriginal people towards a white way of life. Although Kriewaldt
explicitly refer to race in the classifications he uses, the standard against
which behaviours are judged is clearly a white
standard. In the 1950s the
position was effectively that government policy had finally caught up with the
position of the evangelising
churches. It thus makes sense that the son of an
evangelist missionary, himself a practicing Lutheran, should take on the task of
interpreting the secular scriptures (the ordinances) of assimilation in the
PART TWO − ASSIMILATION AND THE ROLE OF THE JUDGE
As I have argued above, the moral aim of assimilation for Kriewaldt was that
Aboriginal people should be ‘uplifted’ and,
in a more practical
sense ultimately found a ‘useful’ place in white society. Kriewaldt,
like Elkin and Hasluck, believed
that the process would take some
. Given the broad reach of the policy,
that is to transform the lives of Aboriginal people in every sense, the
techniques pursued
were also broad in their range. By the 1950s, the question of
the impact of racial characteristics continued to concern Elkin and
to a lesser
extent Kriewaldt but this consideration was largely being pushed into the
background at least partly by the prevailing
Rather than to ‘breed out
the colour’,
the apparently
legitimate objects by the 1950s were to change the behaviours of Aboriginal
people and in that process, to change
the way Aboriginal people thought about
the world. The overriding technique for the implementation of the policy of
assimilation
for Elkin and Hasluck
arguably for Kriewaldt was in educating but the method of education varied. For
his part Kriewaldt confined his attempts to promote
assimilation to the
implementation of the law and to discussions and recommendations about its
closely associated institutions.
The premise underlying many of Kriewaldt’s judgments is that Aboriginal
people must be taught to forego certain Aboriginal cultural
responses, for
example customary law responses, in exchange for the protections of and
subjection to white law.
However his
categorisations in the
also suggest that he accepted that the
exchange would be slow. That is that gradually Aboriginal cultural traditions
would be replaced
with white ways of living in the world, including moving into
towns, working in paid employment and following a set of Christian
The Lutheran faith exhorts that Lutherans should obey secular law provided it
does not conflict with God’s law.
Kriewaldt respected this maxim, on one visit to the Hermannsberg mission he
reportedly advised the local Aboriginal parishioners
that although it was most
important to obey God’s law, ‘if you want to be good citizens, obey
the law of the country
and then enjoy its
privileges’.
During his career
Kriewaldt reiterated this view that subjection to the white law brought with it
protection.
For Kriewaldt the assimilation
policy and the laws that accompanied it were compatible with his Lutheran
outlook. As I demonstrate
below, both in his judicial capacity, and in his
commentary, Kriewaldt often remarked on the importance of the (secular) law as
aid to the process of assimilation.
Initially, during his time on the bench, Kriewaldt expressed a reluctance to
openly describe the law as a tool of assimilation. This
is illustrated in the
Northern Territory News
coverage of the 1954 case of Timothy Chimokee.
The headline for a
Northern Territory News
article, stated;
‘[c]ourt ponders position regarding
assimilation’.
The paper reported
that the judge was pressed by the crown prosecutor to consider the government
policy of assimilation and to use
sentencing to discourage tribal customs.
However, Kriewaldt reportedly stated to the court that the case before him was
not a suitable
case in which to decide whether the Federal Government policy of
assimilation was a relevant factor.
by 1959 the judge was prepared to openly express his view that the law had an
important role to play in the implementation
of the assimilation policy. In the
case of Wheeler, he referred to the relationship between the law and the
assimilation policy.
Wheeler, an Aboriginal person, was reportedly involved in a
tribal fight at Papunya
where he fatally
speared another person. The headline to the coverage of this case quoted
Kriewaldt stating that ‘[l]aws are
part of assimilation; prosecution of
Aborigines who break the law must be an integral part of any assimilation
Indeed the main thrust of
the judgment appears to be an attempt to aid the process of assimilation by
deterring ‘pay back’.
It is possible to see that, for Kriewaldt, the law assisted the assimilation
process in a range of ways. For the law to operate successfully
with respect to
Aboriginal people Kriewaldt argued that Aboriginal people needed to be convinced
that they should submit themselves
to the law. According to Kriewaldt, this
submission could be encouraged in two main ways. First, by demonstrating that
when Aboriginal
people submitted themselves to the law, the law would then
provide protection and second, by demonstrating that the law was equally
to Aboriginal people and white people. This latter aspect of the demonstration
of equality required that the law be seen
to bestow equal rights on Aboriginal
people and white people. As a result of ensuring that Aboriginal people
submitted themselves
to the law, Kriewaldt found that the law could then be used
to teach Aboriginal people appropriate (civilised) behaviours. I examine
aspects of Kriewaldt’s view of the role of the law in the assimilation
process below.
Kriewaldt and Submission, Protection and
Kriewaldt accepted that it was settled law that the criminal law should be
universally applied.
Williams has pointed
out that this attitude complements the egalitarian ideals of
assimilation,
that is that Aboriginal
people and white people should ‘enjoy’ the same rights and
privileges and accept the same
responsibilities.
Kriewaldt has written
that an essential part of the process of assimilation was that Aboriginal people
should be subjected to the
criminal law. The judge believed that it was equally
essential for the process of assimilation that the criminal law was protective
towards Aboriginal people, so that Aboriginal people would be discouraged from
taking the law into their own hands.
I regarded it as settled law that, except to the extent that legislation has
made some alteration, the whole of the criminal law,
both substantive and
procedural, and the whole of the law of evidence, applied equally to whites and
aborigines.
Kriewaldt probably laid emphasis on the criminal law as this was the branch
of the law with which Aboriginal people tended to be most
involved. However, in
the one civil case over which he presided, involving Aboriginal applicants,
similar attitudes are seen to prevail.
Ultimately Kriewaldt wanted Aboriginal people to feel confident to avail
themselves of the
protection of the white law in exchange for their
subjection.
Kriewaldt believed that, like Aboriginal people, white people also had to be
educated to accept that the law should be equally applied.
This is most obvious
in his directions to (inevitably) white
Kriewaldt believed that there were
a number of problems involved in allowing white juries to decide on the guilt of
an Aboriginal
defendant. The judge believed that jury members rarely understood
Aboriginal witnesses, that they rarely had any experience or knowledge
Aboriginal people and that they, from Kriewaldt’s point of view most
disturbingly, often believed that crimes committed
by one Aboriginal person upon
another Aboriginal person should not be tried in white courts of
Kriewaldt believed that because of
this latter attitude there were a disproportionate number of
acquittals.
Thus for Kriewaldt, it was very
important to use jury directions to educate juries to apply the law to
Aboriginal people in the same
way that they would apply the law to a white
person. For example in
case he noted that jurors
... discard from your mind any prejudices you may have against the accused
because of his colour, and similarly discard from your
mind any views you have
regarding the wisdom of trying natives in the same manner as white people...the
law at present is that an
Aboriginal native of Australia in the Northern
Territory is tried according to the same laws as a white
In the above direction the judge emphasised the fact that the law for
Aboriginal people is the same and that it is not only that fact
that the jury
must accept, but also the fact that the method of trial for both Aboriginal
people and white people is the same. He
stressed that all are subject to the
same content and process under the law (the same rights and privileges). The
direction demonstrates
the judge’s anxiety that jurors may have been
concerned about whether white legal rules were the most appropriate way to judge
Aboriginal people and, further, jury concerns as to whether Aboriginal people
should be tried at all by a white system of law.
, Kriewaldt went as far as to advise the jury that they may
well be able to think of a better system for trying natives than the one
had been in place for 150 years, but he re-iterated that ‘[w]hen a native
is accused of a serious crime he must be tried
in exactly the same way
he were white
Given these
directions it is not surprising that unlike Elkin, Kriewaldt was sceptical about
the introduction of a Native Court or
a distinct court or process for judging
Aboriginal people. Kriewaldt suggests that the underlying reason put forward in
such courts was that the current system encouraged unfair
convictions. Kriewaldt argued that the real problem was actually unfair
acquittals, which, in his view, Native Courts would not
Some had also suggested that
tribal matters should be heard by such a Native Court, Kriewaldt’s
response to this was a question
of how to distinguish and define tribal matters
from other matters related to drink or general
The judge was aware that
legislation had been developed for the establishment of Native Courts but it
never came into force
and he did not
support it. He did accept that some changes to the legal procedures may be
any changes would retain the judge as the
final decision-maker. Essentially he was committed to maintaining the same
processes for
Aboriginal and white people.
The judgments in the
Chambers cases
provide excellent examples of
Kriewaldt’s approach to his threefold emphasis on subjection, protection
and equality. Below
I will discuss these cases, firstly the criminal case in
which three white men were prosecuted with assaults against a number of
Aboriginal people and then the associated civil case in which a number of the
Aboriginal victims of the assaults sued their white
The Chambers’ Cases
The first Chambers case came before Kriewaldt in
At the time newspapers covered the
story in depth and correspondence about the case and overseas newspaper
clippings are stored in
the Kriewaldt
An American journalist, Robert
Ruark, was travelling in Australia during the time that the case was heard in
the Northern Territory.
He was so impressed with Kriewaldt’s approach that
he dedicated his column to covering it. His syndicated column subsequently
reached over 200 newspapers across the United
A copy of the transcript of the
ensuing civil application by the victims is held in the archives of the NT
Supreme Court library
and throws some
light on the accepted facts of the criminal prosecution. The Chambers cases
offer a strong insight into Kriewaldt’s
understanding of the role of the
law in supporting the assimilation policy.
In 1955, five Aboriginal people were allegedly stockwhipped and bashed by two
brothers, Colin and Jack Chambers. The Chambers brothers
were the white owners
of Eva Downs cattle station where the Aboriginal victims were employed. It was
accepted that earlier on during
the day of the assaults the only female victim,
Dolly Ross, had had an altercation with Jack Chambers about cooking and Jack
had allegedly called her a malingerer. Some hours later Dolly Ross and
her partner Jim Ross, who were aged in their ’40s and
respectively, were sitting with a 16 year old boy called Monroe on the road when
the Chambers brothers rode up on horses
armed with stockwhips and revolvers. It
is at this point, according to newspaper reports, that the stories of the
victims and the
Chambers brothers diverge. Kriewaldt heard evidence from the
Aboriginal victims and from the Chambers brothers and two other white
The victims testified that the Chambers had ridden up to them and that:
Jim had been flogged by the horsemen until he ran, flogged to the ground, and
driven with whips back to the station, where he had
been bashed and made to work
with a pick; that Dolly had also been flogged until she fell; that the
diminutive Munroe had been flogged,
bashed and booted in the ribs; that Jim and
Munroe had been threatened with a loaded revolver brandished by one of the
horseman ...
Jim and Dolly Ross’ wounds were deep and numerous and the pair
displayed their scars to the court. The prosecutor suggested
that there were
Apart from the testimony from
those actually involved in the events, the only other evidence came from a
policeman who displayed the photographs he had taken of the wounds some four
days after the assaults took place. However, it seems
that, due to the fact that
the photographs were taken so long after the event they carried little weight
for the judge.
The defence argued that
the stockmen had been ambushed and attacked by the Aboriginal people who were
waving nulla nullas and boomerangs
and in self defence the stockmen had formed a
‘stockwhip circle’ together and waved their whips around in a
motion in an effort to protect themselves. The defence also argued that
some of the scars exhibited by the victims were tribal marks
or lash marks they
received when they tried to break through the
Kriewaldt’s main focus, due to the available evidence in the case, was
inevitably on the testimony of the Aboriginal victims
and the white stockmen.
Northern Territory News
reported that the defence lawyer in the case
argued that the evidence of the Aboriginal victims should be viewed as
dangerous, he
was quoted as saying:
The mentality of natives is comparable to very young white children, only
more dangerous because of ... cunning ... Aboriginal’s
evidence ... is
plainly the most dangerous material any court can be required to handle ...
Pinned down in the witness box they always
have a favorite means of escape
– the pretence of being unable to understand the
In spite of the lawyer’s efforts to convince him otherwise, Kriewaldt
accepted the evidence of the Aboriginal victims. Kriewaldt
noted that he thought
that it was ‘quite fantastic’ that a middle-aged native couple and a
young native boy would attempt
to attack five mounted men and that he
didn’t believe there was ever any intention by the Aboriginal victims to
ambush anyone.
The Chambers brothers
were found guilty of the assaults. In the circumstances this was considered by
the public to be an extraordinary
result. However, for Kriewaldt this was
precisely the point of the law, that it had equal application. The message in
this case was
that if Aboriginal people submitted themselves to the law it would
protect them.
The case also demonstrated
Kriewaldt’s view of the legitimacy of the law to enforce standards of
behaviour. The unacceptable
violence of the white defendants in this case (and
Aboriginal tribal law in other cases
was to be punished.
Ultimately the judge sentenced the Chambers brothers to six months jail. In
his judgment one newspaper reported that Kriewaldt said:
I do not think the assaults were pre-meditated ... They were influenced by
sudden bursts of temper. If I thought the stockwhips were
used in self-defence I
would have released the Chambers brothers on a bond ... If I thought the whips
had been used to drive the
natives back to work I would have imposed extremely
severe penalties. But I think the whips were used on the ground to enforce the
will of the white men over that of the natives to show that the white men would
brook no interference in their dealings with the
The result was considered to be remarkable, first because Kriewaldt had
accepted the testimony of Aboriginal people over and above
the testimony of the
white stockmen. Second, because Kriewaldt had not only found the white stockman
guilty of the assaults but he
had also delivered the most serious punishments to
the stockmen, both of
the main protagonists had received jail sentences,
one had received a jail sentence with hard labour. Kriewaldt had never before
(let alone found guilty) a white man who had assaulted an Aboriginal
The judge accepted that the Chambers were not treating Aboriginal people as
slaves, driving them back to work with whips, but rather
that they intended to
‘enforce the will of the white men over that of the
The distinction between
the motives articulated by Kriewaldt; that of slavery versus enforcing wills was
extremely important to the
noted that his penalty would have been much more severe if he thought there was
any suggestion of enslavement.
of the judge’s use of the words ‘white men’ and
‘natives’ his refusal to accept any proposition
of slavery as the
motive for the crime suggests an attempt to diffuse the racial element of the
incident. He was attempting to downplay
the issue of race relations so that he
could demonstrate the neutrality of the law, that it was equally applied
regardless of race.
Later he wrote that if his decision had been to acquit the
white men of the assaults he would have ignored any suggestion that he
influenced by the racial characteristics of the
The crime is ultimately cast as
one between equals rather than slaves and their masters, employers and employees
or as between Aboriginal
and white people. It was arguably this that caused the
journalist, Ruark, to describe Kriewaldt as having ‘enormous
the columnist noted that ‘... this is the only country
where the principle of equal justice for all could be upheld like this
high degree ... Australia and the world’s whites might be truly proud of
Mr Justice Kriewaldt ...’
Finally, the judgment reflects some of the general aims of the assimilation
policy, that rights, responsibilities and privileges would
be the same for
In 1956 the victims of the
stock-whipping incident filed a writ claiming damages for assault against the
Chambers brothers.
The only remaining
record of the case deals with the question of whether Aboriginal people have
standing to sue. The writ in this
case was filed by the victims’ next
friend, the Director of Native Welfare. However there were some problems noted
with respect
to the authority of the next friend and the appropriateness of the
documents filed. Ultimately Kriewaldt found that the primary issue
of the case
was whether an Aboriginal of full-age could sue in his own
The Chamber’s lawyers
attempted to argue for a broad reading of the Ordinance such that Aboriginal
people would be required
to sue via the Director of Welfare. Kriewaldt agreed
that there was an ambiguity within the Ordinance but nevertheless found it
appropriate
to read the legislation down. After examining the relevant
he decided that, prima facie,
an Aboriginal person had the right to sue. He noted that an Aboriginal person of
full-age living in
the Northern Territory
... is subject to the same laws and entitled to the same rights and
privileges as any other person living in the Territory. The law
regarded an aboriginal as deprived of rights or relieved of obligations merely
because of his ancestry.
The judge recognised that there had been modifications made to this principle
by legislation such that Aboriginal people were denied
some of the rights held
by white people and were restricted in some ways more than white people. However
he used that overarching
principle of equality of rights and privileges to
clarify and interpret this ambiguity in the law. One of the important principles
of the assimilation policy, that Aboriginal people and white people have the
same rights and privileges, is again mirrored in his
application of the law.
Where possible Kriewaldt used the law to recognise the legal rights of
Aboriginal people, so that they would
mirror the legal rights of white people;
here the right to sue for damages. For Kriewaldt legal rights existed regardless
Again in this case Kriewaldt is effectively demonstrating his view of
the role of the law in the implementation of the assimilation
policy. That is,
for him it was a policy that ensured equal rights for both Aboriginal and white
Using the Law to Educate
Kriewaldt believed that through the policy of assimilation it was hoped that
Aboriginal people would become ‘permanent, integrated,
and useful’
members of the community.
For this to
occur Kriewaldt argued that Aboriginal people would have to be punished for any
crimes they committed.
accepted that Aboriginal people would need to be taught that the criminal law
both inflicts punishment and protects.
He commented that:
[o]ne of the purposes of the criminal law is to restrain the instinct to
resort to violence when a wrong has been suffered. This restraint
is accepted in
civilised communities partly from fear of punishment but partly also because
there are other means of punishing the
offender than resort to
The implication was that once Aboriginal people became
‘civilised’ or assimilated they would begin to accept the subjection
of the criminal law but could also expect its protection. For Kriewaldt there
were a number of ways in which the legal process could
be used as a tool to
educate Aboriginal people about how to behave in a way that would facilitate
their assimilation into the single
Australian community. Although Kriewaldt
accepted that often individual Aboriginal people did not understand what was
happening to
them with respect to the legal process in which they were
he maintained that the law
could still be used as a tool to educate Aboriginal people more generally.
Kriewaldt believed that the
pre-trial steps involved in bringing a case to court
were extremely important in this regard. He suggested that the informal steps
taken during the police investigation and interview often did more to educate
Aboriginal people about the law than the formal
Further Kriewaldt was ‘... of the opinion that prosecutions must be
part of any assimilation policy’.
Ensuring the prosecution of offences was an important part of the assimilation
process for Kriewaldt because it made Aboriginal people
subjects of the criminal
law. This subjection enabled a demonstration of the law’s protective
function towards the (usually
Aboriginal) victims of the perpetrator through the
application of appropriate penalty. The judge suggested that support could be
provided to the project of assimilation if welfare officers could give
assistance to police in investigating and prosecuting crimes
Aboriginal people.
Kriewaldt presumed
that welfare officers had significant knowledge of the events on Aboriginal
reserves, and often had information
police would find difficult to access. Some welfare officers saw a conflict
between assisting
police to prosecute and their central role of protecting
Aboriginal people and did not readily co-operate with police, but Kriewaldt
pointed out that their role was to protect all Aboriginal people both victims
and offenders
which required the
subjection of perpetrators to the law. In this regard he emphasised the
protective function of the criminal law
and the fact that Aboriginal people must
be made aware of this function so that they would be taught to rely on the white
than their own law.
Interestingly, in a note of warning, the judge suggested that he would expect
crimes committed by Aboriginal people against other
Aboriginal people would
appear to increase in future years as the effects of the assimilation policy
Although he does not explain
directly why this might be the case, we can infer several potential
explanations. One possibility was
that he believed that as Aboriginal people
became assimilated they would begin to understand the universal application of
and report and complain of offences. Alternatively that as Aboriginal
people became assimilated their behaviours may be subjected
to higher scrutiny
by officialdom. A final related explanation was that as assimilation progressed
state institutions (police and
welfare as examples) would also be more willing
to subject Aboriginal people to white law and thus more willing to prosecute the
crimes of Aboriginal people.
The judge found that one of the major challenges for the implementation of
the policy of assimilation was to help Aboriginal people
understand that because
of the criminal law they could safely relinquish
retaliation.
Thus Kriewaldt recognised
an educative function for the criminal law, and surrounding institutions, in
teaching Aboriginal people
educative role of the law is played out in a number of Kriewaldt’s
judgments where he examines the role of punishment in the
assimilation process.
In Charlie’s
case, where Charlie, at the direction of tribal elders killed a person who
divulged tribal secrets, the judge
used the sentencing disposition to send a
message to Aboriginal people that the white law did not approve of killing those
tribal secrets.
However his
sentencing comments reveal his early anxiety about the educative role of
punishment in circumstances involving Aboriginal
defendants:
I have considered one further aspect, namely, whether any punishment on this
prisoner is likely to hasten or retard the assimilation
of the native population
resolved upon by the authorities entrusted with their welfare, and whether the
effect on that policy of
punishment or lack of punishment is a relevant
consideration for me to take into account. I have come to the conclusion that,
the legislature prescribes that this factor shall be taken into account,
it would be wrong to increase or decrease an otherwise just
sentence in order to
give effect to a policy of accelerating the assimilation of the native
population of the Territory.
Although the above extract may suggest an early reluctance to embrace the
policy of assimilation to later cases provide a clearer
and stronger view. Heard
some six years after
Kriewaldt stated that the ‘criminal law must be used to assist in the
assimilation of the Aborigines’.
He described the sentence ‘as an aid in the process of the assimilation of
the Australian Aboriginal into the integrated
community’.
Thus he later accepted
that one of the roles of sentencing was to apply general deterrence to assist in
effecting assimilation,
the consequence
of the penalty would be to deter certain behaviours associated with Aboriginal
ways of living.
Kriewaldt recognised that some Aboriginal people were already more
assimilated (civilised) than others so that different kinds of
depending on the extent of assimilation would be appropriate. For example, for
those Aboriginal people who were effectively
civilised, specific deterrence with
respect to penalty could come into play
while for those who were living essentially tribal lifestyles, general
deterrence may be appropriate where specific deterrence would
Although by the 1950s assimilation policy was focussed on a concept of social
integration rather than biological integration, there
appears to be some
lingering concern for Kriewaldt about the source of the difference between
Aboriginal and white people.
In spite of
his efforts to approach the task of applying the law to Aboriginal people in a
race neutral way, Kriewaldt’s judgments
sometimes suggest an equivocal
view about whether there were some differences between Aboriginal and white
people that would not
disappear with the process of
assimilation.
In the preface to
Kriewaldt’s major article Sawyer writes:
[m]y impression was that his Honour had developed from experience a view that
the Aborigines as a whole, or at any rate a considerable
‘pure-blooded’ Aborigines, had a slightly different mental make-up
from the white man or the mixed blood, and
that this created inherent and
inescapable difficulties in applying our legal concepts to their affairs
Kriewaldt’s uncertainty about the impact of such qualities is
illustrated in his jury directions in a line of cases concerning
provocation to
kill. For example in
Balir Balir’s
case the judge comments:
I see no objection to a jury taking the view that a white person will recover
from the effect of provocation more quickly than an
Aboriginal. I think it is
right in law for a jury to say, from their knowledge of Aboriginals, that
whereas a white man may have
perhaps have cooled down, an Aboriginal would
The implication in this judgment may be that there are biological as well as
cultural differences between white people and Aboriginal
people. White
peoples’ tempers may cool more quickly when provoked and Aboriginal people
may be quicker to respond with violence
when provoked than are white people.
Similarly the lack of direct answers in a statement that the defendant, Jangala,
made to police
were considered by the judge to result from how the
‘native’s mind works’.
Further, in Wally’s case the judge speculated that ‘generally
speaking [aboriginal peoples’] intellect is of a
comparatively low
These comments suggest
that Kriewaldt was concerned that perhaps Aboriginal people had a distinct way
of thinking about the world,
which was largely related to their biological
inheritance. This issue is never clarified to the judge’s satisfaction.
In spite of the unresolved question about the source of certain
characteristics, Kriewaldt found that the law could be usefully employed
aid to assimilation. Kriewaldt believed that the law could play a role in
teaching white people about the equal rights provided
by the law to white and
Aboriginal people alike. The law could be used to demonstrate its protective
role to Aboriginal people which
in turn would encourage Aboriginal people to
subject themselves to the law. The law could also be used to recognise equality
respect to rights of Aboriginal people and white people. Finally, the judge
believed that the law could discourage certain ways of
behaving which were
associated with Aboriginal outlooks. Thus, in these ways, he saw the law as
serving an educative function with
respect to the implementation of the
assimilation policy.
PART THREE − A SINGLE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY− THE
PRACTICAL AIM OF ASSIMILATION
Kriewaldt accepted that the practical aim of assimilation was that eventually
Aboriginal people would become part of an integrated
in this sense they would
essentially disappear. Kriewaldt anticipated that gradually the behaviours and
expectations of Aboriginal
people would change so that eventually they would
assimilate with the ‘civilised’ or white community. This endpoint is
implicit in the writings and judgments discussed above. This position recalls
Wolfe’s contention that the aim of assimilation
was the ideological
elimination of Aboriginal people rather than their physical
elimination.
The position is very well
illustrated in the local news reports of the 1950s. For example, the
Territory News
reported on the liquor supply charges faced by Albert
Namatjira in 1958 and noted that ‘[t]he black skin of Albert Namatjira
hides the sick heart of a white man. A white man if ever there
Namatijira had been exempted
from wardship under the
Welfare Ordinance
, through an administrative
action his Aboriginality was effectively erased. The editorial comment
demonstrates that skin color was
no longer, for the paper or the legislature,
the definer of inclusion in the community. Rather, it was behaviour that
indicated inclusion.
In this case,
counsel for Namatjira pointed out that there was no clear set of standards in
the legislation, which clarified whether
an individual needed
He asked ‘[w]ould the
wearing of trousers be a test? Is it good if he does, bad if he
Here counsel was
pointing out that the focus of the legislation was on the behaviour of the
person. Similarly, an earlier case had
sought to establish whether an offender
was an Aboriginal and the magistrates court in Alice Springs had heard that a
ate with a knife and fork and drank tea from a cup was civilised and
thus not an Aboriginal within the relevant
legislation.
As I have noted, Kriewaldt accepted that Aboriginal people could be divided
into a number of social groupings and these groupings
depended on behaviours.
This categorisation essentially reflected a view that Aboriginal people were
processing towards a civilised
state, or towards life in the integrated
community. For Kriewaldt, as Aboriginal people became assimilated their
behaviour reflected
more and more closely the behaviour of a white person. In
many of his cases Kriewaldt made an assessment of the level of civilisation
the Aboriginal defendant who came before him. In his sentencing judgments he
frequently assessed whether a particular defendant
should be treated as if he
were white (i.e. civilised or assimilated) or whether, because of a lack of
civilisation, he should be
given the benefit of
In his sentencing judgments
the judge used phrases which referred to his understanding of the behaviours of
the integrated community
imagined as part of the assimilation policy. For
example he questioned whether the ‘mode of life and general behaviour
approache[d
that of a] white man’.
Although Kriewaldt did not explain how white people behaved, he did explain,
through the application of the law, how ‘white’
(assimilated or
civilised) people did
behave. Kriewaldt wanted to ensure that the law
should be equally applied to Aboriginal people as well as to white people,
he also sought to use the law to teach Aboriginal people the behaviours
expected of them in preparation for becoming part of the
single community. For
example, in his major article and in a number of cases where he attempted to
clarify the application of provocation
to unlawful killing cases involving
Aboriginal people, Kriewaldt pointed out his view that civilised communities are
‘restrained’
and that they do not take the law into their own hands.
Rather, Kriewaldt believed that civilised communities relied on the law of
state so that retaliation may be safely
Similarly, in a number of
cases involving Aboriginal people charged with using weapons and inflicting
violence, Kriewaldt recommended
punishment to send a message to Aboriginal
people that such behaviours were not
appropriate.
Kriewaldt identified these
behaviours as strongly associated with uncivilised and unassimilated ways of
life. Although Kriewaldt
accepted that in certain circumstances native laws and
customs may be relevant to sentencing, he advised juries that they were never
relevant to the question of guilt. Native law and custom did not excuse
unacceptable behaviour
even though it
may sometimes mitigate penalty.
where mitigation was appropriate, the judge used sentencing to express
disapproval for certain specific behaviours such as killing
those who breach
tribal law.
Kriewaldt believed that any
differences in the treatment of Aboriginal and white people could only be
related to a need to protect
whilst they were being assimilated. He found that
the protective function of some laws while assimilation was taking place was
For example, he viewed the
Welfare Ordinance
prohibition of alcohol for Aboriginal people as serving a protective
The single community had, as its basis, a broad conception of culture in the
sense in which Williams has described it, including expressing
ordinary behaviour.
The single community
was one, which embraced the ordinary behaviours of white people. Thus this
imagined single community was understood
in terms of what white people did. When
the practical aim of assimilation towards a ‘single community’ can
be understood
to reject certain behaviours associated with Aboriginal ways of
life in favour of behaviours associated with white lifestyles, Kriewaldt’s
application of the law reflected this practical aim.
Kriewaldt imagined that white society and its laws could be placed like a
grid over Aboriginal society and laws,
however his approach suggests that he was prepared to loosen the struts of the
grid from time to time to ease the transition to white
society. Like other
assimilationists of his era, he expected that the struts of the grid of white
society and its laws would be able
to be laid firmly in place and Aboriginal
customary law and ways of life would disappear.
To this end, Kriewaldt
applied the law with a view to encouraging the transition towards assimilation.
He accepted that it was a positive
objective that eventually (and inevitably)
Aboriginal people would be culturally absorbed into the white community. He
discourage Aboriginal cultural practices through active prosecution of
offences and through using sentencing as an educative tool.
He accepted that
Aboriginal people needed protection while they were being assimilated and he
sanctioned the operation of the notorious
some of its associated prohibitions. In line with the definition of assimilation
set out earlier in this article, Kriewaldt believed
that one of the underlying
principles of assimilation was that the law should be applied equally to both
Aboriginal and white people.
this meant that Aboriginal people should be subjected to the law, but also that
they should benefit from its protection
and from the rights that it bestowed.
The assimilation policy has continued to receive strong criticism, especially
more recently as we have struggled to come to terms
with the legacy of the
stolen children and the coercive practices associated with their
There is no evidence that
Kriewaldt overtly supported the coercive practices encouraged by other
assimilationists of the era. His
judgments, perhaps unwittingly, do lend support
to those oppressive practices, but his writing overall suggests a view of
assimilation
as a gradual and positive transition over generations. However, in
spite of his apparently benign approach I recall a comment from
Wolfe who notes
that ‘the road to oppression has consistently been paved with good
intentions’.
Kriewaldt’s good intentions and his often benign approach that have led to
him being referred to as culturally sensitive,
in spite of his support for the
assimilation policy.
* Senior Lecturer, Law School, Griffith University. This research is part of
a larger project. The author wishes to thank Peter Rush,
Ian Duncanson and
Rosemary Hunter and the two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments at
various stages of the writing of
1 Justice Dean Mildren, ‘The Role of the Legal profession and the
Courts in the Evolution of Democracy and Aboriginal Self-Determination
Northern Territory in the Twentieth Century’ (1996) 7
Northern Territory History
47, 51. He has also been described as
‘culturally sensitive’, Australian Law Reform Commission,
Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws,
Report No 31 (1986) 302.
See for example Justice Martin Kriewaldt,
‘The Application of the Criminal Law to the Aborigines of the Northern
of Australia’
[1960] UWALawRw 1
(1960-1962) 5
University of Western Australia
, 15, 24, 31;
Namatjira v Raabe
[1958] NTJud 19
’) ‘Death Battle over Woman’
Northern Territory
, 3 April 1958, 1. Others have identified
Justice Kriewaldt as pro-assimilation, see for example Mildren ibid; Mary W
Daunton-Fear
and Arie Frieburg in ‘“Gum-tree” Justice:
Aborigines and the Courts’ in Duncan Chappell and Paul Wilson eds,
Australian Justice System
I note that many of Kriewaldt J’s
judgments are unreported. A number of the unreported judgments referred to in
this article
were viewed by the author at the Supreme Court Library, Darwin,
Northern Territory. I am indebted to librarian Frieda Evans for her
with accessing these judgments. The only record of some judgments is in the
newspapers of the period. Thus the paper has
also relied on newspaper reports of
some of Kriewaldt’s judgments.
For example Kriewaldt’s judgments
continue to be referred to as authoritative in the Northern Territory about
sentencing and
provocation. See
Mungatopi v R
[1991] NTCCA 9
, 166. See for example
Daunton-Fear and Freiburg, above n 2.
Armitage argues that the assimilation
period lasted from 1930-1970, Andrew Armitage,
Comparing the Policy of
Aboriginal Assimilation in Australia, Canada and New Zealand
See Russell McGregor, ‘Wards, Words
and Citizens: A P Elkin and Paul Hasluck on Assimilation’
Obliged to be Difficult:
Nugget Coombs' Legacy in Indigenous Affairs
(2000) 17. McGregor points out
that Hasluck had offered a very similar description of assimilation in 1952 see
Russell McGregor,
‘Nation and Assimilation: Continuity and Discontinuity
in Aboriginal Affairs in the 1950’s’ (draft unpublished
available from the author).
Rowse, above n 7.
McGregor above n 6, 244.
According to McGregor, most policy
makers dispensed with the doomed race theory in the late 1930s. See Russell
, Imagined Destinies: Aboriginal Australians and the Doomed Race
Theory, 1880-1939
(1997) 178-180. See also C D Rowley,
The Destruction of
Aboriginal Society
(1972) 320.
McGregor above n 6, 245; Kriewaldt,
above n 2, 31.
See further
Bringing Them Home:
Report of the National Inquiry into the Separation of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Children from their
, Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission, Sydney, 1997.
Generally this was Elkin’s view.
See Tigger Wise
The Self-made Anthropologist: A Life of A P Elkin
81, 107, 120, 135.
Benedict Anderson,
Communities
(2nd ed, 1983) 6.
Tim Rowse, ‘Assimilation and
After’ in Ann Curthoys, A W Martin, Tim Rowse eds,
Australians from
(1987) 133-149.
For example
Welfare Ordinance
1953-1957 NT, s 64 effectively disallowed association between male non-wards and
female wards, and
Licencing Ordinance,
s 141 made it an offence for
non-wards to supply alcohol to (and therefore to drink with) wards.
Nancy Williams ‘Law, Laws and
“The Law”: Aborigines and the Administration of Criminal Justice,
With Particular
Reference to the Northern Territory’ (unpublished paper
read at the Instructional course for Criminal Justice Personnel,
‘Aboriginal
Culture and Values’ Training Programme, Australian
Institute of Criminology, Canberra, 1 November 1977, 22, copy on file with
Patrick Wolfe,
Settler Colonialism
and the Transformation of Anthropology: The Politics and Poetics of an
Ethnographic Event
See especially MacGregor above n 6, but
also see for example Wise above n 13, Robert Porter,
Paul Hasluck: A
Political Biography
Wolfe, above n 19, 176
Personal email communication with
Justice’s son, Martin Kriewaldt (Jnr), 10 September 2002. See also
Editorial ‘Leaguers
Who Have Made Good’
Luther League Monitor
(Adelaide) April 1952, 5, 7 copy held by the Lutheran Archive, Adelaide,
South Australia. See also Justice Rice, ‘The Court
Australian Bar Review
Personal email communication with
judge’s son, Martin Kriewaldt (Jnr) 10 September 2002.
Martin Kriewaldt, ‘The
Application of the Criminal Law to the Aborigines of the Northern Territory of
Australia’ (draft
paper 3 held in Archives, National Library of Australia
MS5169 folder 2). This comment was subsequently deleted from the final paper,
probably by his editor Geoffrey Sawyer.
Justice Kriewaldt’s father was
the Reverend E P G Kriewaldt, see the listing for Martin Kriewaldt,
Joseph A Alexander ed,
Who’s Who 1955
(1955) 444.
During the 1950s the ELCA, operated
separately from the
United Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australia
(UELCA). The ELCA, which can be traced back to German roots, grew out of a more
conservative approach than the UELCA. Essentially
the difference between the two
strands is that the ELCA had a stronger emphasis on biblical doctrine and
faithful adherence to the
‘historic Lutheran confessions’, while the
UELCA encouraged a more contextual reading of scripture. See H Richard Niebuhr,
The Social Sources of Denominationalism
(1929) 196. In 1966 the two
branches of the Australian church amalgamated and now exist as the Lutheran
Church in Australia (LCA).
See Paul G E Albrecht,
From Mission to Church:
1877-2002 Finke River Mission
Editor ‘Leaguers Who have Made
The Luther League Monitor
(Adelaide), April 1952, 5.
Colin Tatz,
Administration in the Northern Territory of Australia
(unpublished PhD
thesis, ANU, 1964, 260, copy on file with author).
[1958] NTJud 19
John Harris,
One Blood: 200 Years of
Aboriginal Encounter with Christianity: A Story of Hope
(3rd ed, 1990) 635.
B Henson, ‘
A Straight-out Man:
F W Albrecht and Central Australian Aborigines
’ (1992) 205, see also
‘Deep Gulf to Cross Before Assimilation’
Northern Territory
(Darwin), 23 August 1955, 4.
Albrecht, above n 26
F W Albrecht, ‘White Paper’
delivered to Mission Conference in Darwin, reprinted as: ‘Deep Gulf to
Cross Before
Assimilation’
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 23
August 1955, 4.
See for example Kriewaldt, above n 2,
43, where Kriewaldt refers to Albrecht’s writing. The
Territory News
also regularly reported Albrecht’s writing. Note also
that the Finke mission was part of the UELCA which was the only active
church in the Northern Territory at the time, see Albrecht above n 26, 41.
An Indigenous community near Alice
Lutheran Herald
(Adelaide), 4 August 1951, 233.
Personal email communication with
Martin Kriewaldt (son) 10 September 2002.
Luther’s Works,
Pelikan and Helmut Lehmann (eds), (1955) vol iv, 265-266. This theory has been
heavily criticised by Troeltsch on the basis
that it discourages political
action see Ernst Troeltsch,
The Social Teachings of Christian Churches
(1931) vol 2, 540.
Eric W Gritsch,
A History of
Lutheranism
(2002) 113.
See the discussion of this theory in H
Richard Niebuhr,
Christ and Culture
(1951) 42-43, 149, 164, 171, 174.
Unbelievers belong only to the kingdom of the world, see also Gritsch, above n
39, 112-113.
See John Witte Jr,
Protestantism
(2nd ed, 2002) 20, 101.
Pastor Fredrich W Albrect,
‘Citizenship For Aborigines’ Alice Springs, January, 1959, copy held
at the Lutheran Archives,
South Australia 3; ibid 6, 20, 101.
Witte, above n 41, 18, 20, 112.
See ‘New Judge Sworn’ in
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 1 April 1952, reporting on the swearing
in of Justice Kriewaldt, he is reported to say ‘It would ill become me ...
to say more that I have resolved, so far as it may please God to give me
ability, strength and courage, to discharge faithfully and
truly the duty I have
undertaken’. The comment suggests a view that the position is a
‘calling’ or a vocation in
the Lutheran sense.
Henson above n 31, 3. See
Luther’s thesis 94, which exhorts Christians to be ‘diligent’
in following Christ, see
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America
http:www.ecla.org (visited 28 July 2003) (copy on file with author).
See Erwin Doernberg,
Henry VIII and
Luther: An Account of Their Personal Relations
(1961) 111.
Hill points out that ‘a life of
struggle was ethnic to the Lutheran tribe’. Barry Hill,
Broken Song: T
G H Strehlow and Aboriginal Possession
(2002) 46-47; Lonning also suggests
that as a Lutheran the path to Christ entails struggle and affliction. He also
emphasises the
importance of piety. See per Lonning,
The Dilemma of
Contemporary Theology: Prefigured in Luther, Pascal, Kierkegaard, Nietzche
(1962) 28-29.
Hill notes that many Lutherans fled to
Australia from Germany after the King of Prussia attempted to create a new
liturgy; Hill,
above n 47,
46. Harris discusses war-hysteria, which lead
to missionaries of German origin in Australia being described as ‘alien
and accusations of ‘Germanising natives’; Harris,
403. Historically, the Lutheran church in Germany has always
been strongly entwined with government, see Niebuhr, above n 26, 130.
Justice Kriewaldt’s son, Martin
Kriewaldt reported that his family faced hostility (as a result of their
German roots) in Australia before they returned to
America. Personal email communication with Martin Kriewaldt (
September 2002. This would have occurred around the time of the First World
Evangelism is said to weaken sin. See
Thomas McDonough
The Law and the Gospel in Luther: A Study of Martin
Luther’s Confessional Writings
Acts Chapter 1 verse 8,
Gospel according to Mathew Chapter 28 Verse 19, see for example Evangelical
Lutheran Church in America http://www.e
(visited 28 July 2003).
The Judge’s son believed that
this aspect of Lutheran theology would have helped to shape his father’s
views about aboriginal
people. Personal email communication with Martin
Kriewaldt (son) 10 September 2002. See Witte above n 41, 293, where he discusses
the social pluralism encouraged by Lutheran faith.
See Henson, above n 31, 11.
Jean Woolmington ‘The
Civilisation / Christianisation Debate and the Australian Aborigines’
(1986) 10(2)
Aboriginal History
Ibid 92 quoting from J J Freeman,
The Advancement of Nations from the Barbarous to the Civilised State and the
Influence of Christianity on that
Advancement
Although the pair did not belong to the
same branch of the Lutheran Church it is unlikely that the difference between
the branches
would have impacted on their approaches to Aboriginal people. I
note also that Kriewaldt expressed his admiration for Albrecht in
[1953] NTJud 12
Kriewaldt refers to him in his general
writing and also in his cases. See for example Kriewaldt, above n 2, 31;
[1958] NTJud 19
Quoted in ‘Death battle Over
Northern Territory
(Darwin), 3 April 1958, 1
discuss a case where an Aboriginal man named Leo had pleaded guilty to a charge
of assault. Note also Kriewaldt’s
comment that: ‘[the] negative and
static in emphasis’ policy [of protection] condemned by Professor Elkin in
given way in the Northern Territory to a policy of assimilation whereby
it is hoped to make the aborigine a useful member of the
community’ see
Kriewaldt above n 2, 31.
See Niebuhr, above n 40, 164.
His views about assimilation were
carried into his views about overseas migrants. At a
Naturalisation Ceremony
the judge noted that migrants could enrich the Australian way of life. He
asked the new citizens to become ‘part of the Australian
community not
only in law but in fact, to adopt the Australian way of life, to adopt
Australian habits and to learn the Australian
brand of the King’s
English’. See ‘Migration Could Enrich Our Way of Life’
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 8 October 1957, 3.
[1958] NTJud 19
614, 621. For relevant
Northern Territory News
paper commentary see
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 9 October 1952, 1;
Territory News
(Darwin), 1 October 1953, 6;
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 7 June 1955, 2;
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 24 March
[1958] NTJud 19
I am indebted to the anonymous referee
who pointed this out to me. I note that Kriewaldt was also aware that the matter
appealed to the High Court which would make it even more unlikely that
he would accept the invalidity of the legislation at this
stage of the legal
process, see
[1958] NTJud 19
, 624 and the appeal
Namatjira v Raabe
[1959] HCA 13
(1959) 100 CLR
See Niebuhr, above n 40, 174.
[1958] NTJud 19
Section 14(1)
Welfare Ordinance
1953-1957 NT, or had become ‘sufficiently assimilated’, see
unreported decision, Kriewaldt J, Supreme Court of the Northern
Territory, March 1960.
[1958] NTJud 19
621. These categorisations almost mirror the categories developed by the
anthropologist Elkin, A P Elkin,
The Australian Aborigines: How to Understand
(3rd ed, 1954) 330-331.
[1958] NTJud 19
[1958] NTJud 19
See Elkin, above n 67
Shades of Darkness: Aboriginal Affairs, 1925-1965
. (1988) 108;
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 10.
See Alan Powell
Far Country: A Short
History of the Northern Territory
(1996) 202-203; also John Chesterman,
‘Defending Australia’s Reputation: How Indigenous Australians Won
Civil Rights
Part One’ (2001) 116
Australian Historical Studies
McGregor, above n 10, 161-162.
McGregor above n 6.
Kriewaldt above n 2, 10, and see
Ross & Others v Chambers
[1956] Supreme Court of the Northern
Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 5 April 1956;
R v Marikit
Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 8 October 1958
[1958] NTJud 19
For discussions of when Aboriginal
people can be sentenced ‘as if they are white’ see
[1954] NTJud 5
, 249, the discussion of the case of Gilligan,
‘Native Gaoled for Bashing Constable’
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 27 September 1955; ‘12 Months for Police Assault’
Centralian Advocate,
30 September 1955. For a consideration of how the
missions would continue to effect changes on Aboriginal people see
[1953] NTJud 12
I note that Luther advised passive
resistance in the face of oppressive laws, see Gritsch, above n 39
Editor, ‘Miscellaneous
Lutheran Herald
(Adelaide), 4 August 1951, 233.
Ross & Others v Chambers
[1956] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 5 April
R v Marikit
[1958] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory
(Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 8 October 1958 [6]; Kriewaldt, above n 2, 10.
Northern Territory News
9 December 1954, 1.
The judge found that there was
provocation and because Chimokee had already served two months in jail, he was
sentenced to the rising
of the court
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 9 December 1954, 1.
Spelt ‘Papunyah’ in the
case report, this community was, at that time, a government controlled
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 21 August 1959, 4; see also
R v Wheeler
[1959] Supreme Court of
the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 19 August 1959.
Although Kriewaldt was aware of the
doubts held by many people about the desirability of this view, see his
directions to juries
R v Patipatu
[1951] NTJud 4
[1951] NTJud 5
R v Charlie
[1953] NTJud 10
R v Jangala
[1956] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory
(Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 1 May 1956;
[1955] Supreme Court of
the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 12 May 1955 [168].
Williams, above n 18, 8.
Rowse, above n 7, 17.
See Kriewaldt archive, National Library
of Australia MS5169 folder Folder 3: draft article; ‘The Application of
the Criminal
Law to the Aborigines of the Northern Territory’ 94.
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 20. See also for
R v Muddarubba
[1956] NTJud 1
Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 9 December
Ross & Others v Chambers
[1956] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 5 April
1956. There are no records of any other cases of
Martin Kriewaldt, above n 2, 16;
Ross & Others v Chambers
[1956] Supreme Court of the Northern
Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 5 April 1956;
R v Marikit
Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 8 October 1958
[6]. Note the more recent argument about
subjection of Aboriginal people to the
criminal law in
Walker v The State of New South Wales
[1994] HCA 64
(1994) 182 CLR
R v Jangala
[1956] Supreme Court
of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 1 May 1956;
[1955] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt
J) 12 May 1955 [168]. I note that in the 1950’s juries
never included
Aboriginal people. Jury members were required to be over 21 years, of
‘European extraction’ and resident
for 12 months or more in the
Northern Territory, and were only used in murder trials; see
NT 1912-1954 s 5 (pursuant to s 5B of the Jury Ordinance certain
half-caste returned soldiers were also able to sit on juries) see
‘Judge calls for Reform for Outmoded Jury Law’
Northern Territory
(Darwin), 4 August 1955, 3. In this context I note Haebich’s
discussion of pamphlets produced by the government to educate
white people about
assimilation, see Anna Haebich, ‘Imagining Assimilation’ (2002) 118
Australian Historical Studies
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 41; see
[1951] NTJud 5
R v Muddarubba
R v Marikit
[1958] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory
(Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 8 October 1958 [4];
R v Balir Balir
[1959] NTJud 1
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 40, ‘Jury
System for Native Trials Condemned’
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 16 May 1957 1, 2.
R v Jangala
[1956] Supreme Court
of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 1 May 1956. In this case the
accused hit another Aboriginal
person with a stick during a fight. See also
[1951] NTJud 4
, 19 where Kriewaldt J similarly states that
there is no difference between the law relating to ‘white’ people
law relating to ‘coloured’ people. Note the extended
commentary on
Centralian Advocate
(Alice Springs), 30
May 1951, 4; 6 April 1951, 12; 18 May 1951, 1.
R v Wheeler
[1959] Supreme Court
of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J), 19 August 1959 [192].
(Author’s italics.)
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 44; ‘Alice
Springs Moves for Special Courts for Territory Natives’
Territory News
12 November 1953, 3; ‘Petition on
Native Trial Anomalies’
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 1
December 1953, 2; ‘Jury System for Native Trials Condemned’
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 16 May 1957, 2.
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 44;
[1956] NTJud 3
, 333, 336;
[1957] NTJud 10
Native Administration
No 14 of 1940 (Northern Territory); Kriewaldt, above n 2, 45.
A full record of the trial is not
available and it has not been published in any law reports. Part of the case is
available at the
Library of the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory. See
R v Chambers and Others
[1955] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory
(Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 15 December 1955.
Kriewaldt Archive, National Library
of Australia MS5169 folder 8.
Robert Ruark, ‘Scottsboro Case
in Reverse: Australia Stamps on Stockwhip Rule’ – probably during
December 1955;
this article appeared in numerous newspapers in the USA, for
example in the
Cincinatti Post and Richmond Times Dispatch
. The Kriewaldt
archive contains an undated copy of the article and a number of letters from
Americans praising the judge. See Kriewaldt
Archive, National Library of
Australia MS5169 folder 8.
R v Chambers and Others
[1955] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 15
December 1955 [70].
No author noted ‘Floggings
Earn Gaol for Station Owners’ Truth, New Zealand, 21 Dec 1955, no page
number noted. Held
in the Kriewaldt Archive, National Library of Australia
MS5169 folder 8.
Untitled/unauthored report,
Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney), 16 December 1955, 1. Held in the
Kriewaldt Archive, National Library of Australia MS5169 folder 8.
The judge is not reported to mention
the photographs.
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 13 December 1955, 1.
Untitled/unauthored report,
Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney), 16 December 1955, 1. Held in Kriewaldt
archive, National Library of Australia MS5169 folder 8.
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 23.
For example
R v Charlie
[1953] NTJud 12
R v Patipatu
[1951] NTJud 4
the case of Leo discussed in ‘Death battle Over Woman’
Territory News
(Darwin), 3 April 1958, 1.
Robert Ruark ‘Scottsboro Case
in Reverse: Australia Stamps on Stockwhip Rule’ copy of syndicated
American article probably
January 1955 considering letters included in the
archive, held in Kriewaldt Archive, National Library of Australia MS5169 folder
No author noted, ‘So That The
Will of the White Man Would Prevail’
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 20 December 1955, 2.
According to Justice Rice the case
can be understood in a broader political framework. He notes that at this time
Hasluck was being
called to account by the United Nations to put an end to
‘extreme maltreatment of aborigines’. See Justice Rice, ‘The
Court as it was’
(1986) 2(1)
Australian Bar Review
The newspapers reported that
Kriewaldt had heard about allegations of slavery in Australia but that he had
put this background fact
from his mind before
making a decision. No
author noted; ‘So That The Will of the White Man Would Prevail’
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 20 December 1955, 2.
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 11.
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 1 March 1956, 1
Williams, above n 18, 6.
Ross & Others v Chambers
[1956] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 5 April
Ross & Others v Chambers
[1956] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 5 April
Ordinance Number 9 of 1953 (Northern
Territory).
Ross & Others v Chambers
[1956] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 5 April
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 31,
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 31, in the
case of Barney ‘Strip-Poker Game Leads to Manslaughter Charge’
Northern Territory News
4 October 1956, 3;
[1956] NTJud 2
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 31;
[1958] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported,
Kriewaldt J) 8 October 1958 [7];
R v Charlie
[1953] NTJud 12
[1953] NTJud 7
Lewis v Metcalfe
against sentence) [1959] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported,
Kriewaldt J) 5 May 1959 [62].
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 13, there is a
particular message to Aboriginal people here because it asks Aboriginal people
to forego customary
law practices, see for example
R v Patipatu
[1951] NTJud 4
, 19; the case of
discussed in ‘Death Battle Over
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 3 April 1958, 1;
Balir Balir
[1959] NTJud 1
; Balir Balir’s sentence is discussed
in ‘Angry Young Man Kills’
Northern Territory News
10 March 1959, 1.
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 22 and 23; see
R v Charlie
[1953] NTJud 12
, 221; also in the case of Daywonga
discussed in ‘Court Told of Spear Killing’
Northern Territory
(Darwin), 15 March 1955, 1. Further see ‘Juries and Native
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 16 May 1957, 2, reporting
on a public talk given by the judge where he said: ‘If the rule requiring
substantial comprehension
of proceedings were applied in the Northern Territory
many aboriginals would not be tried.’
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 29.
‘Laws are Part of
Assimilation’
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 21 August 1959, 4.
Kriewaldt above n 2, 31 and see
[1958] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported,
Kriewaldt J) 8 October 1958 [6];
Wilson v Porter
[1959] Supreme Court of
the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 7 December 1959 [4].
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 31. Ultimately
the judge appreciated that the conflicts of policy may mean such co-operation
was not possible.
Ibid 16. Again this is linked to his
idea that Aboriginal customary law required violent retaliation. It was the
reliance on customary
law that had to be replaced with a reliance on the white
legal system. See
R v Wadderwarri
See for example
R v Wheeler
[1959] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 19
August 1959 [202], see the case of Leo discussed in ‘Death
battle Over
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 3 April 1958, 1.
R v Charlie
[1953] NTJud 12
, 222. He also sought to send a message to Aboriginal people that white law
did not approve of ‘native tribal custom’
R v Tiger and
[1953] NTJud 11
, 216; ‘payback’ see
, 679 or wife disputes see the case of Leo
discussed in ‘Death battle Over Woman’
Northern Territory
(Darwin), 3 April 1958, 1.
R v Charlie
[1953] NTJud 12
, 223. Note also the similar attitude expressed in the case of
discussed ‘Aborigine Gaoled
for Two Years for Tribal Vengeance
Centralian Advocate
(Alice Springs) 27 May 1955, 9, see
[1955] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory
(Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 12 May 1955.
‘16 Months for
Manslaughter’
Centralian Advocate
(Alice Springs), 21 August 1959
(no page number).
R v Wheeler
[1959] Supreme
Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J), 19 August 1959 [202].
See also see the case of Leo discussed
in ‘Death battle Over Woman’
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 3 April 1958, 1.
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 31.
See for example
R v Anderson
[1954] NTJud 5
Wilson v Porter
[1959] Supreme Court of the
Northern Territory No 150 of 1959 (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) no date [295];
[1956] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported,
Kriewaldt J) 8 May 1956 [128];
[1952] Supreme Court of the
Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 22 January 1952. Peppin’s
case is also discussed in
‘Five Years Gaol Ordered’
(Alice Springs), 25 January 1952, 1.
See for example
R v Charlie
[1953] NTJud 12
, 223, the case of
discussed in
‘Court Told of Spear Killing’
Northern Territory News
15 March 1955, 1.
For a detailed discussion of the two
forms of assimilation see McGregor above n 6.
His jury directions with respect to
provocation suggest this; see for example
R v Balir Balir
[1959] NTJud 1
[1956] NTJud 3
[1956] NTJud 1
R v MacDonald
[1953] NTJud 7
, 189. I note that Yeo has critisised this line of cases saying
that they had the effect of promoting a ‘negative stereotype
of Aborigines
being at a lower order of the evolutionary scale than other ethnic
groups’. SMH Yeo ‘Sex, Ethnicity, Power
of Self-Control and
Provocation’
[1996] SydLawRw 15
Sydney Law Review
Geoffrey Sawyer; preface to
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 1.
R v Balir Balir
[1959] NTJud 1
R v Jangala
[1956] Supreme
Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 1 May 1956 [121].
See R v Wally
[1951] NTJud 5
case the judge commented on the difficulties
involved in following the ‘processes of the native mind’
[1953] Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt
J) 21 October 1953 [ 302, 305].
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 15:
[1958] NTJud 19
, 621, discussion of the case of Leo in
‘Death battle Over Woman’
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 3
April 1958, 1.
Wolfe, above n 19, 34.
‘The Truth About
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 10 October 1958,
Welfare Ordinance
(NT) s 14(1); people could be declared wards by reason of manner of living,
inability to manage affairs, standard of social
habit or personal associations,
or if they stood in need of special care.
Counsel referred to
1953-1957 (NT) s 14(2)
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 16 December 1958, 1.
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 20 December 1956, 3
R v Anderson
[1954] NTJud 5
, 249; see for example
R v Charlie
[1953] NTJud 12
223 and the case of
discussed in ‘Court Told of Spear
Northern Territory News
15 March 1955,
R v Anderson
[1954] NTJud 5
, 249. See also the discussion of the case of Kevin,
‘Aborigine Draws Long Prison Term’
Northern Territory News
11 December 1959, 4.
Kriewaldt, above n 2, 16; see also
R v Wadderwarri
[1958] NTJud 5
I note again that Kriewaldt
specifically wanted to use the law to encourage Aboriginal people to forego
customary law ways of dealing
with disputes.
R v Pananka
[1956] NTJud 3
, 336, I note in these cases he
draws attention to the use of particular weapons by Aboriginal people
specifically.
R v Patipatu
[1951] NTJud 4
[1951] NTJud 5
[1959] NTJud 7
R v Charlie
[1953] NTJud 12
, 222, ‘native tribal custom’,
R v Tiger and Captain
[1953] NTJud 11
, 216, ‘payback’ see
, 679 or wife disputes see the case of Leo discussed in
‘Death battle Over Woman’
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 3
April 1958, 1.
[1958] NTJud 19
, 621. Kriewaldt J perceived that the drinking laws had essentially a
protective function, see for example
Lewis v Metcalfe
(appeal against
sentence) Supreme Court of the Northern Territory (Unreported, Kriewaldt J) 5
May 1959 [62] and the appeal against
sentence of Tudawali discussed in
‘Native Actor Appeal Dismissed’
Northern Territory News
(Darwin), 11 December 1959, 1.
Raymond Williams,
Culture and
Society 1780-1950
See Benton’s discussion of
this analogy and approach, Laura Benton,
Law and Colonial Cultures
I note, as Dorsett has pointed out,
that this understanding of legal uniformity has constantly constrained the
possibility of legal
pluralism. See Shaunnagh Dorsett, ‘“Since Time
Immemorial”: A Story of Native Title and the Case of Tansitry’
Melbourne University Law Review
Bringing Them Home
n 12; Anna Haebich,
Broken Circles
Wolfe above n 19, 213.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (141 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter