URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AULegHist/2007/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:35:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hunter, Ian --- "Natural Law, Historiography, and Aboriginal Sovereignty" [2007] AULegHist 8; (2007) 11(2) Legal History 137
Natural Law, Historiography, and Aboriginal Sovereignty
I Introduction
II Natural Law and Social History
III The Law of Nature and Nations in Context
IV Natural Law, Common Law, and Public Law
V What is New South Wales?
VI Conclusion
Natural Law, Historiography, and Aboriginal
Sovereignty
IAN HUNTER*
I Introduction
From the 1970s onwards the juridical and political cultures of common law
settler societies — Canada, New Zealand, and Australia
— witnessed a
wave of activity focused initially on claims to native land title and latterly
on a broader array of indigenous
rights placed under the umbrella of indigenous
sovereignty.
This activity was
driven by the post-war decolonising agendas of international law, national land
rights movements, revisionist academic
work on colonialism, and constitutional
and juridical reconsideration of the forms in which indigenous peoples had been
dispossessed
of their lands during the period of European imperialism and
colonialism. In the Australian context a particular style of historiography
provided significant impetus for the juridical construction of native title
rights by aiming to overturn what was claimed to be the
misunderstanding on which the earlier failure to recognise native title was
based. Embodied most forcefully in the writings
of Henry Reynolds, this
historiography sought to expose the error involved in the legal category under
which the British annexation
of Australia was supposed to have taken place,
terra nullius
: variously, land uninhabited, belonging to no-one, or
without a sovereign.
Running along dual tracks, this historiography claims to show the real
character of Aboriginal tenure and sovereignty at the moment
of colonisation. It
also offers an account of the forms of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century
European jurisprudence deemed capable
of justly recognising indigenous rights,
were it not for the intervention of racist and imperialist prejudice that
impelled ‘Australian
jurisprudence’ towards the unjust ideology of
terra nullius
. This historiography thus presents itself as both empirical
and normative. Not only does it offer an objective account of the historical
of colonisation, but it insists that the injustice of this act can be
objectively judged in accordance with a moral-juridical
principle common to
modern Australians and their colonising forebears. This principle is that of the
fundamental right of a people
or ‘nation’ to exercise the
territorial and political rights required to maintain its cultural identity
against the encroachments
of a foreign state, potentially also a domestic
To the extent that it
embodies this principle, indigenous-rights historiography participates in the
genre of the ‘history of
the moral nation’. It offers a narrative of
the origins of the nation in terms of a fall from its high moral destiny —
to be a just polity that manifests the moral identity of its people — and
thereby holds out the prospect of a partial restitution
of that destiny, in the
form of recognition of native title and indigenous
sovereignty.
Since the early 1990s this style of history has fallen under the scrutiny of
what is in effect a rival form of historiography associated
with a different
sense of history. This latter form is one that takes within its ambit the
‘history of historiography’
and, in doing so, offers an historical
analysis of the moral-nationalist historiography of indigenous rights. Operating
through the
reconstruction of context-specific ‘languages’ of
political thought — rather than through resolving historical
— this analytic historiography has begun to reconstruct the context of
indigenous rights historiography. It has
done so by identifying a strong linkage
between the redemptive historiography of the moral nation and the revisionist
sense of the culture of the common
This link is their shared
‘presentism’ — the view that past actors were governed by the
same norms and purposes
as their present counterparts — which permits the
law to function as the trans-historical frame against which the moral history
the nation can be judged. Modern indigenous-rights historiography and common-law
revisionism both view the law as historically
grounded and yet timelessly
present, in the sense that its past defects can be judged and corrected in
accordance with present norms
that are treated as timelessly available to its
original architects.
This contextualising history of historiography has a founding text in the
form of J. G. A. Pocock’s mid-twentieth-century
The Ancient
Constitution
and the Feudal Law
. Pocock charts the seventeenth-century rise
of a particular historiography and historical sense associated with the
political power
of England’s common lawyers. This ‘common-law
mind’ was imbued with the historical doctrine that the laws of England
arose from an ‘ancient constitution’ whose customary or
time-immemorial character places it beyond all arbitrary legislation
allowing it to be timelessly present. According to Pocock, this view of a
time-immemorial ‘law without a legislator’
arose within the context
of the jurisprudential monopoly exercised by an exhaustively insular English
common law — countries
with multiple legal systems cannot treat them as
timeless — and provided a powerful weapon against those who argued that
originate in the will of a historical
By the end of the
seventeenth century this historical sense had been joined and transformed by a
different conception of the timelessness
of English rights and liberties, namely
Locke’s philosophical conception of natural rights arising from individual
conscience. This formed a space in which a ‘Whig’
historiography could assert the double timelessness of rights —
time immemorial and as permanently present to reason — against all
attempts to treat them as historical products of
the governing will of a
sovereign or state.
It is this double timelessness of rights — formed at the nexus of a
time out of mind and a mind out of time — that the
contextual historians
of historiography have identified as a thread running through the national
historiography of indigenous rights,
binding historiography to a common law
presentism and a ‘juridical’ relation to the colonial past. This
history of historiography
is contextual in the manner of the Cambridge school.
It does not view forms of political, juridical, and philosophical thought as
timeless in either sense: as customary or as rationally founded. Rather, it
approaches them in terms of the elaboration of particular
‘languages’ seen as modes of action serving limited historical
circumstances and purposes. Such a contextualising historiography
tends to arise
when cultural rivalry or fracturing destroys timeless foundations — for
example, the rivalry between common
and Roman law in some European
competing religions —
making it possible to treat (here) law and religion
as relative to time and place. In this regard, it might be significant that many
of the leading historians of indigenous-rights historiography are New
Zealanders, coming from a context in which a founding treaty
between coloniser
and indigenous people resulted in the kind of cultural bifurcation suited to a
contextualist historiography and
historical sense. No less significant is the
fact that these New Zealand historians combine expertise in Pocockian contextual
historiography
with formal expertise in public
Contextualist historiography
and public law have a symbiotic relationship, as public law arises from the
governmental will of a sovereign
or state and is thus anchored to a particular
time and place through the contest of political forces. New Zealand
contextualist historiography
is joined to the tradition of constitutional
history where the actions of the state play a central role. It thus provides a
contrast to Reynolds’ social history of the law, where centre-stage
is occupied by the nation as the morally flawed defender
of timeless rights
against the state.
The present paper draws on the public law historiography of the New Zealand
contextualists but does not pretend to add to it. To the
extent that it
contributes to current scholarship and discussion, it is by further developing
the intellectual history of the ‘social-national’
historiography of
indigenous rights. In particular it offers an account of the role of natural law
discourse in this historiography.
It treats the revival of this unfamiliar and
apparently superseded political language as the unexpected outcome of the
application
of 1970s style social history to the constitutional and public law
constructions of Crown authority in colonial settings. I argue
that a certain
tradition of European natural law thought makes it possible for Australian
indigenous rights historiography to treat
the act of colonial expropriation as
timelessly unjust and as presently redeemable in the history of the moral
II Natural Law and Social History
Written in the aftermath of the Australian High Court’s
judgment, Henry Reynolds’
Aboriginal Sovereignty
concerned to answer a question that the author believes was left unresolved by
that judgment. Given that the Court decided
that Aborigines possessed a
presumptive native title right to unallocated Crown lands, why did it not also
recognise the survival
of rights associated with Aboriginal sovereignty? Such
rights are pre-eminently those associated with the maintenance of a system
customary law and the right to social and political institutions permitting some
form of self-government on Aboriginal lands,
similar to the rights associated
with the ‘dependent nations’ status granted to American Indians
under American constitutional
law. After all, if native title rights survived
colonisation and were capable of recognition by the Court, why did it declare
the issue of a surviving parallel sovereignty was non-justiciable within a
domestic court?
Before discussing Reynolds’ answer to this question, it is important to
observe that his book contains a weak and a strong thesis
on the issue of
Aboriginal sovereignty and makes no attempt to differentiate them. On the weak
thesis, a ‘sovereignty’
right such as the maintenance of a parallel
system of customary law could be treated in a manner similar to the recognition
land title: namely, as a special form of indigenous right whose
legitimacy and scope depend on its construction within the overarching
constitutional-legal order of the Australian state. On the strong thesis,
Aboriginal sovereignty depends not on its constructability
within Australian
constitutional and public law but is a right rooted in the time immemorial
cultural and ethnic identity of the
Aboriginal ‘nation’. Such is the
right to maintain this identity through the exercise of an indigenous political
over a territory. Far from receiving its legitimacy from the
constitution of the Australian state, this right possesses the higher
accorded by natural and international law, so much so that the failure to
recognise it has rendered this state itself
illegitimate. Only the strong thesis
sustains Reynolds’ aspiration to write a history of the moral
nation’s originary
fall into injustice, as we can see in these comments
from his earlier book on land rights:
The inability of Australian law to retreat from historical injustice has had
major implications for relations between white Australians
and Aborigines. ...
Outwardly a majority of white Australians has rejected the claims of historic
injustice. But there has always
been a sense of uneasiness, a lurking shadow of
guilt, a ‘whisper in the heart’ that encouraged a tendency to
the problem away by blaming the Aborigines themselves ... It eased the
conscience but did nothing for the moral health of the
It is important to note, then, that our discussion of Reynolds
as a representative of a national land rights historiography pertains
this strong thesis — to the claim that the recognition of Aboriginal
sovereignty represents the recovery of a timeless
right and the correction of an
originary wrong — for only this claim sustains his moral history of the
To support this claim Reynolds offers what he takes to be two convergent
lines of argument. First, he offers anthropological and historical
— pertaining to Aboriginal numbers, patterns of land use, and the exercise
of customary law — designed to show
that in the face of claims regarding
terra nullius
the Aborigines exercised sovereignty over their own
Given that this evidence
cannot by itself determine the existence of Aboriginal sovereignty —
sovereignty not being an anthropological
or historical fact but a category of
European law and politics — Reynolds mounts a second argument. This is to
the effect that
sovereignty of indigenous peoples was recognised in eighteenth
and nineteenth-century European law in the discipline of
jus naturae et
, the law of nature and
It is this second argument
that is decisive for Reynolds’ case. Through it he purports to show that
Aboriginal territorial
self-governance was legally recognisable as sovereignty
at the time of colonisation, such that the actions of the British and Australian
states in denying Aboriginal sovereignty are morally or legally
‘justiciable’ under the
jus gentium
or its step-child, modern
international law. If this is so, then the refusal of ‘Australian
jurisprudence’ to recognise
Aboriginal sovereignty — a refusal that
Reynolds identifies with Justice Burton’s denial that the tribes were
states in the case of
R. v Murrell
(1836) — arises not
from law and justice but from the racism and ignorance of colonial society.
In order to answer the question ‘Were Aboriginal tribes
sovereigns?’, Reynolds thus regards it as sufficient to ask: ‘Did
Burton’s conclusions flow logically from the law of nations as it was
understood in 1836? Or had the jurisprudence of New South
Wales been corrupted
by the needs and prejudices of colonial
In order to show
what should and did flow logically from the law of nations, he cites from an
array of similarly titled works, but
above all from the Prussian philosopher
Christian Wolff’s
Jus gentium
, which Reynolds characterises as
‘the major work of international law in the middle years of the eighteenth
In one regard
Wolff suits the purpose well. Not only does he argue that wandering tribes and
nations should be seen as the rightful
owners of their lands regardless of
whether they make settled and intensive use of them, but he insists that
colonising powers have
no right to impose their sovereignty on ‘barbarous
and uncultivated nations’ in order to make their own use of these
In another regard, though, Wolff offers at best only tenuous support for
Reynolds’ case. Setting aside for the moment
the question of whether Wolff
was the major eighteenth-century representative of the law of nature and
nations, we can observe that
while there was a German version, Wolff’s
was not translated into English until the twentieth
century. Further, unlike comparable works by Pufendorf and Vattel, which were
translated into English during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, there
is no record of Wolff’s
Jus gentium
being used as a teaching text
at English universities or the Inns of Court, or circulating in common law
circles. Given this, it
is hard to see how Wolff’s defence of indigenous
property rights could have been ‘of major importance for the debate
Australia’.
In fact, and somewhat incongruously, Reynolds partially acknowledges this
problem — ‘Australian judges may not have been
Wolff’s writing’ — but then argues that Australian jurists had
encountered Wolff’s arguments at
one remove. This occurred via the
writings of his Swiss disciple Emmerich de Vattel, whose
Le Droit des
(1758) had been translated into English in 1759 and did circulate in
common law circles, principally in the 1833 translation of Joseph
Chitty. The
problem with this move though — as Reynolds acknowledges — is that
Vattel did not equate nomadic land ownership
(as a form of
sovereignty of a territory (
). In fact used the difference
between nomadic ownership and territorial sovereignty to justify the right of
European nations to colonise
lands occupied by ‘wandering nations’
and impose sovereignty on them. Given that Burton himself cited Vattel in this
vein, it begins to look as if the law of nations did not provide unambiguous
support for the existence of indigenous ownership and
sovereignty, and that some
uses of it might even have justified the denial of these things.
In order to counter this serious threat to his case, Reynolds argues that in
citing Vattel, Burton turned to ‘those passages
which supported attitudes
towards the Aborigines which had developed within colonial society and twisted
international law to a shape
which justified what had already been done’.
He thus moves into the register of the subjunctive and counterfactual, arguing
that ‘Had the law been applied with more impartiality it would have been
possible to accord to the Aborigines both land ownership
sovereignty.’
In doing so,
however, Reynolds silently drops his central historical argument — that
the recognition of Aboriginal sovereignty
did ‘flow logically from the law
of nations as it was understood in 1836’ — and replaces it with a
different, non-historical
one: namely, that such recognition would have flowed
logically had the law been applied impartially. Given though that the only
he offers for an impartially applied law of nations is that it
recognises Aboriginal sovereignty, it appears that Reynolds is establishing
circular relation between the ‘true’ law of nations and the
recognition of Aboriginal sovereignty. He thus tacitly
abandons his historical
investigation into whether aboriginal sovereignty was recognisable in the law of
nations ‘as it was
understood in 1836’, replacing it with the covert
philosophical argument that Aboriginal sovereignty’s mode of existence
such as to make it timelessly recognisable by a properly impartial law of
This set of moves is a pointer to the constitutive features of
Reynolds’ historiographic discourse. Reynolds appeals to the
nations in order to establish the normative standpoint, common to us and our
colonial forebears, within which Aboriginal sovereignty
is rightfully
recognisable, and in relation to which its denial (by Burton and the courts)
constitutes a manifest injustice. In silently
dropping his historical claim that
the colonial jurists did indeed share this normative law-of-nations standpoint,
however, Reynolds
tacitly treats this standpoint as timeless and universal. In
fact he treats it as grounded in the time-immemorial ‘ancestral
rights’ of the Aborigines themselves and their recognition by a timelessly
jus gentium
. In this regard, he reactivates one of the
programmatic imperatives of a particular tradition of the
jus naturae et
: namely, to subordinate the positive law of the state to a higher
timeless moral law. This reactivation is in turn governed by the
conceptions of history and society present in the genre of social history that
drives Reynolds’ account. History for
Reynolds is not operative at the
level of law and state but at the level of society. Society signifies the
economic and ideological
mechanisms that defeat or delay the manifestation of
rational law by forcing it through the detour of local historical interests
— the corruption of law by colonial society — but also the process
of moral development that will bring this detour to
an end in true recognition.
This produces Reynolds’ structuring opposition between a timeless law from
whose impartial use
the recognition of a time-immemorial Aboriginal sovereignty
flows logically, and a law whose failure to recognise this sovereignty
that it has been ‘corrupted by the needs and prejudices of colonial
This structural opposition is a pointer to the historiographic genre that
governs Reynolds’ reactivation of the law of nature
and nations: namely, a
particular form of anti-state social history that rose to prominence during the
1970s. This is a historiography
that derives law and the state from society
— understood as a collective moral or cultural identity seeking
self-determination
— and that treats political and legal forms deemed
inimical to this process as ideological expressions of social interests.
excluded from this historiographic perspective is the possibility that legal and
political discourses — such as those
found in the tradition of
naturae et gentium
— might be anchored in historical reality in a
manner at once both more direct and less universal than when seen as the true
false expression of a self-determining moral identity, ‘nation’ or
society. It already appears, though, that the law
of nature and nations varied
in its deployment not in accordance with the options of true representation or
false ideology, but in
accordance with its elaboration in different forms
designed to give shape to particular juridical, philosophical, and political
This suggests that if sovereignty was an important object of natural
law discourses, then there may be no single or uncontestable
Reynolds’ question, ‘Were Aboriginal tribes sovereigns?’ It
might be that any answer will depend on how
sovereignty has been constructed in
particular discourses, and on the juridical, moral, theological, or political
purposes governing
its construction. That, at least, is the possibility to which
we now turn.
III The Law of Nature and Nations in
Despite its intellectual importance in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century
Europe, the law of nature and nations was not really a
unified academic
discipline and was certainly not a
Rather it formed a matrix
for an array of disciplines — politics, theology, ‘positive’
law (Roman, civil, public),
and moral philosophies of various kinds —
inside which an array of normative concepts (obligation, duty, right, law,
sovereignty,
state, nation, ruler, citizen) were ceaselessly formulated and
reformulated. This gestational matrix was nominally held together
overarching conception of a law that is ‘natural’ in two distinct
but interacting senses: in being derived from
man’s moral nature, and in
being derived using natural reason as opposed to revealed Christian truth. Early
modern Europe,
however, housed a multiplying diversity of models of human
nature, and neither was there any consensus regarding the character of
reason or its limits in relation to divine truth. This meant that rather than
enclosing a settled domain of scholarly inquiry,
these twin features of natural
law marked the parameters of a field of ferocious cultural-political
As a result of its centrality to various European political orders and their
interlocking religious orders, ‘law’ played
a talismanic role in
such conflict. This was especially so in the forcing houses of
jus naturae et
, the universities of the Holy Roman German Empire. Here imperial
public law was used to regulate political conflict, and Romano-canon
a key role in securing the nexus between political and ecclesial authority that
lay at the heart of the early modern confessional
In this setting, it was
the matrix character of
jus naturae et gentium
— its capacity to
harness the powerful disciplines of politics, law, and theology — that
permitted it to address the
most important and intractable cultural-political
problems of the period: namely, the unsettled and incendiary relations between
estates and territorial states, states and empire, and political and religious
authority, or state and church. Considering the cultural
and political fissures
underlying these problems, and given the conflicting interpretations of
man’s moral nature and rational
capacities present in the
jus naturae
, it is less surprising that this took shape not as a single
academic discipline but in a diversity of rival forms aligned with a
conflicting religious and political
The form of
jus naturae et gentium
that Reynolds identifies with the
law of nations as such — the line that passed from Wolff to Vattel (and
that would include
Darjes and Achenwall) — was thus only one of several on
offer in the crowded and fractious intellectual market of the eighteenth
century. Its way of constructing such concepts as nature, obligation, right, and
sovereignty was neither uncontested nor capable
by itself of determining norms
governing positive politics and law. In fact Wolff elaborated his
jus naturae
in direct competition with another form, one whose Grotian and
Hobbesian origins were definitively reworked by Samuel Pufendorf and
then passed
into the eighteenth century by Christian Thomasius, where it remained in rivalry
with the Wolff school.
What is distinctive about Wolff’s version of the
jus naturae et
is that it makes natural theology (metaphysics) and moral philosophy
foundational for the construction of juridical and political
concepts. Drawing
on a mix of Thomistic and Leibnizian fundamentals, Wolff argues that as a result
of its emergence from God’s
intellection of the forms of things, the
universe represents a morally ordered whole in which man participates through
his own nature,
understood in the Aristotelian manner as rational and sociable.
From within this metaphysical framework Wolff can derive an objective
of the good — as the happiness attendant on man’s rational
participation in the divine natural order —
and a conception of obligation
based in a notion of moral necessity grounded in man’s moral nature. Man
is thus obligated by
his rational nature to follow the good, and because this
good can only be acceded to through the realisation of this nature, the
fundamental natural law duty is that man must complete or perfect his own
rational and sociable nature.
opposition to Hobbes and Pufendorf, Wolff thus regards obligation as natural
rather than imposed. This allows him to define law
not in terms of the command
of a superior — God, the prince, the state — but in terms of the
rule that binds man to act
in accordance with the natural obligation he is under
to perfect his nature.
thus understands natural law via the traditional Thomist formula as the command
of right reason (
dictamen rectae rationis
) through which man performs
actions conformable to the perfection of his nature and avoids those that
conflict with this.
The law thus
arises from natural obligation, and from this obligation also arises a natural
right to perform the actions required
by human moral
self-perfection.
It is this moral-ontological basis that is responsible for the moralised and
universalised (deterritorialised, cosmopolitan) construction
of sovereignty and
polity in the Wolffian form of
jus gentium
. In Wolff’s model,
individuals enter states not in pursuit of security as such, but in order to
obtain the security necessary
for them to perfect their rational and sociable
nature in common.
fundamentally a citizen of the world, as his moral nature is the universal means
by which he participates in the divine order
of the cosmos, which leads Wolff to
civitas maximus
or world republic as the ultimate destiny of
human political development. Vattel does not share Wolff’s conception of a
republic, but he does follow him in viewing peoples or nations as the form
of political association into which individuals enter
in order to perfect their
rational and moral nature.
Political authority is thus vested in the people or nation itself, with
sovereignty understood in terms of the exercise of power
required and justified
by the maintenance of a self-perfecting or self-determining collective moral
The second general duty of a nation towards itself is to labour at its own
perfection and that of its state. It is this double perfection
that renders a
nation capable of attaining the end of civil society: it would be absurd to
unite in society, and yet not endeavour
to promote the end of that union. ...
All the citizens who form a political society reciprocally engage to advance the
common welfare,
and as far as possible to promote the advantage of each member.
Since then the perfection of the society is what enables it to secure
the happiness of the body and that of the members, the grand object of the
engagements and duties of a citizen is to aim
at this perfection. This is more
particularly the duty of the body collective in all their common deliberations,
and in every thing
they do as a
This conception of a morally-grounded sovereignty incorporate in
the moral nation is one that outstrips the merely delegated sovereignty
positive laws of the state: ‘Government is established only for the sake
of the nation, with a view to its safety and
happiness’.
provides the intellectual architecture for a supra-state order in which the
world is envisaged as peopled by nations each
of which is obligated by the law
of self-perfection and all of which are thus under a universal law of nations by
which the rights
attending this obligation can be
adjudicated.
It is in this
context that Vattel can assert the rights of territorial ownership
) and sovereignty (
) acquired by a nation to this
end to be inviolable by all other nations. This same framework, though, also
makes it possible for
him to argue that ‘wandering’ nations at a
lower level of self-development may not possess the right of sovereignty over
territory, making it legitimate for higher (European) nations to assume such
sovereignty and restrict the
of the indigenous
In any case, in arguing
that Aboriginal sovereignty was recognisable by the law of nations, Reynolds
cites only the Wolff-Vattel
(metaphysical and moral-philosophical) version
— centred in a conception of the nation as a morally self-determining
individual obligated by a supra-state moral order — even if he
reactivates this conception at one remove, from the standpoint
late-twentieth-century anti-state social history.
Taking into account its location in an array of rival forms of
jus naturae
, how should we view the cultural and political significance of
the Wolff-Vattel version? In claiming that Wolff’s
Law of Nations
was the ‘major work of international law in the middle years of the
eighteenth century’ from which, if it had been applied
‘impartially’, recognition of Aboriginal sovereignty would
‘flow logically’, Reynolds seeks to establish
a general normative
framework against which the injustice of the denial of sovereignty can be
objectively established. This strategy
attempts to escape from the historical
reality that there was no such shared normative framework. We have noted that
the Wolff-Vattel
jus naturae et gentium
was elaborated in
self-conscious opposition to a quite different line — that running from
Grotius and Hobbes into Pufendorf
and thence via Thomasius into the eighteenth
century — which was the source of conflicting conceptions of obligation
sovereignty and state. This body of work produced a normative and
substantive framework for understanding law and politics that was
opposed to and by the Wolff-Vattel framework, yet was no less available to
eighteenth-century public law officers, including
those working in the British
Colonial Office.
Pufendorf’s
Jus naturae et gentium
of 1672 begins with a
construction of obligation that is grounded in public law and Hobbesian
anthropology rather than metaphysics
philosophy.
Man is placed under
obligation not by his own rational and moral nature — whose vicious
passions make him incapable of rational
self-governance — but by a
‘superior’ with two defining features: power to coerce the
recalcitrant, and ‘just
reasons’ for restraining the free will of
his subjects at his discretion.
These just reasons refer not to the rules governing the perfection of
man’s moral nature but to a pact in which individuals,
living in mutual
fear, agree to submit their wills to the will of a superior in exchange for the
provision of protection, against
each other and their external
The unchallengeable
power or sovereignty arising from this pact is thus not the political expression
of fundamental capacity for
or right to moral self-development. Rather, it is
that required to maintain domestic civil peace and to protect the borders of a
political territory from external threat. Security is not a means to anything
higher — the collective moral self-determination
of the nation — but
constitutes the absolute untranscendable horizon of politics and law as such. As
a result of this exclusion
of metaphysics and moral philosophy from the
political-juridical construction of obligation and sovereignty, nations —
as self-perfecting collective moral persons — play no role in
Pufendorf’s construction of politics and law. This construction
wholly on what has been characterised as the modern form of the state,
understood as an apparatus for the exercise of
political rule that is doubly
‘impersonal’ or detached: from the personal will of the ruler, and
from the moral will
of the communities or nations over which he
Pufendorf’s conception of sovereignty and the state is indicative of a
profound de-universalising or territorialising of politics
and law. His version
of the law of nature — that man should conduct himself in a sociable
manner in order to avoid the dangers
posed by his weak will and vicious passions
— is indeed seen as universal. The manner, though, in which individuals
obligated to this law — via the pact in which a bordered population
pledges obedience to a sovereign in exchange for protection
from each other and
from foreigners — is deeply territorial or geopolitical. This issues in
the Hobbesian doctrine that only
the territorial sovereign may determine how the
natural law is to be enacted as civil law, and whether it has
For Pufendorf all human
law properly understood — as sovereign commands capable of coercively
imposing obligation — is
thus confined to the interior of the territorial
state. As a result, he denies the existence of a positive law of
In the international
arena, absent the sovereign who is the source of coercively imposed obligation,
there is no law, only the tenuous
domain of treaties and covenants, adherence to
which is voluntary and governed by the balance of power rather than
This is sometimes referred to as the problem of ‘enforcement’ in
international law, on the assumption that rights exist
under a law of nations
even if the power to enforce them is absent. But this assumption belongs to the
Wolff-Vattel version of
jus gentium
, where obligation arises from the
universal imperative of moral self-perfection and thus gives rise to supra-state
human or international
rights independent of their enforcement by a
‘superior’. In Pufendorf’s construction, where individuals are
by human laws only to the extent that they are coercively imposed by a
territorial sovereign, it is not just the enforcement of supra-state
rights that
is in question, but their existence. As a result, while Pufendorf insists that
it contravenes the law of nature for states
to wage war on each other, to seize
each other’s land and treasure, this contravention infringes no
justiciable right, as none
such exists at this level. This means that such
infringements must find their redress not in law but in war, to the extent that
cannot be avoided.
Such acts of sovereign states, including expropriatory colonisation, may thus
be wrong in relation to the law of nature and a legitimate
cause of war, without
being illegal (or legal) in relation to a putative law of nations. It is thus
characteristic of Pufendorf’s
approach to interstate politics that he
should endorse Grotius’s view of how sovereignty is acquired over
conquered peoples.
According to
Grotius, when a conquest occurs, the relations between the conquered people and
their new sovereign should revert as
quickly as possible to the standard model
— with the conquered people exchanging obedience for protection and
thereby establishing
the new sovereign’s legitimacy — as it is not
the role of the state to express the moral identity of a nation, only to
security for its subjects.
this view, ‘stateless nations’ or ‘captive nations’ do
not constitute an ongoing moral-political burden,
as the legitimacy of the
secular state depends not on the ‘recognition’ of its constituent
moral communities but on their
pacification and the achievement of domestic
security. The wrongness of conquest and the fact that it infringes no actual
— that it is neither just nor unjust — both arise from the
circumstance that states are not under juridical obligation
in their relations
to each other, conducting themselves rather in the manner of individuals living
in the state of nature.
It would be misguided, however, to treat Pufendorf as any kind of apologist
for colonisation. The two states in which he served as
a public law jurisconsult
and court political adviser — the Protestant territorial states of Sweden
and Brandenburg-Prussia
— were not significantly involved in
(extra-European) colonisation and his work for them pertained to a different
kind of problem.
Pufendorf’s
Jus naturae et gentium
was centrally
concerned with the relation between religious and political authority as this
had come into crisis in the context of
the early modern Holy Roman German
This was a context in
which complex interrelations between bitterly opposed confessionalising churches
and an array of rival political
authorities — the imperial estates,
cities, and dynastic states for which the churches served as institutions of
cultural formation
and national pedagogy — had led to a protracted period
of religious and political conflict. This had jeopardised the existence
Empire itself during the Thirty Years War, and exposed its Protestant states and
estates to the threat of annihilation by
their Catholic enemies. If Pufendorf
severed the link between man’s moral nature and political obligation, and
if he located
sovereignty in the doubly impersonal state as opposed to the
‘moral nation’, that is because the moral nation was in
religious nation: the community whose cultural identity was formed through its
participation in the liturgies of the rival
The political
expression of the moral nation — most dramatically in the form of early
modern confessional state — had
been accomplished by programs for the
political and juridical enforcement of a particular religion. This in turn had
produced endemic
and protracted conflict under conditions where a single state
was home to more than one religious ‘nation’, and across
as a whole owing to its housing of rival confessional states. Pufendorf
responded to this problem by relegating the ‘politics
recognition’ oriented to the moral nation in favour of the doubly
impersonal conception of the nation-blind
The state itself thus
should not be identified with one or with many religious nations, as these are
forms of society over which
it must exercise impersonal rule.
Pufendorf’s version of the law of nature and nations may thus be
regarded as supplying the intellectual architecture for a radical
desacralisation and territorialisation of political
This program for the
separation of church from state required that obligation and right be severed
from a grounding in man’s
cosmic moral nature, which was hostage to rival
moral theologies and philosophies. They should be tied instead to the laws
by a sovereign who is secular in the sense of grounding his power in the
preservation of territorial social peace. The denial of
a domain of positive
jus gentium
or supra-state international law — which in reality had
been the law of the trans-territorial church and Empire — was
product of the same secularisation of politics that provided a rationale for
religious toleration and civil
This is not to say
that Pufendorf’s program was the expression of an exemplary secular
rationalism embodied in the modern
It was in fact a much
more strategic intervention designed to respond to the Treaty of Westphalia
— as an imperial public law
enactment that required imperial states to
introduce limited forms of religious toleration — and to the
Religionspolitik
of Brandenburg-Prussia, where the Calvinist ruling house
had been compelled to deconfessionalise itself after failing to Calvinise
Lutheran nobility and
population.
The programmatic character of Pufendorf’s law of nature and nations
— that is, its role in reshaping political and juridical
thought in order
to provide a (fiercely contested) response to the problem of the political
governance of religion — means
of course that it is not ‘true’
in the sense of representing the timeless essence of obligation, sovereignty,
state. Despite their ability to capture important aspects of cultural
and political reality, such concepts operate as instruments
for achieving
programmatic purposes, which is also why they cannot be false in any
straightforward sense. The same comments apply
to Wolff and Vattel’s
jus gentium
, whose concept of a universal natural obligation —
grounded in man’s moral nature and expressed collectively in the
self-determining
nation — was programmatically intended to defeat the
Hobbesian-Pufendorfian desacralisation of the state and reinstate moral
philosophy at the foundations of politics and law. Neither of these versions of
jus naturae et gentium
can thus provide a definitive answer to
Reynolds’ question of ‘Were Aboriginal Tribes Sovereigns?’ The
unreconciled
historical co-existence of two such fundamentally different forms
of the law of nature and nations, however, might suggest why this
cannot be answered and should not be put in this form. If sovereignty is not a
stable concept representing an evident political
reality — if it confronts
us instead as a fiercely contested term within rival theory-programs, anchored
in particular historical
circumstances, and shaping particular political
interests — then the revealing question is not whether Aboriginal tribes
sovereignty. Rather, it is the question of how this possession was
affirmed, denied, or left open: on the basis of what kind of political
juridical discourse; uttered by what sorts of actors; as a way of formulating
what kinds of competing cultural, economic, or political
IV Natural Law, Common Law, and Public Law
We have indicated that natural law is not a species of justiciable law but a
hybrid academic discourse, drawing on the disciplines
of theology, positive law,
political science, and moral philosophy. Its rival forms have been distinguished
by the relative pre-eminence
given to particular disciplines within the matrix,
and by the uses to which these forms have been
In the early modern Holy
Roman German Empire natural law discourses played an important role in
organising the reception of positive
law (Romano-canon, imperial public law)
within the legal orders of emerging territorial states, most of which first took
confessional states. Theological forms of natural law — the
tradition of Christian natural law — thus helped to shape
the development
of theocratically-oriented legal systems by showing how the civil law could be
regarded as an expression of divine
law, mediated through the norms of
‘natural law’ (typically the Decalogue and the rules of the
Christian love ethic).
Political-jurisprudential forms of natural law, such as Pufendorf’s, were
designed to facilitate the emergence of secularised
legal and political orders
by, for example, showing how fundamental public law instruments like the Treaty
of Westphalia could be
integrated into territorial legal orders, providing
states with a means to govern their churches and religious
The manner in which continental natural law was received within the
overwhelmingly common law juridical and political culture of England
has not yet
been the subject of sustained research, although important lines of inquiry are
emerging. The translation of several
of Pufendorf’s key works into English
during the last decade of the seventeenth century and the first decade of the
is a pointer to their reception by various factions in the great
unresolved struggles over state and religion, king and parliament,
sovereignty
and the ‘ancient constitution’. The student digest of
Pufendorf’s
De jure naturae et gentium
hominis et civis
of 1673 — translated by Andrew Tooke in 1691, had a
‘Whig’ complexion. This was heightened in the modified fourth
edition of 1716 when the editors drew on Barbeyrac’s French translation to
erase references to the state — displacing
it with ‘civil
society’ and ‘nation’ — going so far as to excise some
of Pufendorf’s Hobbesian
characterisations of the state of nature,
presumably because of their role in motivating the need for an absolute
In his 1717 English
rendition of Barbeyrac’s extraordinary 1712 French edition of the
, Basil Kennet deepened this Whig reception of Pufendorf, this time not
by doctoring the text but by embedding it in Barbeyrac’s
notational apparatus of a distinctly Lockean caste. There were two English
translations of Pufendorf’s 1687 treatise
on the separation of church and
De habitu religionis christianae ad vitam civilem
. The preface
to the 1698 version (by Jodocus Crull) treats separation — against the
grain of Pufendorf’s arguments —
as a means of protecting the
independence of the church against and overweening Hobbesian
while the preface to the
second (anonymous) translation of 1719 treats the text as a warning against the
political empowerment of
religion and as a defence of toleration, more in
keeping with Pufendorf’s original
In commenting on the
English edition of Pufendorf’s major work of political and constitutional
history — his anti-imperial
De statu imperii Germanici
— Michael Seidler has characterised Edmund Bohun’s translation as
the work of a Tory propagandist intent on defending
a divine right absolute
sovereignty (repudiated by Pufendorf) against Protestant dissent and republican
popular sovereignty
When it comes to the most important English edition of Vattel’s
— Joseph Chitty’s translation and
commentary of 1833 — we find a similar process of grooming the original
for a particular kind of reception and use. Chitty was a ‘pupil
master’ at the Inns of Court, and his central concern
was not the domestic
disposition of sovereignty but the status of the British Crown in the
international context of the Napoleonic
wars and the American revolutionary
wars. It was to this end that he translated Vattel’s treatise on the
obligations of ‘nations’
under a natural law of international
rights, surrounding it with notes on the latest public law cases dealing with
obligations in relation to Admirality law, war reparations,
military alliances, and peace treaties. It is significant that in these
Chitty comments on the difficulties posed for Vattel by the fact that monarchs
have disregarded the law of nations in tying
their sovereignty to the common
law. In doing so they have denied that natural law might form part of a positive
law of nations,
such that the law of nations is regarded as of ‘imperfect
and inefficient obligation’. In this early formulation of the
‘enforcement’ in international law, Chitty notes the absence of a
‘permanent and general international
court’ and observes that
‘it will be found that in general the sovereign, or government of each
state, who has the power
of declaring war and peace, has also, as an incident,
sole power of deciding on questions of booty, capture, prize, and hostile
such acts being non-justiciable in any domestic court. Despite
his attraction to Vattel’s conception of a universal moral obligation,
Chitty does not think that this can be binding on states. Rather, he envisages
their conduct as being gradually and partially governed
through the emergence of
temporary interstate tribunals ‘confirmed by temporary statutes in each
In other words,
Chitty’s common law reception of Vattel was oriented not to the relegation
of state jurisdictions in favour
universal natural (human) and international
rights, but to a linking of state jurisdictions via bi- or multi-lateral
treaties and
domestic statutes that left the principle of state sovereignty
The diverse works of
jus naturae et gentium
reached the Australian
colonies at the beginning of the nineteenth century, carried in the baggage and
minds of governors, officials,
and lawyers formed in the English common law
culture, some of whom may well have been taught by
At this point, these
works had already passed through several stages of grooming and reception, where
they had been made and remade
in accordance with their several uses in a variety
of political and juridical contexts. Their use in the colonial Australian
would draw on these prior articulations of the law of nature and
nations. It would also give rise to new inflections in the context
volatile tripartite relations between imperial officials, local settlers (and
their lawyers), and the indigenous peoples.
Arguments over Aboriginal
sovereignty thus did not take place against the backdrop of a normatively
pristine law of nature and nations,
from whose impartial use the objective
recognition of such sovereignty might flow logically. Rather, they occurred
within the context
of an internally divided and ceaselessly transformed
discursive hybrid whose pretensions to universal rationality and impartiality
had long been forfeit to the vehement disagreements of those laying claim to
them. This provides us a suitable standpoint from which
to discuss the role of
the law of nature and nations in colonial arguments over Aboriginal
sovereignty.
In appealing to natural law as a source for the recognition of Aboriginal
title and sovereignty denied by Australian common law, the
social-national
history of indigenous rights has reactivated one of the central functions of the
natural law tradition. This is to
provide a reception context for positive law
by surrounding it with an array of political, metaphysical, and
moral-philosophical
discourses designed to anchor it in a particular
cultural-political program. By identifying itself with the moral-philosophical
jus naturae et gentium
— at the centre of which lies the
conception of the nation as a self-determining collective moral person —
this historiography
has purported to uncover native title and customary law
rights below (or above) the level of positive law, hence surviving colonisation
and now capable of legal
recognition.
In order to
overcome the problem posed by the apparently moralistic and non-justiciable
character of this version of
jus gentium
rights, its protagonists have
not followed Chitty in tying them to the piecemeal constructions of
international public law. Neither
have they followed the public law jurists who
treat native title rights as positive law constructions designed to integrate
of Aboriginal land use within the tenure jurisdiction of the domestic
Rather, they have sought
to show that morally obligatory natural law rights were actually present within
the positive law and policy
of colonial Australia, at least during an initial
‘golden age’. Not only does this make it possible to claim that
law native title and sovereignty rights are justiciable realities
recognised by colonial jurisprudence, it also allows these rights
to be treated
as timeless moral facts that positive law is compelled to recognise on pain of
being condemned as unjust.
amounts to what I earlier identified as Reynolds’ strong thesis, the
alternative thesis being that native title and (where
they are recognised)
customary law rights are creations of constitutional and public law, operating
as means of integrating colonised
peoples within the legal and political order
of the colonising state.
Reynolds develops his case by pointing to the presence of
jus gentium
arguments in a series of colonial cases where various protagonists argued for
the non-amenability of Aborigines to Crown jurisdiction,
hence for a parallel
Aboriginal jurisdiction and rights. Taking as their starting point the three
main ways in which the
jus gentium
recognised the lawful assertion of
sovereignty over a colonised territory — by conquest, cession, or
occupation/settlement
— these protagonists argued that as they had neither
been conquered nor ceded their territory via a treaty, the Aborigines
outside Crown jurisdiction and under their own laws. Reynolds tracks this line
of argument through its use by defence attorneys
R. v Murrell
R. v Bonjon
(1841), where it was accepted by the presiding judge,
Justice Willis. He also provides extensive citation of its elaboration by the
colonial publicist E. W. Landor, who buttressed it with an argument that British
colonial sovereignty was ‘personal’
rather than territorial, hence
capable of recognising indigenous
That this view did
not carry the day, Reynolds attributes to two counterpoised legal doctrines
terra nullius
which allowed Australia to be treated as a
‘legal desert’, and a conception of sovereignty as the exercise of
and unchallengeable supreme authority over a territory — doctrines
that signaled the corruption of
jus gentium
by the racism and ignorance
of colonial society.
In a different version of this argument, Bruce Kercher arrives at a similar
destination, working with an overlapping array of cases
that Kercher himself has
been instrumental in recovering and making availed for
researchers.
(1827) — where Lieutenant Lowe was on trial for the murder of an
Aboriginal man know to Europeans as Jackey Jackey —
Kercher focuses on the
defence team’s use of arguments drawn from the law of nature and nations
in order to show the non-amenability
of Aborigines to Crown jurisdiction (hence
Lowe’s innocence in killing one). William Wentworth thus cites from
Law of Nations
to the effect that a nation, here
consisting of ‘independent families’, might occupy and live off the
land of a territory
without exercising ‘empire’ or sovereignty over
it or themselves. As a result, according to Vattel:
No person can take possession of that empire, because it would be to subject
them, in spite of themselves, and no person is under
condition to subject free
born men, unless they submit voluntarily. The land belongs to them exclusively,
and one cannot, without
injustice, deprive them of their
Wentworth even permits himself to speculate whether — New South Wales
having been settled without the appropriation of sovereignty
— the Crown
actually possesses jurisdiction over European settlers, but retreats from this
incendiary conjecture and contents
himself with the argument that the Crown
certainly does not possess sovereignty over the Aboriginal population. While the
judges — Chief Justice Forbes and Justice Stephen —
rebuffed the defence argument, declaring the court’s jurisdiction
Aboriginal victim hence over Lowe, they did this, Kercher argues, not via
terra nullius
but by invoking the New South Wales Act of 1823, as
establishing Crown jurisdiction by
According to Kercher,
the possibility for jurisdictional plurality thus remained open — as can
R. v Ballard
(1829) where Forbes denied Crown jurisdiction in
homicide — until its closure in
of 1836, whose affirmation of jurisdiction overturned
. In locating the emergence of the ‘insidious myth’ of
terra nullius
in Justice Burton’s
Kercher’s account thus converges with Reynolds’. Kercher, though,
ascribes Burton’s blindness to Aboriginal
sovereignty not so much to his
distorted use of Vattel’s
jus gentium
‘positivist’ acceptance of a unified sovereignty as the sole source
of law — Reynolds concurs —
this associated with the loss of a more
flexible colonial legal
If we look a little more closely at some of the cases cited by Reynolds and
Kercher, however, then a different picture of their significance
emerge, one of greater historical-juridical complexity, and of much greater
political ambivalence. In
, prior to Wentworth’s citation of
Vattel, his colleague Robert Wardell also drew on the of law of nature and
nations, this
time citing from Pufendorf’s
De jure naturae et
. In a sobering reminder of the purpose driving the defence arguments
for the non-amenability of Aborigines to Crown jurisdiction
— that is, to
justify Lieutenant Lowe’s killing of one — Wardell culminates these
arguments with the assertion
that the Aborigines must nonetheless be punishable
under divine law and the law of nature. According to Wardell, Pufendorf provides
authority for the defence argument that it is legitimate for an individual to
avenge a crime committed in the state of nature by
unilaterally punishing the
perpetrator. He quotes from Pufendorf’s
thus: ‘It may
sometimes happen that any private subject may assume the same right of defence
which he would have had in a state
of nature, for instance, if he happened to
come into any place which belongs to no commonwealth, but continues in its
primitive liberty
Were someone to
be attacked by a foreigner under these circumstances then he can do whatever is
necessary to defend himself. Wardell
concludes that: ‘According to this
doctrine then the right of punishing crime is vested in the individual insured,
avenger’. Lowe was thus appropriating the natural right of
punishment that reverts to individuals in the state of nature, and
in doing so
was following a natural law of reciprocal violence that is practiced by the
Aborigines themselves.
To date, however, the historiography of this case has failed to observe the
following significant fact: the doctrine that Wardell
attributes to Pufendorf
directly contradicts the latter’s own arguments on the right to punish.
The passage cited by Wardell
— regarding the circumstance in which
individuals may defend themselves when outside their own states — comes
Pufendorf’s discussion of the right to punish, but from his
account of the right of war. In fact Pufendorf discusses this circumstance
marginal exception to the rule that individuals living in states have no private
right of war, which belongs to the sovereign
alone who exercises it on behalf of
the state. In no sense is this exceptional circumstance supposed to legitimate a
private right
to punish, as claimed by Wardell. If we turn to Pufendorf’s
actual discussion of the right of punishment, then it is clear
that the whole
point of this is to deny any continuity between the right of war in the state of
nature and the right of punishment
in the civil state. According to Pufendorf,
the latter right belongs wholly to the civil sovereign who exercises it not as a
right of defence delegated to him by his subjects, but as a right
originating from the purpose of sovereignty itself: namely, the
maintenance of
social peace through the exercise of unchallengeable coercive
If we look for the source of Wardell’s defence of the
individual’s natural right to punish, or right to punish in the
nature, searching in the edition from which he was citing — Basil
Kennet’s 1717 English translation of Barbeyrac’s
1712 French edition
— then we can find it in on the very pages where Pufendorf denies this
right. Here Wardell’s argument
is presented in a long note by
Pufendorf’s famous Huguenot translator and commentator, Jean Barbeyrac,
from Pufendorf’s doctrine that the civil sovereign
possesses an exclusive right to
Citing Locke’s
Second Treatise of Government
as his authority, Barbeyrac contends that
were the right to punish wholly a prerogative of the territorial state and its
— as Pufendorf argues — then it would be impossible to
punish foreigners or pirates, who are not members of the state.
Neither, of
course, would subjects have a right to punish a tyrannical sovereign. In other
words, the Pufendorf cited by Wardell
is not a pristine source of natural law
reasoning from which an objective recognition of Aboriginal sovereignty arose.
is the doctored, ‘Lockeanised’ Pufendorf produced by early
eighteenth-century Whig publicists as part of their battle
against the
prerogative rights of the sovereign and the Crown. The fact that this Lockean
Pufendorf was produced to defend a particular
political position should alert us
to the possibility that Wardell’s inverted citation of him might also have
been intended
to serve a political purpose.
Similar remarks apply to the liberties that Wentworth takes with
Vattel’s text and arguments. In fact Wentworth begins his submission
repeating Wardell’s Lockean argument that a natural right to punish
belongs to individuals before it is delegated to the
Crown, asserting that, as
the Aborigines are living in the state of nature, individuals possess the
natural right to punish their
aggressions.
Next, Wentworth
adds an argument which McHugh shows had formed an important part of the settler
arsenal in the American colonies:
namely, that, having met with little
opposition, the British sovereign had not conquered the native inhabitants and
thus did not
the exercise prerogative rule that came from the seizure of
sovereignty through conquest.
According to Wentworth, this is why the Crown did not empower the Governor of
New South Wales to exercise discretionary rule in such
matters as taxation, so
that government must take place through parliamentary legislation. This, then,
is the context in which Wentworth
introduces Vattel’s doctrine regarding
the illegitimacy of assuming sovereignty over native land-holders who do not
exercise sovereignty. In other words, he does not introduce this
doctrine as a natural law argument for the recognition of Aboriginal
sovereignty
under the law of nations. Rather, he assimilates it to a ‘Whig’
common-law political argument supposed to
show that in the absence of conquest,
the Crown has no jurisdiction over Aborigines in their own
‘demesne’, hence no
‘punish’ them in that place — elided by Wentworth with the
nature — in accordance with natural right.
Here too, an exceptional case — Vattel’s discussion of nations
living off the demesne of a territory without exercising
sovereignty over it
— is turned into the normal situation. Vattel is quite clear that
land-holding and sovereignty are normally
reciprocally related, and that
coincidence.
This shows that it
is impossible to derive a conception of Aboriginal sovereignty from
Vattel’s account of independent families
occupying a demesne. Of more
immediate importance, it is a pointer to the fact that Vattel does not regard
those nations who exercise
ownership without sovereignty as if they were in the
state of nature. In living off the land, such nations are already within the
‘society of nations’, but at a lower developmental level than those
nations who have formed political societies in order
to exercise
sovereignty.
They are at an even
lower level still if they live off the land by hunting and gathering rather than
agriculture, which is a sign
that they have scarcely begun to develop their
In other words, it is
only by forcibly assimilating Vattel’s conception of the hunter-gatherer
demesne to a Lockean state of
nature that Wentworth can seek to deny Crown
law liberties of soldiers and settlers. Not only does Vattel regard the
hunter-gatherer demesne as subject to the law of nations
— rather than
treating it as the state of nature — but he views this law as legitimating
the partial appropriation of
this demesne by more developed sovereign nations,
who would thus certainly exercise jurisdiction in their appropriated
It begins to seem, then, that in seeking to find within early colonial law an
uncompromised law of nature and nations from whose impartial
application the
recognition of Aboriginal sovereignty would flow logically, the social history
of the moral nation has been engaged
in a doubly risky venture. On the one hand,
this strategy risks overlooking the fact that the cited law of nature and
nations represents
a partisan moral-philosophical version of the discourse. The
cited form of this discourse, moreover, was itself the product of a
political assimilations and uses that had transformed it into a weapon of choice
for various anti-state political positions.
On the other hand, it risks treating
a different line of
jus naturae et gentium
political-juridical form focused in not in the morally self-determining nation
but in the politically determinant sovereign
state — as an ideological
cover for social forces. In so doing, it fails to grasp its independent
historical reality of this
form as a rival reception context for positive law
and politics in the colonial state. If the assertion of the extra-jurisdictional
status of the Aborigines was something less than a
recognise their national sovereignty, then the assertion of the Crown’s
singular and unified sovereignty over the
territory was something more than a
denial of the Aborigines’ existence as a self-determining
moral nation.
V What is New South Wales?
Paul McHugh has argued that the doctrines that historians take to be
exemplary for the recognition (or denial) of indigenous rights
indigenous people had not been conquered by the Crown; that the Crown exercised
supreme sovereignty over a territory
— in fact occurred within the context
of certain kind of political conflict that played out in a number of English
regarding conquest, rights, and sovereignty emerged from a long-standing culture
of English political thought. This was
organised around the poles of the defence
of time-immemorial common law rights against Crown prerogative versus the
assertion of
Crown sovereignty as the condition of existence of the common law
and its rights. In the common law colonies, this bifurcated political
played into a repeated pattern of colonial political conflict. Settlers and
their lawyers could appeal time-immemorial rights
and jurisdictional pluralism,
asserting a more local jurisdiction against that of the far-off sovereign, and
seeking maximum freedom
to exploit the economic and social opportunities
provided by the under-regulated frontier. The British Colonial Office and its
governors could assert the unchallengeable and unified territorial
sovereignty of the Crown, seeking to bring both settlers and Aborigines
single jurisdiction, but lacking the administrative reach, police powers, and
local knowledge required to make such programmatic
assertions binding on the
dangerously fluid reality of the frontier. Under these conditions the natural
law rights of
jus gentium
and the public law rights of the Crown —
including native title rights — did not provide a formal legal basis for
realities, but an entirely historical means of programming government,
and resistance to it.
Consider again in this regard the circumstances in which colonial jurists
denied that the Aborigines had been conquered — and
were hence unamenable
to Crown jurisdiction — which Reynolds treats as evidence for natural-law
openness to the possibility
of Aboriginal sovereignty. In
, Wentworth
formulated this denial in the following way:
I will not suppose this Court can be ignorant of the early annals of this
country, because it must be within the judicial cognisance
of this Court, as
much as the battle of Hastings in the Court of Westminster — that we
landed on these shores without opposition,
that we took it, and remained in it
without opposition, and that no conquest was ever made of it by his Britannic
Majesty. ... if
any conquest had ever been made, it is clear that it was
competent to his Majesty, by virtue of his prerogative, to delegate his
Governors various powers, which he withheld from them. The King would have had
the power to authorise his Governors here to make
laws, and levy taxes, and not
have been under the necessity to have had recourse to this legislature for any
In reactivating the status of the Norman conquest of England within English
common-law culture, Wentworth positions the controverted
conquest of the
Aborigines according to long-standing topics of English political argument.
Here, conquest provided a justification
for rule by a sovereign regarded as the
source of all law, while the questioning of conquest provided a justification
for the denial
of such rule via recourse to time-immemorial (Saxon) laws and
rights: the ‘ancient constitution’ that had survived the
In denying that the
Aborigines had been conquered, Wentworth’s intention was not to assert
their natural law rights to an independent
restrict the prerogative rights of the Crown over the settlers, including
Wentworth himself.
The object of the exercise was to permit the settlers to deal
directly with the Aborigines outside of Crown jurisdiction. This was
not so much
to justify violent treatment of them — although this is what Wentworth was
doing in his defence of Lieutenant Lowe
— as to permit the unfettered
purchase of Aboriginal lands. In this regard it is worth noting that in 1840
Wentworth would
himself play a key role in an abortive attempt to purchase large
tracts of Maori land from a group of visiting
The British Colonial Office’s assertion of an exhaustive and singular
territorial sovereignty needs to be seen against the backdrop
of this kind of
settler and judicial activism. On 26 July 1837 — no doubt informed by the
doubts raised about Crown jurisdiction
over Aborigines in the cases of
(1829), and
(1836) — the
Colonial Secretary, Lord Glenelg, spelt out government policy in a dispatch to
Governor Bourke:
Your commission as Governor of New South Wales asserts Her Majesty’s
sovereignty over every part of the continent of New Holland
which is not
embraced in the colonies of Western or Southern Australia. Hence I conceive it
follows that all the natives inhabiting
those territories must be considered as
subjects of the Queen, and as within Her Majesty’s allegiance. To regard
them as aliens,
with whom a war can exist, and against whom Her Majesty’s
troops may exercise belligerent rights, is to deny that protection
to which they
derive the highest possible claim from the sovereignty which has been assumed
over the whole of their ancient
possessions.
This attempt to constitute the Aborigines as British subjects
through the sovereign assertion of the Crown’s territorial jurisdiction
was no doubt fuelled by several motives, no less by the desire to control and
Christianise the Aborigines than to protect them from
land-hungry entrepreneurs
and vigilante shepherds and soldiers. Such
assertions of
territorial sovereignty did indeed function as authority to which judges could
appeal in declaring Crown jurisdiction
over Aboriginals and settlers.
Sovereignty and its consequences for Aboriginal rights, however, was not itself
seen as founded
in the titles under which it was asserted —
whether these be conquest, cession, occupation or prescription — as these
were treated as instruments for exercising governmental authority in accordance
with (shifting) policy objectives.
The instrumental public law use of these concepts is clear enough in a
supportive letter that Governor Gipps wrote to Chief Justice
Dowling in January
1842. This letter was in response to Justice Willis’s arguments in
(1841) that, in the absence of conquest or cession, the Crown lacked
cases. Arguing that none of
the three ways of acquiring colonies — by conquest, cession, or occupancy
— had been satisfied
in the Australian context, Willis had drawn on Vattel
to mount a case for a form of Crown sovereignty that treated the Aborigines
‘dependent states’ retaining their own laws in
Gipps’s letter to
Dowling is a clear expression of the executive’s concern at what seemed to
be an attempt by the judiciary
to make government policy from the bench. After
asserting that the ‘sovereigns of Great Britain have ... assumed
unqualified
dominion over the parts of New Holland forming the territory of New
South Wales’ and declaring that ‘by an Act of Parliament,
c. 83, that within the colony of New South Wales, British law shall be
established, without reference to any other law,
or laws, save as such as may be
made by the local legislature’, the Governor offered this comment on the
status of the Aborigines
as a conquered people:
That even if the aborigines be looked upon as a conquered people, and it bew
even further admitted that a conquered people are entitled
to preserve their own
laws until a different law be proclaimed by the conqueror, still no argument in
favour of a separate code of
laws for the aborigines of New South Wales can be
drawn therefrom: first, because the aborigines never have been in possession of
any code of laws intelligible to a civilized people; and secondly, because their
conquerors (if the sovereigns of Great Britain are
so to be considered) have
declared that British law shall prevail throughout the whole territory of New
In short, were it to have been used as a public law category in
New South Wales, then the juridical meaning and effectivity of a term
conquest would have been determined not by its (in any case controverted) use in
the texts of the law of nature and nations,
but by something else altogether:
namely, the government’s practice of asserting its complete rights of
ownership (
) and legislation (
), on the basis of
which the Crown alone could grant such rights as native title rights or
customary law rights should this be deemed
appropriate on policy grounds. The
argument that colonisation is normatively governed by the
jus gentium
categories of conquest, cession, or occupation — such that a colonised
people not deemed to be conquered might retain native
title or sovereignty
rights in accordance with a higher law of nature and nations — suffers
from a double weakness. On the
one hand, it is undermined by the fact in the
absence of concrete legislative enactments and judicial decisions the meaning
and applicability
of such categories remains floating and contentious. On the
other, it is vitiated by the fact that the use that state officials do
such categories is determined not by the higher law of nature and nations but by
far more immediate policy objectives linked
to the extension of government and
expressed in positive law.
There was, nonetheless, real uncertainty in all quarters about how Crown
what sense they could
be regarded as British subjects. On the one hand, there were those officials
like Secretary Glenelg and Governors
Bourke and Gipps who sought to exercise a
strict Crown jurisdiction over the Aborigines by asserting the territorial
character of
sovereignty and jurisdiction. On the other hand, there were those
who argued against such strict jurisdiction and in favour of the
retaining their own laws, at least for the time
This latter argument
could be maintained by those who regarded it as unjust to subject the Aborigines
to a form of law so foreign
to their own laws and way of life, as well as by
those who sought to weaken the exercise of Crown jurisdiction to facilitate
exploitation
of the Aborigines. If Lord Glenelg derived the status of British
subject directly from the exercise of territorial sovereignty or
subjection,
Wardell and Wentworth made it conditional on a dense network of cultural
qualifications: knowledge of the English language
and the basic precepts of
Christianity, and, above all, knowledge of English law and the capacity to
occupy the roles of plaintiff
and juror in trial proceedings.
It is this common law construction of British jurisdiction and subjecthood
that allows Wentworth to argue that the Aborigines do not
live in the
Crown’s territorial sovereignty, but by the
presence of common law British
By the New South Wales Act the jurisdiction of this Court in New South Wales is
rendered co-extensive with the jurisdiction of the
Court of the King’s
Bench in England. It is a preliminary question then what is New South Wales? I
think I shall prove that
New South Wales in this act means such parts of the
territory as are occupied by British subjects
Given that the Aborigines are not British subjects — as they have never
been conquered and lack the necessary common-law cultural
qualifications —
they exist in another jurisdictional space. In declaring this space to be that
of the state of nature subject
jus gentium
and natural law, Wentworth
and Wardell were in fact defending a more personal and local form of common-law
modern territorial jurisdiction of the
In the three leading cases of
R. v Ballard
(1829), and
R. v Murrell
(1836), one can see the colonial judiciary
charting a fluctuating course between these two poles — between
defined by the presence of British common law subjects and as
defined by the exercise of the Crown’s territorial sovereignty
gravitating in the latter direction. In
, Chief Justice Forbes
rejects Wentworth’s attempt to restrict the Crown’s jurisdiction to
a place co-terminus with the
presence of British common law subjects, and he
does so by defining jurisdiction in terms of the exercise of territorial
sovereignty.
According to Forbes, the time for ‘the abstract principles of
the law of nations’ is over, having been eclipsed by the
act of parliament
that establishes sovereignty over the territory of New South Wales: ‘If
the Act of Parliament has recognised
a sovereignty over this country, and
recognised the application of English law here, we must look to the British law
as established
; and the Court is of that opinion’.
The only thing required to establish Lowe’s amenability to jurisdiction is
geo-political locale in which the killing took place: ‘It is
stated to be at Wallis’s Plains, in the district of Newcastle,
Territory of New South
This way of
asserting the British subjecthood of the Aborigines was the means by which the
British government sought to maintain
like Lowe and similar threats to civil order on the frontier.
, however, concerned with
homicide, Forbes denies the Court’s jurisdiction by using the other
principle: Aboriginals in their natural state
lack the moral and juridical
capacity to qualify as British subjects. They are thus beyond Crown jurisdiction
even if the purported
crime does take place ‘in the Territory of New South
Wales’. It is noteworthy that here Forbes makes use of the Lockean
law argument that entrance into the state’s jurisdiction takes place via a
contract in which natural rights are exchanged
for the sovereign’s
protection — ‘They give up no natural rights’, he says of the
Aborigines — rather
than through the
declaration of
territorial sovereignty.
effect Forbes accepts the argument that he rejected when it was put by Wentworth
: New South Wales is defined by the presence of British common law
subjects or the English common law nation, which means that the
inhabit another jurisdictional space, the state of nature.
Given this oscillation between opposed principles for determining
could try an Aborigine for the killing of another — in
R. v Murrell
(1836), seven years after
— he was not so much
‘overturning’
as reverting to
, the defence attorney, Sydney Stephen, uses all of the common law
arguments for identifying jurisdiction with common law British
subjecthood,
hence denying the Court’s jurisdiction over Aboriginal offenders: having
neither been conquered nor ceding their
lands, the Aborigines are not British
subjects, and it is unfair to subject them to the common law when they lack the
juridical capacities
and standing required to enjoy its
protection.
In explaining the
Court’s rejection of these arguments, Justice Burton’s reasons
rehearse the grounds for the Crown’s
exercise of territorial sovereignty
in substantially the same terms as Forbes in
. Burton asserts that
the British sovereign has taken possession of New South Wales as a distinct
territory and imposed jurisdiction
on it — ‘the rights of Domain and
Empire’ — through an act of parliament, and the offence took place
this territorial jurisdiction where ‘by the Common Law and by Stat.
9 Geo. 4 c 83 the law of England is the law of the
Burton does, however, supplement Forbes’ arguments with one taken from
Vattel. With regards to ‘numbers and civilisation’
‘form of Government and laws’, he argues, the Aboriginal tribes
could not be ‘recognized as so many sovereign
states governed by laws of
their own’, which means that the land of New South Wales could be regarded
as ‘unappropriated’
when taken by the British sovereign. This is the
reasoning that Reynolds and Kercher view as representing the dark cloud of the
terra nullius
doctrine settling over Australian law. They see it as
signifying the eclipse of the earlier natural law recognition of native title
and jurisdiction by a positivist law acting at the behest of a corrupt state and
society in order to dispossess the Aboriginal population
of their rights and
land. There are several reasons, though, for doubting the contextual adequacy of
this interpretation. Firstly,
as mentioned, the bulk of Burton’s reasons
for asserting Crown jurisdiction are identical to Forbes’ arguments from
territorial
sovereignty made nine years earlier in his
Second, the one argument that Burton adds to Forbes’ — his denial
that the Aboriginal tribes were sovereign
states — comes not from statist
positive law, but from Vattel’s
. It appears from
the passages cited as authority for his judgment — especially the relevant
paragraphs in Bk. I, ch. xviii
Law of Nations
— that Burton
is mobilising Vattel’s argument that legitimate ownership requires both
occupancy (domain) and territorial
sovereignty (empire), understood as an
unified and unchallengeable capacity for political rule over a territory.
Following Vattel,
Burton can thus argue that ‘wandering tribes’ who
do not exercise sovereignty over a territory do not possess legitimate
ownership, which means that appropriation of such a territory is lawful
according to the law of
At the level of textual citation, then, Burton’s argument from the
absence of Aboriginal sovereignty represents not a new legal
positivism but an
attempt to marshal the law of nations in support of Crown jurisdiction. Burton
may well have been seeking to supplement
Forbes’ earlier
defence of territorial jurisdiction — the view that jurisdiction and
legality are internal to an expropriating act of sovereignty
that is not itself
legal (or illegal) — by using Vattel to argue for the natural law
legitimacy of this act. This would combat
the way in which the settlers’
advocates used Vattel to restrict Crown territorial jurisdiction in favour of a
more local common
law jurisdiction. In any case, the fact that Vattel could be
cited with roughly equal plausibility on both sides of the argument
that it was not the law of nature and nations that was playing the determinative
role. Rather, this was played by the two
counter-balanced ideological positions
which, despite their seventeenth-century origins, continued to frame political
and juridical
argument: the conception of subjecthood in terms of the exercise
of territorial sovereignty versus the conception of it as a dense
customary rights, cultural qualification and local jurisdiction.
VI Conclusion
The picture of the exercise of sovereignty and jurisdiction in colonial
Australia that begins to emerge from a contextualist historiography
several regards from that characteristic of the narrative social history of the
moral nation. It is not self-evident that
any of the peoples caught up in
colonisation — whether indigenous dwellers or incoming ‘people of
the boat’ —
should be regarded as possessing juridical rights
arising from their status as morally self-determining ‘nations’.
is in part because to view them in this way one must first accede to a
particular tendentious moral-political position — represented
here by the
metaphysical version of the law of nature and nations — whose concrete
political and juridical outcomes have varied
with its programmatic use. It is
also because a rival conception of politics — oriented not to the
self-realising nation but
to the exercise of ‘impersonal’ rule by a
nation-blind state — has become indispensable to our political and
self-understanding. In its radically
imposition, a state conceived in this way does not recognise indigenous rights
in accordance with the principle of moral
self-determination founded in
time-immemorial law. Rather it does so in accordance with the practice of
incorporating the totality
of ownership and legislative right, in order to
constitute itself as the sole source of the titles that its subjects are capable
of holding. This includes native title understood as a modern form of land
tenure defined by the Crown’s exclusive right of
extinguishment. The
recognition of native title in High Court’s
judgment may thus
be regarded as the common law’s belated exercise of this right on behalf
of the Australian Crown. If the
British Crown’s refusal to formally
recognise native title and customary law — as time-immemorial natural law
does not represent the moral nation’s fall into an originary
injustice, then the
judgment does not represent the partial
restoration of this nation to an integral condition. This conception of history,
as the path
charted by a morally self-perfecting nation, arose during the 1970s
when an anti-state social history reactivated a metaphysical
natural law
doctrine and attached itself to the ‘presentist’ self-understanding
of common law revisionism. The rival
contextualist historiography of political
thought and public law constitutionalism views the state not as an agent
responsible to
and for the moral history of the nation, but as one whose
normatively ungoverned actions — including colonisation — give
to history as their uncontrollable consequence. If this is a historiography from
which no moral guilt may be ascribed to today’s
Australians, then it is
equally one from which they may draw no moral comfort.
* Australian Professorial Fellow in the Centre for the History of European
Discourses, University of Queensland, Ian Hunter has published
widely on early
modern European political and philosophical thought.
Research for this paper was made possible by the award of an
Australian Professorial Fellowship. A first version was presented to
‘Cultural Translations Symposium’, held by the National Early
European Research Network in 2006, where I received
valuable input from Glenn
Burgess, Conal Condren, and John Gascoigne. In the course of rewriting it I
benefited a great deal from
the comments of Shaunnagh Dorsett, Mark Finnane,
Lisa Ford, Angus Francis, Knud Haakonssen, Paul McHugh, Mark Hickford, David
and Damen Ward, each of whom helped to clarify the legal and
historical issues addressed, but none of whom is responsible for such
See Henry Reynolds,
Aboriginal Sovereignty: Reflections on Race, State, and Nation
xiii, 177. This reflects a tendency to place European ‘stateless
nations’ — entho-religious groups who did
not succeed in forming
their own states — and colonised indigenous peoples on the same political
footing, as ‘captive
nations’ or ‘nations within’. For a
further example, see Will Kymlicka, ‘American Multiculturalism and the
“Nations Within”’, in D. Ivison, P. Patton and W. Sanders
Political Theory and the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
On the status of this
historiography as national myth-making, see Bain Attwood, ‘The
or the Law of the Land? History, Law and Narrative in a Settler
Society’ (2004) 2
History Compass
1. For a defence of such
myth-making, see David Williams, ‘Myths, National Origins, Common Law and
the Waitangi Tribunal’
E Law: Murdoch University Law
http://www.murdoch.edu.au/elaw/issues/v11n4/williams114.html
See in particular, P. G.
Aboriginal Societies and the Common Law: A History of Sovereignty,
Status, and Self-Determination
(2004), Introduction; and for a summary
statement, McHugh, ‘The Common-Law Status of Colonies and Aboriginal
How Lawyers and Historians Treat the Past’
Saskatchewan Law Review
In addition, see the important studies by
Andrew Sharp, ‘History and Sovereignty: A Case of Juridical History in New
Zealand/Aotearoa’,
in M. Peters (ed.),
Cultural Politics in the
University in Aotearoa/New Zealand
(1997), 158; Mark Hickford,
““Decidedly the Most Interesting Savages on the Globe”: An
Approach to the Intellectual
History of Maori Property Rights, 1837-53’
History of Political Thought
; and Damen Ward, ‘A
Means and Measure of Civilisation: Colonial Authorities and Indigenous Law in
Australasia’ (2003)
History Compass
J. G. A. Pocock,
Constitution
and the Feudal Law: A Study of English Historical Thought
in the Seventeenth Century
(1957) 36, 51, 58.
In addition to Pocock’s
own commentaries on indigenous rights historiography — some now collected
The Discovery of Islands
(2005) — see the works of McHugh,
Hickford, and Ward cited mentioned above and cited below.
Henry Reynolds,
(1987) 7. (Citing from the 3
edn. of 2003).
This evidence is presented in
chapter 2 of
Aboriginal Sovereignty
, much of which is a repetition of
chapter 3 of
The Law of the Land
Presented in chapter 3 of
Aboriginal Sovereignty
For overviews, see Knud
Haakonssen, ‘German Natural Law’, In M. Goldie and R. Wokler (eds.),
The Cambridge History of Eighteenth-Century Political Thought
251; T. J. Hochstrasser,
Natural Law Theories in the Early Enlightenment
(2000); Ian Hunter, ‘Natural Law’, In A. C. Kors (ed.),
Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment
(2002), vol. 3, 130; and Gerald
Die Naturrechtsdebatte: Geschichte der Obligatio vom 17. bis 20.
Jahrhundert
On this set of issues, see
Horst Dreitzel, ‘Naturrecht als politische Philosophie’, In H.
Holzhey and W. Schmidt-Biggemann
Die Philosophie des 17.
Jahrhunderts, Band 4: Das heilige Römische Reich deutscher Nation, Nord-
und Ostmitteleuropa
(2001), 836.
For a rare overview of some
of this diversity, see the essays collected in T. J. Hochstrasser and Peter
Schröder (eds.),
Early Modern Natural Law Theories: Contexts and
Strategies in the Early Enlightenment
On this competition, see
Klaus-Gert Lutterbeck, ‘Die societas civilis bei Christian Thomasius und
Christian Wolff: Zwei alternative
Konzepte im älteren deutschen
Naturrechtsdiskurs’, in H. Rüping (ed.),
Die Hallesche Schule des
Naturrechts
(2002), 53. More extensively, Lutterbeck,
Gesellschaft bei Christian Thomasius und Christian Wolff: Eine historische
Untersuchung in systematischer Absicht
Christian Wolff,
Philosophia practica universalis, methodo scientifica pertractata ... qua
omnis actionum humanarum differentia, ominisque juris ac
obligationum omnium,
principia, a priori demonstrantur
(1971) 113.
Christian Wolff,
Grundsaetze des Natur- und Voelckerrechts, worinnen alle Verbindlichkeiten
und all Rechte aus der Natur des Menschen in einem bestaendigen
Zusammenhange
hergeleitet werden
Emmerich de Vattel,
Droit des Gens, ou Principes de la Loi Naturelle/The Law of Nations or the
Principles of Natural Law
(1758). In English,
The Law of Nations, or
Principles of the Law of Nature Applied to the Conduct and Affairs of Nations
and Sovereigns
, trans. J. Chitty (1833), Prelims., § 10.
. bk. I, ch. ii,
. bk. I, ch.
. bk. II, ch. i,
. bk. I, ch.
xviii, § 208.
For overviews, see Michael
J. Seidler, ‘Samuel Pufendorf’, in A. C. Kors (ed.),
Encyclopedia
of the Enlightenment
(2002); and Ian Hunter,
Rival Enlightenments: Civil
and Metaphysical Philosophy in Early Modern Germany
(2001), ch. 4.
Samuel Pufendorf,
jure naturae et gentium, libri octo
(1672). Relevant English translation,
The Law of Nature and Nations: Or, A General System of Morality,
Jurisprudence, and Politics in Eight Books
, trans. Basil Kennet (1703), bk.
I, ch. vi, §§ 1-8.
For a classic account of
the historical emergence of this conception of the state, see Quentin Skinner,
'From the State of Princes
to the Person of the State', in
vol. 2, (2002), 368.
naturae et gentium
, bk. VII, ch. vi, § 13; bk. VIII, ch. i, §
. bk. II, ch.
There would thus seem to be
little to be said in favour of Richard Tuck’s claim that Pufendorf’s
natural law was similar
to Wolff’s in combining an account of law-governed
relations between states with a rejection of ‘liberal values’
states. See Richard Tuck,
The Rights of War and Peace: Political Thought and
the International Order from Grotius to Kant
(1999), 195. Pufendorf had a
basically Hobbesian view of interstate relations and his domestic absolutism
supported a powerful form
of religious toleration.
. bk. VIII, ch.
vi, §§ 1-3.
Hugo Grotius,
belli ac pacis
(1625), bk. III, ch. viii. In English,
The Rights of War
(Liberty Fund edn.) (2005).
See, Horst Dreitzel,
‘Samuel Pufendorf’, in Holzhey and Schmidt-Biggemann (eds.),
Philosophie des 17. Jahrhunderts, Band 4
, 757; and Seidler, ‘Samuel
Pufendorf’.
See Wolfgang Reinhard,
‘Zwang zur Konfessionalisierung? Prolegomena zu einer Theorie des
konfessionellen Zeitalters’
Zeitschrift für Historische
257; and Heinz Schilling, ‘Confessionalisation and the Rise
of Religious and Cultural Frontiers in Early Modern Europe’,
in E. Andor
and I. G. Tóth (eds.),
Frontiers of Faith: Religious Exchange and the
Constitution
of Religious Identities 1400-1750
(2001), 21.
On this, see the insightful
essay by Michael J. Seidler, ‘Pufendorf and the Politics of
Recognition’, in I. Hunter and
D. Saunders (eds.),
Natural Law and
Civil Sovereignty: Moral Right and State Authority in Early Modern Political
(2002), 235.
Enlightenments
Richard Tuck’s
argument that natural law thinkers derived their moral anthropologies from
accounts of the anarchic conduct
of states — see Tuck,
, 9 — thus finds little purchase in the case of Pufendorf.
Pufendorf developed his quasi-Epicurean conception of man —
as a creature
whose passions threaten his society and whose reason is incapable of
transcendent reflection and self-control —
primarily in opposition to the
rationalist anthropology of the Christian natural theologians and natural
jurists. He did so not by
reflecting on the international conduct of states, but
on what it would take to deprive the scholastic natural jurists of the
authority they claimed in mediating divine law to the civil sovereign
via their purported insight into a transcendent natural law.
See above all, the
polemical essays and disputations collected in Samuel Pufendorf,
Scandica, und andere polemische Schriften über das Naturrecht
Fiammetta Palladini (2002).
The appropriate cautions in
this regard are given in Detlef Döring, ‘Säkularisierung und
Moraltheologie bei Samuel
von Pufendorf’ (1993) 90
Zeitschrift für
Theologie und Kirche
On this, see Bodo Nischan,
Prince, People, and Confession: The Second Reformation in Brandenburg
Horst Dreitzel,
‘Einleitung’ [zur Naturrecht], in Holzhey and Schmidt-Biggemann
Die Philosophie des 17. Jahrhunderts, Band 4
Hans-Peter Schneider,
‘Christliches Naturrecht’, in Holzhey and Schmidt-Biggemann (eds.),
Die Philosophie des 17. Jahrhunderts, Band 4
David Saunders and Ian
Hunter, ‘Bringing the State to England: Andrew Tooke’s Translation
of Samuel Pufendorf’s
De officio hominis et civis
History of Political Thought
See also the introduction and notes to
the Liberty Fund’s edition of Tooke’s translation: Samuel Pufendorf,
The Whole Duty of Man According to the Law of Nature
, I. Hunter and D.
Saunders (eds.) (2003).
Samuel Pufendorf,
Nature and Qualification of Religion in Reference to Civil Society
trans. (1698). See also the 2002 Liberty Fund edition of Crull’s
translation, edited by Simone Zurbuchen.
Samuel Pufendorf,
Relation between Church and State: or, how far Christian and Civil Life Affect
See Seidler’s
introduction and notes to the recent Liberty Fund edition: Samuel Pufendorf,
The Present State of Germany
, Preliminaries, Chitty’s note 1.
See Hickford, ‘Maori
Property Rights’, 147, 151, 159, 161.
In addition to
Reynolds’ works, see for example, Justin Malbon, ‘Natural Law and
Positive Law Influences on the Law
affecting Australia’s Indigenous
Australian Journal of Legal History
Marks, ‘Sovereign States vs Peoples: Indigenous Rights and the Origins of
International Law’
[2000] AUIndigLawRpr 1
Australian Indigenous Law Reporter
For an instructive
exemplification of this approach, see Mark Hickford, ‘John Salmond and
Native Title in New Zealand: Developing
a Crown Theory on the Treaty of
Waitangi, 1910-1920’, forthcoming,
Victoria University Law
On this, see McHugh,
‘Common-Law Status’.
For the alternative thesis,
see Hickford, ‘Maori Property Rights’; Damen Ward,
‘Constructing British Authority
in Australasia: Charles Cooper and the
Legal Status of Aborigines in the South Australian Supreme Court, c.
1840-60’ (2006)
The Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History
483; Ward, ‘A Means and Measure of Civilisation’; and more
extensively, McHugh,
Aboriginal Societies and the Common Law.
Finnane provides an insightful discussion of customary law in this regard, in
his ‘The Tides of Customary Law’ (2006)
ANZLH E-Journal
www.anzlhsejournal.auckland.ac.nz/Keynote%20Speeches.htm
Sovereignty
See, Bruce Kercher,
‘Native Title in the Shadows: The Origins of the Myth of Terra Nullius in
Early New South Wales Courts’,
in G. Blue, M. Bunton and R. Croizier
Colonialism and the Modern World: Selected Studies
(2002), 100.
Wentworth citing Vattel,
(1827), in Bruce Kercher (ed.),
Decisions of the Superior
Courts of New South Wales, 1788-1899
, (http://www.law.mq.edu.au/scnsw/,
Division of Law, Macquarie University, 1997-). For the original, see
Chitty’s translation
The Law of Nations
(1833), bk. II,
ch. vii, § 97. See Kercher ‘Native Title in the Shadows’, 104.
. 110, 112.
Decisions of the Superior Courts
. Wardell is citing from Basil
Kennet’s 1717 English translation of Jean Barbeyrac’s famous French
edition of Pufendorf:
Samuel Pufendorf,
The Law of Nature and Nations
bk. VIII, ch. vi, § 8.
It is a sobering historical
irony that Wardell would himself be murdered by two escaped convicts, an event
that occurred not in
the state of nature but in the under-policed governmental
half-light of the colonial frontier.
Law of Nature
and Nations
, bk. VIII, ch. iii, §§ 1-4.
. The relevant
Barbeyrac commentary is given in note 3, at 764.
Decisions of the Superior Courts
See McHugh, ‘Common
law Status’. See also the illuminating essay by Lisa Ford, ‘Empire
and Order on the Colonial
Frontiers of Georgia and New South Wales’ (2006)
, bk. II, ch. vii, § 84.
On the place of Scottish
developmental ‘stadial theory’ in Vattel’s
jus gentium
— and its use in the construction limited forms of indigenous rights
— see Hickford, ‘Maori Property Rights’;
more generally, Mark
Hickford, “Making 'territorial rights of the natives': Britain and New
Zealand, 1830-1847”, (PhD,
University of Oxford, 1999).
. bk. I, ch.
. bk. II, Ch.
See in particular, McHugh,
‘Common-Law Status’; and, more extensively, McHugh,
Societies and the Common Law
Decisions of the Superior Courts
For the seventeenth-century
origins of these arguments, see Quentin Skinner, ‘History and Ideology in
the English Revolution’,
Visions of Politics. Volume 3: Hobbes and
Civil Science
(2002), 238.
See Hickford, ‘Maori
Property Rights’, 156.
British Parliamentary
Papers: Correspondence and Papers Relating to the Government and Affairs of the
Australian Colonies 1837-40
(1970), vol. 5, 373.
Willis’s address can
be found in
British Parliamentary Papers, Colonies Australia, 1844
Cf., Damen Ward’s
discussion of the ‘strict applicationist’ and
‘exceptionalist’ positions —
both of which remained
integrationist — in his ‘A Means and Measure of
Civilisation’.
Decisions of the Superior Courts
On this see Ford,
‘Empire and Order’.
Decisions of the Superior Courts
R. v Ballard
Decisions of the Superior Courts
R. v Murrell
Decisions of the Superior Courts
R. v Murrell
Decisions of the Superior Courts
The relevant passage, among
those cited by Burton, is: Vattel,
Law of Nations
, bk. I, ch. xviii,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (258 KB)
PDF format (1.02 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter