URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMelbLRS/2018/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Garnett, R --- "The Rights of Diplomatic and Consular Employees in Australia" [2018] UMelbLRS 5
The Rights of Diplomatic and Consular Employees in
This article examines a group of employees who have been rarely considered
in Australian court and tribunal decisions and scholarly
commentary to date:
diplomatic and consular workers. While persons employed by foreign states in
their embassies and consulates generally
enjoy favourable rights of access to
justice under the Australian law of foreign state immunity, those retained
personally by individual
diplomats (commonly domestic servants) stand in a much
worse position due to the excessively wide rules of diplomatic immunity. After
discussing the current legal regimes in Australia and other jurisdictions, the
author suggests possible strategies for improving
the situation of such
Introduction
An issue of increasing importance globally is the status of persons
employed by foreign states in embassies or consulates or retained
personally by
individual diplomats or consular officials. While the topic has been the subject
of court decisions in the European
Union and North America and some scholarly
writing in those countries,
Australia there has so far been little consideration of the area. Given,
however, the likely substantial number of diplomatic
and consular employees in
Australia, an examination of their rights to obtain redress under Australian law
is both necessary and
timely. At the outset, a key distinction must be drawn in
terms of categories of employee. First, there are persons employed by foreign
states in diplomatic or consular missions for which the principles of foreign
state immunity apply to any suits against their employer.
Second, there are
persons employed (normally domestic staff) by diplomats and consular officers
whose claims will be subject to the
principles of diplomatic and consular
immunity. The distinction (occasionally
between foreign state and
diplomatic immunity is of great significance because, as will be seen, the scope
of foreign state immunity
in employment cases is far narrower than diplomatic
The significance of either form of immunity applying to an action
is that an Australian court is prevented from adjudicating the merits
employee’s claim, whether it is for unfair dismissal, unpaid pension or
leave entitlements, for example. Immunity is
therefore a major hurdle for
employees to overcome in these cases and is the focus of this article.
Employees of Foreign States
Where a person is directly engaged by a foreign state
to work at its embassy or consulate in Australia and brings an action in an
Australian court or industrial tribunal for, for example, unfair dismissal, the
foreign state may plead that it is immune from the
adjudicating body's
whereby a state may not be sued
before the courts of another country without its
Until the 1970s it was
assumed, at least in common law countries, that such immunity from jurisdiction
was 'absolute' unless it was
waived by the defendant state. Once however nation
states (particularly developing countries) began to engage increasingly in
activities, the absolute immunity rule began to come under pressure.
Specifically, the idea emerged in the jurisprudence of some
European states that
it was no longer appropriate for a state to enjoy all the privileges of
statehood where it was acting in a manner
similar to a private entity, for
example, as a party to a commercial
transaction.
For the first time it
was felt that the interests of private parties who dealt with the states also
had to be considered.
Accordingly, a new rule of restrictive immunity
appeared based on the distinction between acts
jure imperii
jure gestionis
jure imperii
were those acts of a
particularly sovereign or governmental nature that no private person would
ordinarily perform whereas acts
jure gestionis
were those acts that,
although performed by governments, could equally be done by private persons.
Although this distinction had
originated in European civil law countries, it
came to be accepted in United States and United Kingdom courts in the
In the area of employment
disputes, it was also well-recognised that foreign states enjoyed absolute
immunity from suit and indeed
that was the view taken in
Australian decisions prior to
the enactment of the
Foreign States Immunities Act 1985
Recent legislative and judicial practice however shows
that the restrictive immunity trend has now entered the employment domain.
significantly, there have been instruments such as the 1972 European Convention
on State Immunity,
the Foreign
Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976
the State Immunity Act 1978
(UK) c 33, the State Immunity Act 1985
and most recently, the
United Nations Convention on the Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their
that all embody to
varying degrees the restrictive approach to foreign state immunity. Australia,
through the enactment of the FSIA,
may be added to the above group. Under the
leadership of James Crawford, the Australian Law Reform Commission
recommended the creation of legislation based on the
restrictive model in 1984,
came into being in the FSIA.
A difference of approach to employment actions
is evident in the jurisdictions that have adopted the restrictive immunity test.
countries such as the United States, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand and
European civil law countries apply the general
jure imperii/jure
distinction to consider whether the foreign state, by entering an
employment transaction, was acting in a private or a sovereign
capacity. Other
countries such as the United Kingdom and Australia, by contrast, have created
specific provisions to deal with immunity
and employment matters, an approach
also taken in the UN Convention. In the European Union also, there is the
further impact of art
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
and Fundamental Freedoms
(ECHR) and art 47 of the
Charter of Fundamental
Rights of the European
which provide for a
right of access to a court for the vindication of a person’s rights and
whether the rules of foreign state
immunity infringe such a right.
outline will be made of the approaches taken to foreign state immunity and
employment claims in the United States, Canada,
the United Kingdom and the
European Union as a background to assessment of the Australian position. While
caution needs to be expressed
when making generalisations in this area, it can
be said that a trend has emerged in a number of nation states to resolve
questions by focusing on the status and duties of the employee and/or
the territorial link between the employee and the forum of
litigation. Such an
analysis is also present in art 11 of the UN Convention, an instrument that has
strongly influenced the European
Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) in its
interpretation of art 6 of the ECHR, as discussed further below.
comparative perspective
Under the United States’ Foreign Sovereign
Immunities Act 1976, the relevant provision for employment claims is s
1605(a)(2),
which provides an exception to immunity where the foreign state has
engaged in ‘commercial activity’ in the United States.
legislative history to the US Act states that the employment of
‘diplomatic, civil service or military personnel’
considered governmental in nature, but not the employment of US citizens or
third country nationals or the ‘engagement
of laborers, clerical staff or
public relations or marketing
The US therefore
clearly draws a distinction in the application of its immunity rules based on
the status and role of the employee
with immunity reserved for the more senior
or policy- oriented positions. The nationality of the employee (in particular,
he or she holds the nationality of the foreign state employer) is also
United States courts have, by and large, followed the guidelines
in the legislative history in the context of disputes involving embassy
consular employees. So, for example, both a commercial officer with the trade
and investment section of a
and an accountant at
an embassy who had no role in the creation of government
were allowed to sue their
foreign state employers. An alternative (minority) view, however, has been
applied that focuses instead
on the activities of
the foreign state
the place of employment, whether they are sovereign in nature and whether the
claimant employee’s duties form part of such
functions. In such cases,
claims by embassy and consular employees have almost always been barred by
A broadly similar
position applies in Canada which, like the US, also resolves employment immunity
disputes by reference to whether
a foreign state has engaged in
‘commercial activity’ under s 5 of the State Immunity Act 1985.
Again, while most Canadian
courts in embassy and consulate cases have focused on
the duties and responsibilities of the employee in resolving the immunity
some tribunals have
considered all mission employment as unreviewable on the basis of the sovereign
nature of the workplace.
the UK, the position of embassy and consular employees has long been precarious
because s 16(1) of the State Immunity Act 1978
precludes the bringing of claims
by any person who is a ‘member of a diplomatic or consular mission’
against their employer,
which is defined to include ‘administrative and
technical staff’. Such a description has been held to embrace a wide
of embassy and consular employees in routine
Recently, however,
the United Kingdom Supreme Court in
Benkharbouche v Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth
held that the
application of s 16(1) to bar a suit by employees in the service staff of a
mission violated the claimants’ right
of access to a court under art 6 of
the ECHR. Hopefully the UK government will respond to this decision by amending
the legislation
to provide at least some scope for routine staff in subordinate
positions to sue their employer.
Finally, reference should be made to art
11 of the UN Convention. Article 11(1) provides for a general exception to
foreign state
immunity in a proceeding which relates to a contract of employment
unless, under art 11(2), the employee: (a) ‘has been recruited
particular functions in the exercise of governmental authority’; or (b) is
a diplomatic agent or consular officer;
or (c) the subject matter of the
proceedings is the ‘recruitment, renewal of employment or reinstatement of
an individual’.
Leil v France
ECtHR held that a switchboard operator and an accountant respectively, both
employed at foreign missions, were entitled to sue
their foreign state
employers. Article 11 of the UN Convention was found to represent customary
international law and so any decision
by a national court on state immunity that
was inconsistent with art 11 automatically amounted to a breach of art 6 of the
which provides for a right of access to a court. In the case of both
employees, such a violation was shown where the national courts
granted immunity
in circumstances where neither claimant performed particular functions in the
exercise of governmental authority
under art 11(2)(a). In short, the
employees’ work did not engage the sovereign interests of the employer
and so their claims should
have been allowed to proceed. The decisions in
were highly influential in the United Kingdom Supreme Court decision
Benkharbouche
Australian position
How does the FSIA address the issue of foreign state
immunity and employment in embassies and consulates? Section 9 of the FSIA first
creates a general presumption of immunity in an action brought against a foreign
state in an Australian court or tribunal subject
to exceptions in s 10−21.
The relevant exception for employment claims is s 12. Section 12(1) establishes
a general rule of
non-immunity in the case of a proceeding in respect of an
employment contract where the contract is made in Australia or to be performed
(wholly or partly) in Australia. Subsection (3) restores immunity where the
employee is a national of the foreign state but not a
permanent resident of
Australia at the time when the contract is made. Immunity is also reimposed
under sub-s (5) where the employee
is: (a) a member of the diplomatic staff of a
mission as defined in art 1(d) of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations
(VCDR) (that is, a member of staff having diplomatic rank); or (b) a
‘consular officer’ as defined in article 1(d) of
Convention on Consular Relations (1963) (VCCR) (that is, a member of staff
having consular rank). Under sub-s (6), immunity
also applies where: (i) the
employee is a member of the administrative and technical staff of a mission as
defined in art 1(f) of
the VCDR; or (ii) a 'consular employee' as defined in art
1(e) of the VCCR unless the member or employee was, at the time the contract
made, a permanent resident of Australia. Under sub-s (7), 'permanent resident'
includes an Australian citizen or a person whose
continued presence in the
country is not subject to time limitation.
Further, sub-s (2) of s 12
provides that any proceeding by an employee includes a claim concerning: (a)
‘a right or obligation
conferred or imposed by a law of Australia on a
person as employer or employee’; or (b) ‘a payment the entitlement
which arises under a contract of employment’. In
Robinson v Kuwait
Liaison Office
confirmed that subsection (2) extends the scope of non-immunity beyond
contractual claims to statutory actions such as under
the former s 170EA of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
(Cth). An order for compensatory relief for unfair
dismissal is also squarely within the terms of
Note, however, that
of the FSIA, a court or tribunal may not make an order that a
foreign state employ a person or reinstate a person to a position.
provision is entirely consistent with international practice on the issue, which
has long held that a foreign state employer
is immune from proceedings in which
an order for recruitment or reinstatement is
The rationale for this
view is that imposing such an order on a foreign state would unduly interfere
with its sovereign decisions
with regard to staffing and personnel management.
An order to pay a sum of compensation to a former employee, by contrast, is much
less intrusive. Hence, only compensation orders may be made under
The Australian
legislation therefore adopts an intermediate and balanced position in the area
of persons employed by states in embassies
and consulates based on the position
and rank held by the employee and his or her residential links with the
Australian forum. Instead
of imposing immunity in the case of suits by all
employees at diplomatic and consular missions, as occurs under the UK Act, the
seeks to divide the employees into two groups: those in executive,
policy-related positions and those in routine administrative,
clerical or
maintenance roles.
In the first group, immunity is imposed on the basis
that such persons will almost certainly be engaged in matters of a
policy-related
or sensitive nature and so the foreign state's interest in
protection of its sovereignty should be
recognised.
Also, an Australian
court will generally have little interest in exercising jurisdiction over a
dispute between a foreign state and
one of its nationals but rather, in such a
case, would wish to maintain good relations and comity with the foreign state.
Under general
principles of private international law, an Australian court would
also likely be a ‘clearly inappropriate forum’ in
In the second group, by
contrast, immunity will only apply where the employee is not a permanent
resident of Australia. This provision
is based on the premise that such persons
are employed in roles largely indistinguishable from those in the private sector
marginally involved in the sovereign activities of a mission. Hence,
where the employee is an Australian permanent resident, the
Australian interest
in protection of its local labour force should prevail over comity concerns.
Moreover, the Australian interest
in employee protection is further engaged by
the fact that a contract of employment between a foreign state and a local
in a routine administrative role creates ‘a dynamic generally
recognised as involving an unequal bargaining position between
the State as
employer, and the
interest of Australia in providing a local forum [in such a case] outweighs the
interest of the foreign state in exclusive
report of the ALRC upon which the FSIA was based, attention was drawn to a third
category of mission employees, domestic servants.
It was expressly stated in the
that such employees would
come under the general presumption of non-immunity in s 12(1) provided that
under sub-s (3) they were permanent
residents of Australia at the time the
contract was made. Note that the domestic servants referred to here are those
directly employed
the foreign state
, not those engaged by individual
diplomatic staff such as an ambassador. While the ALRC felt that domestic
servants in general were
those employees ‘most in need of protection' in
terms of non-application of the immunity rules, the sad reality is that those
employed by diplomats in their households (as discussed below) enjoy almost no
protection.
It would be fair to say that the FSIA is liberal and reasonably
generous to employees in embassies and consulates by international
standards. A
clear attempt is made to protect those mission employees whose work and duties
are largely indistinguishable from those
in the private sector such as
secretaries, chauffeurs and technical support staff. Such persons should not
have their claims for
redress barred simply because they happen to be employed
by a foreign state at its embassy or consulate. Such an approach contrasts
sharply with the position under the UK State Immunity Act mentioned above, where
any employee who is a member of a diplomatic or
consular mission, which is
defined to include 'administrative and technical staff', is prevented from suing
its foreign state employer.
The result therefore of this benevolent
approach to foreign state employees under the FSIA is that there have been
comparatively few
Australian cases in which states have sought to plead
immunity, possibly because such arguments would likely
So, for example, the
following persons have been allowed to sue for damages in relation to their
dismissal: a gardener at the Kuwait
a secretary/typist at
the Indian Consulate in Sydney;
a driver/receptionist at the Libyan
receptionist/administrative assistant at the Italian Consulate in
and an administrative
assistant at the Korean Embassy,
the High Commission of Malaysia
and the Lebanese Consulate in
In all of the above
cases, once it was established that the claimant employee was a permanent
resident of Australia at the time of
entry into the contract, then the effect of
s 12(1), (6) was to negate any claim for immunity.
Undeterred, some foreign
states in the above cases sought to rely on other provisions in the FSIA to
impose immunity. For example,
it was argued in some decisions that an industrial
relations commission, either state or federal, has no power to adjudicate upon
matters under the FSIA. As noted above, s 12(1) of the FSIA provides that a
foreign state will not be immune from 'a proceeding'
where the terms of the
provision are satisfied. Section 3 of the FSIA defines 'a proceeding' to mean 'a
proceeding in a court but
... not ... a prosecution for an offence'. The term
'court' is then defined in s 3 to include ‘a tribunal or other body (by
whatever name called) that has functions, or exercises powers, that are judicial
functions or powers or are of a kind similar to
judicial functions or
In a series of decisions, both the Australian Industrial
Relations Commission (AIRC) and the New South Wales Industrial Relations
Commission clearly found that each tribunal, while not having judicial functions
or powers, 'has functions or exercises powers that
are of a kind similar to
judicial functions or powers' in its termination of employment
For example, the
commissions can: conduct arbitration proceedings where parties may be
represented; adjudicate upon applications
for relief and determine whether a
termination of employment was harsh, unjust or unreasonable; make orders in
relation to this issue
as well as on costs; administer oaths and receive
evidence; and issue summonses for the attendance of witnesses and production of
documents by witnesses.
Obviously, a mission employee's prospects for recovery from his or her
foreign state employer would be substantially affected if he
or she were to be
prevented from bringing proceedings in a major tribunal in which claims for
unfair dismissal are normally brought:
an industrial relations commission.
Two other provisions in the FSIA have also been relied upon by foreign state
employers in an attempt to secure immunity. First, there
is s 6 of the FSIA,
which provides that
this Act does not affect an immunity ... conferred by or under the
Consular Privileges and Immunities Act 1972
[implementing the VCCR], the
Defence (Visiting Forces) Act 1963
... [or] the
Diplomatic Privileges
and Immunities Act 1967
[implementing the VCDR] ...
was relied upon by the state of Malaysia in
in the following
way. The defendant state argued that the exception to foreign state immunity in
must be read subject to
so that, in effect, a foreign state could not
be stripped of immunity in circumstances where immunity would be available under
VCCR or VCDR. As will be discussed below, art 31(1)(c) of the VCDR provides
for the immunity of diplomats when sued. In response
to this argument, the AIRC
correctly found that foreign state immunity has exclusive application where the
state is the named defendant
in litigation (as in
diplomatic immunity only arises when an individual diplomat is sued.
AIRC said, the VCDR 'appears to provide immunities to the diplomatic staff of a
foreign state. The application in this case
is directed at the High Commission.
The applicant's contract was expressed to be one between the applicant and the
High Commission
for Malaysia', which is the state of Malaysia, 'an entity
whose contractual dealings in Australia are regulated by the
Hence, the VCDR (and
VCCR) are strictly irrelevant in employment actions against foreign states and
the operation of
of the FSIA is unaffected by these
instruments.
A similar conclusion was reached in the
case (above)
response to an argument that, because the territory of an embassy is
'inviolable' under art 22 of the VCDR and may not be entered
by officials of the
receiving state, its premises are not therefore within Australia and so
the FSIA has no application. The AIRC found that merely because embassy
premises were inviolable under the VCDR did not mean that
they were not situated
within Australia. In any event,
clearly tolerates 'intrusion' 'into aspects
of the activities of embassies' by allowing suits by employees against foreign
Another provision
very recently relied upon by a foreign state in an attempt to obtain immunity is
of the FSIA. This subsection provides that the removal of immunity
in sub-s (1) does not apply where (a) an inconsistent provision
is included in
the contract of employment and (b) a law of Australia does not avoid the
operation of, or prohibit or render unlawful
the inclusion of the
Section 12(4)
of the FSIA was considered by the South
Australian Industrial Relations Court (SAIC) in
This case involved an
application by two former consular employees for entitlements alleged to be due
upon termination under the
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) (‘FW Act’)
(specifically the Clerks' Award)
Long Service Leave Act 1987
(SA) (LSLA). The foreign state argued
that immunity applied because there were both inconsistent provisions in the
contract and no
Australian law that prohibited such terms.
SAIC first rejected the argument by the employees that clear and unambiguous
language was required to establish an inconsistent
provision under
specifically, that ‘there must be a provision in the contract of
employment providing in specific terms for
Instead, the
term 'an inconsistent provision' must 'not ... be narrowly construed’
and ‘may be considered by reference
either to a single provision or to
multiple provisions of a contract of employment, and by asking whether the
provision or provisions
are expressly or impliedly inconsistent with the lifting
of immunity under
Benvenuto SAIC
, the SAIC had to determine whether the creation of
rights and obligations under the contract of employment by reference to Italian
law indicated 'inconsistency with a lifting of
First, the SAIC noted
that the Italian language of the contract of employment was supportive of the
view that the contract was governed
Secondly, there was the
fact that the employees had elected for a contract governed by Italian law
because of the greater perceived
benefits compared to those that would apply
under a contract governed by the law of South
Thirdly, the SAIC
found that the contract of employment made reference to Italian legislative
decree 103/2000,
of which provided an employee with the option to enter a
contract governed by Italian
Fourthly, other terms in
the contract supported the view that Italian law governed the contract. While
the contract specified a salary
entitlement in Australian dollars, all other
benefits and entitlements were fixed by reference to Italian instruments and
administrative
arrangements.
together, the SAIC concluded that there were sufficient provisions in the
contract to indicate that Italian law governed the
contract, which created the
inconsistency with the removal of immunity under
Presumably, a
straightforward clause in the contact expressly choosing Italian law would have
The SAIC’s approach to the interpretation of
however, merits a response. It is far from clear that a choice of foreign law by
parties in a contract is inconsistent, by itself,
with the removal of a foreign
state employer’s immunity before the Australian courts. In private
international law, jurisdiction
and choice of law are distinct
A plea of immunity
involves a challenge to the jurisdiction of the Australian court or tribunal,
not a question of the law to be
applied to the merits of the action. The issue
of choice of law therefore normally only arises
a court has
determined that it has jurisdiction to adjudicate. Consequently, it is perfectly
possible for an Australian court to
deny a foreign state’s claim for
immunity and accept jurisdiction but nonetheless apply that state’s law to
resolve the
substantive matter. Such an outcome occurs often in disputes
involving private parties.
situation would be different, however, if the parties included a clause in their
contract requiring that all disputes be litigated
in the foreign state’s
courts (an ‘exclusive jurisdiction
Such a clause
imposes an obligation on the parties to litigate in the chosen court and will be
enforced unless ‘strong reasons’
are shown for the matter to proceed
in Australia.
Such a clause
would be plainly consistent with a recognition of foreign state immunity by an
Australian tribunal.
Interestingly, similar sentiments were recently
expressed by the Full Court of the Federal Court on appeal from the SAIC in
Benvenuto FCAFC
Court disagreed with the SAIC in finding that there was no inconsistency between
the contract of employment and lifting
of immunity under
of the FSIA.
Specifically, the fact that Italian law governed the contract and provided for
rights and obligations different to those
arising under Australian law was
insufficient for ‘inconsistency’. Instead, the Full Court noted
‘the distinction
between the jurisdiction of a court, on the one hand, and
the law to be applied in the exercise of that jurisdiction, on the other’,
seeing no reason why the SAIC ‘could not, on proper evidence, determine
the parties’ entitlements by reference to the
Something more
than a difference in laws is therefore necessary. Consequently, there must be
‘a provision in the contract of
employment which is inconsistent with the
local [Australian] court having jurisdiction over disputes arising from ... the
An actual inconsistency with
the Australian courts
Benvenuto FCAFC
, there were no ‘features of the rights and
entitlements’ under the contracts that ‘were linked inherently to
or quantification depended upon a judicial determination
which only an Italian
court could make’. Nor was there any aspect of the contracts that would be
‘incapable of determination
by an Australian
As noted above,
the inclusion of a foreign exclusive jurisdiction clause in a contract,
particularly one stipulating a specialist
labour or employment tribunal, may
satisfy this test, as such a term would suggest that matters under the contract
were unsuitable
for Australian court
adjudication.
Court’s conclusion that there was no inconsistency under
an inquiry into
strictly unnecessary. Yet, the SAIC in
in reaching a different result on the
point, had to
consider whether, under
, there was an Australian law that
‘avoid[ed] the operation of, or prohibit[ed] or render[ed] unlawful the
inclusion of, the
inconsistent provisions, or at least some of the
provisions'.
The SAIC first
noted: that the relevant contracts concerned the ‘employment of persons
under a contract made in Australia’,
‘performed wholly within
Australia’;
foreign state was an Australian employer for the purposes of the FW
and that the employment was
subject to the Clerks' Award.
The foreign state argued that ‘the exception under s 12(4)(b) would be
satisfied if there was no law of Australia which specifically
provided that a
foreign state could not contract out of the obligations’ sought to be
enforced by the employees.
SAIC rejected this argument, saying that it imposed 'an unduly narrow
construction' of the provision.
According to the SAIC, s 12(4)(b) establishes two categories: one being an
Australian law which ‘
operation of the inconsistent provision and one which does not
prohibit or render unlawful
’ the inclusion of the provision
in the contract.
category is wider than the second and significantly, for a law to come within
the first group, it is not necessary that
it 'identify and prohibit contracting
out of specific minimum
entitlements'.
It would be
enough to 'avoid' an inconsistent provision if the law 'nullified'
The SAIC then proceeded to
identify specific examples in the present case where provisions of the FW Act
and the LSLA, which deal
with notice periods prior to termination and long
service leave requirements, had the effect of nullifying the operation of
terms in the employment contract by being inconsistent with such
Yet, the SAIC noted
that it will not be in every case where a provision in a contract that is
inconsistent with the removal of immunity
in s 12(1) will be avoided or
prohibited by an Australian law. Where, for example, a provision in a contract
conferred an entitlement
on an employee under foreign law that was not the
subject of any contrary Australian legislative provision, it would be
unaffected.
The question to be determined therefore under s 12(4)(b) is 'whether
there is an Australian law which sets a minimum standard and
impliedly and
expressly forbids contracting
The result may therefore
be that a foreign state employer in a single action is immune in respect of some
employment claims but not
As noted, the Full
Court on appeal from the SAIC, did not strictly have to address the application
of 12(4)(b) because it found s
12(4)(a) not to be
Nevertheless, two
judges of the Full Court (White J with whom Allsop CJ agreed) examined the
issue. On the assumption that the contracts
had included provisions to the
effect that Australian courts would not have jurisdiction in relation to
disputes arising under the
contracts (and so triggered s 12(4)(a)), both s
545(3) of the FW Act and s 13 of the LSLA were found to have the effect of
such contractual terms. Both statutory provisions expressly conferred
the respective
enactments and so would have fallen under s
The decision of
the Full Federal Court in
is the most detailed consideration by
an Australian superior court so far of s 12 of the FSIA. The decision is likely
to be studied
closely by foreign states with embassies and consulates in
Australia, particularly in its endorsement of the view that in certain
circumstances it is possible to 'reclaim' immunity under s 12(4) by including
relevant foreign jurisdictional provision(s) in an
employment contract. The
‘catch’ however is that such terms must not preclude the
breach of mandatory provisions of
Australian labour legislation.
The approach of the Full Court to s 12(4)
accords with Australian principles of private international law relating to
choice of law
in contract. Such rules allow parties to choose foreign law in a
contract provided that it does not infringe overriding mandatory
legislative
rules of the Australian forum that demand to be
Sometimes, such
mandatory rules are explicit like s 11(1) of the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act
1991 (Cth), which requires the application
of Australian law in any contract for
the carriage of goods by sea from an Australian port to a foreign country.
Another example
is s 67(a) of the Australian Consumer Law 2010 (Cth) (ACL) which
requires the consumer guarantees in the ACL to be applied to any
contract that
would be governed by the law of an Australian State or Territory but for an
express provision in the contract to the
contrary. In other cases, mandatory
legislative rules may be implied, such as s 18 of the ACL, which proscribes
misleading or deceptive
conduct in trade or commerce and which may apply even
where parties have entered a contract governed by foreign
All of the above
legislative provisions impose Australian law for reasons of public policy:
normally to protect a perceived weaker
Australian party when contracting with a
foreign entity. This is also the rationale of section 12(4): it allows parties
to contract
‘into’ foreign state immunity by including relevant
foreign jurisdictional provisions provided that such terms do not
employee of the protection of fundamental Australian labour laws.
ultimate result in
Benvenuto FCAFC
is consistent with the observation
made earlier: by international standards, the FSIA is by and large a generous
and benevolent treatment
of foreign state immunity from the point of view of
embassy and consular employees. The Act ensures that, in most cases, a locally
recruited employee in a subordinate or routine role will not be denied justice
after termination of employment simply because of
his or her possibly fortuitous
choice of employer.
Collective employment claims
Before leaving
the discussion of foreign state immunity, a question arises as to how collective
employment claims by trade unions
or other representative labour bodies may be
dealt with under s 12 of the FSIA. The position is ambiguous since no express
is made to collective actions in the text of the Act or the
legislative history. For example, s 12(1) of the FSIA provides that a
state ‘is not immune in a proceeding in so far as the proceeding concerns
the employment of a person under a contract
of employment ...'. The reference to
of employment’ may suggest
that only individual, not collective, actions were contemplated, although such a
result may seem
inconsistent with the expressed legislative intention to protect
locally recruited persons who are permanent residents of Australia.
For example,
such persons, when working at an embassy or consulate, may wish to seek
representation by a local trade union as their
‘bargaining
representative’ in enterprise agreement
negotiations.
In such a case,
the Australian interest in worker protection would seem clearly engaged. Yet, if
the workplace is a highly sovereign
location such as a military base or an
embassy, then a foreign state may be wary of allowing trade union intrusion in
what the state
may perceive as its sensitive security interests. As was
mentioned above in the context of the reinstatement remedy in s 29(2) of
FSIA, a collective claim in such circumstances may be seen as simply too
invasive when compared to, for example, an individual
employee’s suit for
compensation.
There have been judicial decisions in the US, Canada and Italy
on collective employee claims and foreign state immunity. The common
these cases is that, where the action is brought in relation to workers at a
sensitive installation with high national
security concerns, then the proceeding
will be barred by immunity. For example, the Supreme Court of Canada refused to
allow a claim
for union certification brought by a labour organisation on behalf
of Canadian civilian employees at a US military
and an Italian court
reached the same outcome in respect of a collective proceeding, alleging
discrimination against trade union
members, in relation to administrative and
clerical workers at an embassy.
By contrast, collective actions on behalf of employees at a state-owned
or a cultural and
educational organisation
both allowed to proceed.
It is not clear how an Australian tribunal
applying the FSIA would regard such a collective action, but on balance, in the
of clear words in the text and guidance from the preparatory report, the
exception to immunity in s 12 may not apply in such cases.
Yet that conclusion
may not be the end of the inquiry; all this may mean is that the FSIA does not
extend to such circumstances.
Could a trade union instead argue that it would be
entitled to bring the action under the Australian common law principles of
state immunity? Such principles of course may be held no longer to exist
after the enactment of the FSIA, but if they were found
still to apply, for
example, to fill gaps in areas not expressly covered by the legislation, then a
version of restrictive immunity
could be asserted. In essence, the union could
argue that the public/private acts distinction applies to resolve the immunity
This line of argument may however be of little assistance if the matter
concerned embassy and consular employees and the Australian
tribunal applied the
Canadian and Italian decisions mentioned above, as immunity would arguably then
apply. Consequently, an outcome
where individual employees at embassies and
consulates can sue their employers but collective actions on behalf of groups of
cannot be brought seems an appropriate balancing of the interests of
employee redress and foreign state security.
Employees of Diplomats and Consular Officers
The relatively favourable position enjoyed by persons employed at
embassies and consulates in Australia differs markedly from the
plight of those
retained personally by diplomats or consular officers, typically to work as
domestic servants. The principles of
diplomatic and consular immunity, which
apply where an individual foreign state official as opposed to the state itself
have undergone little evolution or modification since their
articulation in the VCDR and VCCR in the early 1960s. The result is that,
compared to foreign state immunity, the rules of diplomatic immunity in
particular are far more onerous from a claimant employee's
point of view.
Although there have been no Australian tribunal decisions on the issue of
diplomatic and consular immunity in employment
matters, the matter has arisen on
a number of occasions in the United States and English courts. Since the
relevant legal instruments
governing diplomatic and consular immunity —
the VCDR and the VCCR — are the same in almost all countries including
English and American
authorities are likely to be highly persuasive in the Australian context.
Hence, in this section the focus
will be on foreign decisions and their
implications for employees who wish to seek redress in this country.
employment area, the pleas of diplomatic and consular immunity have typically
been invoked where a domestic servant, employed
by a currently serving diplomat
or consular officer in his or her residence, commences court proceedings against
the employer. Three
workers' contractual rights as employees have been violated due to non-payment
of wages, lack of leave etc, where workers have been victims of slavery,
involuntary servitude or forced labour, or where they have
been subject to human
trafficking. Unlike foreign state immunity cases where most employees are
'locally recruited' residents of
the forum country, domestic servant disputes
typically involve workers hired outside the forum.
In response to such claims
against them, diplomatic and consular agents have relied upon immunities granted
to them under the VCDR
and VCCR. Article 31(1) of the VCDR provides that a
‘diplomatic agent shall ... enjoy immunity from the [receiving state's]
civil and administrative jurisdiction’. Article 31(1)(c) provides that
immunity will not be available 'in the case of ... an
action relating to any
professional or commercial activity exercised by the diplomatic agent in the
receiving State outside his [or
her] official functions'. Such a provision has
unfortunately acted as a form of absolute immunity barring all suits by employee
in diplomatic employment cases because entry into a contract with a
domestic servant has not been considered a 'professional or commercial
on the part of the diplomat. Courts in the United States, the United Kingdom and
other European countries have all adopted
this position.
States Circuit Court of Appeals had to consider an action by a Filipino domestic
servant against her employer, a Jordanian
diplomat. The court upheld the
diplomat's plea of immunity under art 31(1)(c), holding that the hiring of a
domestic servant as household
diplomat and therefore not 'professional or commercial activity ... outside his
[or her] official functions'.
The court emphasised that ‘professional or commercial activity’
under the article was found to 'relate only to trade
or business activity
engaged in for personal profit.'
United States courts in subsequent decisions have unanimously reaffirmed this
interpretation of ‘professional or commercial
Furthermore,
until very recently, English courts took the same approach, with the Court of
noting that 'as a
matter of ordinary language, a contract for the provision of services which are
incidental to [a diplomat's] family
or domestic life is not “commercial
activity”'.
conclusion was also supported by the context, object and purpose of the
A German court
reached the same outcome.
Very recently, however, a three-judge majority of the United Kingdom Supreme
Court, in the judgments on the appeal in
has shown some
tentative signs of a reassessment of this position. Strictly speaking, the court
was not required to decide whether
the diplomat was entitled to immunity under
art 31(1)(c) since, by the time of the hearing of the appeal, he was no longer
post’ and thus not entitled to the protection of the provision.
On the assumption, however, that the provision applied, two
distinct views were
expressed as to whether the hiring of a domestic servant was professional or
commercial activity.
Lord Sumption (with whom Lord Neuberger agreed)
followed the traditional approach, finding that the expression ‘any
professional
or commercial activity’ refers to the diplomat
carrying on or participating in
a professional or commercial
means that the employment of domestic servants is excluded. In his view,
‘a wider scope for exception (c) would expose
[diplomats] ... to local
proceedings not only in respect of their employment of domestic servants but in
respect of any transaction
in the receiving state for money or money’s
Such an outcome
would therefore have the potential ‘to impede the functions of the mission
to which [the diplomat] ... is
and so would
not be consistent with the scheme of the Convention. Lord Sumption further
rejected the argument that art 31(1(c) should
be interpreted in line with the
‘narrowing’ of foreign state immunity in mission employment cases
noted above,
or in light of
the nature of the allegations against the diplomat — in particular human
rights abuses such as
trafficking.
Both such facts
are irrelevant to the characterisation of the diplomat’s acts under
article 31(1)(c), a provision whose meaning,
in any case, is fixed in
The three other
judges of the Supreme Court in
, Lords Wilson and Clarke and Lady
Hale, took a refreshingly different view to the interpretation of art 31(1)(c).
While noting that
the court did not have to ‘answer [the question] in any
binding form’ on the
, Lord Wilson (with whom
the other two judges agreed) noted a number of matters that may call for a
change to the established view.
The first is that the UK ‘confronts a
significant problem in relation to the exploitation of migrant domestic workers
and the second is ‘the universality of the international community’s
determination to combat human
trafficking’.
defining ‘professional or commercial activity’ in art 31(1)(c),
‘another rational view is that the relevant
“activity” is not
just the so-called employment [of the domestic servant] but
trafficking
; that the employer of the migrant is an integral part of the
chain, who knowingly effects the “receipt” of the migrant
supplies the specified purpose, namely that of exploiting her, which drives the
entire exercise from her recruitment
‘diplomatic immunity is an aspect of state
anomalous that a suit by an employee of a diplomat in the UK will be barred by
immunity in circumstances which, if the
contract were entered into by a foreign
state, immunity would not
Finally, all of the
above factors are appropriate tools in interpreting art 31(1)(c), whose meaning
is not fixed in time but may
be determined ‘in accordance with the
development of international
In the meantime
and until a court directly has to resolve the question, it would be
‘preferable’ for the International
Law Commission to be invited
‘to consider, and to consult and to report upon, the international
acceptability of an amendment
of art 31 which would put beyond doubt the
exclusion of immunity in a case such as that of Ms
If the ‘traditional’ approach above were adopted by Australian
tribunals, the picture would be fairly bleak for domestic
servants employed by
diplomats who wished to obtain redress. What is particularly disturbing about
the decisions supporting this
view is that they appear to have no regard for the
differing range of circumstances forming the basis of the employee's complaint.
For example, claims for breach of contract based on excessive working hours and
inadequate wages are treated the same as where serious
human rights allegations
are alleged. In the United States cases of
the claimants
complained of physical abuse by their employer, and in the English Court of
Appeal decision in
, the complainant alleged human trafficking, but
the result in each case was the same: immunity was upheld. To accept that such
allegations must go un-adjudicated and un-remedied simply because of the
privileged status of the defendant perpetrator seems extraordinary
in 2017. It
is therefore a credit to Lord Wilson and the other members of the majority in
that, for the first time, it has been suggested that the grant of
diplomatic immunity be made dependent on the nature of the allegations
be denied where human trafficking or other serious abuses have occurred.
Until however such an approach achieves general acceptance, there remain two
rays of light for domestic servants: first, where a proceeding
against a diplomat who has left his or her post, and second, where the domestic
servant has the fortune to be employed
by a consular official rather than a
diplomat. In the first case, art 39(2) of the VCDR provides that a former
diplomat will only
be able to claim immunity 'with respect to acts performed ...
in the exercise of his [or her] functions as a member of the mission'.
second case, a similar rule to art 39(2) applies under art 43(1) of the VCCR
which provides that a consular officer 'shall
not be amenable to the
performed in the exercise of consular
functions'. What is significant in
relation to both provisions, compared to art 31(1(c) of the VCDR, is that the
employee does not
have to show that the employer engaged in 'professional or
commercial activity' to overcome immunity; only that the employer’s
conduct falls outside official functions. Not surprisingly in both of the above
situations, domestic servants have had far greater
success in suing their
employers than in proceedings against an incumbent diplomat.
In the case of
former diplomats, both United States and United Kingdom courts have held that
immunity will not apply under art 39(2)
in respect of acts that ‘pertain
to [a diplomat's] ... household or personal life ... that may provide, at best,
indirect” rather than a “direct ... benefit to”
diplomatic functions’.
Immunity therefore does not apply for acts that are incidental to the exercise
of a diplomat's functions as a member of the mission
but only those
'inextricably tied to a diplomat’s professional activities’, that
is, official acts'.
diplomat's employment of a domestic servant is not an official act given that
the duties of such a person typically involve housekeeping
and childminding in
the diplomat's personal residence. United Kingdom courts have also held in
recent cases involving former diplomats
that such work performed by domestic
servants falls outside the official functions of a diplomat as it is not
‘done for or
on behalf of’ the foreign
Significantly
also, US courts have relied on the fact that the diplomat had allegedly
committed serious human rights abuses such as
rape and human trafficking in
finding that the defendant's acts were outside official functions. In the
courts' view, such heinous
conduct strengthened the argument that the diplomat
had not been engaged in official acts, since such conduct, by definition, could
never be 'authorised'. By contrast, the UK employment tribunal in
felt that the question was simply whether the employee's duties fell
within the official functions of the diplomat; behaviour towards
the domestic
servant had no relevance to that
Yet, in a later
case, another English judge seemed to backtrack from this position, finding that
allegations of discrimination and
harassment in the form of sexual abuse cannot
'sensibly be argued ... [to be] acts carried out in the exercise of the
functions of
It may be that
in most cases it will be enough to defeat immunity for a domestic servant to
show that his or her work, being predominantly
household-related, fell outside
the diplomat's official duties. Arguably however, where the diplomat has engaged
in egregious conduct
towards the employee, this should be a further supporting
factor in showing that no official acts were involved.
Note, however, that
despite the better outcomes on the immunity issue for these domestic servants,
the practical barriers to obtaining
redress against a former diplomat may still
be a disincentive to sue. For example, a diplomat at the end of his or her
posting may
well have left the receiving state and so be difficult or impossible
to locate for service of Australian tribunal process. Alternatively,
may have no assets in Australia that are capable of being attached in the event
that a judgment on the merits for damages
is obtained. Also, for a domestic
servant to have to travel to the former diplomat's country of residence and
commence proceedings
there is not only financially unrealistic but unlikely to
yield a positive outcome if the courts in that country are not independent
the executive.
A finding of
non-immunity may therefore be a hollow victory for claimants. The best way
forward, therefore, is for art 31(1)(c)
of the VCDR to be amended to delete the
‘professional or commercial activity’ requirement, and to be put in
a form similar
to art 39(2), with the result that currently serving diplomats
may be sued simply where they engage in conduct outside their official
functions. As noted above, a majority of the UK Supreme Court in
support for such a view. Such a result can be seen in the case of claims
against serving consular officials by domestic
servants. Such actions are
governed by art 43(1) of the VCCR which, as noted above, is in largely the same
terms as art 39(2) of
the VCDR. Relevantly, in a United States Court of Appeals
Park v Shin,
a domestic servant was held entitled to sue her employer, the Deputy Consul
General of Korea, on the basis that the bulk of the household
performed related to the care of the consular official and his family, not
official consular functions. Of relevance also
was the fact that the employee
entered the United States on a visa for ‘personal employees’ and
that her salary, medical
expenses and costs of travel were all paid by the Shins
directly. The claimant was therefore the Shin family’s
Again, once
the burdensome 'professional or commercial activity' requirement is removed, the
domestic servant's prospects of defeating
immunity improve dramatically, at
least when such person is engaged in predominantly household duties.
approach under art 39(2) of the VCDR and art 43(1) of the VCCR should form the
basis for future negotiations on the status of
art 31(1)(c) of the VCDR and it
is suggested that the Australian government should take the lead on this issue
in international forums.
While it is impossible to know if domestic servants in
Australia have been deterred from bringing actions against their diplomat
employers because of this harsh provision, an amended version of art 31(1)(c)
would go some way to avoiding injustice in the future.
Such action would ideally
accompany other measures such as imposing mandatory welfare checks for domestic
workers, overhauling the
screening process for domestic workers’ visas
(which has occurred) and expelling diplomats who breach Australia’s
or anti-slavery
This article has examined the position under Australian law of persons
employed by foreign states in embassies and consulates and
also those retained
directly by diplomats and consular officers. The difference in treatment between
the two groups of employees
is stark and unconscionable: while employees of
foreign states enjoy generous rights of access to justice by international
those engaged by diplomats, normally domestic servants, have very
limited rights of redress due to the operation of the rules on
immunity. One
solution to the problem would be to amend the VCDR but as this will require the
support of many nation states, it is
incumbent upon the Australian government to
make this an issue of international concern.
Professor, Melbourne Law
School, University of Melbourne.
For analyses of the position
in other jurisdictions, see R Garnett, ‘State Immunity in Employment
; R Garnett, ‘Precarious
Employment? Varying Approaches to Foreign Sovereign Immunity in Labor
The International Lawyer
; R Garnett,
‘The Precarious Position of Embassy and Consular Employees in the United
; R Garnett, ‘State Immunity and
Employment Relations in Canada’ (2015) 18
643; R Garnett,
‘State and Diplomatic Immunity and Employment Rights: European Law to the
See also J Brower,
State Practice
on Sovereign Immunity in Employment Disputes Involving Embassy and Consular
(Center for Global Legal Challenges, 19 December 2015), at <
https://law.yale.edu/system/files/state_immunity_in_employment_disputes.pdf>
(accessed 15 February 2018); P Webb, ‘The Immunity
of States, Diplomats
and International Organizations in Employment Disputes: The New Human Rights
Dilemma?’ (2016) 27
745; A Sanger, ‘State Immunity and
the Right of Access to a Court under the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights’
Saab v Embassy of Egypt
[1997] ACTSC 80
, where Miles CJ referred
to a foreign state choosing to claim ‘diplomatic immunity’ when what
was meant was ‘foreign
J Crawford,
Brownlie’s Principles of Public International Law
ed 2012 Oxford University Press) at 487.
Claim Against the
Empire of Iran
(1963) 45 ILR 57 (West
German Federal Constitutional
Trading Corporation v Central Bank of Nigeria
[1977] 1 QB 529
Dunhill of London Inc v Cuba
[1976] USSC 83
Bendix Mintex Pty
Ltd v Barnes
(1997) 42 NSWLR 307
at 310 per Mason P;
Re Tolotti and
Commonwealth of Australia
(1986) 9 ALN N148
[1986] AATA 42
Hussein v Libya
[2006] AIRC 48
Reid v Nauru
[1993] VicRp 17.
European Convention on State Immunity
Foreign Sovereign
Immunities Act of 1976, Pub L No 94-583, 90 Stat
State Immunity Act,
1985, RSC 185, c S-18.
United Nations Convention on the Jurisdictional Immunities of States and
Their Property 2004
, UN Doc A/5938 (‘
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Foreign State Immunity
, Report No 24
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
1953, 213 UNTS 222
, commonly known as the
European Convention on Human
Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union
Legislative History
of Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976, HR Rep No 94-1487, reprinted in
United Nations Legislative Series, Materials on Jurisdictional Immunities of
States and Their Property
(1982, United Nations Office of Legal Affairs)
Holden v Canadian
[1996] USCA9 2543
92 F 3d 918
El-Hadad v United
Arab Emirates
496 F 3d 658 (DC
Permanent Mission of Saudi Arabia to the United Nations
403 Fed Appx 631
Cir, 2010), applying
Kato v Ishihara
[2004] USCA2 67
360 F 3d 106
(2nd Cir, 2004).
Roy v South Africa
2013 ONSC 4633
Butcher v Saint Lucia
(1998) 79 ACWS (3d) 815 (Ont CA); [1998] 61 OTC
Consulate General of Barbados
2010 HRTO 2258 (Ont
Human Rights
v Saudi Arabia
[1996] 2 All ER 248
[1996] ICR 25
; Garnett, ‘State
Immunity in Employment Matters’, above n 1, at
[2017] UKSC 62
(18 October 2017)
Benkharbouche
(2010) 51 EHRR 15
[2011] ECHR
Sabeh El Leil
, above n 22, at
Benkharbouche,
above n 21.
Consulate General of India
[2002] NSWIRComm 24
Fogarty v United
(2002) 34 EHRR 12
[2001] ECHR 762
; UN Convention art
Consulate General of India
[2002] NSWIRComm 24
Robinson v Kuwait
Liaison Office
(1997) 145 ALR 68
ALRC Report
above n 12, at [100].
Voth v Manildra Flour Mills Pty Ltd
(1990) 117 CLR 538;
Italy v Benvenuto
[2016] SAIRC 31
Benvenuto SAIC
) at [37] referring to
ALRC Report
above n 12, at [99].
was very recently affirmed on different
grounds by the Full Federal Court (see
Italy v Benvenuto
[2018] FCAFC 64)
Firebird Global Master
Fund II v Nauru
(2015) 258 CLR 31
(2015) 326 ALR 396
[2015] HCA 53
(Nettle and Gordon
ALRC Report
above n 12, at [100].
the following cases involving suits by embassy and consular employees where
foreign state immunity was not invoked:
Kim v Embassy of Algeria
Kumar v Consulate General of India
[2018] FCCA 7
Embassy of Mexico
[2012] FWAFB 5840
Riskalla v Consulate General of
[2009] NSWIRComm 185
Sidhwa v British Consulate General
[1997] IRCA 129
Mucci v Consulate General of Italy
[2012] FWA 9243.
however the employee was a national of the foreign state and had
his ‘fiscal residence’ in that country. Query whether
immunity would
have existed in such circumstances under s 12(3) of the
Robinson v Kuwait
Liaison Office
(1997) 145 ALR
Thomas and Consulate
General of India
[2002] NSWIRComm
Hussein v Libya
[2006] AIRC 486
SAIC, above n 32 (affirmed on different grounds
[2018] FCAFC
Saville v Embassy of
South Korea
[2006] AIRC 598
High Commission of Malaysia
[2005] AIRC 882
(2014) 283 FLR 408;
[2014] FCCA
41, at [36]. See also
, above n 38, [11];
Saville v Embassy of
South Korea
[2006] AIRC 598
Thomas and Consulate General of
[2002] NSWIRComm 24
, [27]– [29]. Cf
Christodulakis v French Consulate
[1999] AIRC 460.
n 38, at [11].
above n 41.
Saville v Embassy
of South Korea
[2006] AIRC
above n 32 (affirmed on different grounds
[2018] FCAFC
Clerks Private
Sector Award 2010 [MA000002]
(at 4 December
SAIC, at [40].
See generally R
Mortensen, R Garnett and M Keyes,
Private International Law in Australia
edn, LexisNexis Butterworths, Chatswood,
For an example in the
personal injury context, see
Regie Nationale des Usines Renault SA v
(2002) 210 CLR 491
(2002) 187 ALR 1
Mortensen, Garnett and
Keyes, above n 58, ch 4.
Akai Pty Ltd v The People’s Insurance Co Ltd
(1996) 188 CLR 418
, above n 32 (White J with whom Allsop CJ and Besanko J
Ibid at [47] (emphasis
While the Full Court
noted (at [47]) that ‘inconsistency’ would not be found merely
because ‘the courts of the
foreign state could hear and determine the
dispute’, the presence of an exclusive jurisdiction clause stipulating the
of the foreign state goes further in
the dispute to be
heard by such courts.
Benvenuto SAIC
, above n 32, at
Ibid, at [54]. A
similar conclusion was reached in respect of another foreign state employer in
Kassis v Lebanon
(2014) 282 FLR 408
[2014] FCCA 155
on the basis that
the state, ‘through its Consulate carried on an activity [of employment]
of a governmental nature’
under s 14(1)(f) of the FW Act: at
Ibid, at [54]. But
, above n 35, where it was held that the Clerks’
Award did not apply to ‘employment in the service of a foreign
Ibid, at [58]
(emphasis added).
Benvenuto SAIC
, above n 32, at
above n 32 at
Ibid at [68] –
For a discussion in the
international arbitration context, see
Comandate Marine Corp v Pan
Australia Shipping Pty Ltd
(2006) 157 FCR 45
(2006) 238 ALR 457
Act, Part 2-4.
States v Public Service Alliance of Canada
(1992) 91 DLR (4th) 449
See also, more recently,
Defense Contract Management Agency
Americas (Canada) v Public Service Alliance of
2013 ONSC 2005
, where an application by the Public Service
Alliance to be certified as the bargaining agent for Canadian civilian employees
branch of the US government was refused on the ground of immunity. The
branch was engaged in the procurement in Canada of supplies,
services and
weapons for the US military. See also
United States v Nolan
[2013] 1 CMLR
at [49] (CJEU).
Italian Trade Union for Embassy and Consular Staff v United States
65 ILR 338.
State Bank of
India v National Labor Relations Board
[1986] USCA7 955
808 F 2d 526
Goethe House New
York, German Cultural Center v National Labor Relations Board
[1989] USCA2 157
869 F 2d 75
Cir, 1989).
Note that the VCDR was implemented in Australian law in the
Privileges and Immunities Act 1967
(Cth) and the VCCR in the
Consular Privileges
and Immunities Act 1972
[1996] USCA4 149
73 F 3d 535
Ibid at 537,
Paredes v Vila
479 F Supp 2d 187 (DDC
Sabbithi v Al Saleh
623 F Supp 2d
Montuya v Chedid
779 F Supp 2d
Fun v Polger
993 F Supp 2d 470
[2015] EWCA Civ
[18]−[19], [29].
Rechtsprechung
[Higher Regional Court],
Pfarr v Anonymous
2011, 17 Sa 1468/11
Komla v The South African High
Commissioner to New Zealand
[2016] NZERA Wellington
[2017] UKSC 61
[21] (emphasis added),
Ibid, at [62]
(emphasis added).
622 F 3d 123
Cir, 2010) at 134–5, quoting
Park v Shin
[2002] USCA9 915
313 F 3d 1138
Cir, 2002). See also
Baoanan v Baja
627 F Supp 2d 155 (SDNY
622 F 3d 123
Cir, 2010) at
[2017] UKSC 61
(Lord Sumption, with whom all the other
judges agreed on this point);
Abusabib v Taddes
[2012] UKEAT 0424_
2012 at [35], affirmed
[2013] EWCA Civ 1351
Wokuri v Kassam
[2012] EWHC 105 (Ch).
Al-Malki v Reyes
[2013] UKEAT 0403_12_0410
[2015] EWCA Civ 32
. The UK Supreme Court, on appeal,
expressed no view on this
[2012] UKEAT 0424_
11_ 2012 at [35], affirmed
[2013] EWCA Civ 1351
[2017] UKSC 61
Ibid at [68] (Lord
Wilson with whom Lady Hale and Lord Clarke
[2002] USCA9 915
313 F 3d 1138
Ibid at 1142
(emphasis in original). Note that
Park v Shin
was recently applied to
deny immunity in
Rana v Islam
305 FRD 53 (SDNY
, 2015). The court also
relied on art 43(2)(a) of the VCCR, which provides that even if acts were
performed in the exercise of consular
functions, no immunity exists where an
action arises ‘out of a contract concluded by a consular officer ... in
which he [or
she] did not contract expressly or impliedly as an agent of the
sending State’: at
‘Plight of Domestic Workers Must Not Be Overlooked’,
Morning Herald
, 15 June 2016.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (371 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter