URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LawTechHum/2025/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:12:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Deibel, Talya; Deibel, Eric --- "Forgotten Boundaries in Law: On AI and Neurotechnology" [2025] LawTechHum 7; (2025) 7(1) Law, Technology and Humans 96
Forgotten Boundaries in Law: On AI and
Neurotechnology
Talya Deibel
School of Law, University College Cork, Ireland
Eric Deibel
School of Communication and Information Studies, University College Dublin,
AI; legal personhood; neurotechnology; private
1. Introduction
The modern understanding of private law is based
on the myth of the natural person, narrated as if there are clear boundaries
the inner and outer realms. It is the sovereign individual of political
theory conceived of a physical and spiritual being whose
body is governed by a
rational mind that is both hidden and private. Crucially, this myth is also
integral to how technology is narrated,
both historically and today.
Artificial intelligence (AI) and neurotechnology, which are often regarded as
separate fields of research, are examples of this. While
neurotechnology is
associated primarily with healthcare, AI is frequently linked to robotics and
computational methods. However,
they have significant similarities. The
development of AI technology draws inspiration from
neuroscience;
neurotechnologies often involve brain–computer interfaces, which establish
direct communication between human brains
and technological devices, and as such
incorporate AI and machine learning
technology.
Moreover, neural data
are often collected and analysed through AI-driven algorithms. Their convergence
is also evident in how AI
and neurotechnology symbolise the symbiotic
relationship between human bodies and various technological practices, thereby
reconstructing
the narrative around legal personhood.
This is an illustration of a basic insight of science and technology studies
(STS) from over half a century ago: science and technology
shape and are shaped
by society. Like law, the term ‘society’ does not refer to a
singular category; rather, it should
be understood in terms of a variety of
technoscientific practices that are integral to the reproduction of society. The
true for science and technology, which are understood in terms of
specific settings and systems that shape the social as a reflection
of society,
its values, interests, power dynamics and other such sociological
categories.
This article therefore adopts this perspective to examine the powerful
sociotechnical imaginaries that surround and permeate AI and
neurotechnology. On
the one hand, this involves analysing the role of narratives that challenge
established legal concepts such as
‘the person’, ‘the
thing’, ‘privacy’ and ‘data’. On the other hand,
the article focuses
on AI and neurotechnology, exploring how these technologies
are transformative in ways that require closer attention to private law
This brings the theoretical, methodological and political significance of legal
history to the fore, especially in the context
of emerging technologies,
experimentation and STS more broadly. This perspective goes beyond the obvious
point that law today has
become increasingly invested in technoscientific
practices and is shaped by them. It is equally important to recognise that
law has its own performativity – its ability to shape the social
and the technological in its own image.
Specifically, the article refers to legal history as the field from which to
approach efforts to regulate AI and neurotechnology.
The STS perspective becomes
critical as it aims to foreground a perspective on private law, with its
2000-year-old history dating
This relationship between STS
and private law is essential in an understanding of the integration of AI and
neurotechnology into human
bodies, minds and daily life. For instance, private
law and its underlying principles are being reinforced, challenged and
transformed
in close relation to the narratives of hope and fear that are
invoked in the context of AI and neurotechnology.
This article argues that private law theory should be placed at the centre of
how the narratives that surround these technologies
(re-)imagine the legal and
social order.
Narratives not only
refer to storytelling; myths are potent – they create narratives and
discourses and inform how words translate
into actions. They carry an imperative
character as they play an active role in the sociotechnical imaginaries that
lead to the creation
of material
infrastructures.
This applies
directly to law, particularly when its foundational categories are challenged.
Myths become crucial in creating sociotechnical
imaginaries, to deal with what
is uncertain and nebulous from the standpoint of law while also providing
guidance and pointing to
plausible future
directions.
These narratives revolve around what the title refers to as ‘forgotten
boundaries’. These are not the rigid legal lines
of modern law; rather, a
historical understanding of contemporary law considers such lines to be a
collection of boundary zones.
These zones involve substantial commitments
regarding the legal (boundary) work required to maintain established categories,
them into frontier areas or otherwise redefine them. This implies that
modern legal categories such as ‘persons’ and
should be viewed as specific (boundary) objects that require constant
management, surveillance and
intervention.
The dialogue with STS aims to contribute to comparative legal methodologies
that are better equipped to address the normative challenges
posed by AI and
neurotechnology. This calls for methods inspired by STS, reflecting a broader
context in which law and technology
scholars adopt more pluralistic and critical
perspectives, drawing from meta-disciplines such as sociology, philosophy and
the history
of science, technology and law.
2. On STS and Private Law
The starting point for this article is a basic tension between two classical
positions from the early days of STS. The first refers
to technological systems
as integral to the reproduction of modern societies. This implies that science
and technology are heavily
shaped by a limited range of social groups, their
interests and material practices, with a strong hold over ideas in today’s
liberal economy.
insight started out as a response to this perspective, pointing out that science
and technology are not simply shaped
by the hierarchies, influential interest
groups and other types of powerful agents.
Accordingly, STS makes it impossible to approach technology as something that
exists in isolation from what it means to be human,
to be a person, to have
authentic experiences, to possess, to be private, to be a subject and so on.
This includes any approach that
would see the law as the logical opposite of
progress, framed as constantly falling behind, unable to keep up with
technological
change, or about law as the steward of society, protecting it from
technological transgressions, risks and harms that science and
technology might
end up inflicting on it.
all, the same uneasy relation can be observed between law as a system and the
difficulty of affirming its own basic categories
in a technological world where
complex relationships are involved in various new types of agency that come to
characterize legal
concepts such as ‘the person’, ‘the
thing’, ‘privacy’ and ‘data’.
This complexity is not incidental, with early STS seeing it as part of why
technology is able to surprise us, to enable directions
that could not be
anticipated in advance, and as inescapably part of the authorization of types of
agency at the centre of modern
Law is not different in
its relation to technology, given its hold over any of its sharply drawn lines
that begin to blur the boundaries
between subjects and objects, inner and outer,
body and information, person and property, and so on. Modern law is built on
tied to science and technology, such as the distinction between the
organic and the artificial. In law, these categories form the
basis of the
modern distinction between personhood and property, natural personhood and
In this regard, the STS
perspective offers a framework that embraces hybrid categories and grey areas.
It is not that the lines between
established categories are being erased;
rather, the perspective emphasises how modern dichotomies that have come to
characterise
law are often misunderstood when viewed through a myopic lens.
Law as characterised by dichotomies echoes the perspective of Bruno Latour,
one of the key figures in STS. In the early 1990s, Latour
pointed out that the
modern world and its basic social order were organised around these types of
dichotomies, each of which seeks
to establish a separation of
‘Nature’ and ‘Culture’. This separation, which he calls
acts of purification,
is being overwhelmed by the many types of
‘hybridisation’. This refers to the experiment as a key dimension of
authorising objects, things, artefacts, and products that blend the
nature of science and technology with their authorization as
integral to modern
The result is a
paradox: a commitment to modernity that denies its relation to the countless
artefacts and types of knowledge that
are produced in the confined spaces of
experimentation, where science and technology are created as a special relation
as natural history, as physics or mathematics, and as any other of
the strong claims on what reality is
In turn, the paradox applies to a lack of reflection on what exactly is
‘modern’ about the contemporary conception of
legal personhood. For
example, futuristic theories such as posthumanism and transhumanism refer
primarily to conceptions of humanness
that are modern, either coming from the
eighteenth-century Enlightenment or nineteenth-century
Kantianism.
The same applies to
law to the extent that there is little interest in how and why contemporary
protection of personhood initially
flourished in Roman law. This is a topic that
is well studied but remains within the disciplinary confines of legal history,
a lack of appreciation for how modern private law doctrines are based on
legal remedies of antiquity. Accordingly, it is in Roman
law that a different
perspective can be found, as it represents the remarkable continuity and
longevity of law and legal narratives,
as opposed to pure memory, direct
experience and observation echoed by the language of the scientific revolution
and the experimental
On the one hand, this is a point about continuity. Contemporary legal tools
have more than 2000 years of history, representing epistemic
continuity in terms
of the narrative structures of the legal and policy instruments on AI and
neurotechnology. On the other hand,
it should be clear that private law was
recontextualised several times, including during the imperial era, the Byzantine
medieval times and the
ius commune
. Each period had distinct
political and technological characteristics that created a new legal reality.
The Enlightenment and a strictly
applied Cartesian perspective transformed the
Romanist tradition. Yet, early modern and modern private law codifications did
decouple themselves from Roman antiquity.
A key example is today’s narrative of the ‘protection of
personhood/personality interests’ in European laws with
emerging technologies. For instance, in the civilian tradition, personality
interests are protected through ‘personality
rights’. These are
often seen as products of Kantian-inspired German legal scholarship; they refer
to a bundle of rights that
aim to protect legal interests associated with
personhood.
This includes bodily
integrity, mental/psychological integrity, privacy, identity, reputation,
freedom, dignity, personal data and
Consequently, the natural
person is seen as a dual being. The natural person is a legal fiction, which has
a physical and psychological
existence. It has an outer and an inner world. What
this shows is the point made earlier: a perspective in which the modern person
has an outer and an inner self.
Such an inner self is epistemologically closed and ontologically separated. It
has unmanifested thoughts, emotions, desires, wills,
ideas and memories. It is
opaque and impenetrable. Even though it sits in the metaphysical realm, legal
personhood is deeply connected
with the idea of an inner
On the one hand, this explains why modern laws provide strong protection,
mainly because of the idea of the existence of an inner
self. This protection
implies making a pragmatic separation between the inner sphere (thoughts,
feelings, emotions) and the body,
as well as between personhood–property,
subject–object and public–private. In the end, private law’s
to personhood crystallises in two key points. First, private law takes
the natural person as a dual entity: a biological being with
a body that ends
with the epidermis and a mind that is an unreachable
Second, private law
takes personhood primarily as a legal fiction. Even though it is based on
natural law, personhood refers to a
legal category that undergoes stages of
naturalisation and
artificialisation.
human beings have personhood by virtue of being born.
On the other hand, modern conceptions of personhood, contracts and property
stem from Roman law, where foundational categories were
never completely stable.
For instance, personhood as a legal category initially emerged in relation to
property. In Roman antiquity,
personhood was characterised by the capacity to
own. Humans were legally treated as ‘
’ due to their
capacity as proprietor, whereas slaves mostly fell under the legal category of
This illustrates how
the narrative of property, market and competitiveness is deeply rooted in the
private law theory.
Its implications include further examples, such as how legal questions around
AI and neurotechnology concentrate on ‘how to
protect persons
better’. This question has been at the centre of private law ever since
its creation, as a social and political
narrative. The point, however, remains
the same: Roman antiquity retains a strong hold on the present, which carries
over to a view
of private law and its complex history as performative in the
creation of visions of the future. Today, when we analyse AI and
neurotechnology,
we witness the same narrative patterns: the narrative of
humanness accompanied by the narrative of ownership, performance, and
competition.
This includes how AI is often discussed in terms of concepts such
as ‘trust’, ‘responsibility’ and
‘efficiency’.
These notions reflect the concept of legal personhood
as a legal-philosophical concept that arose in Roman law through its
relationship
with what might be called frontier technologies of the era, such as
military, navigation, commerce and production.
Finally, the implication for the remainder of the analysis is not that we
should always go back to antiquity and never move forward
when we deal with a
new technology. Indeed, the opposite is true: pushing the unstable dichotomies
of law back by at least a millennium
changes the perspective on the modern
separation of Nature and Culture to which Latour points. Accordingly, an
alternative approach
becomes possible, whereby private law theory is at the
centre of how we plan to deal with future technologies. We need to develop
deeper and broader narrative analysis of private law theory alongside those of
contemporary technoscience, as a powerful normative
framework through which law
in its myopic form seeks to remain blind to its own long
3. The Myth of Personhood
Myths are powerful. Sometimes they create stories in the form of
decontextualised narratives. Sometimes they are aestheticism, and
as such they
become appealing as discourses. Sometimes they take the shape of marketing
At other times, they
imply narratives that provide explanations and interpretations for techno-legal
concepts that are difficult
to conceptualise. They reflect long-standing power
relations, with certain narratives benefiting some actors and hindering others
from pursuing their interests. This includes technology, with its dominant myth
of having the power to influence destiny, illustrated
in the case of the myth of
personhood and how it influences and disrupts the narrative frameworks of AI and
neurotechnology.
For example, Barthes characterised myths in terms of
‘neither/norism’. This refers to the pronouncements on the utopian
potential and dystopian risks of technology, as well as the idea that personhood
should be seen as categorically distinct from the
object/machine exactly when it
is on the verge of transforming social
Myths show the world
in specific ways, creating materialities, order and a relationship with the
‘unknown’. This is today
visible around the narratives of AI and
neurotechnology, each of which is a narrative response to the myth of free and
mental and physical integrity. The same applies to its legal version:
the entity that is the bearer of rights and obligations, which
conclude contracts and whose identity and dignity entitle it to protection.
What matters about the
narratives that surround technology is that they show the ability to shake this
liberal myth by blurring the
line between life and information, artificial and
organic, and person and thing. The point is not only that this creates legal
as legal instruments start from the separation of such ontological
categories encompassing binary concepts such as body–mind,
person–property and public-private. Rather, legal history shows that the
underlying values of the challenges to this mythology
belong to the
words, the person in European law can be seen as the subject of rights and
obligations, primarily created by and for the
market. The legal person was not
any person; he was the white, rich, and male person who could have property
rights and other rights
This mythology of
its external form with the human rights paradigm of the twentieth century. Yet,
its foundational tie with ownership and power
relations remained.
In other words, it never decoupled itself from the class, gender, and race
asymmetries that belong to the deeper layers of western
legal systems. That is
to say, the myth of person reflects a tension with the concept of personhood of
future and modernity. Modern
laws are often built on ontological binary
categories that are often presumed to be separate and distinct from each other
a certain level of legal clarity. Law acts ‘as if’ the
body is a different phenomenon than the mind. Law treats the public
‘as if’ it is separate from the private. Law sees personality rights
‘as if’ they are clearly distinct
from what we call property
In this context, the concept of ‘myth’, particularly in the works
of Claude Lévi-Strauss and Roland Barthes, becomes
informative when
looking at personhood. According to Lévi-Strauss, myths can create
collective ownership over the meaning
of a concept. They have discursive power,
and through this they bridge the gap between history and
Again, this applies to
the myth of the ‘integrated person’ who is free, who has privacy,
who has autonomy and a degree
of control over writing their own narrative. The
premise is that there is ontological privateness of the mental realm, operating
as a key liberal foundation of the person as a bounded unique
What the perspective of
the myth also foregrounds is how myths rise and fall not because they are right
or wrong, but because they
are living or
The answer, therefore, is not a rejection of law and its dualisms (as myths);
rather, it lies in a renewed interest in the nature
of ‘personhood’
as mythical when considering its historical nuances and complexities. Its
survival as a bounded unique
form requires new legal scholarship, a new
understanding of how to protect bodies, minds and the boundaries in between. It
the boundary zones and crossings that different legal narratives
4. AI Narratives and Personhood
A legal narrative analysis that invokes the long history of private law
theory shows that questions of responsibility, liability,
and accountability are
really questions of personhood. This is relevant in the context of how everyday
narratives on AI switch back
and forth between the language of moral philosophy
and the market.
Clearly, there is no shortage of expert reports and strategy papers that
frame AI as an inevitable development and as massively
disruptive.
The frame that is
invoked foregrounds competition and an urgent need to catch up, with its setting
a geopolitical race that revolves
around the capture of global markets. At the
same time, AI is being presented as a technological fix to social issues, as a
for life quality and affluence. Each of these narratives, however, is
still premised on the myth of ‘personhood’, invoking
its history
every time practical private law questions arise with questions of ethics
revolving around about legal responsibility,
commercial concerns pointing to
liability issues and problems of accountability playing out as a combination of
ethics and the market.
The legal challenges of AI are not novel. For example, Lawrence Solum
observed as much about AI in
More substantially, the
various comments make an appeal to legal personhood. To be a ‘subject of
law’ is, from a positivist
perspective, a legal fiction. From a Kelsenian
perspective, the human belongs to the realm of biology, whereas the person is a
of jurisprudence
In other words, the legal person is a human (natural legal person) or a
non-human legal entity (juridical person/
persona ficta
) that is treated
‘as a person’. Personhood essentially refers to a methodological
tool – a fluctuating legal category
as it historically depended on several
social, economic, moral and technological criteria.
For instance, in both Roman law and the history of Anglo-American legal
tradition, personhood emerged as ‘
’. In Rome, slaves,
women and non-citizens were considered non-persons with ‘human
qualities’. This discussion has
re-emerged in the context of AI and
metaphors such as artificial ‘intelligence’ or machine
‘learning’. These
are perceived to create a new legal narrative
wherein AI is seen as a human–thing
AI reflects the
human–machine nexus where the human characteristics are part of technical
assemblages. We attribute characteristics
to AI, making it anthropocentric on
the premise that it will end up anthropocontrolled. An obvious example is how
ChatGPT comes with
a promise to be ethical and accountable alongside an openness
to market relations. This combination reflects the behavioural standards
developed in the long history of contract law.
One illustration is the standard of
‘bonus vir’
man). The ‘good man’ is the origin of the honest citizen. He does
not deceive and who does not act contrary to
Modern legal systems
still evaluate events and responsibility according to
Similarly, AI operates
in the market with
‘good faith’
. As such, it is honest,
trustworthy and reasonable.
rests on the myth of personhood as such behavioral standards were developed with
respect to natural persons. In other words,
these behavioral standards have
their roots in human-centred ethics. Personhood as a legal category reflects
being the bearer of
rights and obligations. The legal person is the subject of
law, who has certain rights, protections, privileges, duties, responsibilities
and liabilities. The person is accountable and responsible for their own acts
and actions. As such, the primary legal principle ‘liability
follows the
wrongdoer’ is anthropocentric by nature and has its roots in natural law
and ethics.
Further examples can be found in national strategy papers. Germany promotes
an AI imaginary along ethical lines, emphasizing participation,
freedom and
self-determination of citizens.
Similarly, France focuses on the humanist ethos of the AI while focusing on the
importance of responsibility when it comes to its
regulation.
The same examples
can be considered on a larger scale by tracing them to Europe’s AI Act and
the Digital Services Act (DSA).
These contribute to the same legal narrative,
with the DSA seeking to create ‘a safe, predictable and trusted online
environment’
while focusing on the liability of providers from harms to
fundamental rights and broader societal risks. Article 25(1) chooses the
‘freedom’ to emphasise the model person of law as a free and
autonomous individual and highlights the provider’s
duty not to distort
and impair their ability to make free decisions.
Similarly, Article
5(1)(b) of the AI Act specifically prohibits practices that can exploit
‘any of the vulnerabilities of a
specific group’ by causing
personality harm.
these instruments use words such as ‘exploitation’,
‘vulnerability’ or ‘personality’,
they also form clouds
of connotations as part of a narrative.
These examples serve to illustrate how private law has been performative.
Policy instruments and papers tend to discuss the same problems
of liability and
accountability gaps when dealing with AI. Yet, reality is complex and messy:
agency, autonomy, and causality are
not often easy to establish clearly or
detect with accuracy. To address the complexities, Roman law developed several
technical tools
to overcome strictness of law and dual categories when dealing
with questions of liability with respect to new technologies. A key
, which was developed as a methodological tool
to establish responsibility for ‘non-persons’. This referred to
funds granted to slaves so that they could have contractual
responsibility. Similarly, Romans developed special instruments called
actions’ to establish extra-contractual liability
arising from the actions of ‘non-persons’.
This again indicates the constitutive role of myths and narratives in private
law, especially when dealing with techno-mediated relations
such as contracts.
In effect, today’s legal instruments express ethical standards that were
developed in Roman private law
and later translated into human rights and
international law, such as good faith, proportionality and reasonableness.
DSA is illustrative, as it distinguishes between different types of
risk and imposes on providers the duty to mitigate systemic risks
‘reasonable, proportionate and effective’ mitigation measures. From
a legal methodological perspective, national
civil and contract laws already
impose ethical duties that potentially address such risks. Therefore, the
emphasis on proportionality,
reasonableness and effectiveness is performative,
not in terms of its legal effect, but primarily in terms of narrative
Many more of these Roman mechanisms are still in effect, forming the
substance to the ability of private law to provide practical
legal answers to
today’s challenges. It is effectively Roman law that is mobilised to
address the responsibility and accountability
gaps that occur when non-subjects
have the primary agency, compared with personhood and autonomy. The same applies
to AI when seen
as the embodiment of human-like values and qualities such as
security, trustworthiness, openness and good faith. The underlying myth
‘personhood’ and ‘non-personhood’, which never emerged
in connection to any type of sentience, or cognition
– indeed, quite the
opposite is the case: the Western legal narrative of personhood and its related
of the Roman conceptions of ‘market’ and
‘ownership’.
5. Neurotechnology Narratives and Personhood
AI and neurotechnology are often narrated differently in legal scholarship.
However, there are key similarities, including those that
come out of the
history of private law. For example, neurotechnologies record or alter brain
activity. Common examples are functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
technology, which records brain activity based on the hemodynamic response, and
electroencephalogram
(EEG), which measures the electrical activity of the brain.
Moreover, they can also include AI and machine learning technology. One
is brain–computer interfaces (BCIs), which connect the brain to a
computer, initially developed to treat neurodegenerative
disorders. There are
also neuroprostheses, sometimes referred as ‘brain chips’, which can
be coupled with the central
nervous system. The integration of machines into
human bodies is not new, considering that insulin pumps and implanted pacemakers
have been used as part of general medical practice for
Yet, neurotechnologies
are exemplary of the integration of the machine and the human on a deeper and
more intimate level.
Accordingly, the narrative of neurotechnology is much less about the digital,
data and information, and more about bodily integrity,
cognitive capacity and
This is not to say that
this is a difference of substance. For example, the transhumanist vision that
was inspired by speculative
science fiction has long located the human mind in a
data cloud.
neurotechnology, these concerns reached the legal sphere, due to the protection
of brain data and, in a broader vision, personhood.
One illustration of the
narrative of neurotechnology is the changing meaning of data. The concerns
around the protection of personal
data resurface when neurotechnologies are
migrating to the consumer sphere with their ability to reveal and store brain
data. Moreover,
neurotransplants would not only imply access to data but could
also present the potential to manipulate the mind. The boundary between
devices and recreational usage is already blurring and the same applies to
question of employment, with employers gaining
access to the brain data of
employees for efficiency and safety
The overlap is not surprising from the perspective that AI and
neurotechnology share a history of science in relation to the cybernetic
of the mid-twentieth century and the rise of the concept of
‘information’. From this perspective, the narratives
are entangled,
with the main difference being that the digital in neurotechnology has always
already been biological.
such, the status of information is less visible than the need to optimise health
and increase the lifespan and quality of life
for patients with certain
psychiatric and neurological conditions. In turn, the ability to intervene
directly in the ‘inner
spheres’ of humans corresponds to a narrative
The problem with these concerns is that the narrative will never address the
underlying problem raised by private law. One example
is how software and
algorithms that are used in neurotechnology are protected through intellectual
property rights. This is meant
to determine which agent has economic and legal
control over technology and innovation, but it thereby creates a plethora of
legal challenges, including contractual autonomy, exploitation and
neuropiracy.
This creates the
need to establish a functional way of mitigating technology risks as otherwise
vulnerable groups are left open to
exploitation. One example to be proposed is a
specific version of Rawlsian ideas of fairness to be applied directly to the AI
in neurotechnology, informed by private
To this end, the typical frame of reference in governance today has been
ethical guidelines, informed by human rights discourse on
inclusivity. For
example, the legal scholarship has begun to advocate for
‘neurorights’. The neurorights movement argues
for legally
establishing a new category, new ‘human rights for the mind’, to be
able to protect the mental integrity
and cognitive freedom of all human
Yet, the charge –
correctly – is that technology development is not inclusive, leaving out
the interests and rights of
a wide variety of stakeholders, such as non-binary
individuals, immigrants, people with disabilities, individuals dealing with
digitally illiterate people and so on. The ethical codes are also
typically vague, which from the standpoint of private law means
the underlying
problems will remain, and the appeal to inclusivity is effectively another myth,
operating like a Trojan horse for
the neurotechnology companies to escape from
regulation and potential legal tools designed to protect weaker and vulnerable
in the market
The key point is that these solutions still revolve around the mind and the
body in terms of their vulnerability to potential violations
of personhood, such
as surveillance, data breaches, hacking, exploitation and manipulation. These
threats are addressed as human
rights violations, but they are also
infringements of bodily and mental integrity within tort law, as well as
contractual violations
of duties of good faith. New rights will not change the
basic themes that are deeply rooted in the history of private law, and that
not reflected in how the legal challenges are addressed. For instance, data
might be personal and protected by fundamental rights,
yet the question remains
and crystallizes around whether we want personhood as a legal category that is
extra commercium
– that by nature cannot be owned – or simply
– a thing or asset.
Accordingly, no decisive answer can be given to how infringements might refer
to the private realm of tort law and to contract law,
as violations of
personality rights, unfair use of personal data, exploitation in contractual
relationships, surveillance and online
manipulation. This call for neurorights
and other special measures is useful to the extent that it recognises how the
surrounding neurotechnologies challenge modern boundaries between
mind and body and remind us that they have always been fickle and
context-dependent in law.
6. Discussion and Conclusion
AI and neurotechnology are not the only examples that challenge the standard
conception of personhood in law. The same can be said
of the discourse on the
rights of nature and the animal rights
However, the emphasis
on technology encompasses cybernetics, genomics, the internet of things (IoT),
big data and all the related
state and corporate interests. This background
implies that the legal narratives of AI and neurotechnology carry the weight of
much more heterogeneous web of ethical, political, economic, geographical,
scientific and technical relations.
In this context, the STS perspective counterbalances narratives of
‘breakthrough’ and ‘hype’. Both AI and
neurotechnology
are frequently portrayed as a ‘revolution and turning point in world
stereotypical narrative is often presented by industry actors focusing on
potential benefits to humanity. In parallel, legal
scholarship tends towards a
Cassandran narrative of disruption, wherein AI and neurotechnology are seen as
threats to our inner and
outer spheres. However, this Cassandran narrative also
gives way to a techno-optimist vision of AI and neurotechnology, amplifying
their potential Promethean character. The transformative character of these
fields is emphasised: they enhance health, life quality
and market efficiency.
This often leads to agency being attributed to the technology itself, through
its inevitable characteristics.
The sociotechnical imaginaries surrounding AI and neurotechnology serve as a
prime example, both characterised by a strong rhetorical
function that reduces
the agency of law in the context of narratives about their promises and risks.
STS reminds us that these networks
are constantly performed, changing in
accordance with the ongoing interaction between science, technology and society.
This implies
that certain narratives, such as how race, gender and power
asymmetries have been intertwined with the myth of personhood, will likely
disappear and be sidelined within the network. Consequently, the STS critique of
modernist narratives becomes useful in the context
of the history of private
law. It provides a critical lens through which to approach the dualisms of
modern law, so the fringes of
‘technology as disruption’ versus
‘technology as saviour’ can be addressed with insights gained from
years of experience of the interaction between technology, law and
The construction of the legal person demonstrates how nature is actively
separated from the social. In this sense, the argument of
this article supports
STS scholarship and its more nuanced understanding of progress narratives.
Nonetheless, examining the history
of private law shifts this perspective,
showing that personhood is historically contingent and still shaped by class and
In this context, technoscience is marked by power imbalances that have
developed over centuries. There is a long continuity within
the European legal
narrative, with private law constantly evolving as a creative field. This makes
private law theories nearly timeless,
yet in a constant state of change,
contrasting with the typical emphasis in STS on memory and experience.
Indeed, private law existed long before society became modern. In ancient
Rome, it was not necessarily the case that being a person
was synonymous with
being human, while subjectivity was tied to collective power constellations such
as the master and the slave,
forming one unit. What matters here is how private
law has put alternative myths into play. These originate from outside the sphere
of modern technoscience, including STS, which represents broader involvement
with ethics, sociology and philosophy. The point is
not only that the world of
technology includes legal narratives that are constantly created, altered,
challenged and transformed;
rather, contracts or property are continuously
invoked, and their history resurfaces with every creative legal remedy. There is
plethora of historical examples to mobilise, a rich repertoire of boundary
It is surely insufficient to criticise the dichotomization of person and
thing as a relic of Cartesian philosophy. This echoes STS
in pointing out how
the object–subject and inner–outer distinctions are becoming ever
more entangled, challenging foundational
pillars in law. For this reason, the
article finds the mythological significant. Myths
prima facie
history, yet they are future
The power of the myths
lies in their recurrence, and the best solution to myths is to mythify
Accordingly, STS and the
history of private law can inform one another in support of alternative visions
and narratives. There are
starting points, such as Haraway’s emancipated
cyborg, a famous counter-narrative that was part of her feminist
The challenge extends
to legal personhood, which – while idealised – perpetuates gender,
race and class asymmetries.
It is beyond the scope of this article to determine whether any appeal to
intersectionality would be able to reach its mark in the
context of AI and
neurotechnology. Perhaps this is unlikely, given the argument that any
emancipation is still premised on the modern
narrative of personhood. Yet, the
question remains: what new narratives could emerge from the underlying layers of
history, providing
inspiration for addressing legal questions around
responsibility, privacy and personal data in the techno-mediated
infrastructures?
Perhaps this is a simple choice, moving away from the law as it
currently stands, seeking to tame the many wild zones that exist
boundaries in the brave new world. Alternatively, the law may embrace a more
pluralistic, comparative and intellectually
critical scholarship. This would
greatly benefit other fields, including STS. What is needed is a critical study
of private law that
leverages its long duration and diversity of highly detailed
settings, rulings and instruments. This is its greatest strength: its
in dealing with forgotten boundaries that have existed throughout its long
history, which can provide legal substance
to many alternative myths and
narratives that exist on the margins of the networks, whether of AI,
neurotechnology or otherwise.
Bibliography
Bareis, Jascha and Christian Katzenbach.
“Talking AI into Being: The Narratives and Imaginaries of National AI
Strategies and
Their Performative Politics.”
Science, Technology, &
Human Values
47, no 5 (2022): 855–881.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/01622439211030007
Barthes, Roland.
Mythologies.
New York: Giroux, 1972.
Beyleveld, Deryck and Roger Brownsword.
Human Dignity in Bioethics and
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Bijker, Wiebe, Thomas Hughes and Trevor Pinch.
The Social Construction of
Technological Systems.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1984.
Bowker, Geoffrey and Susan Leigh Star.
Sorting Things Out: Classification
and Its Consequences.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.
https://doi.org/10.5860/crl.61.4.380
Boyle, James.
AI and the Future of Personhood.
Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2024.
Bublitz, Christoph. “Cognitive Liberty or the International Human Right
to Freedom of Thought.” In
Handbook of Neuroethics
. Edited by Levy
Neil and Clausen Jens, 1–27. Dordrecht: Springer, 2015.
Cardilli, Riccardo.
Bona Fides Tra Storia e Sistema.
Giappichelli, 2015.
Davies, Margaret and Ngaire Naffine.
Are Persons Property?
Ashgate, 2002.
Deibel, Eric. “Open Genetic Code: on Open Source in the Life
Life Sciences, Society and Policy
10, no 1 (2014): 1-23.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/2195-7819-10-2
Deibel, Talya. “Demarcation Problems in Law and Neurotechnology.”
International Review of Law, Computers, and Technology
https://doi.org/10.1080/13600869.2025.2464504
du Plessis, Paul.
Borkowski’s Textbook on Roman Law.
Oxford University Press, 2020.
Farahany, Nita.
Battle for Your Brain.
Durham, NC: Duke University
Press, 2023.
Forrest, Katherine B. “The Ethics and Challenges of Legal Personhood
Yale Law Journal
133 (2024): 1175–1211.
Gieryn, Thomas F. “Boundary-Work and the Demarcation of Science from
Non-science: Strains and Interests in Professional Ideologies
Scientists.”
American Sociological Review
48, no 6 (1983):
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2095325
Haraway, Donna. “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist
Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century.” In
Simians, Cyborgs and Women:
The Reinvention of Nature
, 149–181. New York: Routledge, 1991.
Hassabis, Demis et al. “Neuroscience-Inspired Artificial
Intelligence.”
95, no 2 (2017): 245–258.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2017.06.011
Hayles, Katherine.
How We Became Posthuman.
Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1999.
Ienca, Marcello and Roberto Andorno. Towards New Human Rights in the Age of
Neuroscience and Neurotechnology.
Life Sciences, Society and Policy
no 1: 1–27.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40504-017-0050-1
Jasanoff, Sheila.
Reframing Rights: Bioconstitutionalism in the Genetic
. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011.
Kelsen, Hans.
Pure Theory of Law
. M. Knight (Trans.). Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 1967 [1960].
Klein, Hans and Daniel Kleinman. “The Social Construction of
Technology: Structural Considerations.”
Science, Technology and Human
27, no 1 (2002): 28–52.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/016224390202700102
Kurki, Visa.
A Theory of Legal Personhood
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2019.
Latour, Bruno. “Give Me a Laboratory and I Will Move the World.”
Science Observed
, edited by Karin Knorr and Michael Mulkay,
141–170. London: Sage, 1983.
Latour, Bruno.
Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network
. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Latour, Bruno.
We Have Never Been Modern.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1993.
Law, John. “STS as Method.” In
The Handbook of Science and
Technology Studies
, edited by Ulrike Felt, Rayvon Fouché, Clark A.
Miller and Laurel Smith-Doerr, pp 1–27. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
Lévi-Strauss, Claude. “The Structural Study of Myth.”
The Journal of American Folklore
68, no 270 (1955): 428–444.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/536768
Ligthart, Sjors, Christoph Bublitz and Susie Alegre. “Neurotechnology:
We Need New Laws, Not New Rights.”
620 (2023): 950.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/d41586-023-02698-z
MacKenzie, Donald and Judy Wajcman, eds.
The Social Shaping of
. Buckingham: Open University Press, 1999.
Marx, Leo. “Technology: The Emergence of a Hazardous Concept.”
Social Research
64, no 3 (1997): 965–988.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/tech.2010.0009
Mosco, Vincent.
The Smart City in a Digital World.
London: Emerald,
Neethling, Johann. “Personality Rights: A Comparative Overview.”
Comparative and International Law Journal of Southern Africa
Nye, David E.
Technology Matters: Questions to Live With
. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 2007.
O’Callaghan, Patrick, Olga Cronin, Brendan D. Kelly, Bethany Shiner,
Joel Walmsley and Simon McCarthy-Jones. “The Right
to Freedom of Thought:
An Interdisciplinary Analysis of the UN Special Rapporteur’s Report on
Freedom of Thought.”
The International Journal of Human
28, no 1 (2023): 1–23.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13642987.2023.2227100
O’Callaghan, Patrick, Talya Deibel and Felicitas Benziger.
the Inner Self Project
https://www.lawinnerself.org
Pickering, Andrew.
The Cybernetic Brain: Sketches of Another Future.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010.
Quigley, Muireann and Laura Downey. “Integrating the Biological and the
Technological: Time to Move Beyond Law’s Binaries?”
Legacy in Medical Jurisprudence: Essays in Honour of Graeme Laurie
by Edward Dove and Niamh Nic Shuibhne, 279–306. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2021.
Rawls, John.
A Theory of Justice.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1999.
Resta, Giorgio. “Personnalité, Persönlichkeit, Personality:
Comparative Perspectives on the Protection of Identity
in Private Law.”
European Journal of Comparative Law and Governance
1, no 3 (2014):
Schiavone, Aldo. “Law, Slaves, and Markets in the Roman Imperial
System.” In
Roman Law and Economics: Exchange, Ownership, and Disputes,
, edited by Giuseppe Dari-Mattiacci and Dennis P. Kehoe,
11–34. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020.
Shapin, Steven and Simon Schaffer.
The Leviathan and the Airpump.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985.
Sismondo, Sergio.
Introduction to Science and Technology Studies
Oxford: Blackwell, 2004.
Solum, Lawrence. “Legal Personhood for Artificial Intelligences.”
North Carolina Law Review
, 70 (1992): 1231–1290.
http://dx.doi.org/10.4324/9781003074991-37
Tamminen, Sakari and Eric Deibel.
Recoding Life: Information and the
Biopolitical.
London: Routledge, 2019.
Torgersen, Helge and Daniela Fuchs. “Technology Assessment as a Myth
Buster: Deconstructing Myths around Emerging Technologies.”
Responsible Innovation
4, no 2 (2017): 118–37.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/23299460.2017.1320157
Ucaryilmaz Deibel, Talya. “Back to (for) the Future: AI and The Dualism
of Persona and Res in Roman Law.”
European Journal of Law and
12, no 2 (2021): 1–27.
Ucaryilmaz Deibel, Talya.
Bona Fides.
Ankara: Yetkin, 2018.
Ucaryilmaz Deibel, Talya and Eric Deibel. “Artificial Intelligence in
Ancient Rome: Classical Roman Philosophy on Legal Subjectivity.”
Women Philosophers on Economics, Technology, Environment, and Gender History:
Shaping the Future, Rethinking the Past
, edited by Ruth Edith Hagengruber,
157–168. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2023.
van Beers, Britta. “The Changing Nature of Law’s Natural Person:
The Impact of Emerging Technologies on the Legal Concept
of the Person.”
German Law Journal
18, no 3 (2017): 559–594.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S2071832200022069
van Beers, Britta. “The Obsolescence of Human Beings and the
Non-Obsolescence of Law’s Natural Persons: Transformations
Personhood Through the Lens of ‘Promethean Shame’.” In
Personhood in the Age of Biolegality: Brave New Law
, edited by Marc de
Leeuw and Sonja van Wichelen, 187–204. (2019): Dordrecht: Springer.
Winner, Langdon. “Do Artefacts Have Politics?”
109, no 1 (1980): 121–136.
Winner, Langdon.
The Whale and the Reactor: A Search for Limits in an Age
of High Technology.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998.
Wootton, David.
The Invention of Science: A New History of the Scientific
Revolution.
Harmondsworth: Penguin, 2016.
This publication has emanated
from research conducted as part of the Law and the Inner Self Project, funded by
a Research Ireland
Laureate (Consolidator) grant (2022/2628) and with the
financial support of Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) at the ADAPT Research
Centre for AI-Driven Digital Content Technology under grant number 13/RC/2016
Pickering, The Cybernetic
Brain; Hassabis, “Neuroscience-Inspired Artificial
Intelligence.”
Latour, We Have Never Been
Modern; Hayles, How We Became Posthuman.
Sismondo, “Introduction
to Science and Technology Studies”; MacKenzie, “Social Shaping of
Technology”; Klein,
“The Social Construction of
Technology.”
Ucaryilmaz Deibel, “Back
to (for) the Future”; Ucaryilmaz Deibel, “Artificial Intelligence in
Ancient Rome,”
Jasanoff, Reframing Rights.
Mosco, The Smart City.
Torgersen, “Technology
Assessment,” 124.
“Boundary-Work,” 781; Bowker, Sorting Things Out; Tamminen, Recoding
Winner, “Do Artefacts
Have Politics?”
“Technology”; Nye, Technology Matters, 1–15.
“Artefacts,” 121ff; Latour, “Give Me a Laboratory”;
Hughes, The Social Construction, 75.
Kurki, Personhood; van
Beers, “Natural Persons”; Deibel, “Demarcation in
Latour, We Have Never Been
Modern; Latour, Reassembling the Social.
Latour, We Have Never Been
Modern, 91ff
Hayles, How We Became
Posthuman, 84ff.
Wootton, The Invention of
“Personnalité, Persönlichkeit, Personality,”
214–215; Neethling, “Personality Rights,”
Beyleveld, Human
Regarding the idea of the
inner self, see O’Callaghan, Law and the Inner Self Project.
Deibel, “Demarcation
“Personnalité, Persönlichkeit, Personality.”
van Beers, “The
Obsolescence of Human Beings,” 189.
Ucaryilmaz Deibel,
“Back to (for) the Future.”
Shapin, The Leviathan and
the Airpump.
Mosco, The Smart City,
Torgersen, “Technology
Assessment,” 127.
Barthes, Mythologies,
du Plessis,
Borkowski’s Textbook; Schiavone, “Law, Slaves, and
Deibel, “Demarcation
Torgersen, “Technology
Assessment,” 119; Lévi-Strauss, “The Structural Study of
Davies, Are Persons
Property?, 7; van Beers, “The Changing Nature of Law’s Natural
Person,” 189ff.
Mosco, The Smart City, 172,
Bareis, “Talking AI
into Being,” 868–869.
See EU AI Act; European
Commission Report from the Expert Group on Liability and New Technologies
– New Technologies Formation
2019; European Commission, White Paper on
Artificial Intelligence
European Commission, Adapting Non-Contractual
Civil Liability Rules (AI Liability Directive)
Solum, “Legal
Personhood.”
Kurki, A Theory of Legal
Personhood, 8; Kelsen, Pure Theory of Law, 94.
Bareis, “Talking AI
into Being,” 857.
Cardilli, Bona Fides, 12;
Ucaryilmaz Deibel, Bona Fides.
See Lord Macmillan in
Glasgow Corporation v Muir
[1943] UKHL 2
[1943] AC 448
, 457, Also see ‘bon
père de famille’ in French law, and ‘buon padre di
famiglia’ in Italian law.
Ucaryilmaz Deibel, Bona
Bareis, “Talking AI
into Being,” 871–873.
Bareis, “Talking AI
into Being,” 871–873.
O’Callaghan,
“The Right to Freedom of Thought,” 2ff.
Ucaryilmaz Deibel,
“Back to (for) the Future,” 21ff.
Ucaryilmaz Deibel,
“Back to (for) the Future”; Ucaryilmaz Deibel, “Artificial
Intelligence in Ancient Rome”;
Forrest, “The Ethics and
Challenges.”
Quigley, “Integrating
the Biological,” 281.
Farahany, Battle for Your
Brain; Deibel, “Open Genetic Code,” 3.
Torgersen, “Technology
Assessment,” 128.
Farahany, Battle for Your
Pickering, The Cybernetic
Bublitz, “Cognitive
Liberty,” 6; Davies, Are Persons Property?, 158.
Davies, Are Persons
Property?, 158.
Rawls, A Theory of Justice;
Boyle, AI and the Future of Personhood, 84.
Ienca, “Towards New
Human Rights”; Ligthart, “Neurotechnology.”
Bareis, “Talking AI
into Being,” 857.
Kurki, A Theory of Legal
Personhood, 49ff.
Bareis, “Talking AI
into Being,” 864.
Bareis, “Talking AI
into Being,” 859, 867, 871.
Torgersen, “Technology
Assessment,” 119.
Barthes, Mythologies,
Law, “STS as
Method”; Haraway, A Cyborg Manifesto, 151.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (226 KB)
PDF format (342 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter