URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CanLawRw/2022/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kashif, Rumesha --- "Murders With Missing Bodies: Evidential Construction of Prosecutorial No-Body Murder Cases" [2022] CanLawRw 9; (2022) 19(1) Canberra Law Review 149
Murders With Missing Bodies: Evidential Construction of
Prosecutorial No-Body Murder Cases
Rumesha Kashif*
To prevent human rights violations, the State has an obligation, one that may
not be legally recognised, to provide victims of crime
and their families with
justice, and consequently, the truth. Therefore, in cases of unlawful deaths, or
homicides, the State must
make the necessary efforts to locate the victims and
perpetrators of the offence. This can become increasingly difficult in the
of the victim’s body or any forensic evidence indicative of death,
also referred to as no-body murders. However, though rare,
convictions for
no-body murders have been tried and successfully prosecuted in Australia. It
follows, that as investigators and prosecutors
continue to bring such cases
forward, and jurors gain more confidence in deciding such matters, the courts
could see a rise in no-body
murder prosecutions, by which, research in this area
is of current relevance. Research in the area remains scarce and limited to
history of the offence and covers international jurisdictions. This article
examines the factors contributing to and impeding
the successful prosecutions of
no-body homicides in Australia. In pursuit of this, the article analyses two
successful and one unsuccessful
no-body murder prosecution, whilst also
providing an interdisciplinary perspective on the relationship between
factfinders and evidence.
It argues that disparate pieces of evidence related to
victimology, which establishes the death, rather than missingness, of a person,
and circumstantial evidence, which establishes the unlawful circumstances of
death, are given meaning through a narrative structure
or case theory to
prosecute no-body homicides.
I INTRODUCTION
The fact that a murderer may successfully dispose of the body of the victim
does not entitle him to an acquittal. That is one form
of success for which
society has no reward.
People v Manson
Homicide refers to the unlawful death of a human being by the actions or
omissions of another.
This general
offence is then divided into two categories: murder and
manslaughter.
An aversion to
causing harm is, to some degree, inherent to the human
Accordingly, causing the
wrongful death, or murder, of a human being, is considered the most deplorable
Therefore, offenders,
though successful in the disposal of their murdered victims, should not go
unpunished. However, establishing
the guilt of an accused becomes necessarily
challenging in the absence of the victim’s
Often, the physical element of a homicide will be established by the body or
remains of a dead person. Without the body, or any such
forensic evidence,
definitively establishing the death of a person is difficult. These types of
murder are commonly referred to as
Murder investigations
differ from those focused on missing persons. Without a body it is difficult to
determine what process is required.
This investigative hinderance results in a low clearance rate for such
The body is also, arguably, the most expressive piece of evidence in a
homicide case.
The old adage
‘dead men tell no
necessarily hold true for homicide cases. First, the manner and chronology, in
particular cause and time of death, of a
crime can be pieced together through
analysis of the body and its disposal
Second, scenes of violent
crimes, in most cases, provide invaluable forensic
information.
noticeably includes genetic material, in particular from blood, semen, sweat,
This evidence is most
cogent to identifying the perpetrator, but can also aid in understanding the
criminal event through a reconstruction
Often, the absence of a body
also means an absence of an investigable crime
Therefore, the absence of
a body undoubtedly causes a deficiency in available
Despite the difficulties, prosecuting no-body murders is important by virtue
of the social good
In particular, the area
of no-body murder investigations, and in turn prosecutions, are most relevant to
the issue of missing people.
The doubt between whether a person is missing or
murdered will often lead to delayed and misguided investigative
Due to this, the
estimated number of no-body homicides, which are still considered missing
persons, cannot accurately be deduced,
and the number may be far greater than
However, victims of
crimes have a right to justice and they, and their family, have a right to the
This is not a legally
recognised obligation, but this duty must be undertaken by the State to prevent
human rights violations.
pursuit of this right, it is necessary that efforts are made to either find the
victim or identify the perpetrator of their
A Aim and Relevance
No-body murder prosecutions are
However, interest in
no-body murders is becoming more widespread, a fact that can be inferred from
the continued media interest
legislative developments in the
As the public, and in turn
jurors, become more comfortable with the idea of convicting offenders for
no-body murders, so too will
prosecutors
and investigators
when it comes to bringing these cases
It reasonably follows,
that this could lead to a rise in prosecution of no-body
Therefore, research
regarding this area is of current relevance, especially to practitioners in the
legal sector.
Research in the area of no-body murders is
Current literature in
this area is anecdotal in nature, focused on the history of the offence, and
limited to larger jurisdictions,
in particular, the United Kingdom and United
At present, there is no
research regarding the issue of no-body murders from the Australian legal
perspective.
The purpose of this
article is to address that gap.
It explores the elements required for the prosecution of no-body murders. It
seeks to identify and analyse, the factors required for
the success of no-body
murder prosecutorial cases, as well as those impeding them. To achieve this, the
following research questions
will be explored. First, how is a person
established as being deceased. Second, what evidential factors underpin no-body
murder cases.
Third, how are these disparate pieces of evidence used, in
particular in a case theory or narrative, to successfully prosecute an
for a no-body murder.
This article is predominantly comprised of doctrinal research, with an aim to
synthesise the principals, norms, and rules guiding
the prosecution of no-body
murder cases in Australia.
Through the integration of social science research, it uses an interdisciplinary
perspective to explore the research questions, in
particular the relationships
between factfinders and
The following cases of no-body murder prosecutions will be examined. They
will be referred to as the
The aggregate of the
various hearings and judgements related to each matter will form the body of the
cases. The former two resulted
in successful prosecutions, whilst the latter
failed due to an absence of substantial evidence establishing the guilt of the
These cases have been selected due to their recency and absence of
substantial direct evidence, in particular forensic material.
In the current study, the cases of successful no-body murder prosecutions
will be compared
to that of an
unsuccessful one. Comparison with this case will provide a wider view of the
factors that affect, specifically those
that aid and impede, the prosecution of
no-body murders. This will better place the article to discern the strengths and
weaknesses,
and future applicability, of the legal concepts, doctrines, and
practices that underpin the prosecution of the
The research will be jurisdictionally limited to
There is no
restriction on the forms of evidence being used to establish no-body murders.
However, owing to constraints on the length
of the article, the current research
will only be analysing a few, rather than all, categories of evidence used in
the cases. These
categories of evidence have been selected due to the high
frequency in which they appear in the cases.
This article proceeds in four parts. Part II is descriptive in nature and
provides the background knowledge necessary to understand
the subsequent Parts.
This includes a brief discussion on the legal framework governing criminal law,
and in particular the offence
of murder. In line with the jurisdictions of the
cases to be examined, the laws concerning murder as they stand in New South
(‘NSW’) and Western Australia (‘WA) will be outlined.
Following this, the material facts of each case will be provided,
as well as a
brief discussion on the topic of jury and judge alone trials. Part III will
explore the use of victimology in no-body
murder cases. This includes an
exploration of the use of victim characteristics, such as age, social
designation, and behaviour,
to establish the death, as opposed to disappearance,
of a person. Part IV will examine the various types of circumstantial evidence
used by prosecutors in no-body murder cases. This includes circumstances related
to the criminal event, evidence of motive, and propensity
evidence. Part V will
explore the construction of case theories and legal narratives, and their impact
on the success of no-body
murder prosecutorial cases.
II BACKGROUND
A Murder and the Law in Australia
In Australia there is no national or uniform legal framework governing
criminal law.
attributable to the limited powers vested in the Commonwealth by the
Constitution
regarding such
matters. Through these powers the Parliament effectuates laws for any subject
matter in the Constitutions
For example, the
Criminal Code 1995
Criminal Code
codifies the standard principles of criminal
responsibility,
constitutional basis in s
Instead, criminal
offences are governed by State and Territory laws by virtue of their plenary
In NSW, the laws concerning
are set out in div 1 of
Crimes Act 1900
In essence,
murder, as defined under
, is the causing of death to another through
an act, or omission, of the accused, which was committed with reckless
indifference to
human life, or with the intent to kill or inflict grievous
bodily harm
upon some person.
This also includes the causing of death done in an attempt, or during or
immediately after the commission by the
accused of a separate crime punishable
by imprisonment for life or for 25
Manslaughter is defined
as every other punishable
In WA, ch XXVIII of the
Criminal Code Act Compilation Act 1913
Criminal Code
sets out the
offences related to homicide. Under s 268, the killing of a person, without
justifiable reason, is unlawful. Similar
murder, as defined in s
279, is the unlawful killing by a person who intended to cause the death of the
person killed or another
person, or intended to cause a bodily injury of such a
nature as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, the life of the person killed
or another person, or caused the death, by an act that would likely endanger
human life, during the pursuit of an illegal
In general, the offence of murder in the two jurisdictions are relatively
similar. Broadly speaking, the charge of murder, in both
the establishment of two elements: the physical element (
and the fault element (
The first is the physical element. The physical element
encapsulates
the outer, behavioural, objective and public aspect of the criminal
Within this also exist
two categories, resulting crimes and conduct crimes. The former is dependent on
conduct leading to a certain
prohibited result, whilst the latter is concerned
with the prohibited conduct independent of any
The physical element
of murder, and homicide in general, is conduct resulting in the death of a
human being.
The second is the fault element. The fault element of a crime is the
subjective and mental state, as well as the private aspect, of
The fault elements
considered by the criminal law are much narrower than those used for everyday
moral judgements.
Traditionally,
the law has, for several crimes, looked to mental states that are malicious,
wilful, and and/or wanton.
contemporary laws governing criminal conduct, including murder, have condensed
these into concepts of intent, recklessness and
For many statutory crimes, such as murder, the physical element must be
accompanied by the requisite fault element. This accounts
for the relationship
between mind and body, as expressed by Rene Déscartes, ‘I think,
therefore I am’.
aligns with Lord Kenyon’s idea about natural justice, in which the
physical and fault element must concur to constitute
The establishment of
these elements is also a statutory requirement under Federal law. By virtue of
Criminal Code 1995
the fault elements and physical elements, as required by the laws creating the
offence, must be established to constitute the
Due to the substantial
punishments
associated with a murder conviction, it is paramount that the label only be
applied to those guilty of the
For this reason, the
prosecution is required to prove each element, beyond reasonable doubt, relevant
to the guilt of the person
This task, and in
particular the establishment of the physical element, becomes increasingly
difficult in the absence of the victims
body. Therefore, the prosecution must
rely on other forms of evidence to establish the death of a person.
B Material Facts
The following is a brief outline of the three cases to be examined in this
This case concerns the death of Tegan Lane
In December 1995 Keli Lane (‘Lane’) became pregnant at the age of
20. Prior to this, Lane had been pregnant three different
times. The first two
pregnancies, and their terminations, were concealed from friends and family.
Then, at, the age of 18, Lane once
again became pregnant. This pregnancy was
carried to term in secrecy. Lane assumed the father of this child to be Duncan
(‘Gillies’), her then significant other. Her first child,
born 19 March 1995 unbeknownst to Gillies, was placed for adoption.
In December 1995, Lane, still in a relationship with Gillies, became pregnant
once again. This pregnancy was also carried to term
in secret. During this time,
Lane did not attempt to terminate the pregnancy, nor did she seek any medical
care. On 12 September
1996, at Auburn Hospital, Sydney, Lane gave birth to
Tegan. Two days later, Lane and Tegan, who both appeared healthy and happy,
discharged. Tegan has not been heard of or seen since.
Following this pattern, Lane became pregnant and gave birth to another child
in May 1999. This pregnancy, as well as the birth of
the child, was concealed
from the child’s father and her family. Soon after the birth, Lane
commenced proceedings to have
the child adopted. Lane falsely claimed Gillies as
being the father of this child. This led to an investigation by a child services
worker, who uncovered the birth of Tegan, and the matter of the missing child
was referred to the police.
Lane claims Tegan to be alive and in the care of the child’s biological
father. The Crown alleged the child to have been murdered
by Lane soon after her
birth. On the afternoon of 13 December 2010, a jury of twelve found Lane guilty
of murdering Tegan.
This case concerns the death of Kerry Whelan (‘Whelan’).
On the morning of 6 May 1997, Mr Bernie Whelan
informed by his wife of an appointment to see a beautician she had later that
day. The couple was to meet at Crown Equipment
around 3:45pm that day to depart
for Adelaide together.
Around 9:40am that day, Whelan was seen in the Parkroyal Hotel parking. She
was then seen, as captured by the hotel’s security
camera, walking up a
ramp to exit the car park. Of interest was a Pajero 4WD seen driving around the
hotel from 9:01am. Approximately,
45 seconds after Whelan’s exit from the
car park, this Pajero was seen driving away. Whelan, who, from 1:30pm, could not
reached by phone, did not make it to Crown Equipment as promised. Worried,
Bernie arrived at Parkroyal Hotel looking for his wife,
only to find her car
with the keys still in the ignition.
The following day, a ransom note was received by Bernie. The note detailed
the steps to be taken regarding the ransom amount of $US
The Crown argued that Whelan was kidnapped and killed by Burrell, a friend of
the family and former colleague of Bernie, for financial
gain. Burrell argued
that he could not have committed the offence due to his ailed physical state at
the time. According to him,
the Crown has no, or insufficient, evidence, linking
him to the offence. On 6 June 2006, Burrell was found guilty of the kidnapping
and murder of Kerry Whelan by a unanimous verdict.
The no-body victim of this case is Sarah Spiers (‘Spiers’).
In the span of 15-months, three women disappeared from or around the
Claremont entertainment precinct in Perth. Jane Rimmer (‘Rimmer’)
and Ciara Glennon (‘Glennon’) were confirmed to have been murdered
after the discovery of their bodies. However, the
location or body of Spiers,
who was 18 at the time of her disappearance, has not yet been uncovered.
On the evening of 26 January 1996 Spiers, with her friends, visited the
Claremont area. She remained at the Ocean Beach Hotel until
midnight, after
which the group moved onto another location, Club Bayview. Spiers, departing
alone, telephoned for a taxi at a nearby
telephone box. After this, she was seen
by three eyewitnesses waiting on the side of the road. Sometime between 2:06am
the next morning,
when she made a telephone call for a taxi, and 2:15am Spiers
disappeared without a trace.
On 22 December 2016, Robert Bradley Edwards (‘Edwards’) was
arrested for the deaths of Rimmer and Glennon. Edwards, who
at the time of the
offences was a Telstra telephone technician, was linked to the murders through
forensic evidence. The Crown posited
that, like Rimmer and Glennon, Spiers was
also murdered by Edwards. Edwards agreed that Spiers must be dead, but firmly
involvement.
On 24 September 2020, Justice Hall found Edwards guilty of the murders of
Rimmer and Glennon, but not guilty for that of Spiers.
C Decisionmakers: Judge vs Jury
It is instructive to note that the cases with successful prosecutions,
, were decided by a jury, whilst
the unsuccessful no-body prosecution, was decide in a judge alone trial. Both
decision making bodies will be explored in turn.
Research indicates several benefits to trial by juries. The jury, which is
selected at random from the electoral roll, is seen to
embody the interests and
experiences of the public.
Following this, the jury serves as a representation of the community in an
attempt to eliminate discriminatory treatment of
defendants.
The jury is also
perceived as an independent decision-making body, separate from the State, and
therefore essential to a fair
However, in some cases, defendants will be tried before a judge. Unlike
judges, jurors have no obligation to provide reasoning for
There is a sense of
uncertainty in the ability of jurors to make decision based on the evidence and
facts alone.
The jury are also
considered incompetent in matters involving technical
In this regard, a
judgement from a judge, which requires adherence to the law and coherent
reasoning, is deemed more
Cases with significant
media attention are also, arguably, best tried by a judge. Media attention can
lead to prejudicial publication
which can unfairly influence
This risk is reduced by
opting for a judge alone trial.
Through State legislation a defendant may, under certain conditions, apply for a
judge alone trial.
Research shows that both jurors and judges are able
decisionmakers.
Further, the
differences in decisions between the two are not indicative of who is more or
less accurate.
However, it would
be remiss not to acknowledge the possibility of the different trial types
affecting the outcome of the cases. This
topic, however, is beyond the scope of
this article.
When referring to the judge and jury as a collective, the subsequent Parts
will refer to them as ‘factfinders’ or ‘decisionmakers’.
III VICTIMOLOGY AND ESTABLISHING DEATH
The starting point of any homicide is the death of a human being. Ordinarily,
this can be established through the deceased body of
that person. However, under
certain conditions, the severed parts of a
and forensic evidence could
also lend towards an inference of
Therefore, in the absence
of a body, and any forensic evidence related to it, proving the death of a
person becomes increasingly
As a case in point,
the defendant in
recurringly challenged the notion that
Tegan’s death could be conclusively proven, reminding the court that the
victim could
be alive, therefore negating the prosecutions entire
This Part will explore
the use of victimology, which is the study of victims of
in positioning the victim
as being dead, as opposed to missing.
A Background
The need to conclusively determine the death of a person in the absence of a
body also carries historic significance. The ‘no
body, no murder’
rule finds it roots in 17
century English
Lord Hale is credited for
the origin of this doctrine, under which a person should not be convicted for
homicide in the absence of
the victim’s body or evidence establishing
The underlying basis of
this principle was to prevent the punishment of a person for a non-existent
crime. This was in line with
Blackstone’s
who proposed the need for
a higher degree of certainty when rendering someone guilty, even if the
likelihood of error increased,
so as to avoid punishing the wrong
Though Hales principle
has eroded over time, Blackstone’s ratio, in some form, still exists in
Western jurisdictions.
reason, the current judicial system requires the death of the victim to be
proved beyond any reasonable
People go missing every day.
Some are forced, whilst others disappear
voluntarily.
To disappear
intentionally is not a crime.
Therefore, at the commencement of such issues, the investigating authority is
required to establish the circumstances of the disappearance
in order to decide
the concern to be attributed to the individual and their
characteristics and behaviours are used to distinguish, even tentatively,
between voluntary and involuntary
disappearances.
the court must determine if, in the absence of a body, the victim has died, or
if there is an alternative theory for their
disappearance. In this situation,
the prosecutor will often turn to the characteristics of the victim, and their
behaviour after
their disappearance, to evidence their
However, the factors
affecting the disappearance of children, will in some respect, always differ to
those affecting adults.
categories of victims will be examined in turn.
B Missing Victims: Adults
Victimology
Often, an intentional disappearance can be triggered by moments of extreme
emotional distress.
facing trauma will generally experience interpersonal conflict, usually brought
on by feelings of panic and
In response, people
will try to distance themselves from the trauma and/or crisis by physically
removing their presence.
can be a temporary disappearance to dissipate their emotional instability, or it
can be a permanent change.
Most commonly, voluntary disappearances are brought on by financial problems,
and relationship, marital, and familial issues and
breakdowns.
Certain people are also more likely to disappear, or be reported missing,
than others. For this reason, when someone from the latter
category does go
missing, their disappearance is, more often than not, considered involuntary.
This will be evidenced with the subsequent
discussion.
One such group includes those that are systemically
marginalised.
Traditionally,
someone is missing when they are physically
However, according to
a person is missing
when their absence is felt by those concerned about their welfare and
whereabouts.
For this reason,
those facing social exclusion
can be missing for some time before their absence is even
This then leads to
delayed, and in some cases effortless, investigations into their
disappearance.
This is based
on the misconception that these individuals have disappeared
voluntarily.
For this reason,
those facing social exclusion are usually overrepresented amongst missing
Factors affecting
this social exclusion can also be linked to the persons circumstances of
disappearance.
demographic comprises of those who are socially and economically
disadvantaged.
This commonly
includes homeless people, unemployed people, victims of domestic violence, and,
in places like Australia and Canada,
Another group more likely to be assumed as intentionally missing include
those with transient lifestyles. Stewart argues that people
without social ties
can be considered as missing due to their geographical
This includes their
absence being felt by those accustomed to seeing them in a single or set of
However, those
from a transient population are less likely to have social designations, and in
turn, less likely to be
This demographic
generally includes homeless people, runaways, hustlers, and
prostitutes.
Beyond this, modern technology has made locating a missing person
considerably easier. As an example, Thomas
takes the ability of
serial killers who could, in the past, construct and maintain lies regarding the
whereabouts of their victims.
This was, he attributed, to the lack of instantaneous communication devices.
Modern day developments have made it so everyone leaves
an electronic trail,
especially if they disappear.
Therefore, in the absence of physical evidence, evidence showing lack of life,
such as no electronic activity, can also establish
Case Analysis
Victimology was used in both the
successfully evidence the death, as opposed to disappearance, of the adult
In the case of
the victim was Whelan. The court’s
illustration of Whelan and her life make it clear that she was unlikely to have
voluntarily
disappeared.
Whelan was described as having close familial
relationships.
evident from the statement regarding her and her husband, who were ‘a
devoted couple and ... equally devoted to their
Beyond this,
Whelan had made plans with her husband regarding the future, in particular, a
prospective overseas
There was no
evidence that Whelan suffered any emotional trauma prior to her disappearance,
nor was she in any financial distress.
The court held that, due to
Whelan’s social designations and responsibilities, such as her children,
it was improbable her
disappearance was
Further, there was
no plausible reason for a voluntary
disappearance.
Evidence regarding Whelan’s activities prior to, and after, her
disappearance was also used in the trial. This included no contact
with any family or friends, her bank accounts not being accessed by her, no
immigration records evidencing departure from
the country, and no
records evidencing
any medical attention sought.
In its totality these factors evidenced a lack of life. This, in conjunction
with her victimology, allowed the court to declare Whelan
as having died rather
than disappearing.
In the case of
, the no-body victim was Spiers. The notion that
Spiers had voluntarily disappeared was, similar to Whelan, illustrated to be out
of character for her person. Spiers was ‘from a loving family’,
working as a secretary, and had made plans for the
The court found no
reasons for Spiers to have willingly disappeared. The Crown used evidence from
those in acquaintance with Spiers
to preclude theories of her voluntarily
disappearing or taking her own
The Crown used the
evidence of Christine Ham
eliminate suggestions of Spiers experiencing an emotional crisis prior to her
disappearance.
reinforced by Amanda Spiers,
whose evidence was led to establish Spiers’ out of character behaviour in
not informing her family about her
whereabouts.
Similar to Whelan, Spiers’ lack of life was evidenced from her
non-existent electronic activity. This included no contact with
friends, no access to bank accounts or medical services, and no departure from
the country.
In light of this
evidence the court found Spiers to be dead as there was ‘no other
satisfactory explanation for her
disappearance.’
C Missing Victims: Children
Victimology
The major issue facing children is the actual knowledge of their
disappearance. In many cases, such as child abduction situations,
the family,
friends, and police, will be unaware the child is even
For illustration, in
Tegan had been missing for around three years before anyone
questioned her whereabouts. This was due predominantly to Lane’s
concealment of the child’s existence from family and friends.
Children, in contrast to adults, are more likely to face
victimisation.
This condition
owes to several factors. First, the physical stature of a child will often
impact their level of risk. Younger children,
who will generally be physically
weak and small, will be dependent on others for their protection and
For this reason, they
are unable to retaliate or deter those intending to harm them. Children of a
higher age, such as those aged
between 15 and 17, are less prone to
victimisation due to their physical ability to protect
themselves.
Second, children
are at greater risk of victimisation due to their early stage of
development.
The younger the
child, the greater their social and psychological
immaturity.
In turn, children
develop a dependency on adults to supplement their immaturity. Third, children
have little to no choice in who
they associate with or their
circumstances.
Other segments
of the population, such as women experiencing domestic violence, also face this
issue. However, these vulnerabilities
can sometimes be overcome through an
assertion of autonomy by these people. Children, due to their dependency, are
unable to do this.
it stands that as a child ages their development increases, which leads to a
decrease in their dependency, which then
leads to a decreased risk of
victimisation.
Case Analysis
Following this path, it can be argued that a child, that is no more than two
days old, would be dependent on their parent or guardian.
This was the case with
Tegan who disappeared two days after her birth. The court in
note of the child being ‘completely defenceless’ and being dependant
on her mother for ‘protection, sustenance
investigation, the search conducted for the child was ‘painstaking,
meticulous and
exhaustive’
could not have voluntarily gone missing. This point was accepted by Simpson and
Adamson JJ, and Bathurst CJ, who noted that
Tegan was either in the care of some
other person, as argued by Lane, or dead, as put by the
The investigation
yielded no child who could have been Tegan, or any person who Tegan may be in
the care of.
Therefore, by
evidential elimination of the first alternative, it was concluded that Tegan was
IV CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE
Evidence can be categorised in two
The first is used to
directly prove a fact, aptly named ‘direct
includes eyewitness identifications and testimonies, confessions, and, in murder
cases, the body of the
The second is
indirect evidence, referred to as, in legal parlance, ‘circumstantial
Circumstantial evidence is evidence from which the existence of a fact may be
This form of
evidence is an accepted form of proof even though it does not explicitly exist
in statute.
The absence of a body in a murder case often results in an absence of direct
evidence. This article argues that prosecutorial cases
of no-body murders rely
substantially, if not wholly, on circumstantial evidence. In the outset of this
Part the reasoning processes,
legal application, and issues, surrounding this
form of evidence will be, for contextual purposes, explored.
The topic of circumstantial evidence has long been an area of contention. The
process of inferential reasoning is interpretative,
and therefore
For this reason,
critics argue that circumstantial evidence is inherently less accurate and has,
historically, led to miscarriages
posits that
inferential reasoning involves heuristic
processing.
processing is a thought process characterised by ‘fast, intuitive
judgements’.
process is plagued by flaws as it involves a modicum of cognitive effort,
specifically, regarding the assessment of
This is caused by
the use of heuristic cues, which are generalisations about human
suggested that people have an inherent ‘proneness’ to construct
theories and distort evidence to establish
Curiously, empirical
research indicates that factfinders are less likely to impose guilt based on
indirect, as opposed to direct,
This can be owed to
the abstract and general nature of such evidence, the inability of jurors to
understand the evidence, and avoidance
of personal responsibility, which is much
greater when convicting on circumstantial
As an area embroiled in conflicting opinions, the use of circumstantial
evidence, in the face of statutory silence, has been guided
by common law. The
principles regarding the evidence are as follows.
Circumstantial evidence is evidence from which inferences about the facts in
issue can be drawn.
issue in a criminal matter are ‘those that establish the elements of the
An inference
is a deduction or conclusion drawn from established evidence or
circumstances.
This inference
must be more than a guess or mere
speculation.
This reasonable
inference need not depend on the assessment of each circumstance in isolation. A
combination of facts, or the evidence
as a whole, may be used to draw an
This inference,
establishing the guilt of the accused, must also be the only reasonable one that
can be drawn.
Following this,
if any reasonable
hypotheses,
or even a possibility of one, consistent with innocence can be inferred, the
benefit of the doubt should be given to
This is because, an
inference consistent with innocence raises reasonable doubt about the guilt of
the accused.
Therefore, this
requirement is merely an expectation of the prosecutor’s burden of
under which guilt
needs to be established beyond a reasonable
This rule is
especially pertinent to prosecutorial cases based substantially on
circumstantial evidence.
Therefore, the only reasonable inferences available from circumstantial evidence
in a no-body murder must be that the victim is dead
and was killed by the
The focal cases of this article explicitly note the substantial reliance on
circumstantial evidence by the
Various forms of
circumstantial evidence exist, and some can be found throughout these cases. The
substantial stock of them will
be considered in turn.
A General Circumstances of the Crime
This general category encompasses the circumstances, such as actions and
physical material, surrounding the offence.
There were several circumstantial items in the
However, there were
‘three prominent factual circumstances upon which the Crown
The first will be referred to as the ‘Pajero evidence’. On 6 May
1997 the image of a Pajero 4WD motor vehicle was captured
by security cameras
parked outside the Parkroyal Hotel. Whelan was seen exiting the hotel’s
parking up a ramp. Soon after,
the Pajero was seen driving away from the hotel.
From there her image disappeared. Whelan was not observed, by the other cameras,
on any pathways she could have taken at her exit. The Pajero had features
similar to one owned by the accused. The inference here
is that Whelan, at the
time of her disappearance, left the vicinity in the vehicle of the accused. An
investigation of Pajero owners
and drivers in the area, as well as the condition
of the windscreen of the
was used to
eliminate the hypothesis of a different Pajero.
The second item of circumstantial evidence was referred to as the ‘dot
point notes’. Two notepads were seized from the
accused’s premises.
Of interest were two notes in his handwriting and in dot point formation. There
was no direct evidence
as to the meaning of these notes. It was concluded, by
the Crown, that the notes contained short-hand instructions guiding the
of Whelan. This was supported by the similarities between the notes
and the ransom letter.
The third item of evidence will be referred to as the ‘Goulburn
call’ evidence. On 23 May 1997 a call was made, from a
public phone in
Goulburn, to Crown Equipment by the kidnapper. It was deduced that the person
was the kidnapper as they relayed knowledge
consistent with the ransom note. The
contents of the note, at the time, were only known by those immediately present
when it was
received. On the same day, the accused admitted to being in the
Goulburn area and making two phone calls from a public phone. From
Crown deduced that it was the accused who made the call and was therefore the
kidnapper. The possibility the accused made
a different phone call was
eliminated by investigation of his calls to the claimed
Burrell argued that
the phone call he made was to his solicitor’s office. However, after
analysis of the records kept by the
solicitor’s office, it was deduced, by
the Crown, that the phone call was made from a different phone booth and a
time to the one made by the kidnapper. Though a call to the solicitor
was proven to be made earlier in the day, it could not be used
as a reasonable
hypothesis as to the innocence of the accused making the phone call to Crown
equipment later in the
A more minor circumstance relied upon was the accused’s future
financial plans. The inference from this evidence regarded the
kidnapping and
ransom of Whelan, and in turn, the accused’s involvement in her death.
Burrell had asked a female friend to
marry him and move to Tasmania with him. He
claimed to be looking for a property to buy in the area. He had also made
enquiries regarding
the purchase of property, from the project manager of
Tasmania Development and Resources, for the purpose of setting up a winery.
Then, during a property search, police discovered a note, written by the
accused, detailing planned improvements, totalling $62,000.
Both these instances
can innocently be explained. However, in light of the accused’s precarious
financial state at the time,
the Crown argued that such plans were
‘consistent with an expectation of a sudden and significant improvement in
his financial
situation’.
case, to a lesser extent, also contained evidence related to
the circumstances of the
Most significantly,
the Crown case was that Lane had the opportunity to commit the murder. Lane left
the hospital at around 12:00pm
on 14 September 1996. Tegan was with her. She
arrived at her parents’ house at 3:00 pm the same day. Tegan was not with
The intervening three hours are unaccounted for. The Crown contends that it
was this period in which Lane killed, and disposed of,
the child. There was no
evidence indicating the child had been given to another person.
Further, evidence regarding Lane’s preparation and arrangements, or
lack thereof, for the birth and care of Tegan was also used.
The Crown alleged
that this absence of preparation gave rise to the inference that Lane did not
ever intend to bring the child home.
Therefore, she left the hospital intending
to dispose of Tegan.
In addition, the Crown used the body of lies told by Lane to infer a
consciousness of guilt on her part. Lies evidencing a consciousness
of guilt is
an accepted form of evidence in
The relevant legal
principles pertaining to them is set out in
Edwards v The Queen
Edwards v The
lie is probative of guilt. The lie must be in response to a realisation of guilt
or fear of the truth.
must be told in relation to a material issue as the accused must be endeavouring
to avoid implication of the matter
It can be argued
that lies are a form of guilty
Guilty behaviours
are important as they are circumstantial evidence of
This stems from the
general notion that guilty individuals will behave differently to those that are
However, it must be
noted that guilt is not the only reason people
For example, an
individual suspected of a crime, may lie to distance themselves from the alleged
event or avoid the inconvenience
of an investigation.
the Crown advanced three lies, all pertaining to the
whereabouts of the child, for this argument. First, Lane told Virginia
she had given the child
to a family in Perth (‘Perth lie’). Second, Lane, in her February
2001 interview with the police,
informed that the child had been given to the
child’s father, Andrew Morris (‘Morris lie’). Then, Lane, in
October 2002 and May 2003 interviews, named the father as being Andrew
Norris (‘Norris lie’). It is instructive to note
that the Morris and
Norris lies were asserted over nine different
In this case, each
assertion was to be evaluated by the jury as an individual statement. These
statements were held to be lies as
persons consistent with the Perth family,
Andrew Morris or Norris could not be located or linked to Lane’s story.
The inference
the jury was invited to make was regarding the physical element
of the offence, in particular, that Lane had told these lies, and
perpetuated them, because she had killed Tegan and ‘the truth
terrible to
contemplate’.
B Evidence of Motive
The prosecutorial cases for the three no-body murders all included evidence
related to the motive of the accused.
The motive behind the accused’s actions, in some cases, can be used as
circumstantial evidence.
In Australia, the prosecution does not have an obligation to prove motive on
the part of the accused.
Nonetheless, there are several ways in which motive evidence may be used, and
even more reasons it may be beneficial to the prosecution.
Motive evidence is most cogent to establishing the fault element. The
distinction between murder and manslaughter, which have a similar
element, is the accused’s mental state. To find a murder conviction, it
must be proved that the accused had an intention
to cause death or grievous
bodily harm (‘GBH’) or was recklessly indifferent to human
This will not always be
easily ascertainable.
aptly embodied in the dictum of Brian CJ who noted that ‘the devil himself
knows not the thought of
However from
motive evidence factfinders can draw inferences relevant to the state of mind of
the accused.
the court found that
motive evidence, though not necessary, could assist in proving whether the
intent to kill or cause GBH existed.
More specifically, such evidence may make
murder a more probative event than
manslaughter.
argued that intent is what guides the offender whereas motive is the driving
force behind it.
cases, the motive may be the very thing that gives rise to the intention, in
turn, turning an innocent physical element into
an unlawful
Therefore, motive may be
defined as the circumstances or emotions which induce a person to
Evidence of motive can also be used to discern the identity of the
The motive may have
bearing on the question of whether a crime was committed and, if so, it was done
so by the accused.
circumstantial evidence to identify the offender it is pertinent that
alternative hypotheses be
eliminated.
For this reason,
such evidence will have probative value as an accused with a motive to kill will
make the hypothesis that they were
the offender, as opposed to any alternative
theory, more probable.
, ‘evidence of motive ... can be relevant because
it may make it more likely that the accused committed the offence
The Crown, in the
case, established motive by evidencing the
accused’s ‘desire for money and his increasingly, apparently
irrational, pursuit
accused’s actions, prior to May 1997, regarding his finances were used as
In May 1996 Ms
Bromely, the accused’s wife, stopped providing Burrell financial support
after the deterioration of their marriage,
and his subsequent departure from the
family business.
Evidence was
led from the accused’s father who admitted to loaning Burrell a
substantial amount of money to maintain his
In May 1997 the
accused had a bank balance of
From this body of
circumstantial evidence, it was inferred that the accused was facing financial
difficulties. Therefore, according
to the Crown, the kidnapping and killing of
Whelan was financially motivated.
This inference was strengthened by further circumstantial evidence. The Crown
submitted evidence regarding the accused’s interactions
Buckley, a former friend and work acquaintance of the accused. In early 1997,
Burrell asked Buckley to provide him a
fictious letter of employment for the
purposes of obtaining a loan from a
He also, forcefully,
asked Buckley to either gift or loan him a substantial sum of
This, the Crown
argued, showed the desperate state of the accused. This desire, according to the
Crown, is what prompted the intentional
kidnapping and ransom demand, and
eventual murder, of Whelan. Therefore, the Crown established Burrell as the
probable killer, as
he had reasonable motive for the commission of the crime.
Similarly, the motive put forward in
regarded the selfish desires
of the accused.
brought charges of murder, as opposed to manslaughter, against Lane. This
necessitated the establishment of a state of
mind to commit the crime, and for
this reason, motive evidence was
The Crown supplied the jury with two motives. Lane’s short-term motive,
the Crown argued, was to avoid the responsibility for
the care of
In the long-term, Lane
was motivated by ‘[h]er sporting life, her social life, educational
career, her job, her Olympic ambitions,
her overwhelming fear of rejection by
her family and friends that would bring shame on
These inferences
were drawn from the evidence regarding Lane’s disposal of prior and
subsequent pregnancies.
Crown alleged that Lane, motivated by selfish endeavours and a fear of shame,
found ways to permanently dispose, whether through
terminations or adoptions, of
her pregnancies.
it can be inferred that the same was done with Tegan, however, in this case,
unlawfully.
case, the Crown relied on motive evidence to make more
probable the identity of the killer as the accused. The motive here was
turmoil. The Crown argued, that in light of emotional upsets or
distresses in his life, Edwards was motivated to commit sexual assault
of violence towards unknown
EB was the first
wife of the accused.
divorced in or around 1997. They had separated before this and resided in
different premises. On an evening close to Australia
Day, the accused visited
EB, unannounced, at her mother’s residence. Edwards asked EB if she would
accompany him to ‘see
fireworks’.
declined. According to the Crown, from this it can be inferred that EB rejected
a ‘gesture of reconciliation’ from
Then, in the early
hours of 27 January 1996, Spiers disappeared. The Crown concluded that this
offence was motivated by the ‘accumulation
of significant emotional
upheaval in the accused’s person life in the immediate lead up to the
disappearance of Sarah
C Propensity and Similar Fact Evidence
Instead of evidence regarding circumstances, the Crown in
used propensity evidence. Propensity evidence is a form of circumstantial
evidence under common law.
Propensity evidence refers to the tendency, disposition, or inclination of a
person to behave in a particular way or on the basis
of a certain state of
Under the umbrella of
propensity evidence exists similar fact
Similar fact
evidence is evidence of the accused’s past behaviour that is similar to,
or shares common features with, the conduct
giving rise to the current
This generally
incudes past conduct that is criminal or
disreputable.
The admission of propensity evidence can be done in two
First, the evidence may
be admitted if it is relevant to matters other than propensity, notwithstanding
that it shows propensity.
Alternatively, the evidence may be admissible if its probative value outweighs
its prejudicial effect.
latter approach is taken in Western
where propensity
evidence is legislated under
Evidence Act 1906
Evidence Act
’). Notwithstanding its statutory enactment,
‘[p]ropensity evidence is a form of circumstantial
Similar fact evidence, and in particular, its admissibility, inhabits an area
of legal uncertainty.
primary issue is the conflicted nature of such evidence, as it is admissible by
virtue of its relevance, but can, simultaneously
be prejudicial, and therefore,
inadmissible.
admissibility of such evidence is guided by the High Court decision of
Pfennig v The Queen
[1995] HCA 7
to the relevance of the
The test echoes the
test required for the evaluation of circumstantial
When dealing with
propensity evidence, the factfinder is asked to gauge whether any
consistent with innocence can be
Therefore, an adverse
inference about the accused can only be drawn if it is the only reasonable one,
and no other rational explanation
An innocent explanation
gives rise to reasonable doubt, and in turn, admission of it will be prejudicial
to the accused.
Though relevant, often propensity evidence can engender a risk of prejudice.
Evaluation of such evidence can, in some instances will,
generalisation of human
Just because a
person acted in a particular way in the past does not necessarily mean they have
done so again. People can, and do,
break patterns of
establishing propensity can make it more likely that the perpetrator was the
Evidence of past
negative conduct may also distract the jury from the matter in dispute.
believes this may lead
some jurors to punish the accused for past conduct by convicting the current
Therefore, the
threshold for admissibility of propensity evidence is
The prosecutorial case in
relied on both propensity and
similar fact evidence to establish the identity of the
The similar fact
evidence relates to the other two charges in the trial. According to the Crown,
the similarity regarding the disappearances
of the three victims, necessarily
‘establishes that they were killed by the same
This body of
evidence included several
First, the similarity
in age and appearance of the
Second, the
vulnerable situation the victims were in, in particular caused by their alcohol
consumption and unaccompanied presence
near the Claremont entertainment
precinct. Third, the time and date of the disappearances as all three victims
were last seen alive
in the early morning hours of the weekend. Finally, the
geographical and temporal proximity of the
The propensity evidence relates to the earlier criminal incidents of the
accused. The first related to a break in and attempted rape
(‘Huntingdale’
The second related
to an attack by the accused on an unknown woman, in which she was gagged,
dragged towards a toilet cubicle, but
ultimately escaped (‘Hollywood
Hospital’ offence).
third was the abduction and sexual assault of a 17-year-old female
(‘Karrakatta’
Each offence, which
the accused had already pleaded guilty
provided propensity
evidence. In totality, the evidence was used to establish the accused as having
a propensity to violently attack,
and in some cases abduct, unknown and
vulnerable females. The Karrakatta offence was also used as similar fact
evidence, due to the
similarity in abduction site, time and day, age and
appearance, and vulnerabilities of the victims. This evidence was also used to
indicate the accused having the knowledge and ability to subdue and abduct
The Crown also used motive to establish
propensity.
The Crown argued
that prior to the murders of Glennon and Rimmer, the accused experienced
emotional turmoil.
to the Crown, this was indicative of a propensity, on the part of the accused,
to attack unknown women when in a state
of emotional distress.
V CASE THEORY AND THE LEGAL NARRATIVE FRAMEWORK
Case theory refers to the explanatory narrative or framework which details
the prosecutorial or defence
This explanatory
structure is dependent on the evidence. Evidence itself can be considered
disparate bodies of
information.
These individual
pieces are given value when placed in a legal
As noted in
the ‘proper approach is to fit the case theory to the
evidence, not to try to fit the evidence to the case
Evidence acts
as the ‘blocks’ used to construct a narrative. This analogy is aptly
captured by the closing remarks of
the Crown in
circumstantial case is a case that depends on a whole lot of building blocks to
make wall’.
article argues that the success of a no-body murder prosecution hinges on the
strength of the prosecutor’s case theory.
This part will demonstrate the
impediment a weak case theory, and to a lesser extent, lack of pieces of
evidence, are to the success
of obtaining a no-body murder conviction.
Case theory has become an indispensable tool in lawyering, and its
effectiveness stems from its story like
Storytelling has
always played a part in legal
Therefore, the
concept of case theory relies on an understanding of narratives. In the broadest
sense, a narrative refers to the
recounting and reception of
From the legal
perspective, this involves two parties: the producers of the stories, the
lawyers, and the receivers of said stories,
the factfinders. The aim of a case
theory is to frame the evidence and facts in a manner which best achieves the
client’s goals.
terms of a no-body murder trial, the evidence, for the prosecution, must be
framed so as to convict the accused.
In a trial, factfinders will be faced with complex and copious amounts of
evidence. Research suggests that in these circumstances,
factfinders, in
particular jurors, will organise this information in a narrative framework.
Often this is an unconscious
occurrence.
This notion stems
from the fact that humans inherently rely on stories to process most aspects of
This is most obvious in
the way in which memories are constructed or dreams are
experienced.
Jurors will
often make judgements on complicated matters without any, or insignificant,
prior knowledge of the subject matter. This
supports the theory that factfinders
possess ‘everyday equipment for living’ that provides this
The narrative mode of recounting and receiving evidence carries several risks
which merit some comment. First, nearly all aspects
of a conventional story,
such as events and characters, have
This is not true
for a legal case theory. Therefore, due to their expectations of narrative
structures, factfinders may give improper
weight to certain pieces of
Second, legal
stories are constrained by procedural rules, in particular regarding the use and
admissibility of evidence.
This process is beneficial as it increases the efficiency of the trial process
and brings attention to only probative and relevant
However, the
exclusion of certain items of evidence will lead to informational gaps in the
narrative. In these situations,
argues, factfinders,
in pursuit of completing the narrative, will supplement these deficiencies with
their own knowledge or
generalisations.
referred to as heuristic
processing,
and is engaged by
both jurors and judges.
may lead to the construction of incorrect stories, which in turn, lead to false
conclusions. However, as discussed in
, both jurors and judges are
reliable and responsible decision makers. Beyond this, the need for narratives
as a means for processing
complex and unfamiliar information certainly counters
these risks.
Legal narratives draw on the factfinders use of
schema refers to the framework by which stories are
understood.
Information is
placed into a pre-existing structure built on conventions and previous
experiences. This includes familiar plot structures
with a beginning, middle and
end, shared beliefs or stereotypes, motives and morals, and traditional actors
such as heroes and villains.
Some scholars refer to these narrative structures as ‘stock’ stories
or scripts.
These stock
stories are effective as they establish, and in some cases reinforce, a
relationship between evidence and the shared
understandings held by
factfinders.
For example, a
narrative develops character tropes through incidents and interactions, rather
than just explicitly characterising
Furthermore, narrative structures are used to assess the
The acceptance of a
case theory is dependent on the credibility and cohesiveness of the explanatory
According to
evidence itself has no
value; neither can its credibility be gleaned in
Therefore, to
construct the credibility, and in turn value, of evidence it must be
incorporated into a
Stories facilitate
the organisation, interpretation, comparison, and testing of vast amounts of
information.
The narrative
acts like a reference framework, into which pieces of evidence, over the course
of the trial, are fit into and
interpreted.
The factfinder
will construct several competing narratives with the same items of
These stories are
then compared, and the most persuasive and plausible one
This selection then
guides their verdict. This is indicative of the theory that jurors test the
evidence as a whole rather than assessing
individually.
In legal practice, the doctrine of case theory encapsulates narrative
construction.
The narrative
involves events that occur over a period of time, and are selected, invented,
and/or emphasised by the
Therefore, the case
theory ‘shapes what
there are two competing, yet no less truthful,
In turn, there are
two dominant narratives in any given case: the ‘guilty’ perspective
and the ‘innocent’
perspective.
The aim for the
prosecution, and defence, is to persuade the factfinder into adopting their
Certain practices
and tactics have, in pursuit of this goal and in alignment with knowledge
regarding the interpretative processes
of factfinders, developed in the legal
First, lawyers will strive to construct a narrative that aligns with those
already imbedded in the factfinders
This story should act
as the broad framework in which the factfinder can reconfigure their
interpretation of the
Rather than a
complex analysis of the evidence, it will be used to support factual
propositions.
Second, lawyers must construct narratives that impart certainty. Certainty is
governed by concepts of coherence and
plausibility.
corresponds to the ‘internal assessment’ of the
A coherent narrative should be free of contradictions, whether it be the
evidence or other factual propositions, and should provide
a recount that is, or
close to, complete.
Plausibility is the external assessment of the narrative. A plausible narrative
is one which, in light of personal experience, the
factfinder perceives to be
believable.
The effectiveness
of a story, as posited by Pennington and
will be lessened if
other coherent and plausible narratives are
introduced.
To attain a favourable outcome, the defendant must create reasonable doubt
with a case
theory. The defendant will provide a rebuttal to this or offer an alternative
An attack on the
prosecutorial case, as posited by
‘poking holes’ in
This in turn will weaken
Therefore, a successful
prosecutorial case will consider and account for any potential deficiencies in
the narrative constructed.
The prosecutorial case theories of
Lane, Burrell,
use various items, as examined in
, of circumstantial evidence. These
evidential items are placed into a narrative to establish the guilt of the
accused. A few observations
can be made from the outset. The narratives in
are constructed on a considerable amount of
circumstantial evidence, free from substantial contradictions, and able to
withstand attacks
by the defence. The same cannot be said for
This is indicative of a weak case theory impeding on the success of a no-body
murder prosecution. The legal narratives of the cases
will be explored in turn.
A Case Analysis: Lane
The Crown narrative regarding the murder of Tegan Lane was as follows. The
case theory established connections between Lane and the
circumstantial
evidence. These relationships were aimed at positioning Lane as the likely
‘villain’, the guilty party,
of the story. In totality, ‘the
Crown case relied upon an extensive and factually interwoven circumstantial
The circumstantial evidence was used to support the factual propositions of
opportunity and motive. Motivated by her fear of rejection
from family and
friends, Lane had a history of becoming pregnant and disposing of her children.
In the present case, Lane was also
concerned with continuing her sporting and
educational life, as well as keeping ‘her social life at its
This time her
pregnancy was brough to term. These ‘selfish’ fears motivated her
disposal of Tegan.
the child was not to remain in her care, Lane had made no preparations regarding
Tegan’s care after birth. Therefore,
Lane’s intentional disposal of
Tegan satisfied the requisite fault element
for murder. Beyond this, the
child was last seen with Lane. In the otherwise unexplained intervening hours
between her departure from
the hospital and arrival at her parent’s
residence, Lane ‘had the opportunity to kill
victimology, specifically the vulnerability of the child and inability to locate
the child, and opportunity, the Crown posited
that the child was dead and not
The defence rebutted this
The major argument
being that, in light of no direct evidence indicating the death of Tegan, the
child could be alive. According
to this narrative, Tegan was given into the care
of her natural father by Lane. This was supported by evidence of Lane lawfully
of previous pregnancies. Alternatively, if this rebuttal narrative was
rejected, the defence also directly attacked the prosecutorial
story. Namely, by
challenging the ability of the evidence to positively identify the death of
Tegan as the intentional and ‘deliberate’
Coherence was established by refuting the defence contradictions. The Crown
knew that they carried ‘an obligation of excluding
any reasonable
explanation or hypothesis inconsistent with
discredited the alternative narrative through evidence of
victimology.
The attacks on
the prosecutorial case were accounted for through evidence of Lane’s lies.
The lies told by Lane were created,
and perpetuated, because she ‘wished
to conceal the fact that she had murdered her daughter
The plausibility of the narrative was drawn through a process of elimination.
When considered in light of general human experience,
the narrative offered by
the defence was hard to accept because, as Whealy J put regarding the transfer
of Tegan’s care to
her father, ‘[i]t would be an unusual thing for a
mother to do’.
Therefore, the narrative constructed by the Crown better withstood the test of
plausibility.
To summarise, the strength of the
prosecutorial case theory can
be attributed to its adherence to narrative conventions and the sense of
certainty it imparted to the
factfinder.
B Case Analysis: Burrell
The Crown narrative regarding the murder of Whelan is one involving
‘motive, knowledge and
opportunity’.
According to the Crown, Whelan left the scene of her last known whereabouts
in a white Pajero 4WD. This vehicle was owned and driven
by the accused. This,
coupled with the unlikeliness of Whelan voluntarily disappearing, as deduced
from her victimology, leads to
the conclusion that she was dead. The fact that
she was last in the company of the accused leads to the belief that he was the
This establishes the physical element
of the offence.
The narrative then shifts to satisfying the requisite fault element of the
charge. The Crown placed the other evidential items ‘against
a background
of the appellant’s financial
difficulties’.
is depicted as a man desperately acting to remedy his impecunious situation,
going as far as to threaten acquaintances and
engage in conduct to commit fraud.
This then motivated the accused to engage in a ‘desperate move and that
desperate move was
kidnapping Mrs Whelan for a
relationship was evidenced by the accused’s future planning consistent
with an improved financial situation. As explored
earlier, intent is necessarily
linked to motive as the latter often gives rise to the
The ‘dot point’ evidence was also used to show intent, as well as
reinforce Burrell as the killer. These notes, as put
by the Crown, were drafts
of the ransom and/or plans of the
kidnapping.
narrative also provided a ‘suggested interpretation’ of these
It can be argued that
the Crown’s extrapolation of the ‘dot point’ evidence was to
avoid the possible heuristic
processing of the evidence in manner that
contradicted their narrative. It was noted, that ‘the Crown case at all
times remained
one where individual facts gained cogency from other facts in the
Therefore, to
establish plausibility, the Crown relied on the similarities between the ransom
note, the interpretation of the dot
point notes, and the murder plot
constructed.
The Crown case then turned to the ‘Goulburn call’ evidence. Now
knowing the ransom was written by the accused, it only
made sense for the
accused to have been the one to have made the call. This is evidenced by the
fact that the caller had knowledge
of the ransom note known only to a limited
number of people, and the accused making a call on the same day, and from the
same public
phone, as the offender.
Rather than offer an alternative narrative, the defence efforts focused on
‘poking holes’ in the prosecutorial case. The
defence case was that
there ‘was no, or insufficient, evidence to connect the appellant with the
disappearance’ of
However, each of these was successfully rebutted by the Crown. As a result,
the coherence of the prosecutorial narrative was maintained.
First, the defence
contended that there was no clear evidence proving Whelan got into the
Whelan, as argued by
the defence, walked to the left of the ramp, and therefore this was the cause of
the image of her person disappearing
from the security camera recording.
However, this scenario was easily struck down due to its implausibility. If this
had occurred,
then Whelan would have exited and progressed across Philip
There was nothing to
support this suggestion, and as the judgement noted, the ‘evidence is
entirely inconsistent with her movements
in the video
recording’.
Second, as regards to opportunity, the accused contended that he, at the time
of the alleged offence, had had a telephone conversation
with an acquaintance.
Beyond this, the accused claimed to have a back
which physically
impacted him at this time. He argued that, due to these incapacitations, it is
unlikely he carried out the crime.
The Crown contended that there was no
sufficient evidence regarding this call. In addition, the possibility of the
accused making
the call and being present at Parramatta was possible. The Crown
also relied on evidence of the accused’s physical activities
leading up to
the day of the offence, as well as a lack of response to his prescription for
medication, to discredit the severity
and/or existence of a back
The Crown case
painted these accounts as a false alibi and ‘part of a
smokescreen’.
Third, in regard to the ‘Goulburn call’ the defence posited that
there existed an inference consistent with the innocence
of the accused. Namely,
that the accused had made a call to his solicitor, from that public phone and at
that time. However, this
attack was already considered by the Crown, who argued
that this was not plausible as this ‘account was inconsistent with the
record of calls kept by the solicitor’s
C Case Analysis: Edwards
The narrative about the murder of Spiers is constructed to reflect those led
for the murders of Rimmer and Glennon. In essence, the
Crown’s narrative
is that ‘the similarity of the circumstances relating to the disappearance
of the three victims ...
establishes that they were killed by the same
The Crown’s narrative involved the killer, the accused, preying upon
young woman who were alone and inebriated in the Claremont
entertainment
Spiers, as outlined
by her victimology, was accepted by both sides as having died. As evidenced
through the Huntingdale, Hollywood
Hospital, and Karrakatta offence, the
accused, according to the Crown, possessed the knowledge and ability to
successfully subdue,
restrain and abduct
Therefore, the accused
was responsible for the abduction and murder of Spiers.
According to the Crown narrative, in response to emotional turmoil in his
personal life, the accused would violently attack unknown
women. This was the
case before the murders of Rimmer and Glennon, and therefore, an emotional
distress around Australia Day motivated
the accused to murder
This was indicative
of an intention on the part of the accused and established the requisite fault
The prosecutorial narrative was subject to substantial deficiencies. These
were successfully exploited by the defence. These also
significantly affected
the decision reached by the judge. The attack on the Crown narrative is as
First, the defence raised doubts as to the timeline of events posited by the
State. To have murdered Spiers, the accused would, due
to a work shift the
previous day, have had, as Hall J noted, ‘no realistic opportunity to
sleep for some 30 hours or
prosecutorial rebuttal was an assertion to the possibility of the accused being
a man ‘with unusual
In response,
the judge noted that it ‘may or may not be
This, arguably,
did not restore the verisimilitude of this part of the narrative, in turn,
negatively impacting the overall plausibility.
There was also little or no
evidence to support this notion. The chronology created by the Crown failed to
consider this contrary
This diminished the
coherence of the prosecutorial narrative as it was contradicted and imparted a
sense of incompleteness.
Second, the Crown was forced to accept, at the end of their case, that the
evidence was incapable of establishing the purported
The subtraction of
this evidence had significant impact on the overall prosecutorial narrative.
Motive can, as evidenced by
, be used to
characterise the accused as the ‘villain’ of the narrative. This is
occurrs because the motives underlying
the actions of an individual can affect
the perceived liability to be attributed to
Therefore, factfinders
are more inclined to attribute blame, and punish, those who act with ‘bad
In this case,
the prosecutorial motive was discredited. This, in turn, weakened the
plausibility of the accused being the blameworthy
party for the murder.
Third, the defence attacked the potential similarities between the Karrakatta
offence and Spiers’ murder. Unlike Spiers who
was murdered, the accused
did not, or make any attempt to, kill the victim of the Karrakatta
This, according to
the defence, was due to nothing but the intention of the accused to not do so,
as he ‘could have killed
her if he had wished to do
countered by arguing that the intention did exist, however circumstances arose
to inhibit the murder.
argument was rejected by the
factfinder.
In turn, the
propensity from this evidence relied on by the Crown was weakened.
Fourth, the Crown narrative plot detailing Spiers’ murder hinged on the
theory of the person killing her being the same as the
one who killed Rimmer and
To establish this,
the Crown relied on ‘broad factual similarities between the
disappearances’ of the
argument to proceed, the similarities must be ‘sufficiently cogent and
compelling’ as to exclude alternative
narratives explaining
The judge in this
instant did not find in favour of the prosecutorial narrative, holding the
similarities general, rather than striking,
As a result, an
alternative consistent with the innocence of the accused was a
possibility.
Therefore, this
part of the prosecutorial case was unable to persuade the factfinder into
acceptance of it.
Following this, it was noted that a body of propensity evidence alone was
unlikely to establish guilt.
Other items of evidence were needed to show the accused as having acted upon his
tendencies. As the other major items of evidence,
and subsequently their
narrative parts, were either rejected or carried insignificant weight, they were
unable to support the propensity
evidence and implicate the accused. Therefore,
the prosecutorial narrative constructed for
failed to persuade
the factfinder due to its lack of evidential items, and decreased coherency and
plausibility. This was not the
created a narrative that adhered to the expectations of the factfinders and was
able to maintain its sense of certainty in
the face of the defence’s
VI CONCLUSION
The absence of a dead body can be a challenging circumstance for
investigators and prosecutors, whether it be a lack of direct evidence
no-body murders have been tried, and successfully
prosecuted, in Australia.
These cases, though scarce, are instrumental in defining the practices, rules,
and norms guiding the prosecution
of no-body murders.
For the purposes of establishing the physical element of a murder, the
victimology of an individual is instrumental in evidencing
their death in the
absence of their body. The cases of
are indicative of this. In
victims were held to be dead due to the lack of life evidenced through a lack of
sightings of their person, contact with family,
and digital footprint. The
alternative proposition, of the victims having disappeared, was overcome by
deeming such an occurrence
to be out of character. In
, due to the
vulnerable state of the child and inability to locate the child in the care of
another person, the victim was established
as being dead.
These cases also demonstrate the deficiency in evidence, in particular direct
evidence, the absence of a body causes. In this situation,
prosecutorial cases of no-body murders must rely on circumstantial evidence. The
varying types of circumstantial evidence
can be used to discern the identity of
the murderer, for example by evidencing opportunity, as well as establish the
requisite fault
element, most effectively through evidence of motive.
However, on its own, each item of evidence in unlikely to establish the guilt
of the accused.
evidence in a circumstantial case must be looked at ‘as a whole’
rather than in a ‘piecemeal
Accordingly,
a successful prosecutorial case theory, as evidenced by
, requires a substantial, and varying, body of circumstantial
evidence. This evidence acquires meaning through the support of a coherent
plausible explanatory narrative. As demonstrated by
prosecutorial case will be jeopardised if it fails to account for alternative
narratives, theories, and contrary evidence, and
fails to support factual
propositions with evidence. All these deficiencies are further compounded by a
lack of items of evidence.
No-body murders are not a new phenomenon, however, they have, in recent
times, found greater interest in the public, media, and legal
sphere. Following
this, their potential effect on missing persons cases, and the willingness of
jurors to convict without a body,
prosecutorial pursuit of these cases is likely
to increase. Therefore, an understanding of the law developing in the area is
for the prosecution of perpetrators of murder, and in turn, justice
for their missing victims.
* Rumesha Kashif is a Canberra Law School graduate. The article is based on
the author&#82
s LLB Honours dissertation.
People v Manson
71 Cal App 3d 1
, 42 (1977).
Mark Findlay, Stephen Odgers
and Stanley Yeo,
Australian Criminal Justice
(Oxford University Press,
ed, 2014) 14. The offence of homicide, and its many forms, is
defined by state legislation: see, eg,
Crimes Act 1900
See Andrew Cornford,
‘Mitigating Murder’
(2016) 10(1)
Criminal Law and Philosophy
Fiery Cushman et al,
‘Simulating Murder: The Aversion to Harmful Action’ (2012) 12(1)
2; Pri Perera, Emina Canic and Elliot A Ludvig, ‘Cruel to
Be Kind but Not Cruel for Cash: Harm Aversion in the Dictator Game’
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review
See, eg, Findlay, Odgers and
Yeo (n 2); Thomas Crofts, ‘Two Degrees of Murder: Homicide Law Reform in
England and Western Australia’
(2008) 8(2)
Oxford University
Commonwealth Law Journal
See Rollins M Perkins,
‘The Corpus Delicti of Murder’
(1962) 48(2)
Virginia Law Review
See, eg, Claire Ferguson and
Kamarah Pooley, ‘Australian No-Body Homicides: Exploring Common Features
of Solved Cases’
Journal of Forensic and Legal Medicine
70; James Morton, ‘Evidence in “No-Body” Murder
(2006) 70(6)
Journal of Criminal Law
; Claire Ferguson
and Kamarah Pooley, ‘Comparing Solved and Unsolved No-Body Homicides in
Australia: An Exploratory Analysis’
(2019) 23(4)
Homicide Studies
Doug LePard et al,
‘Challenges in Serial Murder Investigations Involving Missing
(2015) 16(4)
Police Practice and Research
See Ferguson and Pooley,
‘Comparing Solved and Unsolved No-Body Homicides in Australia: An
Exploratory Analysis’ (n 7).
See, eg, Kylie Reale and
Eric Beauregard, ‘Body Recovery After the “First 48”:
Implications for Sexual Homicide
Investigations’
(2019) 23(2)
According to the Collins
Dictionary, the saying is used to ‘mean that someone who is dead cannot
reveal the truth about what
caused their death’: ‘Definition of
“dead men tell no tales”’,
Collins English Dictionary
<https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/dead-men-tell-no-tales>.
See LePard et al (n 8);
Reale and Beauregard (n 10).
For example, the value of
forensic evidence can be inferred from the fact that cases with DNA evidence in
Queensland are more likely
to be accepted for prosecution and reach court: Tom
McEwen and Wendy Regoeczi, ‘Forensic Evidence in Homicide Investigations
and Prosecutions’ (2015) 60(5)
Journal of Forensic Sciences
R Aparna and R Shanti Iyer,
‘Tears and Eyewear in Forensic Investigation: A Review’ (2020) 306
Forensic Science International
110055:1–9.
Ibid; Joseph A Prahlow et
al, ‘DNA Testing in Homicide Investigations’ (2017) 57(4)
Medicine, Science and the Law
Reale and Beauregard (n
Ferguson and Pooley,
‘Comparing Solved and Unsolved No-Body Homicides in Australia: An
Exploratory Analysis’ (n 7).
Social good refers to
products, services, and causes targeted at enhancing the wellbeing of humans at
large: Michàlle E Mor
Barak, “The Practice and Science of Social
Good: Next Generation Paths for Social Change” (2018) 28(2)
Research on Social Work Practice
Francis Paul Greene,
‘I Ain't Got No Body: The Moral Uncertainty of Bodiless Murder
Jurisprudence in New York After
People V. Bierenbaum’
(2003) 71(6)
Fordham Law Review
See, eg, LePard et al (n 8);
Reale and Beauregard (n 10).
Ferguson and Pooley,
‘Comparing Solved and Unsolved No-Body Homicides in Australia: An
Exploratory Analysis’ (n 7) 383.
See also Enzo Yaksic et al,
‘Detecting a Decline in a Serial Homicide: Have We Banished the Devil from
the Details?’
(2019) 5(1)
Cogent Social Sciences
Y Gloria Park, ‘Truth
as Justice: Legal and Extralegal Development of the Right to Truth’ (2010)
Harvard International Review
See, eg, Jeremy Sarkin,
‘Why Victimology Should Focus on All Victims, Including Missing and
Disappeared Persons’ (2019)
International Review of Victimology
See, eg, Thomas A DiBase,
No-Body Homicide Cases: A Practical Guide to Investigating, Prosecuting, and
Winning Cases When the Victim is Missing
(CRC Press, 2015).
See, eg, Megan Palin,
‘“No body” Murder Convictions Prompt Calls for Shake Up of
Australia’s Legal System’,
News.com.au
(online, 2 March 2016)
<https://www.news.com.au/lifestyle/real-life/news-life/no-body-murder-convictions-prompt-calls-for-shake-up-of-australias-legal-system/news-story/d19968b5c570d5e01a412663cba82215>;
Eliza Laschon, ‘“No Body, No Parole” Laws Give Murder Victim
Wade Dunn’s Fresh Hope’,
(online, 22 March 2018)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-03-22/no-body-no-parole-laws-already-having-an-impact/9569310>.
Services Act 2006
In Australia the prosecution
in a criminal trial is referred to as the ‘Crown Prosecutor’. The
article will use the term
‘Crown’ interchangeably with the term
‘prosecution’.
DiBase (n 25) 43.
See especially Ferguson and
Pooley, ‘Comparing Solved and Unsolved No-Body Homicides in Australia: An
Exploratory Analysis’
See, eg, ‘Murder
Conviction Upheld Despite Lack of Direct Evidence of Corpus Delicti’
(1961) 61(4)
Columbia Law Review
; Perkins (n 6); Francis Willmarth,
‘Criminal Law: Murder: Proof of Corpus Delicti by Circumstantial
(1960) 48(5)
California Law Review
; Steve Weinberg,
‘Missing and Presumed Murdered’
(1995) 81(9)
American Bar
Association Journal
; Gordon Linkon, ‘The Corpus Delicti –
Confession Problem’
(1952) 43(2)
Journal of Criminal Law, Criminology,
and Police Science
; Theodore Sachs, ‘Criminal Law: Proof of the
Corpus Delicti by the Use of Extra-Judicial Confessions’
(1950) 48(8)
Michigan Law Review
; M J S, ‘Corpus Delicti’
Michigan Law Review
; Greene (n 19); Artem M Joukov and Samantha
M Caspar, ‘Wherefore is Fortunato: How the Corpus Delicti Rule Excludes
Confessions, Helps the Guilty Avoid Responsibility, and Proves
Inconsistent with Basic Evidence Principles’
(2018) 41(3)
Journal of Trial Advocacy
; Peter C Bennet, ‘Corpuse Delicti in the
New York Law of Homicide’
(1957) 24(1)
Brooklyn Law Review
Michael E Wheeler, ‘Invitation to Murder?: Corpus Delicti,
Texas-Style’
(1989) 30(2)
South Texas Law Review
Moran, ‘In Defense of the Corpus Delicti Rule’
State Law Journal
; ‘Evidence: Proof of Particular’
Harvard Law Review
There are, however, two
research articles regarding no-body murders in Australia, however these are not
from the legal perspective
as they focus primarily on the investigation of such
cases and use quantative research: Ferguson and Pooley, ‘Australian
Homicides: Exploring Common Features of Solved Cases’ (n 7);
Ferguson and Pooley, ‘Comparing Solved and Unsolved No-Body
Homicides in
Australia: An Exploratory Analysis’ (n 7).
See Terry Hutchinson and
Nigel Duncan, ‘Defining and Describing What We Do: Doctrinal Legal
[2012] DeakinLawRw 4
(2012) 17(1)
Deakin Law Review
, 84. The doctrinal
research will aid in bringing to attention the ‘interplay’ between
the various legal doctrines and
elements present in no-body murder prosecutions:
Sanne Taekema, ‘Methodologies of Rule of Law Research: Why Legal
Needs Empirical and Doctrinal Scholarship’
(2021) 40(1)
and Philosophy
See, eg, Terry Hutchinson,
'Developing Legal Research Skills: Expanding the Paradigm '
[2008] MelbULawRw 33
(2008) 32(3)
Melbourne University Law Review 1065.
aggregation of the following hearing and judgement documents:
R v Keli Lane
[2010] NSWSC 1540
‘Lane [No 13]
Lane [No 18]
[2010] NSWSC 1545
Lane [No 18]
Keli Lane [No 24]
[2011] NSWSC 72
‘Lane [No 24]
v Keli Lane
[2011] NSWSC 289
R v Keli Lane
[2011] NSWCCA 157
Lane Appeal [2011]
[2013] NSWCCA 317
Lane Appeal [2013]
an aggregation of the following hearing and judgement documents:
Burrell v R
[2007] NSWCCA 65
Burrell v R’
Burrell v Regina
[2009] NSWCCA 163
Burrell Appeal
an aggregation of the following hearing and judgement documents:
The State of
Western Australia v Edwards
[2019] WASC 87
The State of Western
Australia v Edwards
The State of Western Australia v Edwards [No
[2019] WASC 282
Edwards [No 2]
The State of
Western Australia v Edwards [No 4]
[2019] WASC 418
Edwards [No
The State of Western Australia v Edwards [No 7]
Edwards [No 7]
Comparative research has
always had a role in the broader doctrinal paradigm: See Terry Hutchinson,
‘The Doctrinal Method:
Incorporating Interdisciplinary Methods in
Reforming the Law’
(2015) 8(3)
Erasmus Law Review
Charles Manga Fombad,
‘Comparative Research: Contemporary African Legal Studies’
Journal of Legal Education
It is also instructive to
note, that due to the dearth of research regarding no-body murders, most, if not
all, literature in this
area is of value. Therefore, articles that have not been
peer reviewed may be considered, though will not be given significant weight.
David Brown et al,
Criminal Laws: Materials and Commentary on Criminal Law and Process of New
South Wales
(Federation Press, 6
ed, 2015) 146.
Constitution
Greg Carne, ‘Detaining
Questions or Compromising Constitutionality?:
The ASIO Legislation Amendment
(Terrorism) Act 2003
[2004] UNSWLawJl 32
(2004) 27(2)
University of New South
Wales Law Journal
Criminal Code 1995
Criminal Code 1995
[2010] HCA 17
Constitution
Homicide is the generic
offence under which murder and manslaughter fall:
Crimes Act 1900
Grievous bodily harm is
defined to include the destruction of a foetus of a pregnant woman, any
permanent or serious disfiguring
of the person, and causing the contracting of
any grievous bodily disease: Ibid
(definition of ‘grievous bodily
s 18(1)(a).
s 18(1)(b).
Criminal Code Act
Compilation Act 1913
Criminal Code Act
Criminal Code Act
53) s 279. It should be noted that WA is a code jurisdiction and therefore
legislation guides most, if not all, criminal law there.
NSW, on the other hand,
is a common law criminal jurisdiction and for this reason, the criminal law is
partly covered by legislation,
but substantially governed by laws derived from
judicial decisions:
Australian Law Dictionary
‘codification’, ‘common law criminal jurisdiction’
Australian Law Dictionary
LexisNexis Concise
Australian Legal Dictionary
ed, 2015) ‘code
LexisNexis Legal Dictionary
103 and 111.
in reference to the elements of offences. The
Criminal Code Act
53), due to an absence of any specific language, uses ‘physical’ and
‘fault’ elements as codified in the
Criminal Code 1995
45). The elements henceforth will be referred to as the ‘physical’
and ‘fault’ elements.
Michael Gorr, ‘The
Actus Reus Requirement: A Qualified Defense’
(1991) 10(1)
Justice Ethics
; Douglas N Husak, ‘The Orthodox Model of the
Criminal Offense’
(1991) 10(1)
Criminal Justice Ethics
Meir Dan Cohen, ‘The
“Actus Reus” and Offences of “Situation”’
Israel Law Review
Gorr (n 57); Husak (n 57).
Nori pg 150 TxtBook.
Brown et al (n 42) 175.
18(1)(a). See also
Criminal Code 1995
(n 45) div 5.
Laura Spitz, ‘I Think,
Therefore I Am; I Feel, Therefore I Am Taxed: Descartes, Tort Reform, and the
Civil Rights Tax Relief
Act’ (2005) 35(2) 429, 434.
Fowler v Padget
[1798] EngR 47
(1798) 101 ER 1103.
See, eg, Colin Manchester, ‘The Origins of Strict
Criminal Liability’
(1977) 6(4)
Anglo-American Law Review
Wing Cheong, 'The Requirement of Concurrence of
in Homicide'
(2000) 2000(1)
Singapore Journal of Legal Studies
Criminal Code 1995
Ibid div 3.
For example, a person who
commits murder is liable to imprisonment for the term of the person’s
natural life:
(n 49) s 19A.
Prue Bindon, ‘The Case
for Felony Murder’
[2006] FlinJlLawRfm 9
(2006) 9(2)
Flinders Journal of Law Reform
Criminal Code 1995
45) s 13.1–13.2.
The material facts of the
case are summarised from the judgement of Whealy JA in
R v Keli Lane
The first name, as opposed
to the surname, of the victim will be used henceforth to avoid any confusion
with the name of the accused.
The material facts of the
case are summarised from the judgement of Beazely JA, and Grove and Howie JJ in
Burrell Appeal
The first name, as opposed
to the surname, of the Bernie Whelan will be used henceforth to avoid any
confusion with the name of the
The material facts of the
case are summarised from the judgement of Hall J in
Edwards [No 7]
38). For an in-depth recount of the material facts see: Tim Clarke,
(West Australian Newspapers, 2020).
Michael Chesterman,
‘Criminal Trial Juries in Australia: From Penal Colonies to a Federal
(1999) 62(2)
Law and Contemporary Problems
Doney v The Queen
[1990] HCA 51
Brown v The
[1986] HCA 11
(1986) 160 CLR 171.
John Jackson and Sean Doran,
‘Judge and Jury: Towards a New Division of Labour in Criminal
(1997) 60(6)
Modern Law Review
Vicki Waye, ‘Judicial
Fact-Finding: Trial by Judge Alone in Serious Criminal Cases’
[2003] MelbULawRw 16
(2003) 27(2)
Melbourne University Law Review
See Neal Ellis,
‘Saving the Jury Trial’ (2006) 23(2)
Waye (n 78).
Jodie O’Leary,
‘Inspiring or Undermining Confidence? Amendments to the Right to Judge
Alone Trials in the ACT’
(2011) 10(3)
Canberra Law Review
Ibid; Rebecca McEwan, John
Eldridge and David Caruso, ‘Differential or Deferential to Media? The
Effect of Prejudicial Publicity
on Judge or Jury’
(2018) 22(2)
International Journal of Evidence and Proof
Procedure Act 2004
The order for a judge alone trial was granted
due to the pre-trial publicity, technical and disturbing
nature of the evidence, and likely length of the trial:
Edwards [No 7]
See, eg, Daniel Givelber and
Amy Farrell, ‘Judges and Juries: The Defense Case and Differences in
Acquittal Rates: Judges and
(2008) 33(1)
Law and Social Inquiry
; Bornstein, Brian H and Edie Greene, ‘Jury Decision Making:
Implications For and From Psychology’ (2011) 20(1)
Current Directions
in Psychological Science
63; ‘Juror understanding of judicial
instructions in criminal trials’,
NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and
(Media Release, 29 October 2008)
<https://www.bocsar.nsw.gov.au/Pages/bocsar_media_releases/2008/bocsar_mr_cjb119.aspx>.
Givelber and Farrell (n 85)
For example, Australian
businesswoman Melissa Caddick has been pronounced dead in the absence of her
body. The police arrived at
this conclusion after her decomposing foot was found
400 kilometres from where she disappeared: Jessica Kidd, ‘Melissa Caddick
Dead, Police Confirm, After Campers Find Her Foot on NSW South Coast’
(online, 26 February 2021)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-02-26/melissa-caddick-found-dead/13195242>;
Australian Associated
Press, ‘Melissa Caddick is Most Likely Dead, NSW
Police Commissioner Says’,
The Guardian
(online, 8 March 2021)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2021/mar/08/melissa-caddick-is-most-likely-dead-nsw-police-commissioner-says>;
Finabar O’Mallon and Michael Pelly, ‘Fraudster Caddick’s Death
May Make It Easier to Recover Stolen Funds’,
The Australian Financial
(online, 26 February 2021)
<https://www.afr.com/companies/financial-services/remains-of-missing-fraudster-melissa-caddick-found-20210226-p57618>.
This was the case in the
death of Azaria Chamberlain. Though Azaria’s body was never located, the
clothes she was wearing were
found. Due to their heavily blood-stained state,
the court deduced that the child must be dead:
Chamberlain v R
See, eg, Weinberg (n
Lane Appeal
[23], [28], [258], [270];
R v Keli Lane
(n 36) [39].
Victimology is the study of
victims of crime:
The Oxford Dictionary of Sports Science and Medicine
ed, 2006) ‘victimology’.
Morton (n 7) 459; Moran (n
32) 826; Joukov and Caspar (n 32) 464.
Morton (n 7); John George
Van Meter, ‘Proof of the Corpus Delicti by Circumstantial Evidence Where
the Body is Never Found’
(1961) 63(2)
West Virginia Law Review
Jan W de Keijser, Evianne GM
de Lange and Johan A van Wilsem, 'Wrongful Convictions and the Blackstone Ratio:
An Empirical Analysis
of Public Attitudes'
(2014) 16(1)
Punishment and
Ibid; Wheeler (n 32).
JF Northey, ‘Murder:
Proof of Corpus Delicti’
(1952) 15(3)
Modern Law Review
[1952] NZLR 111.
See, eg, Geoff Newiss,
‘Estimating the Risk Faced by Missing Persons: A Study of Homicide Victims
as an Example of an Outcome-Based
(2004) 6(1)
International
Journal of Police Science and Management
; Sarkin (n 24).
See, eg, E Bonny, L Almond
and P Woolnough, ‘Adult Missing Persons: Can an Investigative Framework Be
Generated Using Behavioural
Themes?’ (2016) 13(3)
Investigative Psychology and Offender Profiling
296; Marianne James, Jessica
Anderson and Judy Putt, ‘Missing Persons in Austalia’ (2008) 353
Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice
See, eg, Nicholas R Fyfe,
Olivia Stevenson and Penny Woolnough, ‘Missing Persons: The Processes and
Challenges of Police Investigation
(2015) 25(4)
Policing and Society
Bonny, Almond and Woolnough (n 99); Erin Stewart, ‘Missingness: The Social
Realities of Physical Absence’ (2020) 28(4)
Illness, Crisis, and Loss
See Newiss (n 98); Fyfe,
Stevenson and Woolnough (n 100).
DiBase (n 25).
Claire Taylor, Penny S
Woolnough and Geoffrey L Dickens, ‘Adult Missing Persons: A Concept
(2019) 25(4)
Psychology, Crime and Law
See, eg, Bonny, Almond
and Woolnough (n 99).
Fyfe, Stevenson and
Woolnough (n 100); James, Anderson and Putt (n 99).
Stewart (n 100)398;
Bonny, Almond and Woolnough (n 99) 298.
Stewart (n 100) 392.
Author Erin Stewart holds
a doctoral degree from the University of Wollongong in Australia.
Stewart (n 100) 389. See
also Elisabeth Baumgartner and Lisa Ott, ‘Determining the Fate of Missing
Persons: The Importance
of Archives for “Dealing With the Past”
Mechanisms’
(2017) 99(2)
International Review of the Red Cross
Social exclusion
generally includes people that are, due to systemic reasons, are excluded from
engaging in economic, social and
political activities that other citizens in
society have access to allowing them to maintain an acceptable standard of
living: Laura
Kiepal, Peter J Carrington and Myrna Dawson, ‘Missing
Persons and Social Exclusion’ (2012) 37(2)
Canadian Journal of
Stewart (n 100) 389.
See, eg, Ferguson and
Pooley, ‘Comparing Solved and Unsolved No-Body Homicides in Australia: An
Exploratory Analysis’
Kiepal, Carrington and
Dawson (n 114) 138.
See, eg, Kiepal,
Carrington and Dawson (n 114).
The causal relationship
between going missing and these lifestyle characteristics is explored in depth
in Kiepal, Carrington and
Dawson (n 114). See also Boni Robertson and Catherine
M Demosthenous,
Young Aboriginal Females Reported Missing to Police:
‘Which Way for Prevention and Service’
(Report, December
Stewart (n 100).
Kenna Quinet, ‘The
Missing Missing: Toward a Quantification of Serial Murder Victimization in the
United States’
(2007) 11(4)
Homicide Studies
Thomas DiBiase is a
former United States Prosecutor.
DiBase (n 25) xv.
DiBase (n 25).
This was explicitly
Burrell Appeal
(n 37) [134].
Burrell v R
Ibid [318].
Burrell Appeal
Burrell v R
Medicare is the universal
health insurance scheme used in Australia to access health and hospital
services: Commonwealth of Australia,
‘Medicare’,
Government Department of Health
<https://www.health.gov.au/health-topics/medicare>.
Burrell v R
Burrell Appeal
(n 37) [34], [135].
Edwards [No 7]
[8], [730].
Edwards [No 2]
Christine Ham was the
mother of a friend of Sarah Spier.
Edwards [No 2]
Amanda Spiers was the
sister of Sarah Spiers.
Edwards [No 2]
38) [72]–[73].
The State of Western
Australia v Edwards
(n 38) [10];
Edwards [No 7]
(n 38) [8],
Edwards [No 7]
38) [2358].
Stephen J Morewitz,
Clinical and Psychological Perspective on Foul Play
International publishing, 2019) 66–8.
David Finkelhor and
Jennifer Dziuba-Leatherman, ‘Victimization of Children’ (1994) 49(3)
American Psychologist
173. Victimisation refers to the illegitimate
subjection of a person to a detriment as result of an act or omission of
LexisNexis Legal Dictionary
(n 55) ‘victimisation’.
Finkelhor and
Dziuba-Leatherman (n 146).
David Finkelhor,
‘The Victimization of Children: A Developmental Perspective’ (1995)
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry
117, 179–80.
Finkelhor and
Dziuba-Leatherman (n 146).
Finkelhor (n 148)
Finkelhor and
Dziuba-Leatherman (n 146) 176.
Ibid 177. The issue of
autonomy and its comparison to dependant women are noted in Finkelhor (n 148).
Finkelhor (n 148).
R v Keli Lane
Lane Appeal
Lane Appeal
[279]–[283].
See, eg, Eyal Zamir,
Elisha Harlev and Ilana Ritov, ‘New Evidence About Circumstantial
Law and Psychology Review
Young S Kim, Gregg Barak
and Donald E Shelton, ‘Examining the “CSI-Effect’ in the Cases
of Circumstantial Evidence
and Eyewitness Testimony: Multivariate and Path
(2009) 37(5)
Journal of Criminal Justice
Kevin Jon Heller,
‘The Cognitive Psychology of Circumstantial Evidence’
[2006] MichLawRw 31
(2006) 105(2)
Michigan Law Review
; Willmarth (n 32).
Zamir, Harlev and Ritov
Shephard v The Queen
[1990] HCA 56
(1990) 170 CLR 573
208 CLR 593
(n 75). See Stephen Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(Thomson Reuters, 15
ed, 2020) 355.
De Gruchy v R
[2002] HCA 33
(2002) 211 CLR 85
See Karen Ann Montee,
'Sufficiency of Circumstantial Evidence in Nebraska Civil Cases: What is the
(1981) 60(3)
Nebraska Law Review
Donald L Gaffney,
'Circumstantial Evidence Charge in Texas Criminal Cases: A Retrograde Doctrine'
(1977) 55(7)
Texas Law Review
Annie Cossins is an
Associate Professor of Law at the University of New South Wales, Australia.
Annie Cossins, ‘The
Legacy of the Makin Case 120 Years On: Legal Fictions, Circular Reasoning and
Some Solutions’
[2013] SydLawRw 29
(2013) 35(4)
Sydney Law Review
Chris N H Street and
Jaume Masip, ‘The Source of the Truth Bias: Heuristic Processing?’
(2015) 56(3)
Scandinavian Journal of Psychology
Cossins (n 167) 738.
168 ER 1136
; Gaffney (n 165).
Zamir, Harlev and Ritov
(n 158); Heller (n 160).
Zamir, Harlev and Ritov
(n 158); Heller (n 160).
Odgers (n 162) 355.
Hughes v The Queen
[2017] HCA 20
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Australian Law Dictionary
‘inference’;
LexisNexis Legal Dictionary
‘inference’.
R v McIntyre
[2000] NSWCCA 6
(2000) 111 A Crim R 211.
Chamberlain v R (No 2)
[1984] HCA 7
(1984) 153 CLR 521
Chamberlain
R v Hillier
[2007] HCA 13
(2007) 228 CLR 618.
Chamberlain
To be considered
reasonable the hypothesis must rely on more than mere conjecture:
[1911] HCA 66
(1911) 13 CLR 619
[1992] HCA 56
(1992) 175 CLR 495
[1975] HCA 42
(1975) 133 CLR
For more on the prosecutorial burden of proof see: Paul Ames Fairall,
‘Unravelling the Golden Thread: Woolmington in
the High Court of
Australia’ 5(2)
Bond Law Review
Criminal Code
(n 45) s 13.2;
Woolmington v DPP
[1935] AC 462. This is
especially important as it is fundamental principle of the Australian juridical
system, specifically in regard
to the presumption of innocence afforded to those
who stand accused:
Lee v The Queen
[2014] HCA 20
Momcilovic v The
(2011) 245 CLR 1.
Also, this does not necessarily require the
prosecution to exclude all possible hypotheses in advance, only ones capable of
reasonable doubt in the mind of the factfinder:
Andrew Ligertwood,
‘Can DNA Evidence Alone Convict an Accused?’
[2011] SydLawRw 21
(2011) 33(3) Sydney Law
Review 487.
The Queen v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
Edwards [No 7]
Whealy J noted that ‘the Crown Case is a circumstantial case’:
Lane [No 18]
(n 36) [4]. In the
case McClellan CJ and
Sully and James JJ noted ‘[t]he Crown case against the appellant was
entirely circumstantial’:
Burrell v R
(n 37) [5]. In the
case Hall J noted ‘[i]n this case the prosecution relies
upon circumstantial evidence’:
Edwards [No 2]
(n 38) [162].
The evidence to be
examined in this subsection has been extracted from:
Burrell v R
Burrell Appeal
Burrell Appeal
The Pajero on the CCTV
footage was observed as having a dirty rear windscreen. On inspection by the
police on 16 May 1997, the Pajero
owned by the accused also a dirty rear window:
Burrell v R
(n 37) [35].
Burrell v R
The evidence to be
examined in this subsection has been extracted from:
Lane Appeal [2011]
Lane Appeal [2013]
Lane [No 13]
See Andrew Palmer,
‘Guilt and the Consciousness of Guilt: The Use of Lies, Flight and Other
“Guilty Behaviour”
in the Investigation and Prosecution of
[1997] MelbULawRw 3
(1997) 21(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
[1994] QCA 1.
[1993] HCA 63
Edwards v The Queen
Lane Appeal [2011]
(n 36) [56].
Edwards v The Queen
Palmer (n 195).
Ibid. See, eg,
(1990) 55 SASR 321.
Virginia Fung was the
caseworker with the adoption agency appointed to Lane for the purposes of having
her child born May 1999 adopted
This was also referred to
as the ‘perpetuation’ of the lie:
Lane Appeal [2011]
Edwards [No 7]
(n 49) s 18(1)(a).
Leonard I Morgenbessen,
Ann W Burgess and Mark E Safarik, ‘Motive in a Triple Spree
(2008) 3(1)
Victims and Offenders
17 Edw IV 1, quoted in Lee Aitken, ‘Interpreting
R v Baden-Clay
“Discovering the Inward Intention”, or “what Lies Under the
[2016] UQLawJl 18
(2016) 35(2)
University of Queensland Law Journal
See, eg, Morgenbessen,
Burgess and Safarik (n 210).
[1974] UKHL 2
[1975] AC 55
LexisNexis Legal
(n 55) ‘motive’;
Australian Law Dictionary
55) ‘motive’.
See Jeremy Gans,
‘The Case of the Improbable Murder:
De Gruchy v R
Sydney Law Review
[2008] HCA 16.
This is in line with the
use of all circumstantial evidence which requires a guilty verdict only be
returned if the only reasonable
hypothesis to be drawn from the evidence is
inconsistent with the innocence of the accused:
See Richard D Friedman
and Roger C Park, ‘Sometimes What Everybody Thinks They Know Is
True’ (2003) 27(6)
Law and Human Behaviour
Edwards [No 7]
Burrell v R
Burrell Appeal
Ibid [10]–[11].
Ibid [12]–[14].
R v Keli Lane
Lane Appeal [2013]
(n 36) [111].
Ibid [267]. See also
Lane [No 13]
(n 36) [11].
It must be noted that
this evidence was initially submitted as tendency evidence:
Lane Appeal
(n 36). It is acknowledged that tendency evidence may have affected
case, however this form of evidence is beyond the scope of this
Ibid [119].
Edwards [No 7]
Edwards [No 4]
Edwards [No 7]
Edwards [No 4]
38) [77](h).
Edwards [No 7]
Australian Law Dictionary
(n 55) ‘propensity evidence’;
LexisNexis Legal Dictionary
‘propensity evidence’;
Edwards [No 7]
(n 38) [127];
Evidence Act 1906
s 31A(1)(definition
of ‘propensity
evidence’) (‘
Evidence Act
Pfennig v The
[1995] HCA 7
Australian Law
(n 55) ‘similar fact evidence’;
LexisNexis Legal
(n 55) ‘similar fact evidence’.
Kenneth J Arenson, 'The
Propensity Evidence Conundrum: A Search for Doctrinal Consistency'
[2006] UNDAULawRw 4
(2006) 8(1)
University of Notre Dame Australia Law Review
, 31–32. See
Edwards [No 7]
(n 38) [133].
Arenson (n 245).
Ibid 35; Mirko Bagaric
and Kumar Amarasekara, 'The Prejudice against Similar Fact Evidence'
(2001) 5(2)
International Journal of Evidence and Proof
, 75. See also
(1982) 44 ALR 449.
Sutton v The Queen
[1984] HCA 5
152 CLR 528
; David Hamer, 'Similar Fact Reasoning in Phillips: Artificial,
Disjointed and Pernicious'
[2007] UNSWLawJl 36
(2007) 30(3) University of New South Wales Law
Journal 609.
Evidence Act
242) s 31A(2).
Edwards [No 7]
See Wendy Harris,
‘Propensity Evidence, Similar Facts and the High Court’ [1995] 11
QUT Law Review
97; Arenson (n 245); Bagaric and Amarasekara (n 247);
David Hamer, 'The Structure and Strength of the Propensity Inference:
Singularity,
Linkage and the Other Evidence'
[2003] MonashULawRw 7
(2003) 29(1)
Monash University
See Arenson (n 245). See
also Ian Barker, ‘Circumstantial Evidence in Criminal Cases’ [2011]
Bar News: The Journal of the New South Wales Bar Association
mainly concerned similar fact evidence, Wendy Harris
argues that the decision tends to treat propensity evidence as requiring the
same admissibility test: Harris (n 251) 104–5.
See Harris (n 251).
‘rational’ can be defined here as ‘reasonable’: See, eg,
See, eg, Harris (n 251);
Harriman v R
[1989] HCA 50
(1989) 167 CLR 590.
A E Acorn, 'Similar Fact
Evidence and the Principle of Inductive Reasoning: Makin Sense'
(1991) 11(1)
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
The State of Western
Australia v Edwards (No 7)
[2020] WASC 339
A E Acorn is a Professor
of Law at the University of Alberta.
See Acorn (n 260) 67;
Hamer (n 251) 140.
See Bagaric and
Amarasekara (n 247).
Edwards [No 7]
Edwards [No 7]
These are extracted from
Edwards [No 7]
(n 38) [74].
All three victims were
described as being small in stature, with blond hair and a fair complexion aged
between 18 and 27:
Edwards [No 7]
(n 38) [74].
The victims disappeared
around the Claremont precinct area and all three offences occurred within a
14-month period:
Edwards [No 7]
Edwards [No 7]
Ibid [122].
See, eg, ibid [64].
Australian Law
(n 55) ‘case theory’;
LexisNexis Legal Dictionary
(n 55) ‘case theory’. See also Binny Miller, ‘Give Them
Back Their Lives: Recognizing Client Narrative in Case Theory’
Michigan Law Review
Give Them Back Their
’); Kimberly A Thomas, ‘Sentencing: Where Case Theory and
the Client Meet’
(2008) 15(1)
Clinical Law Review
(n 37) [145].
See, eg, Heller who
posits that an item of circumstantial evidence cannot ‘stand or
fall’ on its own: Heller (n 160)
Edwards [No 7]
Burrell Appeal
See eg, Binny Miller,
‘Teaching Case Theory’
(2002) 9(1)
Clinical Law Review
Teaching Case Theory
See Ibid; Phil Meyer,
‘Why a Jury Trial Is More Like a Movie Than a Novel’
(2001) 28(1)
Journal of Law and Society
; Kate Rossmanith, ‘The Problem of
Story: Criminal Evidence, Affect, and Sense-Making’ (2020) 17(4)
503. According to Taylor this has increased in the recent years:
Rebecca Taylor, ‘Integrating Legal Theory and Technique in
the Reporting
Class Curriculum’ (2014) 4(2)
Teaching Journalism and Mass
Communication
Jane B Baron and Julia
Epstein, ‘Is Law Narrative?’
(1997) 45(1)
Buffalo Law Review
See Miller, ‘Give
Them Back Their Lives’ (n 278).
See Lance W Bennett,
‘Rhetorical Transformation of Evidence in Criminal Trials: Creating
Grounds for Legal Judgement’
(1979) 65(3)
Quarterly Journal of Speech
Rhetorical Transformation of Evidence
Sarmas, ‘Storytelling and the Law: A Case Study of
[1994] MelbULawRw 8
(1994) 19(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
Laurie C Kadoch, ‘Seduced by Narrative: Persuasion in the Courtroom’
(2000) 49(1)
Drake Law Review
; Nancy Pennington and Reid Hastie,
‘A Cognitive Theory of Juror Decision Making: The Story Model’
(1991) 13(2–3)
Cardoza Law Review
519; Vicki L Smith,
‘Prototypes in the Courtroom: Lay Representations of Legal Concepts’
(1991) 61(6)
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
857; Givelber
and Farrell (n 85).
Lisa Kern Griffin,
‘Narrative, Truth, and Trial’
(2013) 101(3)
Georgetown Law
Lance W Bennett,
‘Storytelling in Criminal Trials: A Model of Social Judgement’
(1978) 64(1)
Quarterly Journal of Speech
Storytelling in
Criminal Trials
’). See also Richard L Wiener et al, ‘The
Psychology of Telling Murder Stories: Do We Think in Scripts, Exemplars, or
Prototypes?’ (2002) 20(1–
Behavioral Sciences and the Law
Griffin (n 289) 307.
Peter Heerey,
‘Truth, Lies and Stereotype: Stories of Mary and Louis’
[1995] NewcLawRw 2
(1996) 1(3)
Newcastle Law Review
See Griffin (n 289).
Lisa Kern Griffin is a
Professor of Law at Duke University.
Griffin (n 289) 310.
For a more detailed look
at heuristic processing see Cossins (n 167).
Kimberly YW Holst,
‘Non-Traditional Narrative Techniques and Effective Client Advocacy’
(2014) 48(2)
Law Teacher
See Susan Bandes,
‘Empathy, Narrative, and Victim Impact Statements’
(1996) 63(2)
University of Chicago Law Review
; Holst (n 300); Philip N Meyer and
Catlin A Davis, ‘Law Students Go to the Movies II: Using Clips from
Classic Hollywood Movies
to Teach Criminal Law and Legal Storytelling to
First-Year Law Students’
(2018) 68(1)
Journal of Legal Education
Corinna Kruse,
‘Legal Storytelling in Pre-Trial Investigations: Arguing for a Wider
Perspective on Forensic Evidence’
(2012) 31(3)
New Genetics and
299; Meyer (n 284).
Meyer (n 284).
Miller, ‘Teaching
Case Theory’ (n 283) 305. See also Kruse (n 303).
Kruse (n 303) 301. See
also Jackson and Doran (n 77).
See Floris Bex and Bart
Verheij, ‘Legal Stories and the Process of Proof’ (2013) 21(3)
Artifical Intelligence and Law
Corinna Kruse is a senior
lecturer at the Linköping University, Sweden.
Kruse (n 303).
Ibid 301–2.
See Bennett,
‘Rhetorical Transformation of Evidence’ (n 287)
See Pennington and Hastie
See Ibid. Griffin (n
Griffin (n 289).
Miller, ‘Teaching
Case Theory’ (n 283) 295.
See Richard A Posner,
‘Legal Narratology’
(1997) 64(2)
University of Chicago Law Review
Miller, ‘Teaching
Case Theory’ (n 283) 298.
See, eg, Rae Kaspiew,
‘Rape Lore: Legal Narrative and Sexual Violence’ (1995) 20(2)
Melbourne University Law
Bex (n 307) 257.
Kadoch (n 287); Heerey (n
See Meyer (n 284).
See Steven Cammiss,
‘Law as Narrative: Narrative Interpretation and Appropriation as an
Element of Theft’
(2019) 40(1)
Statute Law Review
Pennington and Hastie (n
See ibid; Cammiss (n
At the time of
publication, both Nancy Pennington and Reid Hastie were researchers affiliated
with the University of Colorado: Pennington
and Hastie (n 287).
See Miller, ‘Give
Them Back Their Lives’ (n 278).
Binny Miller is a
Professor of Law at The American University, Washington College of Law.
Miller, ‘Give Them
Back Their Lives’ (n 278) 499.
Miller, ‘Give Them
Back Their Lives’ (n 278).
Lane Appeal [2011]
(n 36) 157 [42].
Lane [No 13]
R v Keli Lane
(n 36) [36].
Lane [No 13]
This is extracted from
Lane [No 18]
Lane [No 13]
See, eg, ibid [44].
Lane [No 24]
Lane [No 13]
Burrell Appeal
Ibid [104].
See, eg, Morgenbessen,
Burgess and Safarik (n 210);
Burrell Appeal
Burrell v R
[105]. The suggested interpretation can be found at [105].
Burrell Appeal
Ibid [122].
Burrell v R
It is instructive to note
that the Appellant did sustain a back injury following a fall while unloading
hay in 1982 or 1983; this
could have led to ongoing back pain:
Burrell Appeal
(n 37) [77].
Ibid [176].
Ibid [172].
Edwards [No 7]
This established the
physical elements
of the murder. It is instructive to note that the first
two offences were held to be irrelevant to this theory. They could, however,
weight to the tendency of the accused attacking unfamiliar women: Ibid
See, eg, Ibid [64].
Ibid [631].
Ibid 339 [134].
See Janice Nadler and
Mary-Hunter McDonnell, ‘Moral Character, Motive, and the Psychology of
(2012) 97(2)
Cornell Law Review
Ibid 258. For more on
assessing blame, motives, and mental states see: Janice Nadler, ‘Blaming
as a Social Process: The Influence
of Character and Moral Emotion on
(2012) 75(2)
Law and Contemporary Problems
Edwards [No 7]
Ibid [548].
Ibid [2338].
Ibid [2360].
Ibid [2361].
Ibid [2370].
See, eg, Jeremy Gans and
Andrew Palmer,
Uniform Evidence
(Oxford University Press, 2
ed, 2014) 76.
Lane [No 18]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (718 KB)
PDF format (597 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter