URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbJlIntLaw/2024/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Roberts, Christopher M --- "Re-Covering Forced Labour: Colonial Foreclosures and Forgotten Potentials" [2024] MelbJlIntLaw 10; (2024) 25(2) Melbourne Journal of International Law 241
I INTRODUCTION
II A BRIEF BACKGROUND TO THE DEBATES OF THE 1920S
III SHAPING THE ANTI-COERCIVE LABOUR AGENDA: THE SLAVERY CONVENTION
A Gathering Momentum
B Initial Openness
C Foreclosing the Possibilities
D Conclusion: Colonial Governance Redeemed
IV THE INITIAL FORCED LABOUR DISCUSSIONS
A The Draft Report on Forced Labour: Pushing the Boundaries
B The Committee of Experts on Native Labour: Colonial Resistance
C Conclusion: Mixed Outcomes
V PREPARING THE FORCED LABOUR CONVENTION
A Framing the Debate
B Raising Freedom of Association
C Finalising the Convention
D Conclusion: Limits and Alternative Visions
VI CONCLUSION: EXPANDING OUR UNDERSTANDING OF FORCED LABOUR
RE-COVERING FORCED LABOUR:
COLONIAL FORECLOSURES AND FORGOTTEN POTENTIALS
Re-Covering Forced
CHRISTOPHER M
This article aims to reopen the question of the meaning of forced labour. It
undertakes this task through a detailed exploration of
the history of the 1930
Convention concerning Forced or Compulsory Labour (‘Forced Labour
Convention’) based on a careful
reading of the archival record. The
history of the Forced Labour Convention and its closely linked predecessor, the
1926 Convention
to Suppress the Slave Trade and Slavery, reveals that while the
processes leading to both were initially open-ended, colonial interests
ultimately produced sharp limitations in both texts. Recognising the colonial
foundations of contemporary international law in this
area should enhance our
openness to reconsidering how we think about coercive labour today. The
development of the Forced Labour
Convention did not only consist in limiting
dynamics, however. While they were pushed to the margins, this article also
three areas — conditions of work, conditions of life and worker
freedoms — in which the historical record helps to suggest
expansive, progressive understanding of forced labour than that which has become
commonplace. Reconstructing our approach
to forced labour, with attention to
these potentials, can revitalise the concept in the contemporary world,
overcoming close to a
foreclosure.
Civilisation for its ... defence requires industry. As soon as any civilised
country brings civilisation to a country in a lower stage
of advancement, it has
the right to require a certain degree of industry on the part of the peoples
which it is benefiting. ... The
primitive races cannot be educated without some
educational stage by which they can be induced to engage in industry. If rigid
are to be adopted, they will be found, in fact, unacceptable, and the
whole progress of civilisation throughout the world will be
Mr de Quevedo, Portuguese Government Representative, Twelfth International
Labour Conference (‘ILC’) (1929)
[While] we may try in whatever way we like to classify forced labour, to
defend it by fine expressions such as ‘the sacred trust
civilisation’ ... [it] is essentially a vicious system from its foundation
... [and the] legacy of an imperialist form of
government.
Mr Rao, Indian Workers’ Representative, Twelfth ILC (1929)
[F]orced labour [is] based on the conception of the innate inferiority of the
subject races ... on the contempt of a dominating people
for a subject people.
...Colonies exist for economic reasons. The colonising Powers that wish to
exploit their riches ... need labour
Hadji Salim, Dutch Workers’ Representative, Twelfth ILC (1929)
[T]he complete suppression of forced labour within ... five years ... [will]
lead to the abolition of colonisation itself
Blaise Diagne, French Government Representative, Fourteenth ILC (1930)
I INTRODUCTION
Forced labour is a term that sounds self-explanatory. A few moments’
reflection is likely to lead to doubt, however —
exactly what sort of
“force” is meant? Does it have to be direct physical compulsion? Do
other measures of compulsion
qualify? Do conditions of work — including
issues such as whether, when and how much workers are paid — factor in
if so, how? How and to what extent should one reflect on the background
circumstances in which different workers and potential workers
find themselves,
and on the manner in which those circumstances impact on, and limit,
individuals’ ability to choose their
work and to negotiate freely over its
terms? To look at the question the other way around, if the opposite of coercion
is freedom,
how much freedom must workers enjoy in order to not be understood as
Contemporary references to forced labour tend to imagine a tightly restricted
definition. The United States Department of Homeland
Security refers to
individuals who have ‘fall[en] into debt during the recruitment process
[and whose] employer ... takes unexpected
deductions from their pay’,
leading them into ‘debt bondage’, as well as individuals whose
conversations or interactions
with others are monitored, persons ‘living
in dangerous, overcrowded, or inhumane lodging’ and persons
physically or culturally’, while noting that none of
these factors is dispositive as to the existence of forced
Anti-Slavery International
provides the example of a domestic worker in Saudi Arabia who was prevented from
sleeping or going out,
threatened by police and assaulted due to alleged defects
in her work.
They further observe
that ‘[f]orced labour affects at least 27.6 million people
worldwide’ — a number that, despite
its scale, suggests a minority
problem, affecting less than 1% of the world’s working
population.
Meanwhile, Beate
Andrees, former head of the International Labour Organization’s
(‘ILO’) Special Action Programme
to Combat Forced Labour, has
cautioned against ‘exploitation creep’, meaning ‘label[ing]
certain practices as more
extreme than is legally accurate’, noting that
‘not all children who are exposed to hazardous work are
and not all workers who don’t receive a fair wage
The scope of the restricted definition that forced labour has taken on is
neither natural nor inevitable, however. As Robert J Steinfeld
and Stanley L
Engerman have observed, ‘the classification of labor into
“free” or “unfree” is an arbitrary
not a natural
classification. All “dependent” labor is elicited as the result of
pressures brought to bear on it, pressures
that are socially and legally
constructed’.
others, meanwhile, have suggested and deployed a flexible approach that
incorporates this insight, referring to a “continuum
exploitation” or the
These recent insights build in turn on Justice Holmes’ classic recognition
that choice and duress typically
a recognition that was
picked up and expanded by Robert Hale’s career-long emphasis on the
ubiquity of coercion in economic
This article explores these issues by going to one of their principal sources
— the process that led to the 1930
Convention concerning Forced or
Compulsory Labour
Forced Labour
New forms of exclusionary but also (to a certain degree) open-ended global
governance, combined with diverse, frequently brutal forms
of labour coercion
around the colonised world, formed the backdrop against which the
Labour Convention
negotiated.
Among other things,
this article foregrounds the deeply inegalitarian, racist and colonial context
in which the
Forced Labour Convention
(as well as its predecessor, the
Convention to Suppress the Slave Trade and Slavery
prepared. This was less simple a process than such a description might suggest;
while the history of the
Forced Labour Convention
is thoroughly colonial,
colonialism in the 1920s was far from homogenous, with frequent disagreements
and differences in perspective
both within and between colonial powers,
disagreements that opened up space for progressive advocacy. In addition, for
much of the
1920s, criticisms of colonial labour exploitation were on the rise
— without such critiques, it is unlikely a
Forced Labour Convention
would have been agreed at
While the 1920s were an era containing a degree of potential, therefore, and
diverse perspectives, core colonial interests remained
strong enough to ensure
the potential of the period would ultimately be cut short. The first major
contribution of this article is
to track in detail the manner in which many of
the possibilities inherent in the process of developing the international law of
labour in the 1920s were gradually foreclosed. This is a complex and
interesting history, in which an array of forces and interests
were at play,
states were learning to navigate new forms of international organisation for the
first time and a rich and growing
international public sphere meant great powers
had to work harder to control the narrative than they had had to before.
Uncovering the history of the
Forced Labour Convention
is important in
itself as it helps us better understand the dynamics that have shaped
international law over time. This history is
not explored here only out of
curiosity, however, but rather also out of a sense of responsibility to
clear-sightedly recognise past
injustices and to attempt to redress them today.
As the epigraphs at the beginning of this article suggest, and the long
that follows makes clear, forced labour was not merely a contingent
characteristic of the colonial context — it was, rather,
inextricably
linked with it.
address the colonial limitations inserted into the law on forced labour
therefore allows for the colonial past to continue
to exert influence
To a certain extent, legal history work is better suited to uncovering past
wrongs than to providing suggestions for ways in which
those wrongs can be
addressed. At the same time, legal history research is well placed not only to
uncover past abuses but also to
recover alternative voices which were silenced,
obscured or pushed to the margins by exclusionary processes during their time.
addition to following the processes through which discussions on coercive
labour in the 1920s were narrowed, this article identifies
three approaches to
forced labour that emerge from those discussions which, while limited or
excluded at the time, offer grounds
on which to progressively rethink the
concept today.
First, it is notable that many of the provisions of the
Forced Labour
concerned conditions of
These protections were
sharply limited, in that they were to apply only to those subjected to public
forced labour, which was allowed
to continue for a time, but required to
eventually end.
Because of this
limitation, the provisions in question were erased from the record by a 2014
protocol, on the understandable grounds
that they represented long past measures
intended only to be applicable during a period in which public forced labour was
while transitions to less coercive labour regimes were
From one perspective,
this erasure was positive, removing a reminder of international law’s
colonial history. From another
perspective, however, this erasure was
unfortunate, insofar as it helped to obscure the importance of improved
conditions of work
relative to any holistic efforts to combat coercive labour.
Rather than simply removing the provisions in question, in other words,
approach would have been to recognise that such provisions in and of themselves
constitute an important means through which
to combat labour coercion — as
the better conditions of work in general, the less the coercion to work will
exist in a system
as a whole.
The second and third progressive potentials contained in the original forced
labour discussions were the product of two sorts of non-state
actors in the
process: the Native Labour Section within the ILO and the workers’
delegates within the International Labour
Conference’s Committee on Forced
Labour. The Native Labour Section was a small team within the ILO headed by
The Section was not strongly supported — it never had more than three
members prior to the Second World
The Native Labour Section nonetheless played an important role in the
development of the
Forced Labour Convention
. Most significantly for
present purposes, the Native Labour Section was the driving force behind
inclusion of reference to the idea
of ‘indirect compulsion’, defined
in broad terms. The language on indirect compulsion was ultimately included in a
recommendation,
rather than the
Forced Labour Convention
, diminishing its
subsequent impact. While largely forgotten since, the text of the 1930
Recommendation concerning Indirect Compulsion to Labour
Labour (Indirect Compulsion) Recommendation
’) provides the coordinates
for a much more encompassing understanding of the limits of forced labour than
that presented by
Forced Labour Convention
The third progressive potential that can be recovered from the history of the
Forced Labour Convention
was voiced and strongly supported by
workers’ delegates within the Committee on Forced Labour of the
International Labour Conference,
given a place in the process thanks to the
ILO’s tripartite government, employer and worker representation
Among the workers’ representatives were several workers representing
colonised peoples in particular, including Mr Rao from
India, Hadji Salim from
the Netherlands/Indonesia and Dali Yahia from France/Tunisia — the first
time representatives of colonised
workers were given so substantial a role in a
process that impacted on them above all. These representatives compellingly
out the limited and unrepresentative perspectives and voices allowed into
the process. In addition, workers’ representatives
collectively forcefully
called for the proposed forced labour convention to recognise the right to
freedom of association. While
this suggestion was rejected at the time, in
putting it on the record, the workers helped to point the way towards a broader
of forced labour that might yet be adopted in future.
In sum, the original discussions on forced labour suggested the need to link
understandings of labour coercion to improved conditions
of work across the
board, to ensure background social and legal rules which minimise the coercion
under which individuals are driven
into the “labour market” and to
fully respect the right to freedom of association. In different ways, however,
suggestions were limited or excluded. Recovering and incorporating
these approaches into our understanding of forced labour today
will require a
more encompassing understanding than that which prevails. Considered
holistically, such a revised conception of forced
labour suggests the need to
deprioritise criminal enforcement measures targeting the most extreme forms of
abuse in favour of structural
reform measures which diminish coercion in labour
systems in general. Reform along such lines promises to tie human rights and
rights much more closely together, addressing a long drifting
apart that took place after the Second World
and to strengthen legal claims in support of freedom of association, social
welfare reforms and improved conditions of work by highlighting
that positive
measures in such areas are necessary not only on the basis of human rights
concerns but also in order to diminish labour
coercion. Perhaps most
fundamentally, adopting a broader understanding of forced labour can help revive
the powerful connection,
taken for granted by late 18
and early 20
century radicals, between freedom at
work and freedom in life as a
For the most part, this article proceeds chronologically. Part II provides a
brief background to the exploration of the processes
leading to the
Forced Labour Convention
followed. Part III explores the debates that led up to the
, a key predecessor to the
Forced Labour Convention
IV considers the ILO’s
Draft for a Report on Forced Labour
initial discussions of that report by the Committee of Experts on Native
Part V explores the final parts of the process that led to the
Forced Labour
, in which workers’ delegates were given a voice for the
first time. Finally, Part VI concludes by drawing out in more detail
areas of progressive potential that arose, but were limited or foreclosed,
during the forced labour discussions in the
II A BRIEF BACKGROUND TO THE
DEBATES OF THE 1920S
Forced Labour Convention
had a long pre-history. While it is
impossible to provide full coverage of that pre-history here, a few key details
provide important
context for the discussion that follows. On the international
level, the transnational campaigns against slavery in the 18
centuries constituted dramatic manifestations of concern with
“forced labour” and were aimed against one of the most
violent and
abusive systems of coercive labour ever
constructed.
The systems that
were put in place following the emancipations connected to those campaigns were
anything but “free”,
however, involving, among other measures,
recourse to forced unpaid “apprenticeships”, criminal punishments
for employment
law violations, the granting of police and judicial powers to
employers and their representatives, the frequent use of corporal punishment,
limitations on freedom of movement, indentured and indebted labour and oversight
by court systems that favoured employers and
Just as with slavery itself, these new forms of coercion were extensively
challenged, first and foremost by those subject to them,
as well as by
transnational advocacy networks. In the late 19
centuries, these challenges intensified. On the international
level, the atrocities committed in the Belgian “Congo Free State”
provoked a particularly forceful
Portuguese colonial labour practices also came in for heavy
In both these and other cases, private and colonial powers were accused not only
of employing coercive labour practices but also
of engaging in new forms of
slavery as expressed, for example, by the titles of Dwarkanath Ganguli’s
Slavery in British Dominion
concerning labour conditions in
British India, and Henry Nevinson’s 1906
A Modern Slavery
describing conditions in Portuguese
The creation of the League of Nations and the ILO in 1919, following the
First World War, provided a new stage on which further developments
place. The ILO’s creation was motivated by many factors, including
organisation and advocacy by workers and socialists
over the preceding decades,
as well as the perspective on the part of states with stronger workers’
rights protections that
ensuring uniform labour standards would reduce what
might otherwise constitute a national
disadvantage.
While the 1919
Constitution
of the International Labour Organisation
Constitution
’) set standards in several areas, it was determined that
those standards would not apply in the colonial context, a decision
through the inclusion of a “colonial clause” as art 35 of the
Constitution
The terms of the League of Nations also, meanwhile, helped to entrench
colonialism, including through the creation of the mandate
At the same time, and as discussed further below, the
Covenant of the League
required certain steps to be taken to address working conditions,
and the new mechanisms of international governance constructed provided
to which complaints might be brought, even if they were rarely effectively
addressed. While the overarching function of the
mandate system was to expand
and attempt to justify colonialism, the existence of the Permanent Mandates
Commission, for example,
also provided a forum in which colonial abuses could be
challenged and in which higher standards could be argued for, as Susan Pedersen
On the ground, meanwhile, forced labour was at a high point in the interwar
period, with increasingly extractive regimes utilising
a wide variety of
different coercive laws and practices to construct railroads, roads and
harbours, including in West, South and
Several reports were
published and submitted to both the League of Nations and the ILO in this
period, including relative to punitive
taxation, forced labour, corporal
punishment, rape and murder in Portuguese Angola and Mozambique, the Belgian
Congo, French Cameroon
and Togo, Liberia, New Guinea, the Dutch East Indies and
Bad conditions
continued throughout the decade — as the ILO itself observed in 1944,
while ‘[t]he use of direct compulsion
to provide labour for private
employers had long fallen into disrepute’, normative condemnation did not
translate into consistent
practice — rather, ‘[c]oncessionary
companies imposed forced labour for their own purposes, and in places officers
the administration were expected to encourage the labour supply for European
employers’.
The background to the debates of the 1920s, in short and in sum, included an
international campaign against slavery of long standing;
extensive deployment by
colonial powers of coercive labour on the ground in practice; the frequent
criticism of those practices,
by those subjected to them as well as European
activists, including on the grounds that they constituted forms of slavery; and
recent creation of a new institutional terrain in which international law
might be developed. Given this confluence of factors, it
is unsurprising that
the 1920s witnessed dramatic developments in the international law governing
coercive labour. The precise manner
in which those developments took place,
however, was far less predictable.
III SHAPING THE
ANTI-COERCIVE LABOUR AGENDA:
THE SLAVERY CONVENTION
This Part considers how the development of standards on coercive labour came
to be placed on the agenda of the international community,
how debates over
slavery and other forms of coercive labour initially evolved and how the key
terms of the
Slavery Convention
were decided. Initial openness on several
key questions was ultimately replaced, primarily on the initiative of the United
by narrower, more conservative conclusions. In addition to exploring
the narrowing of slavery’s definition, the discussion
highlights the
colonial mindset that shaped much of the process, the introduction of the idea
of indirect compulsion and state representatives’
references to the
broader, justificatory idea of development.
Both “slavery” in particular and labour conditions in general
were on the agenda of the League of Nations from its foundation
Convention Revising the General Act of Berlin, 26 February 1885, and the
General Act and Declaration of Brussels, July 2 1890
of St Germain-en-Laye
’), which was primarily focused on ending the
First World War with regards to Austria and formally dissolving the
Austro-Hungarian
Empire, also required parties to ‘endeavour to secure the
complete suppression of slavery in all its
Article 22 of the
Covenant of the League of Nations
, which established the mandate system
— a new mode of governance established for various territories previously
by defeated powers — required the ‘prohibition of abuses
such as the slave trade’ by the mandatory
Article 23 required all
member states to ‘endeavour to secure and maintain fair and humane
conditions of labour for men, women
and children, both in their own countries
and in all countries to which their commercial and industrial relations
When the mandates
were established, they were divided among what came to be known as
“A”, “B” and “C”
The terms of both
“B” and “C” mandates were later interpreted to require
that mandatory powers prohibit ‘forced
or compulsory labour, except for
essential public works and services and in return for adequate
remuneration’.
Another clause required mandatory powers to ‘protect the natives from
abuse and measures of fraud and force by the careful
supervision of labour
contracts and the recruiting of
As the above reveals, concern with conditions of work, in both the
metropolitan and colonial worlds, was extensive in the early 1920s.
process that ultimately led to both the
Slavery Convention
Forced Labour Convention
was kicked off on 6 September 1922, when Sir
Arthur Steel-Maitland, the representative of New Zealand, referring to reports
in Abyssinia, noted that there was ‘every reason to believe
that there has been a considerable recrudescence of slavery in
Steel-Maitland
called on the Assembly ‘to refer to the appropriate Committee the question
... in order that it may consider
and propose the best methods for combating the
Initially, in other
words, there was an attempt to direct attention to coercive labour committed
outside the European colonial context.
The Sixth Committee subsequently produced a draft resolution calling for a
report on ‘the question of
In October 1922,
the Secretary-General of the League of Nations sent a letter to member states
requesting information on slavery
in the territories they
controlled.
The information that
was forthcoming, including information submitted by two non-governmental
organisations, the Anti-Slavery and
Aborigines Protection Society and the
Bureau International pour la Défense des Indigènes
highlighted issues in both non-colonised and colonial states, broadening the
potential terrain of
discussion.
On 14 March 1924, the Council of the League created the Temporary Slavery
Commission.
The Temporary Slavery Commission consisted of eight “independent
experts”: the former and contemporaneously British,
French, Portuguese,
Belgian and Dutch colonial administrators Frederick Lugard, Maurice Delafosse,
Alfredo Freire d’Andrade,
Albrecht Gohr and Mr van Rees; Commandant
Roncagli, head of the Italian Geographical Society; Harold Grimshaw, the head of
the Diplomatic
Division of the International Labour Organization; and Louis
Dante Bellegarde, Haiti’s delegate to the
The majority of the
committee, in other words, were former or current participants in colonial
governance. This body of experts in
colonial governance was given a wide
mandate: to address ‘[s]ystems of compulsory labour, public or private,
paid or unpaid’
as well as ‘[m]easures taken or contemplated to
facilitate the transition from servile or compulsory labour to free wage labour
or independent
production’.
The Temporary Slavery Commission had its first meeting in July 1924. The
first issue on the Commission’s agenda was how to define
and set about its
work. Initially, the Commission adopted an encompassing vision: Lugard proposed
a broader scope that would cover
not only slavery but also ‘ancillary
forms of unjustifiable restriction of personal liberty’, with attention to
and employment should be structured in the colonial context generally
While no firm agreement
was reached, Lugard’s proposal set the tone.
As its work developed, the Commission referred to a range of situations
understood to constitute slavery or be closely related thereto,
‘domestic slavery’, ‘predial slavery’, the
‘[p]ledging or pawning of individuals for debt’,
‘peonage’, ‘serfdom’ and
‘servitude’.
The Commission also accepted ‘[c]ompulsory labour’ as within its
mandate, referring specifically to ‘[c]ompulsory
labour, paid or unpaid,
for public or private works, or as payment of
‘compulsory labour’ was initially presented as a type of situation
‘analogous to slavery’, after an
intervention by van Rees, it was
re-presented as a distinct
Overarchingly, the
Temporary Slavery Commission’s report on its first session made clear the
broad view it had of the scope
of issues it intended to cover, referring to
‘various practices in restraint of human
At its subsequent meeting the League Assembly approved the manner in which
the Temporary Slavery Commission had defined its
Fridtjof Nansen, a
Norwegian diplomat and the rapporteur of the subcommittee tasked with
considering slavery, noted that the Temporary
Slavery Commission had confronted
the difficult fact that ‘[t]here are several possible conceptions of [the]
meaning [of slavery]’.
While Nansen supported the idea of a distinction between slavery and forced
labour, he defined ‘slavery proper’ in terms
very different from
those ultimately adopted, suggesting that it should be understood as ‘the
deprivation of individual liberty
not as a punishment but as an
institution’.
Beyond this,
he referred to other ‘practices restricting human liberty, such as, for
example, forced
At the same session Mr Bonamy, the Haitian representative, launched a direct
attack on colonial states’ attempts to separate
the slavery and forced
labour issues. Bonamy emphasised that ‘colonial officials too often show
but little sense of justice
or humanity in their relations with natives’,
at times being ‘convinced of the natural and incurable inferiority of the
black man and of the absolute necessity of treating him with
brutality’.
Bonamy further
emphasised that ‘[t]he system of forced labour, which still obtains in the
majority of the colonies, cannot
be allowed to continue’ and referred to
that system as ‘almost undisguised
Mr Buxton, the representative of the British Empire, also addressed the Fifth
Buxton framed forced
labour as closely connected to ‘a great economic
On the one hand,
‘in the modern world’ there was a ‘desire and ... need to
develop and to exploit [colonial territories]
and their products to meet the
needs of the white, more advanced
On the other hand,
Buxton cautioned that in the ‘great drive towards the development, for the
whites, of the potentialities
of the tropical areas, there is unquestionably a
danger that the interests of the native labourers may be subordinated to the
of the white
employers’.
therefore, for an approach characterised by ‘utmost sympathy for the
native labourer who, as we all know, has no
one to represent him in this
Assembly, who cannot speak for
Buxton’s position was on the progressive end of the colonial spectrum
at the time.
To a contemporary
reader, the racism of Buxton’s speech will be immediately apparent. More
subtly, in framing the issue in
terms of ‘development’, and in
referring to ‘a great economic problem’, Buxton was also supporting
and helping
to advance a discourse that would help to legitimise a certain
degree of coercive labour, as discussed further below.
The Temporary Slavery Commission’s second session took place in July
1925. The Commission was still undecided as to the precise
meaning of slavery,
considering as relevant factors not only whether an individual might be sold but
also their social status, their
legal status and the rights they
The Commission concluded that in certain circumstances situations of
indebtedness might ‘degenerate into slavery’ as
Whether or not, to what extent and how forced labour was to be included within
the scope of the Commission’s investigations
into slavery were also up for
debate. Lugard defined ‘the objects of th[e] Commission’ broadly as
including ‘practical
measures for establishing liberty and freedom
throughout the
In line with this, he suggested that ‘forced labour was an integral part
of the question of slavery, in all its
Bellegarde took a similar line, recalling that the
Convention of St
Germain-en-Laye
referred to ‘slavery
in all its forms
and arguing that among the ‘disguised forms of slavery [was] what was
called forced
While Lugard was successful in obliging the Commission to address forced labour,
how it was to be addressed was more contentious.
In general, Lugard, Delafosse
and Grimshaw were united in pushing a relatively progressive line, based on the
approach required in
the “B” and “C”
Van Rees, supported by d’Andrade, pushed back,
resulting in a compromise
The Commission took a progressive approach in another area as well,
addressing what would come to be referred to as “indirect
compulsion”. Part of the motivation to address the issue appears to have
been linked to critiques of British colonialism in
particular. Articles in the
British press suggested that Kenyans were subject to ‘indirect
compulsion’ exerted by the
taxes they were required to
These taxes, it was
reported, resulted in ‘forced labour’ that constituted ‘a form
of slavery’.
included the issue in the text he prepared for the Temporary Slavery
Commission’s second
and after some back and
the text adopted indicated ‘that forms of direct or indirect compulsion
the primary object of which is to force natives into
private employment are
The Temporary Slavery Commission was less progressive on another front,
however. Grimshaw attempted to challenge the carving out of
an exception that
allowed forced labour when imposed as a penal sentence by pointing to what he
understood to be a particularly egregious
example, that of forced labour imposed
as a collective
punishment.
The former and current colonial governors had little sympathy for this
suggestion, however. Lugard observed that many British territories
had and used
such laws, referring to them defensively as ‘a matter of internal
legislation’.
echoed the point, arguing that ‘this question concerned at one and the
same time law and politics’ and that
the Commission should not ‘make
any recommendation in regard to repressive or disciplinary measures taken in
respect of native
populations’ as ‘[s]uch measures might be the
necessary consequence of special circumstances, and the Commission might
to be disarming the Government in its task of maintaining
discussions came close to recognising the close linkage between coercive labour
and colonial power as such, that is, the
colonial governors who dominated the
Temporary Slavery Commission immediately shut the conversation down.
At the end of its second session, the Commission called for a new
anti-slavery convention to be adopted, returning the slavery issue
to the League
Foreclosing the
Possibilities
Surprisingly, despite its strongly colonial composition, the Temporary
Slavery Commission demonstrated willingness to adopt a broad
understanding of
slavery, and to understand its anti-slavery mandate as requiring a vigorous
condemnation of forced labour. The potential
inherent in the Temporary Slavery
Commission’s discussions was quickly foreclosed on the interstate level,
however. The Sixth
Committee commenced its consideration of ‘the question
of slavery’ on 8 September
Britain took the initiative, presenting a draft resolution and protocol on the
While this might have at
first appeared a progressive step, driving the process forward, it was in at
least equal measure a regressive
one: by taking control of the process, the
British government sought to ensure narrow, limited approaches to the definition
and the rules governing forced
The first area in which the protocol’s conservative nature was apparent
was in its definition of slavery. The protocol introduced,
for the first time in
the process, a key element that has persisted to the present day, defining
slavery as ‘a status in which
one person exercises a right of property
over another’.
narrowness of this definition was only slightly attenuated by art 2, which
called on states to ‘[p]rovide for the eventual
emancipation of all slaves
in their respective territories, and also for as speedy an elimination of
domestic and other slavery as
social conditions will
The protocol was also conservative on forced labour. It declared:
The signatory States, recognising the grave evils that may result from the
employment of forced labour, except for essential public
services, engage that,
where it is necessary for special reasons to admit the employment of forced
labour, they will take all necessary
precautions, particularly where the
labourers belong to the less advanced races, to prevent conditions analogous to
these [sic] of
slavery from resulting from such
employment.
In short, the draft suggested ‘grave evils’ would not arise from
forced labour for essential public services; allowed
it to be deployed
‘for special reasons’, presented by the definition as existing above
and beyond ‘essential public
services’; and suggested that the main
concern that should be borne in mind in the context of forced labour was
it from developing into ‘conditions analogous to these [sic] of
slavery’, not more.
Subsequent discussions within the League went some way towards addressing the
British draft’s conservative language. First,
the League subcommittee
tasked with developing the protocol rebranded it a
convention.
The subcommittee also broadened the definition of slavery, defining it as
‘the status
or condition
of a person
over whom any or all of the
powers attaching to the right of ownership are
Article 2 was also broadened, with the relevant part expanded to require states
to ‘bring about progressively the disappearance
subcommittee also introduced progressive amendments to the language on forced
labour, though the text still failed to outright
prohibit forced labour for
private purposes.
While more forceful than the British proposal, the draft convention was still
weak in the eyes of many and was criticised as such
in the Sixth Committee,
including due to the fact that forced labour for private purposes was not
directly outlawed, resulting in
The Sixth Committee
presented the draft convention to the Assembly on 26 September 1925. Viscount
Cecil, the British representative,
defended the draft’s stance on forced
labour on the grounds that ‘[i]n uncivilised or semi-civilised countries
demand [for forced labour] must necessarily be and obviously is much more
frequently made than in civilised
countries’.
argued further that those suggesting the convention did not go far enough were
making the perfect the enemy of the
representative, Mr Montigny, took an even more assertive stance, challenging
empires’ critics by asserting that
it was only ‘owing to the
civilising action of the Colonial Powers that the terrible curse of slavery has
been brought to an
end’, while suggesting that colonial empires bore a
‘heavy material burden’ which they only adopted in the interest
‘the work of
civilisation’.
The final decision was delayed until the following year. While there was some
debate as to the definition — Mr Louwers, the
Belgian delegate, for
instance, suggested that slavery be defined as ‘the state of a person who
has not the enjoyment of his
full natural rights’ — no changes were
The language of art 2 was slightly amended to refer to ‘the
of slavery in
and amendment was also made to the provisions on forced labour, emphasising that
forced labour for private purposes was only to be
recognised for a
‘transitional’
Despite some
resistance, the Committee adopted an accompanying resolution in support of a
stronger position as well, stating that
‘[t]he Assembly, [w]hile
recognising that forced labour for public purposes is sometimes necessary, [i]s
of opinion that, as
a general rule, it should not be resorted to unless it is
impossible to obtain voluntary labour and should receive adequate
remuneration’.
Seventh Assembly considered and approved the convention, the Sixth
Committee’s report and its recommended resolutions on
25 September
Conclusion: Colonial
Governance Redeemed
As the above account demonstrates, the restrictive definition of slavery
ultimately adopted was not the only outcome that might have
been agreed. At
various moments, participants suggested that the object of focus should be all
measures impacting on ‘liberty
that slavery
should be defined in such broad manners as ‘the deprivation of individual
liberty not as a punishment but as an
institution’,
alternative, as ‘the state of a person who has not the enjoyment of his
full natural rights’;
and that forced labour was nothing but a ‘disguised form of
That a more restrictive definition was adopted was the direct result of
British involvement. This accorded with other aspects of the
process, including
its initial focus on Abyssinia and various statements by the colonial actors
involved, including the frequent
reference to ‘civilised’ and
‘uncivilised’ countries. These different aspects all sat firmly
within the traditional
patterns through which colonial powers attempted to use
anti-slavery discourse to expand and legitimise their power, while shutting
critiques. In this context, Montigny’s eulogy to empire’s virtues at
the Sixth Assembly was merely a particularly
blatant example of this ethos.
Even more disquieting and effective were other manners in which colonial
powers managed to shut down or reframe the process. Perhaps
at no point was the
foundational importance of violence to colonialism more clearly exposed than
when Lugard and Delafosse defended
collective punishment. Reflection on the
issue surfaced a theme generally submerged throughout the discussions —
the connection
between forced labour and public order governance. As Lugard and
Delafosse’s endorsement of collective punishment revealed,
whatever the
willingness of the colonial figures given a prominent role in the process to
imagine forms of paternalistic humanitarian
improvement, that tolerance quickly
ran out where colonial rule itself was threatened. As Delafosse put it,
collective punishment,
including via forced labour, was necessary for
‘maintaining order’, and hence it was not to be
challenged.
The possibility
of exploring the close connection of such underlying violence to coercive labour
in the colonial context in general
was thus foreclosed.
The debates on slavery also touched on a new ground on which some were
attempting to justify empire in the period, the idea of
“development”.
This constituted a particularly effective form of
justification, insofar as references to “development” were broadly
appealing and seemed to justify some degree of suffering along the way. At the
same time, Buxton’s reference engaged in a form
of obscurantism typical in
this context: avoiding specifying in any detail exactly who would benefit, and
who would suffer, from
any particular instance of labour coercion.
Despite the above criticisms, it should be noted that the process which
resulted in the
Slavery Convention
was not without its achievements. The
more restrictive definition of slavery initially proposed was limited by later
changes, including
the amendments that broadened the definition to refer to
‘the status or condition of a person over whom any or all of the powers
attaching to the right of ownership are
insertion of the requirement to abolish ‘slavery in all its forms’
in particular.
Convention’s stance on forced labour was less than advocates hoped, that
forced labour would be addressed at all
was still a victory, the result of
inside pressure from Lugard and Grimshaw and outside pressure from the
Anti-Slavery and Aborigines
Protection Society and in the British press. This
IV THE INITIAL FORCED
LABOUR DISCUSSIONS
This Part considers the initial discussions on forced labour. It foregrounds
the extensive open-endedness of the process and several
positive components
thereof, including the broad agreement on the importance of providing for a
range of labour protections, and
the support, advanced by Grimshaw and the
Native Labour Section in particular, for the idea of indirect compulsion. At the
this Part foregrounds the manner in which, while participants’
views differed, those differences were circumscribed within
a narrow, colonially
defined frame, encompassing conservatives who believed in the need to compel
labour to teach “natives”
“civilisation” and
industriousness on the one hand, and progressives who suggested certain forms of
labour coercion were
necessary in order to “develop” colonies on the
The Draft Report on
Forced Labour: Pushing the Boundaries
Attention to forced labour continued in the mid-1920s, thanks not least to
the efforts of Indian representatives, including Narayan
Malhar Joshi, who
called on the ILO to study labour in Asian countries in 1925, and Lala Lajpat
Rai, who called for an inquiry into
‘native’ labour conditions in
Africa and the Americas in
In July 1927, a new body, the Committee of Experts on Native Labour, was
convened to consider the
At least as important as the discussions of the Committee of Experts on Native
Labour, however, was the document which structured
those discussions. That
document was the
Draft for a Report on Forced Labour
, prepared by the
ILO’s Native Labour Section.
The bulk of the report documented the manner in which forced labour was
deployed and regulated across colonial
The report took a strong stance on forced labour for private employers, stating
clearly that it ‘should not be permissible’
circumstances’.
The report took a more complicated stance relative to forced labour compelled by
public authorities, however, noting forced labour
might be justified where
‘the work to be carried out’ was ‘essential’ or
‘necessary’, including
in ‘[c]ases of emergency’ in
particular.
The most important section of the report was ch VII, entitled
‘Principles Underlying the Regulation of Forced Labour’,
out manners in which such forced labour as continued to be conducted might be
made more humane.
Regulations
suggested pertained inter alia to whom might be subjected to forced labour; to
workers’ health and diet; to the
necessity of habituation periods for
difficult work; to conditions of work, including how far workers might be
removed from their
hours per day (eight); to the need for compensation in cases of accident
sickness; to in what periods and for how long workers might be required to
engage in forced labour; and to their ability to make
The report also
suggested that workers should receive adequate remuneration, defined as a sum
‘not less than the ruling rate
in the district from which they come or in
the district in which they are employed (whichever be the
Broadly, as
all of this suggests, the report was framed in a way that encouraged stronger,
rather than weaker, governments. This
was made even clearer at times, with the
report calling for ‘the extension of administrative control’, the
of the ‘quality of the administrative staff’, the
‘strengthening of the judiciary machinery’ and the strengthening,
‘if necessary, of the law ... [and] penalties’ pertaining to illegal
compulsion of forced
The report also contained substantial discussion of indirect compulsion, an
important component part of the forced labour discussions,
as noted above, and
one for which the Native Labour Section was fairly directly responsible.
Indirect compulsion was classified under
four headings: ‘[r]ecruitment by
Government officials’; ‘[d]irect taxation’; ‘[v]agrancy
and ‘[r]estriction of lands open to native
As the report put
it, ‘[d]irect compulsion is ... not the only means of obtaining
Rather, labour might also be acquired ‘by indirect means’, through
which labour that was ‘theoretically voluntary’
would ‘in fact
[be] made compulsory by the artificial creation, intentionally or otherwise of
certain conditions, such as deprivation
of land, vagrancy regulations, pressure
on tribal authorities,
On the subject of
taxes, the report observed that ‘[t]here have been cases where the
taxation imposed upon native populations
has been devised with the express
intention of forcing them into employment in order that they might earn the
money necessary to
concluded that such taxes constituted ‘a method of instituting forced
labour for private employers ... [that] should
be condemned equally with the
direct forms of compulsion for this
also addressed the ‘[d]eprivation or restriction of land’, which it
grouped together with the ‘prohibition
or restriction of cultivation or of
cattle-owning’.
report put it, the ‘common effect’ of such policies was ‘to
diminish the opportunities which are offered
to individuals to provide for
themselves in ways to which they are accustomed, and thus to force them into the
labour market’.
The report also highlighted vagrancy law provisions in South West Africa,
Kenya and Southern Rhodesia.
The report further addressed proto-apartheid policies under the indirect
compulsion heading, observing the manner in which ‘the
segregation
(“native reserve”) policies adopted in Kenya and South West Africa
... are bringing difficulties in their
train’, including
‘impoverishment, or even famine and
depopulation’.
vagrancy and pass law provisions were criticised on the grounds that they were
aimed at ‘the creation of a labour
supply at the disposal of white
employers’,
on the grounds that they had the effect of ‘plac[ing] ... individual[s]
... not in the employment of another person
(or of the State) in a
disadvantageous position in regard to’ employed
As with its other
discussions of indirect compulsion, the fact the Native Labour Section tackled
vagrancy and pass laws was positive.
The Native Labour Section ultimately lost
its nerve, however. It was willing to conclude that where ‘the definition
... [was] so wide as to include the whole of that part of a
population which is not in employment’ such provisions should be
from the law, as such provisions ‘bec[ame] a legal but indirect form of
compulsion to labour’.
At the same time, and in a plainly problematic manner, speaking once again to
the context of the 1920s, the report accepted that
some ‘[v]agrancy laws
are necessary, as, no doubt, are some forms of “pass” laws, where
the policy of the administration
is that known as
“segregation”’.
In addition, the report took issue with one frequently encountered
justification for forced labour over the preceding decades, challenging
termed the ‘stubborn opinion’ among some colonial authorities
‘that man’s duty to work can best be
inculcated upon a native by
measures of
compulsion’.
the report generally endorsed the broad mode of reflecting on colonialism and
labour contained in a recent Belgian investigative
committee report on the
That report had
suggested that ‘[s]ocial policy and economic policy are inseparable’
and further that ‘[t]he task
of civilising the peoples must be financed,
supported and remunerated by the economic returns of the Colony, while the
economic prosperity
of the Colony depends on the physical, intellectual and
moral progress of its
At the same
time, the Belgian report cautioned against the adoption of ‘a policy of
economic development ... [that] make[s]
greater demands upon the peoples
concerned than they are able to meet by voluntary
In endorsing
the views expressed in the Belgian report, the Native Labour Section’s
report aligned itself with the more progressive
colonial viewpoint against a
more traditional, conservative colonial position.
In sum, the Native Labour Section’s report contained proposals pushing
in different directions. The emphasis it placed on conditions
of work was
valuable. Its emphasis on indirect coercion was even more progressive still,
suggesting a broad understanding of the
nature of coercion in society. Other
parts of the report, however, such as its endorsement of the developmental
defence of colonialism,
while on the progressive end of the colonial spectrum,
were still firmly within the colonial worldview — imagining that
colonisation
existed to ‘civilise’ through the beneficent
paternalism of imposed social and economic policies.
The Committee of
Experts on Native Labour: Colonial Resistance
Former Temporary Slavery Commission members Lugard, Gohr, van Rees,
d’Andrade and Grimshaw were all reunited in the Committee
of Experts on
Native Labour. Lugard was joined by Selwyn Fremantle, another former British
colonial official with experience in India.
Delafosse was replaced by Martial
Merlin, who was joined by Camille Lejeune (‘Director of Colonial
Companies’). There
were also German, Japanese, Spanish and South African
appointments, Freiherr von Rechenberg, Nobumi Ito, Pedro Saura del Pan and
Taberer (‘Native Labour Adviser to the Transvaal Chamber of Mines, Native
Recruiting Corporation, Limited, and Witwaters
and Native Labour Association,
A primary issue for the committee was the definition of forced labour. At its
first session, a definition proved too difficult to
At its second session, in December 1928, the committee agreed on a definition
with little debate. Forced labour was defined as ‘[a]ll
work or service
which is exacted under menace of any penalty for its non-performance and for
which the worker concerned does not
offer himself voluntarily’ —
essentially the same text ultimately included in the
Forced Labour
In addition, while much time was spent on the details, the committee was
entirely in support of the idea that a range of rules aimed
at improving
conditions of work should be put in place relative to populations subjected to
forced labour.
For the most part, the discussions of the committee, especially at its more
conclusive second session, were dominated by more conservative
voices, owing in
significant part to the fact Lugard was unwell and hence unable to attend that
This played out
relative to several issues. First, discussion took place on whether forced
labour for private purposes should be
abolished immediately. The Anti-Slavery
and Aborigines Protection Society had pressed hard for such an outcome, and
while the Committee
of Experts on Native Labour had resisted that position at
its last session, Lugard had led support for it in the
In Lugard’s absence, Merlin was able to challenge this position
uncontested, arguing that an immediate end to forced labour
might have negative
consequences, including potentially ‘caus[ing] revolution in some
countries’.
close connection between coercive labour and repressive sociopolitical control
that had appeared briefly in the Temporary
Slavery Commission’s discussion
of collective punishment once again showed up, this time being defended in
positive terms by
one of the committee’s most conservative members.
Merlin and Lejeune were also successful in challenging language indicating
‘that officials ... should be prohibited from putting
constraint upon the
populations under their charge to work for private
employers’.
suggested this was a problem as, in his view, in practice, officials in several
colonies in Africa ‘had failed to make
natives understand that work was an
obligation’, leading to ‘natives [understanding that they had]
permission to remain
Lejeune argued
that the work of the Committee of Experts on Native Labour had already
‘been interpreted by the natives to mean
that they need not work’
and suggested that ‘a Convention [that] prohibited officials from even
seeming to put pressure
on the natives’ would lead to the
‘endanger[ment]’ of ‘the whole of colonial
development’.
support of Taberer,
French delegates were able to have the relevant language amended to read:
‘Do you agree that whilst it is the duty of officials
Administration to encourage the populations under their charge to engage in some
form of labour, they should not be permitted
to put constraint upon them to work
for private employers?’
Thus Merlin, Lejeune and Taberer were able to muster at least some support for
the more traditional colonial justification of forced
The French and South African delegates did their best to push back on the
subject of indirect compulsion as well. Taberer objected
to the language
suggesting that taxation might be used to compel labour on the relatively
unsubtle grounds that he supported such
compulsion.
Lejeune objected to the proposed language on vagrancy laws as well, arguing that
‘[v]agrancy was on the increase in the French
colonies and was becoming a
serious problem’ and that ‘the natives in question were, as a rule,
disturbing elements ...
[who] created all the difficulties in colonial
undertakings’.
some debate, the Native Labour Section’s suggestion that states should
refrain from ‘trea[ting] persons not in
wage-earning employment as
vagrants liable to enforced
employment’
replaced by a much vaguer call for states not to ‘extend[] abusively the
generally accepted meaning of
Merlin only
dropped his forceful pushback against the language of indirect compulsion in
general, moreover, following Grimshaw’s
assurance the language in question
would only take the form of a recommendation, not inclusion, in the intended
convention.
While Merlin was doubtless the most significant colonial conservative,
Lejeune was the most unfiltered in his remarks. In addition
to the statements
recounted above, Lejeune suggested that ‘[t]oo much attention had perhaps
been devoted to the natives’
interests by the Office, and the employers
not sufficiently
considered’;
potential ‘desertion by natives’ should be addressed with measures
designed ‘to ensure’ that native
workers ‘fulfilled’
‘obligations’;
and that ‘[o]wing to the present state of native mentality, it was
necessary to say quite clearly that natives should be encouraged
and that ‘[u]nless this were done, natives would interpret any decision
taken by the Committee as according
them the right to remain
“Director of Colonial Companies” was, in short, a frequent source of
the most unvarnished, racist sorts of
colonialist perspective.
Conclusion: Mixed
The Committee of Experts on Native Labour’s discussions of a potential
forced labour convention involved similar dynamics to
the Temporary Slavery
Commission’s discussions of the
Slavery Convention
unsurprisingly, given their similar composition, even down to some of the same
individual participants. First, the Committee
of Experts on Native
Labour’s discussions made clear the committee members’ uncertainty,
both individually and collectively,
as to the meaning of “forced
labour”. Inability to agree on a definition at the first session was
replaced by quick agreement
on a definition at the second, however. Why exactly
a definition was ultimately adopted with so little challenge cannot be
ascertained
with certainty from the record but was likely due to the elasticity
and ambiguity of the terms that were adopted, which enabled multiple
understand them as they wished.
The colonial mindset of the participants was even more apparent in the
Committee of Experts on Native Labour’s discussions than
it had been in
the Temporary Slavery Commission’s discussions, thanks to the greater
prominence of conservative colonial voices
in the committee’s discussions.
The conservatives were able to weaken the anticipated convention in several
ways, including
by resisting the immediate abolition of forced labour for
inserting a reference to the official duty ‘to encourage ... populations
... to engage in some form of
and weakening
the language condemning the imposition of taxes, deprivation of access to and
restrictions on the use of land and the
use of vagrancy laws. The arguments
advanced in support of these positions were rarely based on claims they did not
constitute forms
of compulsion to work but rather on the polar opposite
position: that compulsion to work — in short, forced labour —
Temporary Slavery Commission’s discussions, the underlying connection
between coercive labour and public order also
emerged on occasion and was not
taken as a ground to question the nature of colonial public order but rather as
a justification for
limits to anti-forced labour measures, as when Merlin
suggested that an immediate end to forced labour might ‘cause revolution
in some countries’
when Lejeune observed that vagrancy laws were necessary in order to tackle
‘disturbing elements ... [who] created all the
difficulties in colonial
undertakings’.
Despite such limitations, the early stages of the process that led to the
Forced Labour Convention
were not without normative value. Much of the
Committee’s discussions was devoted to regulations designed to ameliorate
improve conditions for forced workers, which ultimately made up a
substantial portion of the treaty adopted. At least equally as
importantly,
while watered down and consigned to a recommendation, rather than to the treaty
itself, Grimshaw was able to preserve
the reference to various forms of indirect
compulsion from total elimination.
V PREPARING THE
LABOUR CONVENTION
This section explores the discussions that took place at the International
Labour Conference and within its Committee on Forced Labour
on the scope of the
Forced Labour Convention
. As with earlier processes both conservative and
progressive colonial positions were on display, which imposed substantial
limitations
on the text ultimately produced. At the same time, important
substantive guarantees survived the negotiations, including numerous
guaranteeing enhanced conditions of work for forced labourers, as well as
recommendations calling on states to avoid indirect
compulsion. The most notable
aspect of the final stage of the proceedings was the contribution of
workers’ delegates, however,
including several representing colonised
territories in particular. The workers’ delegates challenged the manner in
which forced
labour had previously been discussed, and unified around a call
that the right to freedom of association be guaranteed within the
Labour Convention
Framing the
The ILO shared its updated report on forced labour, along with the draft
proposed text (in the form of a questionnaire) relative to
forced labour, at the
June 1929 International Labour
Conference.
finally addressed an issue that had been ambiguous throughout the process: was
the intention to develop standards that
would apply to all states equally, or to
target conditions in colonial and analogous states in particular? The report for
time firmly adopted the former position, suggesting that there was no
‘valid reason why any ... Convention or Recommendation
... ultimately
adopt[ed], should not be perfectly general in [its] terms and [its]
application’.
reference of the convention was universalised, however, there was no meaningful
reflection on whether this should lead
to amendments to its proposed terms,
which had almost entirely been prepared with the colonial context alone in mind.
The International Labour Conference commenced its discussions on forced
labour on 3 June 1929.
opening of the deliberations contained emblematic articulations of both the more
conservative, traditional colonial mindset,
and the more “modern”,
liberal justification for colonialism. Mr de Quevedo, a Portuguese state
delegate, provided the
first, suggesting that
[c]ivilisation for its own defence requires industry. As soon as any
civilised country brings civilisation to a country in a lower
advancement, it has the right to require a certain degree of industry on the
part of the peoples which it is benefiting.
This does not imply forced labour
obtained by force, but history shows that it does necessarily imply some measure
of constraint
to labour. The primitive races cannot be educated without some
educational stage by which they can be induced to engage in industry.
rules are to be adopted, they will be found, in fact, unacceptable, and the
whole progress of civilisation throughout the
world will be
threatened.
Other government delegates took a similar line: Granville Ryrie, an
Australian state delegate, for instance, in defending Australian
use of forced
labour in Papua New Guinea, argued it was necessary because the ‘natives
are improvident and
Quevedo’s remarks were especially notable for how unguarded they were,
however — making clear his personal support
for what, while he termed it
‘constraint to labour’, was clearly in essence forced labour.
The more sophisticated colonial line was advanced by Mr Cayen, a Belgian
employers’ representative, who referred to the ‘complementary’
duties of colonial governments to ‘rais[e] the moral, intellectual and
social level of the peoples entrusted to their care’
and to ‘giv[e]
full effect to the latent prosperity of [the] countries’ under their
Von Rechenberg,
present as a German state delegate, put a similar point in even more flowery
language, suggesting that the task of
the Committee of Experts on Native Labour
had been ‘[t]o consider the principles of humanity and the needs of
material and
moral development, and to reconcile these ideas with the necessity
of economic
development’.
Rao, from India, the first workers’ delegate to take the floor,
advanced a very different perspective. Rao took aim at de Quevedo,
[w]e may try in whatever way we like to classify forced labour, to defend it
by fine expressions such as “the sacred trust of
civilisation” ...
[it] is essentially a vicious system from its foundation ... [and the] legacy of
an imperialist form of
government.
Rao condemned the ‘theory of trusteeship’ as well, which he
suggested had, over the past century and a half in India,
allowed ‘the
trustee ... [to] grow[] steadily richer and more prosperous at the expense of
Rao’s next remarks went further still, underscoring the extent to which
the struggle against forced labour was an anti-colonial
struggle. Rao observed
that ‘in discussing this question of forced labour we have not amongst us
an adequate number of representatives
from the coloured peoples who are most
affected by this
‘[C]oloured’ workers, Rao went on, were ‘being denied even our
legitimate rights’.
also drew a connection between labour conditions and political repression,
observing that it was important in dealing with forced
labour ‘not [to]
forget the atrocities which have been committed in various parts of the world
and which seem to be inseparable
from forced
While Rao did
not explicitly call for self-government, the connection between self-government
and workers’ rights was implicit
in his remarks.
Salim, a workers’ representative for the Netherlands, raised similar
points at a later stage in the proceedings as well. Salim
suggested that
‘forced labour was based on the conception of the innate inferiority of
the subject races’ and ‘on
the contempt of a dominating people for a
subject people’; referred to the ‘abuse[s]’ and
‘reprisals’
taken by European powers against subject peoples; called
out members of the committee for their reference to the ‘laziness’
and lack of education of subject peoples; and noted that ‘there was no
single representative of’ many of the peoples
discussed to raise their
cause in their own voice.
Salim further observed that while Europeans celebrated their own revolutionary
independence struggles, they refused to understand
the struggles of colonised
peoples in the same terms, demonstrating ‘a lack of feeling of
solidarity’ and ‘a lack
of feeling of common
The workers’ delegates used their inclusion in the process to support
and criticise various components of the text under consideration
as well. On the
positive side, workers’ delegates emphasised the importance of recognising
indirect compulsion. Rao observed
that ‘every ... European militarist
Power has to answer for a long record of deeds in various parts of the world in
of colonial development’, including ‘vagrancy laws, ...
polic[ies] of land reservation, ... levying of poll taxes, [and]
the methods ...
[of] recruit[ing] labour for building railways’, all of which he condemned
as ‘so many devices for perpetuating
the system of forced
British workers’ delegate, meanwhile stressed the importance of
‘security of native lands, just labour laws
and fair taxation’ to
the avoidance of forced
Workers’ delegates challenged various limiting aspects of the broad
frame being adopted too. Mr Wong, a Chinese workers’
delegate, took on the
developmentalist defence of forced labour, noting that it was used in practice
to obscure systems which ‘promote[d]
the economic development of the few
at the expense of the exploitation of the majority and at the expense of human
Mr Jouhaux, a
French workers’ delegate, called for the exceptions recognised by the
draft materials to be removed, arguing
that while ‘[i]t may be said that
forced labour should not be permitted except for exceptional cases’, if
such an approach
were adopted, ‘we shall find that the exceptional cases
are becoming the rule’.
Mr Furtwängler, a German workers’ representative, suggested the
proposed definition of forced labour was too limited but
was cut off before he
was able to elaborate his
Raising Freedom of
Association
In addition to general discussions before the full International Labour
Conference, more detailed deliberations were conducted by
the Committee on
Forced Labour, a special body charged with further elaborating the proposed
It was in the Committee
on Forced Labour that the workers made their most ambitious proposal. Dali
Yahia, a French workers’
delegate of Tunisian
background,
argued that while
he was in favour of the regulations called for, they ‘ran the risk of
being ineffective, unless the workers
concerned enjoyed freedom of
association’.
Yahia’s position was resisted by government and employers’
representatives. The chairman suggested that the issue ‘did
not appear to
be necessarily associated with the question actually under
discussion’.
a Belgian employers’ representative, recalled that even when discussing
all workers, the International Labour Conference
‘had not been able to
arrive at positive decisions on the question of freedom of
association’.
Yahia’s position was backed by other workers’ delegates, however.
Mr Backlund, a Swedish workers’ representative,
argued that ‘the
progress of ... peoples towards emancipation was intimately bound up with the
establishment of the right of
association’
‘the problem of replacing forced labour by other forms of the organisation
of labour would demand the creation of
a new system for which the existence of a
trade union organisation would be extremely
Topalovitch, a workers’ representative from the Kingdom of the Serbs,
Croats and Slovenes, similarly argued that ‘[t]here
was a certain danger
that laws would not be applied unless some pressure was exercised by the persons
interested in their application’
and that ‘[i]t was therefore
essential that native workers should be placed in a position to assist in the
application of any
Convention on forced labour which might be adopted, and they
could only do this if they enjoyed freedom of
association’.
The contentiousness of the subject led to a vote on the issue being delayed
until the day after it was first
By the following day,
the workers’ group had formulated its proposed language in the following
terms: ‘in order to facilitate
the abolition or limitation of forced
labour, it would be useful to encourage or at least not to hinder the efforts
made by the workers
to organise themselves freely in the territories which are
at present subject to a system of forced
The language
was formulated in modest terms — referring to encouragement and
non-hindrance, rather than obligation. Despite
that, it was voted down by 21
votes to 12, with all the government and employers’ representatives (with
the exception of Mr
Das, the Indian employers’ representative, who
abstained) voting against, while all the workers’ representatives voted
The debate on whether freedom of association should be understood as a
necessary part of any programme designed to combat forced labour
was the most
dramatic and consequential part of the discussions undertaken by the Committee
on Forced Labour. The Committee considered
several other important issues as
well, however. Particularly noteworthy was Ross’s suggested language
that “collective punishment laws” under which an entire community
may be punished for misdemeanours committed by a few
of their number should
contain no provision for forced labour by the community as one of the methods of
punishment.
The proposal was adopted without
opposition.
limitation was an important and valuable one, in retrospect the most notable
aspect of the question was its frank recognition
that collective punishment was
a colonial reality — testifying to how little opposition there was at the
time to the widespread
and systematic injustice inherent in such an approach.
The attitude of the times was underscored by Mr Vernon, a British government
representative, who observed ‘that he had seen very satisfactory results
of collective punishment recently in
Palestine’.
Following the conclusion of the Committee on Forced Labour’s work, the
Workers’ Group prepared a minority report. The
report was critical of the
approach to forced labour adopted in general. In particular, the minority report
suggested the text in
question had ‘tend[ed] towards a kind of
codification of Forced Labour. The international regulation which it suggests
not be satisfactory; it would embody, besides vague and insufficient
solutions, so many exceptions that the abuses to be suppressed
perpetuated’.
The report was also critical of the majority’s refusal to recognise the
right to freedom of association in particular. As the
minority report put
It seems to us impossible that this decision should not be reconsidered. On
the one hand, we are told that the end which justifies
even the worst methods of
colonisation is to raise the cultural and economic level of backward or
primitive peoples. On the other
hand, these people are refused an effective
element of development and defence. ... [F]reedom to organise should be allowed
both because it is recognised to be urgently necessary in certain cases,
and because in others it would constitute a safeguard for
After the Committee on Forced Labour’s discussions, the subject
returned to the full International Labour Conference. Several
delegates took the occasion to raise the issue of freedom of association one
last time. Rao argued that:
The only guarantee that forced labour will some day be suppressed is to grant
freedom of association; otherwise even if you set up
most detailed and precise
regulations for controlling and supervising the use of forced labour they will
remain a dead-letter.
Mr Ma, a Chinese workers’ delegate, similarly argued that ‘an
immediate guarantee ... can only be provided by the principle
of freedom of
association’, while Mr Kupers, a Dutch workers’ delegate, emphasised
the extra vulnerability of workers
to coercive labour conditions when they did
not have trade unions, or government representatives, to look out for their
Finalising the
The Twelfth International Labour Conference ended with a decision to consider
the issue again at the Fourteenth International Labour
Conference, to be held in
Once again the
Committee on Forced Labour was convened and discussed several issues of note.
First, the representatives spent a significant
amount of time debating how much
time states should be given to comply with their proposed
obligations.
Some remarkably pro-colonial, pro-forced labour positions were articulated in
this debate. Blaise Diagne, for instance, a French
government representative,
that the complete suppression of forced labour within a delay of five years
... would lead to the abolition of colonisation itself,
with the result that the
progress which the Workers’ Group hoped to obtain would recoil against the
populations aimed at being
Other government representatives similarly pushed hard against a brief
temporal limitation followed by the obligation to completely
suppress forced
In the end, the
British government’s suggestion that the matter should be considered again
after five years was adopted.
In other words, while forced labour was coming under increased normative
condemnation, public forced labour would be allowed to continue
indefinite period even for states party to the
Forced Labour Convention
— a remarkably clear sign of how limited colonial states’
willingness to take on the issue was.
Second, on the positive side of the register, an important exchange took
place in relation to the workers’ proposal that the
reference to
‘under the menace of any penalty’ in the definition of forced labour
be augmented by a reference to ‘the
loss of any rights or
privileges’ as well.
The proposal was objected to somewhat histrionically by Mr de Heusch, a Belgian
government representative, who suggested it would
‘result in the
destruction of all social life in civilised
countries’.
Ironically,
the amendment was withdrawn after the Committee on Forced Labour indicated its
agreement with Vernon, who noted that
he understood ‘the words
“under the menace of any penalty”’ to have ‘the widest
possible scope’,
which would only be limited by the addition of another
phrase — recognising, in other words, that ‘the loss of any rights
or privileges’ should already be understood as the sort of penalty that
would constitute forced
This exchange
provided some basis, at least, on which future progressive development of the
definition of forced labour might be
For the most part, however, the text that had been broadly agreed over the
previous years was preserved throughout the 1930 discussions.
While several
workers’ delegates took the occasion of the final discussions before the
full International Labour Conference
to criticise limitations in the proposed
convention,
the conference as
a whole supported it, and on 28 June 1930 the
Forced Labour Convention
was adopted.
Conclusion: Limits and
Alternative Visions
In some ways, the discussions of the Committee on Forced Labour and within
the International Labour Conference that marked the conclusion
of the process
leading to the
Forced Labour Convention
were similar to previous
discussions. Overtly colonial perspectives continued to be unabashedly advanced,
including, for instance,
At the same time, the
process was distinct from previous discussions for one simple reason: the
inclusion of the workers’ delegates.
Representatives of colonised peoples
in particular, including Rao and Salim, forcefully made their presence known,
seizing the opportunity
to denounce the dramatically inadequate representation
of the most affected populations in the process, the racism of the colonial
powers and their representatives, including as expressed in references to the
laziness of ‘native’ peoples, and the
‘reprisals’
colonial powers carried out under the cover of rhetorical claims of advances in
civilisation and development.
Despite the fresh air representatives like Rao and Salim were able to breathe
into the process, colonialism remained the structural
reality underpinning the
negotiations. The limitations that reality imposed on the worldviews and/or
ability to advance challenges
of the participants were made clear at various
points, including by the failure of any representatives to challenge either the
of collective punishment as such or Vernon’s suggestion that the
collective punishment recently inflicted on Palestinians had
satisfactory results’.
Most clearly, the underlying structural reality manifested itself in the
rejection of an outright ban on forced labour in favour
of a regime of
protections for those who might continue to be subjected to public forced labour
for an unspecified period as well
as in the carving out of five areas of
exception in which forced labour was, and remains today, considered
The perverse nature of the result produced had one unexpected, and ironic,
positive consequence. As in the previous deliberations,
a great deal of the
Committee on Forced Labour’s and the International Labour
Conference’s discussions focused on measures
meant to improve the working
conditions of individuals subjected to forced labour. To the extent forced
labour was normalised, rather
than simply banned, as numerous critics noted
throughout the process, this development was negative. To the extent the
drafters recognised
that forced labour could be ameliorated by improved
conditions of work, however, they set a precedent that should not be forgotten
today. This is the first unexpected and unfulfilled positive legacy of the
process leading to the
Forced Labour Convention
that should be recovered
today, as explored further below.
A second area in which progressive potential emerges from attention to the
history is relative to indirect compulsion. While the language
on indirect
compulsion continued to be challenged, it survived the final portion of the
process largely unscathed.
The force of the relevant language was weakened by its inclusion in a
recommendation, which has come to be known as “soft law”,
than in the
Forced Labour Convention
This paved the way
for the recommendation to be forgotten: while referenced a handful of times in
the ILO’s 1953
Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Forced Labour
— the ILO’s first major revisiting of the issue after the
process leading to the Convention — the implications of
the recommendation
were largely sidelined in that report, and it has been even less referenced
Forced Labour
(Indirect Compulsion) Recommendation
hence constitutes a second key legacy
for recovery from the initial process.
Finally, not only colonialism but the entire global political situation at
the time worked to foreclose a third possibility as well.
As noted, the most
ambitious proposal by the workers’ representatives was for the inclusion
Forced Labour Convention
of a clause protecting freedom of
association. It was a proposal they knew was unlikely to succeed given that they
had been unable
to obtain recognition for the right even outside the colonial
context. In making the proposal, however, workers’ representatives
connection between freedom from forced labour and freedom of association as
such. Despite the defeat of their proposal at
the time, the workers’
vision provides another key element in a more emancipatory understanding of free
labour. This is the
third key forgotten progressive legacy of the
Labour Convention
discussions.
VI CONCLUSION: EXPANDING
OUR UNDERSTANDING OF FORCED LABOUR
The previous sections have explored the processes through which the 1930
Forced Labour Convention
Forced Labour (Indirect Compulsion)
Recommendation
were generated. Several important points arise from this
investigation. The first and most foundational is the simple recognition,
highlighted at several points above, that the international legal definitions of
“slavery” and “forced labour”
that were ultimately
adopted were not obvious or
Rather, they were
arrived at through a long process, more shaped by political motivations and
colonial mindsets than rational deliberation.
At times, the racist assumptions and viewpoints of the participants were
plainly stated, offending even other colonial actors at the
time. More often and
more troublingly, colonial mindsets and framings dwelt beneath the surface,
shaping participants’ understandings
of the field of possibilities
available to them in ways that are harder to pick apart. Among other things, the
process leading to
Forced Labour Convention
both repeatedly revealed
and helped to construct the dominant justificatory ideology for late
colonialism, that of “development”.
As noted above, more progressive
colonial forces were willing to admit, inside and outside the forced labour
debates, that “development”
and the wellbeing of local populations
might conflict. Dramatically under-interrogated, however, were the interrelated
of whose development was implicated and of whether forced labour ever
had any positive functions for those compelled. The suggestion
that the purpose
of the process being undertaken was to reach an appropriate balance between
development and welfare accomplished,
in other words, an invisibilisation and
normalisation of its premises: that forced labour might serve some positive
purpose for those
being exploited, as opposed to merely for their exploiters;
and that “development” involved the betterment of the lives
colonised, rather than of the
colonisers.
Recognition of the openness that preceded the final texts of the
Forced Labour Convention
, and of the exclusionary
nature of the processes through which they were drafted, should inform the way
we approach their key legal
terms today. Despite frequent weak enforcement,
public international law is powerful, both because it claims to set rules that
across all contexts and because it presents its rules as justified by
higher order normative concerns. The definitions that were
given to slavery and
forced labour by the processes that took place in the 1920s have proven
particularly powerful and lasting, likely
in substantial part due to their
ability to claim a sort of universal validity. Coming to recognise that there
was a great deal of
uncertainty at the time should help us to see that our
manner of understanding such categories is more contingent than necessary,
however. Recognising that the relevant terms were defined by colonial powers
interested in extending and expanding their power, moreover,
should prompt us to
rethink our manner of understanding those categories in the contemporary
The narrow understanding of coercive labour adopted in the 1920s took several
forms. In part, it consisted in the limiting of progressive
potentials supported
by the Native Labour Section and workers’ delegates, as explored further
below. More broadly, colonial
states achieved a victory in framing. As the above
history reveals, discussions on coercive labour generally offered both a threat
and an opportunity to states. On the one hand, states’ practices might be
subjected to critique. On the other hand, states
could gain legitimacy and
justify expansions of their power and jurisdiction by claiming to fight coercive
labour. Prior to the 1920s,
European colonial powers had been highly effective
at utilising the language of labour coercion to legitimate their power, with the
British justifying expansion of their naval power on the grounds of the fight
against the slave trade,
instance, and various European powers justifying the carving up of Africa in
part on the grounds of the need to fight
The processes of the
1920s threatened to challenge this dynamic, as the fact that European powers
themselves were primary employers
of labour coercion was pushed to the
As the above history makes clear, however, the process was largely one of
imperial victory over such challenges. While forced labour
was challenged in
international law, the resulting legal framework was highly complex, helping to
fracture attention and resistance.
In addition to requiring only progressive
realisation, the scheme established set up exceptions for various forms of
public forced
labour, while the potentially strongly progressive idea of
indirect compulsion was pushed to the sidelines. At the same time, the
recognised an important, central role for states in tackling private coercive
labour, suggesting states should strengthen
their efforts and the mechanisms at
their disposal to address such harm. When the linkage between forced labour in
general and public
order threatened to come to the surface, as it did on a few
occasions throughout the process, colonial states quickly and aggressively
the discussions down, insisting on their fundamental public order
The imperial states
that guided the process, in short, were largely able to foreclose the
possibility of more serious challenges
to their core legal and institutional
practices, while reorienting the deliberations and their outcomes in support of
their own legitimacy
and power. Going forward, this version of the project has
received increasing focus over time, as states have been able to present
picture in which coercive labour is an exceptional problem, driven by nefarious
private actors.
appropriate response to the problem of coercive labour, they have suggested, is
greater state policing and carceral power rather
than legal and regulatory
changes designed to strengthen the structural power of
Exploring the history of the
Forced Labour Convention
valuable because it helps us see the extent to which our conception of forced
labour is the result of a narrow political
process undertaken at a particular
moment in history, rather than an understanding of universal validity. It is
also helpful insofar
as it enables us to see the manner in which a particular
image of the source of forced labour, and the state’s appropriate
response, was generated. Through the long process of drafting the Convention,
forced labour came to be increasingly understood
as primarily a problem of
private power, to be checked through deployment of the state’s penal
mechanisms, rather than as a
problem produced by the manner in which state laws,
institutions and practices structure the quantities of coercion involved in
labour relations, appropriately tackled through systemic reforms
designed to alter the balance of power between employers and workers.
The history of the
Forced Labour Convention
was not only one of
foreclosure, however. Rather, the history of the Convention also reveals
numerous potential approaches that,
while limited at the time, can help
revitalise and expand our understandings of forced labour and hence of measures
that may be taken
to limit it
Put concisely, these concern conditions of work, conditions of life and worker
The first category, conditions of work, was both addressed but also obscured
by the terms of the original
Forced Labour Convention
. Forced labour was
defined in a manner that did not take account of the conditions of work. The
majority of the
Forced Labour Convention
was, however, concerned with
ameliorating those conditions, for such forced labour as was recognised would
continue for an intermediate
period. This had at least two justifications:
disincentivisation, by expanding the costs and difficulty of employing forced
thereby making it harder to rely upon; and amelioration, that is,
improving the conditions for those who were subjected to such labour,
diminishing their suffering while being coerced.
The compromise reached in the
Forced Labour Convention
forced labour was recognised and regulated, was sharply limited, however. By the
terms of the Convention, even if it might
continue for a time, public forced
labour was supposed to disappear before long. Even if it remained technically
legal, moreover,
it was clearly not something for states to be proud of. States
hence had every incentive not to explicitly recognise any forced labour
might deploy. It was unlikely the terms of the
Forced Labour Convention
requiring improved terms of service would be frequently employed in practice,
therefore, since states would be unlikely to recognise
the underlying situations
requiring such protections.
This problem has not gone away. It is a problem with an apparent solution,
however. If improved conditions of work help to ameliorate
the conditions of
those compelled to work, but states in general are unwilling to recognise the
existence of forced labour within
their jurisdictions, the impasse created can
be circumvented by extending improved conditions to all workers. If labour
is better understood not as an exceptional circumstance so much as a
widespread reality, moreover — as the following discussion
suggests it
should be — such coverage is all the more justified, insofar as it not
only extends protections broadly to ensure
improved conditions for the worst off
but also ensures all those subjected to one degree of labour coercion or another
conditions of work ameliorated to the extent possible. Enhancing
conditions of work for all workers — in regard to minimum
wages, maximum
working hours, guaranteed holiday time, health and safety measures, and more
— hence constitutes one clear step
states can take to reduce the level of
harm that accompanies the background level of coercion operative in contemporary
More broadly, improving conditions of work will reduce the coercion
operative within a system in general by making it easier for
workers to leave
jobs they do not desire to perform, knowing they can enjoy decent conditions of
work in alternative positions.
The second category, conditions of life, goes directly to our understandings
of forced labour as such. A broader understanding of
the meaning of forced
labour here arises from the
Forced Labour (Indirect Compulsion)
Recommendation
, and in particular from its passages recognising the manner
in which deprivation of land and the imposition of taxes constitute indirect
forms of coercing individuals into
Remarkably, the
colonial context enabled a more progressive picture of forced labour to be
recognised than that which might otherwise
have been possible, as the rapid,
external and clearly intentional imposition of policy measures designed to
produce an available
and pliant workforce proved more visible and readily
criticisable than the longer, slower processes through which the same changes
were introduced in Western European polities.
Unfortunately, while it remains part of international law, the
Labour (Indirect Compulsion) Recommendation
has been largely forgotten.
Recalling and recovering the Recommendation helps make apparent the shape a more
expansive vision of
forced labour may take, however: wherever one is unable to
sustain one’s life adequately outside the official monetary economy,
form of forced labour may be said to exist. Such an understanding constitutes a
reversal of the typical understanding: forced labour
is no longer an
exceptional, and exceptionally abusive, condition, but rather a near-universal
Some may object that this risks undermining measures taken to attempt to
address the worst forms of abuse. It is not necessarily the
case that a broader
definition of forced labour will undermine efforts to combat the worst abuses,
however. In fact, a strong case
can be made that it will help, even relative to
the worst abuses alone. First, an expanded understanding of forced labour does
mean gradations in severity of harm cannot be recognised, nor does it remove
the possibility for more serious steps, and more severe
sanctions, to be
employed relative to the worst abuses. At the same time, it may be that a
broader approach to forced labour, which
works to target structural coercion in
general, is more effective in terms of combatting the worst forms of abuse than
more targeted (and typically penal) approach. In part, this is
because rules of general application are easier to enforce than rules
a narrow set of cases, particularly where those cases are hard to identify in
practice. More fundamentally still, a broader,
structural approach will work to
address and limit states of vulnerability that make the worst forms of coercion
It will also work
to enhance the strength of the worst-off and workers in society across the
board, enabling enhanced pressure from
below — which is arguably stronger
and more effective than attempts to monitor from above.
A broadened understanding of the scope of forced labour suggests the need for
several steps to be taken. If indirect compulsion is
taken seriously, some
degree of coercion is involved in the vast majority of forms of work,
increasingly in proportion to the lack
of options available to the individual
taking on that work. While it may not be entirely eliminable, this coercion can
by measures that improve the conditions of the poorest and most
vulnerable. Social welfare measures, in short, should be understood
necessitated not only by humanitarian concerns but also by the need to diminish
the coercion through which the worst-off in society
are driven to work. Such
measures should, accordingly, be afforded higher priority than they often
receive as they are necessary
not only for humanist reasons, due to their status
as social and economic rights and due to their importance to stable, prosperous
and just societies generally, but also in order to minimise labour coercion.
The third category, worker freedoms, concerns the issue raised by the
workers’ delegates but rejected by employers’ and
representatives at the Committee on Forced Labour: freedom of association. The
arguments raised by the workers’ delegates
focused primarily on the manner
in which freedom of association was necessary in order to effectively combat and
limit forced labour
in practice, a compelling point that maintains its relevance
and which is reason enough for the right to freedom of association to
recognised as inseparable from the obligation to prevent forced labour.
The connection between the right to freedom of association — and the
associated rights to freedom of expression, assembly and
political participation
— and recognition of whether or not forced labour exists can be taken
further, however.
article suggested at its beginning, coercion cannot be fully understood unless
its opposite — freedom — is kept
in view. If labour is to be free,
workers must not only be free in their individual choice of whether to engage in
that labour but
also must continue to enjoy their fundamental rights while
working. From this perspective, freedom of association is not only essential
a means through which particularly coercive forms of producing labour can be
checked. Rather, freedom of association should also
be understood as essential
to non-coercive labour as such. More broadly, this is to assert that whenever
workers do not enjoy their
right to freedom of association, a degree of forced
labour exists.
The importance of each of these three elements — conditions of work,
conditions of life and worker freedoms — to non-coercive
labour emerges
directly from misrepresented, forgotten and excluded aspects of the original
debates on the
Forced Labour Convention
. Once we have recognised the
possibility of reimagining the concept of forced labour, however, there is no
reason why we must stop
there — rather, other elements may be imagined as
well. A strong case can be made, for instance, that work will only be maximally
non-coercive when workers are involved, through one mechanism or another, in
ownership and control as well as labour. While it is
beyond the capacity of this
article to fully explore such issues, it is important to make clear that
contemplating the various ways
in which the original
Forced Labour
discussions chart a path towards broader understandings of
“forced labour” should not be understood as accomplishing
foreclosing of the meaning of the term but rather as opening the way to yet
broader understandings in time.
Even without going further, recomposing a vision of forced labour that pays
attention to the three elements just mentioned will help
the concept break free
from the limitations under which it has struggled in the near century since the
Forced Labour Convention
was finalised. Recovering the language of forced
labour promises prospects in the realm of popular and collective conscience
the narrow terrain of the law as such as well. For much of the
centuries, freedom at work
and freedom in general were understood as closely interconnected. While early
republican thinkers struggled
with whether or not freedom might be
universalised, the struggles to end slavery and to challenge conditions of
unfree work that
advanced in the 19
and early 20
centuries were premised on such a
universalisation.
Unfortunately, the connection between political freedom and freedom at work grew
less clear over the course of the latter part of
Reimagining forced
labour promises to help recover the radical emancipatory potential struggles
over labour freedom once possessed.
Better addressing the coercion made visible
by an expanded understanding of forced labour will require sustained efforts.
Revitalising
the language of coercive labour can help make the terrain of
contestation more recognisable, however, and the goals that might be
towards more concrete, more compelling and more achievable.
Christopher M Roberts is an
Associate Professor in the Faculty of Law at the Chinese University of Hong
Kong. The research for this
article was supported by General Research Fund Grant
Number 14608222 from the Research Grants Council of
the University Grants Committee
in Hong Kong. Special thanks are due to
Remo Becci and Jacques Rodriguez, who provided invaluable assistance at the ILO
as well as to Vivian Lam, who provided support at CUHK. The author
would also like to thank the participants at the 4
Asian Legal
History Conference in Hue, Vietnam, and the Editors of the
Melbourne Journal
of International Law
for their thoughtful and insightful comments and
support throughout the process.
International Labour
Conference,
Forced Labour: General Discussion
sitting (3 June 1929) (Mr de Quevedo, Government Delegate,
Portugal), reproduced in League of Nations,
International Labour Conference:
Twelfth Session
(International Labour Office, 1929) vol 1, 42, 44
ILC Twelfth Session, ILC, Sixth Sitting
Ibid 46 (Mr Rao,
Workers’ Adviser, India).
International Labour
Conference,
Fifth Report of the Selection Committee
sitting (18 June 1929) (Hadji Salim, Workers’
Adviser, Netherlands), reproduced in League of Nations,
International Labour
Conference: Twelfth Session
(International Labour Office, 1929) vol 1, 409
ILC Twelfth Session, ILC, Nineteenth Sitting
International Labour
Conference,
Minutes of the Committee on Forced Labour: Third Sitting
sess (12 June 1930) 10, paraphrasing the words of Blaise Diagne
ILC Fourteenth Session, Committee on Forced Labour, Third
‘What is Forced
Blue Campaign
(Web Page, 5 April 2024) <
https://www.dhs.gov/blue-campaign/forced-labor/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/GV79-8CRG
‘What is Forced
Anti-Slavery
(Web Page) <
https://www.antislavery.org/slavery-today/forced-labour/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/GA9V-ECKU
Ibid. The International Labour
Organization estimated the global workforce as approximately 3.32 billion as of
2022: ‘Number
of Employees Worldwide from 1991 to 2024’,
(Web Page, 4 July 2024) <
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1258612/global-employment-figures/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/6G9N-WN7G
Beate Andrees, ‘Why
Definitions Matter’,
International Labour Organization
(Web Page, 3
February 2014) <
https://www.ilo.org/resource/article/why-definitions-matter
archived at <
https://perma.cc/BD9P-29UR
Janie A Chuang, ‘Exploitation Creep and the Unmaking of Human Trafficking
(2014) 108(4)
American Journal of International Law
Chuang’s piece is not as purely critical of broadened understandings as
Andrees suggests, as Chuang notes that wider definitions
might be positive
should they give rise to efforts to ‘target structural vulnerability ...
through strengthened labor frameworks’:
‘Exploitation Creep and the
Unmaking of Human Trafficking Law’,
Digital Commons @ American
University Washington College of Law
(Web Page) <
https://digitalcommons.wcl.american.edu/facsch_lawrev/563/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/W436-SZ7D
powerful critique of the manner in which contemporary slavery and forced labour
discourses are deployed to limit, rather
than enable, challenges to structural
vulnerability, see Julia O’Connell Davidson,
Modern Slavery: The
Margins of Freedom
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2015).
Robert J Steinfeld and
Stanley L Engerman, ‘Labor — Free or Coerced? A Historical
Reassessment of Differences and Similarities’
in Tom Brass and Marcel van
der Linden (eds),
Free and Unfree Labour: The Debate Continues
Lang, 1997) 108.
See Robert Steinfeld,
‘Coercion/Consent in Labour’ (Working Paper No 66, Centre of
Migration, Policy and Society, University
of Oxford, 2009); Klara Skrivankova,
‘Between Decent Work and Forced Labour: Examining the Continuum of
Exploitation’
(JFR Programme Paper: Forced Labour, Joseph Rowntree
Foundation, November 2010); Julia O’Connell Davidson, ‘New Slavery,
Old Binaries: Human Trafficking and the Borders of “Freedom”’
(2010) 10(2)
Global Networks
244; Stephanie Barrientos, Uma Kothari and
Nicola Phillips, ‘Dynamics of Unfree Labour in the Contemporary Global
(2013) 49(8)
Journal of Development Studies
Strauss and Siobhán McGrath, ‘Temporary Migration, Precarious
Employment and Unfree Labour Relations: Exploring
the “Continuum of
Exploitation” in Canada’s Temporary Foreign Worker Program’
(2017) 78 (January)
199; Katie Cruz, ‘Beyond Liberalism:
Marxist Feminism, Migrant Sex Work, and Labour Unfreedom’
(2018) 26(1)
Feminist Legal Studies
Union Pacific Railway Co
v Public Services Commission of Missouri
[1918] USSC 181
, 70 (1918).
See Robert L Hale,
‘Coercion and Distribution in a Supposedly Non-Coercive State’
(1923) 38(3)
Political Science Quarterly
; Robert L Hale, ‘Force
and the State: A Comparison of “Political” and
“Economic” Compulsion’
(1935) 35(2)
Columbia Law Review
; Robert L Hale,
Freedom Through Law: Public Control of Private Governing
(Columbia University Press, 1952).
Convention concerning
Forced or Compulsory Labour
, opened for signature 28 June
1930, 39 UNTS 55
(entered into force 1 May 1932) (‘
Forced Labour Convention
In exploring this issue, this article draws on the immense contributions made by
previous scholars of the history of the
international law of labour coercion.
Key contributions include Jean Allain, ‘The Definition of Slavery in
International Law’
(2009) 52(2)
Howard Law Journal
The Slavery Conventions: The Travaux Préparatoires of the 1926
League of Nations Convention and the 1956 United Nations Convention
(Martinus Nijhoff, 2008); Joel Quirk,
The Anti-Slavery Project: From the
Slave Trade to Human Trafficking
(University of Pennsylvania Press, 2011);
Jean Allain (ed),
The Legal Understanding of Slavery: From the Historical to
the Contemporary
(Oxford University Press, 2012); Michel Erpelding,
Droit International Antiesclavagiste des ‘Nations Civilisées’
(1815–1945)
(Institut Universitaire Varenne, 2017). As the titles
suggest, previous work has approached the history with a central focus on the
legal concept of “slavery” rather than with central attention to the
concept of “forced labour”.
Exclusionary in the sense
only a small number of states were represented in the new international system
and open-ended in that numerous
new principles were recognised, the future
evolution of which was hard to predict at the time.
Convention to Suppress
the Slave Trade and Slavery
, opened for signature 25 September
[1927] LNTSer 19
1926, 60 LNTS
(entered into forced 9 March 1927).
See Christopher M Roberts
and Michelle M Ong, ‘Anticolonial Rights Advocacy’ (2025) 8(1)
Cardozo International and Comparative Law Review
This was suggested not only
by Mr Rao and Hadji Salim’s critiques but also by Mr de Quevedo and
Diagne’s defences, which
observed that
“civilisation”/colonialism would collapse without labour coercion:
ILC Twelfth Session, ILC, Sixth Sitting
ILC Twelfth Session, ILC,
Nineteenth Sitting
Fourteenth Session, Committee on Forced Labour, Third Sitting
). For a later critique that similarly
emphasises the centrality of labour coercion to colonialism, see Issa G Shivji,
in Independent Africa: Some Reflections on the Role of Legal
(1985) 46(3)
Ohio State Law Journal
While it differs in terms
of approach, in its broad spirit this article is aligned with the thrust of both
Ali Hammoudi’s and
Christopher Gevers’ recent discussions of similar
issues: see Ali Hammoudi, ‘International Order and Racial Capitalism:
Standardization of “Free Labour” Exploitation in International
(2022) 35(4)
Leiden Journal of International Law
Christopher Gevers, ‘Refiguring Slavery through International Law: The
1926 Slavery Convention, the “Native Labor Code”
Capitalism’
(2022) 25(2)
Journal of International Economic Law
Forced Labour Convention
) arts 10–18.
Ibid art 1.
Protocol of 2014 to the
Forced Labour Convention, 1930
, opened for signature 11 June
2014, 53 ILM
(entered into force 9 November 2016).
See JP Daughton, ‘ILO
Expertise and Colonial Violence in the Interwar Years’ in Sandrine Kott
and Joëlle Droux (eds),
Globalizing Social Rights: The International
Labour Organization and Beyond
(International Labour Organization and
Palgrave Macmillan, 2013) 85, 87 (‘ILO Expertise and Colonial
Violence’); Daniel
Human Rights, Development and Decolonization:
The International Labour Organization, 1940–70
(Palgrave Macmillan and
International Labour Office, 2012) 20 (‘
Human Rights, Development and
Decolonization
’). The creation of such a body had been urged, inter
alia, by WEB Du Bois and the Second Pan-African Congress, which sent
communications
to such effect to Albert Thomas, the first Director of the ILO,
in 1921: see Memo from WEB Du Bois to Albert Thomas, 1921 <
https://credo.library.umass.edu/view/full/mums312-b017-i343
archived at <
https://perma.cc/87WZ-AWVK
from the Second Pan-African Congress to the President of the Council of the
League of Nations, September 1921 <
https://credo.library.umass.edu/view/full/mums312-b017-i345
archived at <
https://perma.cc/LG66-CWUT
from Albert Thomas to WEB Du Bois, 1921 <
https://credo.library.umass.edu/view/full/mums312-b017-i347
archived at <
https://perma.cc/STV8-MPQG
Form of Letter from Albert Thomas to WEB Du Bois, 1921 <
https://credo.library.umass.edu/cgi-bin/pdf.cgi?id=scua:mums312-b017-i348
archived at <
https://perma.cc/PV5B-SZPN
See Daniel Maul,
Rights, Development and Decolonization
) 20. For more on the ILO and the Native
Labour Section, see Luis Rodríguez-Piñero,
Indigenous Peoples,
Postcolonialism, and International Law: The ILO Regime (1919–1989)
(Oxford University Press, 2005) 28–33.
International Labour
Conference,
Recommendation concerning Indirect Compulsion to Labour
sess, 28 June 1930 (‘
Forced Labour (Indirect
Compulsion) Recommendation
Treaty of Peace
the Allied and Associated Powers and Germany
, signed 28 June 1919, 225 ConTS
188 (entered into force 10 January 1920)
Constitution
of the International Labour Organisation
Constitution
On that separation, and
some attempts to address it, see, eg, Philip Alston, ‘Development and the
Rule of Law: Prevention versus
Cure as a Human Rights Strategy’ (Basic
Working Paper, Conference on Development and the Rule of Law, International
of Jurists, 1981); Virginia A Leary, ‘The Paradox of
Workers’ Rights as Human Rights’ in Lance A Compa and Stephen
Diamond (eds),
Human Rights, Labor Rights, and International Trade
(University of Pennsylvania Press, 1996) 22; Philip Alston (ed),
Rights as Human Rights
(Oxford University Press, 2005); Virginia
Mantouvalou, ‘Are Labour Rights Human Rights?’ (2012) 3(2)
European Labour Law Journal
151; Alan Bogg et al,
Human Rights at
Work: Reimagining Employment Law
(Bloomsbury, 2024). ‘[T]he human
rights movement and the labor movement run on tracks that are sometimes parallel
meet’: Leary (n
See WEB Du Bois,
Reconstruction in America: Toward a History of the Part which Black Folk Played
in the Attempt to Reconstruct Democracy in America,
(Routledge, 2017); Philip S Foner,
History of the Labor Movement in the
United States: The Industrial Workers of the World 1905–1917
(International Publishers, 1997) vol 4; David Montgomery,
Beyond Equality:
Labor and the Radical Republicans 1862–1872
(University of Illinois
Press, 1981); Melvyn Dubofsky,
We Shall Be All: A History of the Industrial
Workers of the World
(Quadrangle, 1969); William E Forbath, ‘The
Ambiguities of Free Labor: Labor and the Law in the Gilded Age’
Wisconsin Law Review
(‘Ambiguities of Free Labor’);
William E Forbath,
Law and the Shaping of the American Labor Movement
(Harvard University Press, 1991); James Gray Pope, ‘Labor’s
Constitution of Freedom’
(1997) 106(4)
Yale Law Journal
Gourevitch,
From Slavery to the Cooperative Commonwealth: Labor and
Republican Liberty in the Nineteenth Century
(Cambridge University Press,
2015); Gregory Laski,
Untimely Democracy: The Politics of Progress after
(Oxford University Press, 2018); Alex Gourevitch, ‘Solidarity
and Civic Virtue: Labour Republicanism and the Politics of Emancipation
Nineteenth-Century America’ in Bruno Leipold, Karma Nabulsi and Stuart
White (eds),
Radical Republicanism: Recovering the Tradition’s Popular
(Oxford University Press, 2020) 149; Bruno Leipold,
‘Marx’s Social Republic: Radical Republicanism and the Political
Institutions of Socialism’ in Bruno Leipold, Karma Nabulsi and Stuart
White (eds),
Radical Republicanism: Recovering the Tradition’s Popular
(Oxford University Press, 2020) 172.
International Labour
Organization, Committee of Experts on Native Labour,
Draft for a Report on
Forced Labour: Chapter I
(CENL No 2, 1927).
On those struggles, and the
role normative pressure may or may not have played in the
“abolition” of slavery, see Eric
Capitalism and
(University of North Carolina Press, 3
ed, 2021); Robin
The Overthrow of Colonial Slavery, 1776–1848
1988); Marcel Dorigny (ed),
The Abolitions of Slavery: From Léger
Félicité Sonthonax to Victor Schoelcher
(UNESCO Publishing,
2003); João Pedro Marques,
The Sounds of Silence: Nineteenth-Century
Portugal and the Abolition of the Slave Trade
(Berghahn Books, 2006).
See, eg, Frederick Cooper,
Thomas C Holt and Rebecca J Scott,
Beyond Slavery: Explorations of Race,
Labor, and Citizenship in Postemancipation Societies
(University of North
Carolina Press, 2000); Douglas Hay and Paul Craven (eds),
Masters, Servants,
and Magistrates in Britain and the Empire, 1562–1955
(University of
North Carolina Press, 2004); Clare Anderson, ‘Convicts and Coolies:
Rethinking Indentured Labor in the Nineteenth
Century’ (2009) 30(1)
Slavery and Abolition
93; Kate Boehme, Peter Mitchell and Alan Lester,
‘Reforming Everywhere and All at Once: Transitioning to Free Labor across
the British Empire, 1837–1838’ (2018) 60(3)
Comparative Study of
Society and History
See generally Adam
Hochschild,
King Leopold’s Ghost: A Story of Greed, Terror, and Heroism
in Colonial Africa
(Houghton Mifflin Company, 1998); Kevin Grant,
Civilised Savagery: Britain and the New Slaveries in Africa, 1884–1926
(Routledge, 2005); Dean Pavlakis,
British Humanitarianism and the Congo
Reform Movement, 1896–1913
(Routledge, 2015).
See Catherine Higgs,
Chocolate Islands: Cocoa, Slavery, and Colonial Africa
(Ohio University
Press, 2012); Eric Allina,
Slavery by Any Other Name: African Life under
Company Rule in Colonial Mozambique
(University of Virginia Press, 2012);
Miguel Bandeira Jerónimo,
The ‘Civilising Mission’ of
Portuguese Colonialism, 1870–1930
, tr Stewart Lloyd-Jones (Palgrave
Macmillan, 2015).
Dwarkanath Ganguli,
Slavery in British Dominion
(Jijnasa, 1972); Henry W Nevinson,
Modern Slavery
(Harper & Brothers Publishers, 1906). Evelyn
Baring’s 1920
What is Slavery
, meanwhile, produced by the
Anti-Slavery and Aborigines Protection Society, described forced labour for
private purposes as slavery:
Opolot Okia, ‘The Northey Forced Labor
Crisis, 1920–21: A Symptomatic Reading’ (2008) 41(2)
International Journal of African Historical Studies
263, 281 n 86.
See Michel Dreyfus,
‘The Emergence of an International Trade Union Organization
(1902–1919)’ in Anthony Carew et
The International
Confederation of Free Trade Unions
(Peter Lang, 2000); Reiner Tosstorff,
‘The International Trade-Union Movement and the Foundation of the
International Labour
Organization’ (2005) 50(3)
International Review of
Social History
399; Jasmien Van Daele, ‘Engineering Social Peace:
Networks, Ideas, and the Founding of the International Labour
Organization’
(2005) 50(3)
International Review of Social History
435; Olga Hidalgo-Weber, ‘Social and Political Networks and the
Creation of the ILO: The Role of British Actors’ in Sandrine
Joëlle Droux (eds),
Globalizing Social Rights: The International Labour
Organization and Beyond
(International Labour Organization, 2013); Sandrine
Kott, ‘From Transnational Reformist Network to International Organization:
The International Association for Labour Legislation and the International
Labour Organization, 1900–1930s’ in Davide
Rodogno, Bernhard Struck
and Jakob Vogel (eds),
Shaping the Transnational Sphere: Experts, Networks
and Issues from the 1840s to the 1930s
(Berghahn Books, 2015); Daniel Maul,
The International Labour Organization: 100 Years of Social Policy
Gruyter, 2019).
Constitution
Treaty of Peace
the Allied and Associated Powers and Germany
, signed 28 June 1919, 225 ConTS
188 (entered into force 10 January 1920)
Covenant of the League
See Susan Pedersen,
Guardians: The League of Nations and the Crisis of Empire
(Oxford University
Press, 2015). See also Antony Anghie,
Imperialism, Sovereignty and the Making
of International Law
(Cambridge University Press, 2005) ch 3.
See generally Alice L
A Mission to Civilize: The Republican Idea of Empire in France and
West Africa, 1895–1930
(Stanford University Press, 1997); Kwabena
Opare Akurang-Parry, ‘Colonial Forced Labor Policies for Road-Building in
Ghana and International Anti-Forced Labor Pressures,
1900–1940’ (2000) 28
African Economic History
1; Daniel Roger
Maul, ‘The International Labour Organization and the Struggle against
Forced Labour from 1919 to the Present’
(2007) 48(4)
Labor History
477; Opolot Okia,
Communal Labor in Colonial Kenya: The Legitimization of
Coercion, 1912–1930
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2012); Babacar Fall and
Richard L Roberts, ‘Forced Labour’ in Stefano Bellucci and Andreas
General Labour History of Africa: Workers, Employers and
Governments
(James Currey, 2019) 77; JP Daughton,
In the Forest of No
Joy: The Congo-Océan Railroad and the Tragedy of French Colonialism
(WW Norton & Company, 2021).
See Daughton, ‘ILO
Expertise and Colonial Violence’ (n
International Labour
Social Policy in Dependent Territories
(Series B (Economic
Conditions) No 38, 1944) 30.
Convention Revising the
General Act of Berlin, 26 February 1885, and the General Act and Declaration of
Brussels, July 2 1890
, signed 10 September
[1922] LNTSer 19
1919, 8 LNTS 27
(entered into
force 31 July 1920) art 11.
Covenant of the League
Ibid art 23.
Ibid art 22. On the
creation of “A”, “B” and “C” class mandates,
see Pedersen (n
Draft for a Report on
Forced Labour: Chapter I
This language is from the “B” mandates. The language employed for
“C” mandates was substantively similar:
League of Nations,
Question of Slavery: Motion by Sir Arthur Steel-Maitland
plen mtg (6 September 1922), reproduced in League of
Records of the Third Assembly: Plenary Meetings
(1922) vol 1,
League of Nations,
Question of Slavery: Draft Resolution
ass (1922), reproduced in League of Nations,
Records of the
Third Assembly: Minutes of the Sixth Committee (Political Questions)
Jerónimo (n
) 147. See also Allina (n
See Suzanne Miers,
Slavery in the Twentieth Century: The Evolution of a Global Problem
(AltaMira Press, 2003) 100.
League of Nations,
Question of Slavery: Resolution Proposed by the Sixth Committee
plen mtg (22 September 1924), reproduced in
League of Nations,
Records of the Fifth Assembly: Plenary Meetings
League of Nations, Fifth Assembly, Seventeenth Plenary
The nomination of
Henri Junod, an important activist with the
Bureau International pour la
Défense des Indigènes
, was rejected, as was that of the
American sociologist Edward Ross, who had been reporting on slavery in
Portuguese Africa, indicating
colonial states’ resolve not to lose control
of the process: at 105–6
In addition, the British Foreign Office
later responded internally to a protest by the British Women’s Freedom
League that there
were no women on the Commission by observing that
‘enlargement of the commission “was undesirable even if these
ladies could produce a candidate who had any genuine practical
experience” with slavery’: at 106 (citation omitted)
Draft for a Report on
Forced Labour: Chapter I
Temporary Slavery
Commission,
Programme of Work
July 1924), reproduced in League of Nations,
Temporary Slavery Commission:
Minutes of the First Session
(League of Nations, 1924) 6.
Temporary Slavery
Commission,
Submission of the Draft Questionnaire by Sir F Lugard
mtg (9 July 1924), reproduced in League
of Nations,
Temporary Slavery Commission: Minutes of the First Session
(League of Nations, 1924) 9 (‘
Temporary Slavery Commission, First
Session, Second Meeting, Submission of the Draft Questionnaire
Temporary Slavery Commission,
Detailed Discussion of the Draft Questionnaire
Prepared by Sir F Lugard
July 1924), reproduced in League of Nations,
Temporary Slavery Commission:
Minutes of the First Session
(League of Nations, 1924) 11–13.
Temporary Slavery
Commission, First Session, Second Meeting, Submission of the Draft
Questionnaire
Temporary Slavery
Commission,
Detailed Discussion of the Draft Questionnaire (Programme of
Work) Prepared by Sir F Lugard (Continuation of the Discussion)
mtg (10 July 1924), reproduced in League
of Nations,
Temporary Slavery Commission: Minutes of the First Session
(League of Nations, 1924) 14.
League of Nations,
Temporary Slavery Commission,
Report to the Council
, Doc A.17.1924.VI (12
July 1924) 2.
League of Nations, Fifth
Assembly, Seventeenth Plenary Meeting
Notably, Mr Buxton’s
remarks were ‘the first’ delivered by a ‘representative of a
Labour Government ... on
the question of native labour’: League of
Mandates: Resolution Proposed by the Sixth Committee
plen mtg (22 September 1924), reproduced in
League of Nations,
Records of the Fifth Assembly: Plenary Meetings
Ibid 126–7.
Ibid. Buxton therefore
argued that the principles laid down in art 22 of the
Charter of the League
should be understood to apply not only to the mandates but to all
colonies: ibid
This was testified to by
the fact that Mr Bonamy praised Buxton’s speech:
League of Nations,
Fifth Assembly, Seventeenth Plenary Meeting
See Temporary Slavery
Commission,
Examination of the Draft General Report of M Delafosse: Chapters
V and VI (Continuation of the Discussion)
mtg (16 July 1925), reproduced in League of Nations,
Slavery Commission: Minutes of the Second Session
(League of Nations, 1925)
37; Temporary Slavery Commission,
Examination of the Draft General Report of
M Delafosse (Continuation of the Discussion)
mtg (17 July 1925), reproduced in League of Nations,
Temporary Slavery Commission: Minutes of the Second Session
Nations, 1925) 45; Temporary Slavery Commission,
Examination of the Draft
General Report of M Delafosse and Question of Principle concerning the
Documentation of the Commission: Chapter
V (Continuation of the Discussion)
mtg (18 July 1925), reproduced in League of
Temporary Slavery Commission: Minutes of the Second Session
(League of Nations, 1925) 60–2; Temporary Slavery Commission,
Examination of the Draft General Report of M Delafosse: Chapter V
(Continuation of the Discussion)
(20 July 1925), reproduced in League of Nations,
Temporary Slavery
Commission: Minutes of the Second Session
(League of Nations, 1925)
Temporary Slavery Commission, Second Session, Thirteenth
Temporary Slavery
Commission, Second Session, Thirteenth Meeting
Temporary Slavery
Commission,
Work of the Commission: General Discussion
mtg (13 July 1925), reproduced in League of Nations,
Temporary Slavery Commission: Minutes of the Second Session
Nations, 1925) 10 (‘
Temporary Slavery Commission, Second Session, First
Temporary Slavery
Commission,
Examination of the Draft General Report of M Delafosse
(Continuation of the Discussion)
(20 July 1925), reproduced in League of Nations,
Temporary Slavery
Commission: Minutes of the Second Session
(League of Nations, 1925) 68
Temporary Slavery Commission, Second Session, Fourteenth
’). Mr Delafosse supported this point: at 68
Temporary Slavery
Commission,
Examination of the Draft Report: Chapter VIII (Conclusion)
mtg (22 July 1925), reproduced in League of
Temporary Slavery Commission: Minutes of the Second Session
(League of Nations, 1925) 87 (emphasis in original) (‘
Temporary Slavery
Commission, Second Session, Seventeenth Meeting
Temporary Slavery
Commission,
Examination of the Draft General Report of M Delafosse
(Continuation of the Discussion)
(21 July 1925), reproduced in League of Nations,
Temporary Slavery
Commission: Minutes of the Second Session
(League of Nations, 1925)
Temporary Slavery Commission, Second Session, Fifteenth
’). That approach required that all forced labour ‘except
for essential public works and services’ be prohibited,
‘adequate remuneration’ be provided for such forced labour as
occurred: at 71
In particular, they argued
that remuneration was impracticable: ibid 71–2.
The text adopted read, at
While recognising that in certain circumstances compulsory labour may be
admissible subject to certain guarantees and that the Governments
may be obliged
in certain definite conditions to have recourse to it, the Commission, while
realising the necessity of putting an
end to the abuses still occasionally
involved by this practice, which tend, where found, to make forced labour a more
or less disguised
form of slavery, recommends that, by analogy with the clauses
inserted in B and C Mandates, ‘all forms of compulsory or forced
should be prohibited except for essential public works and services and’
(unless this proves utterly impossible) ‘then
only in return for adequate
remuneration’.
On the one hand, that is, it was recognised that forced labour might be
slavery, and the Commission recommended that the terms found
in the B and C
mandates be followed. On the other hand, the text recognised that in certain
circumstances compulsory labour might
be admissible, suggested abuses were only
occasionally involved in its practice and allowed for remuneration not to be
albeit only where ‘utterly impossible’.
‘Forced Labour in
The Manchester Guardian
(Manchester, 19 May 1925)
Discussions in
the House of Lords and other newspaper reports echoed this point, while
criticising land deprivation as well: ‘Forced
Labour in Kenya: Lord
Balfour’s Reply’,
The Manchester Guardian
(Manchester, 21 May
1925) 11. In addition to criticism from international humanitarians, repressive
labour conditions in Kenya were
opposed by the East African Association, the
leader of which, Harry Thuku, was detained in 1922 due to the growing strength
campaigns: see KJ King, ‘The Nationalism of Harry Thuku: A Study
in the Beginnings of African Politics in Kenya’ (1971)
Transafrican Journal of History
39, 43, 52.
Temporary Slavery
Commission, Second Session, Fifteenth Meeting
Mr d’Andrade noted
that ‘[u]nder Portuguese legislation the obligation to work existed’
since ‘[a]nyone who
did not work was condemned as a vagabond’ and
argued that it was necessary for colonial governments ‘to induce the
especially those who ‘were entirely idle’, ‘to
work for the development of their territory’:
Temporary Slavery
Commission, Second Session, Fifteenth Meeting
) 77; Temporary Slavery Commission,
Examination of the Draft General Report of M Delafosse (Continuation of the
Discussion)
mtg (21 July 1925),
reproduced in League of Nations,
Temporary Slavery Commission: Minutes of the
Second Session
(League of Nations, 1925) 78 (‘
Temporary Slavery
Commission, Second Session, Sixteenth Meeting
D’Andrade’s position was a standard Portuguese one: see, eg,
Jerónimo (n
Frederik Lugard supported inclusion of reference to indirect compulsion,
however, as did Harold Grimshaw, who argued
not only ‘excessive
taxation’ but also restrictions on land and vagrancy laws might be used to
indirectly force populations
Temporary Slavery Commission, Second
Session, Fifteenth Meeting
Temporary Slavery Commission, Second Session, Sixteenth
Temporary Slavery
Commission, Second Session, Sixteenth Meeting
Temporary Slavery
Commission, Second Session, Fourteenth Meeting
) 70. Mr Bellegarde supported Grimshaw:
Temporary Slavery
Commission,
Examination of the Proposal for an International Convention
(Continued)
mtg (22 July 1925),
reproduced in League of Nations,
Temporary Slavery Commission: Minutes of the
Second Session
(League of Nations, 1925) 93. The vote was five to three: at
League of Nations,
Slavery: Report of the Temporary Slavery Commission and Resolution and Draft
Protocol Proposed by the British Government
mtg (8 September 1925), reproduced in League
of Nations,
Records of the Sixth Assembly: Minutes of the Sixth Committee
(Political Questions)
(League of Nations, 1925) 7 (‘
Slavery: Report
of the Temporary Slavery Commission
While Lugard had sent a
more progressive draft to the British government, the British government
substantially revised it: see Robin
Hickey, ‘Seeking to Understand the
Definition of Slavery’ in Jean Allain (ed),
The Legal Understanding of
(Oxford University Press, 2012) 220, 221–2
That such a
move was underway, and that those closely following the subject knew it, was
made apparent by an article from a ‘Special
Correspondent’ that
appeared in
Manchester Guardian
on 23 September 1925, which
was highly critical of the proposed British protocol: ‘League Discussions
on Slavery’,
The Manchester Guardian
(Manchester, 23 September
League of Nations,
Slavery: Draft Resolution and
ass (1925) art 1, reproduced in League of Nations,
the Sixth Assembly: Minutes of the Sixth Committee (Political Questions)
(League of Nations, 1925) annex I.
Ibid art 2.
Ibid art 3.
Slavery: Report of the
Temporary Slavery Commission
); League of Nations,
Examination of the Report of the Sub-Committee and of the Draft Convention
mtg (24 September 1925),
reproduced in League of Nations,
Records of the Sixth Assembly: Minutes of
the Sixth Committee (Political Questions)
(League of Nations, 1925) 28.
League of Nations,
Draft Convention Submitted by the Sub-Committee and Examined
by the Sixth Committee on September 24
ass (1925) art 1 (emphasis added), reproduced in League of
Records of the Sixth Assembly: Minutes of the Sixth Committee
(Political Questions)
(League of Nations, 1925) annex IV
Draft Convention Submitted by the Sub-Committee and
Examined by the Sixth Committee on September 24
Ibid art 2 (emphasis
In particular, the
relevant language preserved the reference to the need to ‘prevent
conditions analogous to those of slavery
from resulting from compulsory or
forced labour’, while further stipulating that ‘[i]n principle,
compulsory or forced
labour may only be exacted for public purposes’ and
requiring that where used for private purposes, forced labour ‘be
exceptional and temporary character’; that it ‘not involve the
removal of the labourers from their usual place
of residence’; and that
parties ‘endeavour gradually to put an end to the practice’: ibid
Slavery: Examination
of the Report of the Sub-Committee and of the Draft Convention
The lack of
reference to adequate remuneration was also criticised. In his defence of the
draft, Viscount Cecil suggested that while
‘[f]orced labour might in
certain circumstances be analogous to slavery ... it might also be a perfectly
innocent thing’
(for instance, when used to force members of ‘a very
much less advanced civilisation ... to perform ... public services’):
29–30. The challenges to the text resulted in the language on progressive
realisation being amended to require parties to
‘endeavour progressively
and as soon as possible to put an end to’ private forced labour and to
‘adequate remuneration’
being required when forced labour was relied
upon: League of Nations,
Slavery: Article 6 of the Draft Convention, Adopted
at the Seventh Meeting on September 24
ass (1925) art 6, reproduced in League of Nations,
Records of the Sixth Assembly: Minutes of the Sixth Committee (Political
(League of Nations, 1925) annex Va.
League of Nations,
Question of Slavery: Report of the Sixth Committee
plen mtg (26 September 1925) (Viscount Cecil of Chelwood,
British Empire), reproduced in League of Nations,
Records of the Sixth
Assembly: Text of the Debates
(1925) 156–7.
Ibid 158. Outside the
League’s halls, a different tone was adopted. An article in
Manchester Guardian
from 28 September 1925 observed:
Quietly and a little shamefacedly this year’s Assembly of the League
wound up its proceedings yesterday. Its one positive
achievement is a slavery
protocol for which its sponsor, Lord Cecil, had to make a half-apology. To its
critics — to those
who resent authorisation for the first time in an
international document of forced labour for private profit, who denounce the
retrogression
from the mandate system, not to speak of the high British standard
— Lord Cecil’s only plea was not to let the better
stand in the way
of the good.
‘League Assembly’s Negative Record: No Progress on
Arbitration’, The Manchester Guardian (Manchester, 28 September
This article was also authored by
Manchester Guardian
anonymous ‘Special Correspondent’ in Geneva
League of Nations,
Discussion of the Draft Convention on Slavery and Amendments Thereto
mtg (10 September
1926), reproduced in League of Nations,
Records of the Seventh Ordinary
Session of the Assembly: Minutes of the Sixth Committee (Political
(League of Nations, 1926) 10 (‘
League of Nations, Sixth
Committee, Seventh Session, Second Meeting
League of Nations,
Draft Convention relating to Slavery Proposed by the Sub-Committee
sess (1926) art 2 (emphasis added),
reproduced in League of Nations,
Records of the Seventh Ordinary Session of
the Assembly: Minutes of the Sixth Committee (Political Questions)
of Nations, 1926) annex.
Ibid art 5.
League of Nations,
Draft Convention on Slavery: Draft Resolutions Submitted by the
Sub-Committee
(23 September 1926), reproduced in League of Nations,
the Seventh Ordinary Session of the Assembly: Minutes of the Sixth Committee
(Political Questions)
(League of Nations, 1926) 32. See also at 33–4.
League of Nations,
Slavery Convention: Report of the Sixth Committee
plen mtg (25 September 1926), reproduced in League of Nations,
Records of the Seventh Ordinary Session of the Assembly:
Text of the
(League of Nations, 1926) 130–7.
Temporary Slavery
Commission, Second Session, First Meeting
League of Nations,
Fifth Assembly, Seventeenth Plenary Meeting
) 130 (Dr Nansen, Norway).
League of Nations,
Sixth Committee, Seventh Session, Second Meeting
Temporary Slavery
Commission, Second Session, Seventeenth Meeting
Temporary Slavery
Commission, Second Session, Fourteenth Meeting
Slavery: Draft
Convention Submitted by the Sub-Committee and Examined by the Sixth Committee on
September 24
Draft Convention
relating to Slavery Proposed by the Sub-Committee
See Ulrike Davy,
‘Decolonizing Equality: The Legacies of Anti-Colonial Struggles at
International Labour Conferences, 1920–1940’
(2023) 23(3)
Rights Law Review
, 10. See also at 11.
See International Labour
Organization, Committee of Experts on Native Labour,
Opening of the
(7 July 1927),
reproduced in International Labour Office,
Committee of Experts on Native
Labour: Minutes and Report
(International Labour Office, 1928) 4
CENL First Session, First Sitting
The investigation was
divided into three areas of focus: public forced labour for
‘general’ purposes ‘in the interest
of the territory or
country viewed as a whole’; public forced labour for ‘local’
purposes ‘for the benefit
of a local community such as a village or group
of villages’; and forced labour for private purposes: International Labour
Organization, Committee of Experts on Native Labour,
Draft for a Report on
Forced Labour: Chapter II
(CENL No 3, 1927) 1.
International Labour
Organization, Committee of Experts on Native Labour,
Draft for a Report on
Forced Labour: Chapter VII (continued)
(CENL No 9(b), 1927) 1.
International Labour
Forced Labour: Report and Draft Questionnaire
(Report, 1929) 242,
1929 Forced Labour Report and Draft Questionnaire
The original of this part of the 1927
Draft for a Report on Forced Labour
is missing from the archival records, hence the 1929 version of the report
is relied on. While the 1929 version was amended in some
respects, the
surrounding discussion suggests these elements stem from the 1927
Draft for a
Report on Forced Labour
International Labour Office,
Draft for a Report on Forced Labour: Chapter VII
(CENL No 9, 1927) 6. It
suggested any such forced labour should be subject to three additional
requirements, however: that it should
only be possible where, in addition to
being necessary/essential, it was urgent; where it was impossible to obtain
voluntary labour;
and where the ‘work or service ... [could] be done
without endangering the present well-being of the existing population’:
3–4. Work of direct benefit to the community was also considered to
potentially merit an exception:
Forced Labour Report and Draft
Questionnaire
Draft for a Report on
Forced Labour: Chapter VII
Ibid 10–19,
Draft for a Report on
Forced Labour: Chapter VII (continued)
Draft for a Report on
Forced Labour: Chapter II
International Labour
Draft for a Report on Forced Labour: Chapter V
(CENL No 8, 1927)
Ibid. The phrase
‘intentionally or otherwise’ was significant here; pushing back
against the regressive impulse to suggest
that only intentional indirect
coercion was problematic.
Draft for a Report on
Forced Labour: Chapter VII (continued)
Draft for a Report on Forced Labour: Chapter V
Draft for a Report on
Forced Labour: Chapter VII (continued)
Draft for a Report on
Forced Labour: Chapter V
6–8. See also ibid 7. The report also observed the similarity between the
developments in question and ‘the similar
legal enactments of fifteenth
century England’: ibid 7
Draft for a Report on
Forced Labour: Chapter V
Draft for a Report on
Forced Labour: Chapter VII (continued)
1929 Forced Labour
Report and Draft Questionnaire
) 236. In contrast, the report
suggested that forced labour was destructive due to ‘the humiliation
inherent in compulsion’:
at 235. As noted above, the 1927 version of this
portion of the report could not be located in the archives; it seems likely this
text was included in the 1927 report, but it is possible the text was added over
the following two years. Certainly, however, the
text in question accords with
the general posture of the Native Labour Section’s 1927
Draft for a
Report on Forced Labour
International Labour
Committee of Experts on Native Labour: Minutes and Report
(International Labour Office, 1928) 3. British women’s organisations had
pushed for the inclusion of a woman on the panel but
to no avail: ‘Women
in Politics and Industry: England’s Backwardness’,
The Manchester
(Manchester, 3 January 1927) 9.
CENL First Session,
First Sitting
International Labour Organization, Committee of Experts on Native Labour,
Discussion on the Terms ‘Forced Labour’ and ‘Compulsory
Labour’ (Continued)
(7 July 1927), reproduced in International Labour Office,
Committee of
Experts on Native Labour: Minutes and Report
(International Labour Office,
1928) 8; International Labour Organization, Committee of Experts on Native
Discussion on the Terms ‘Forced Labour’ and
‘Compulsory Labour’ (Continued)
(9 July 1927), reproduced in International Labour
Committee of Experts on Native Labour: Minutes and Report
(International Labour Office, 1928) 23 (‘
CENL First Session, Fifth
International Labour
Organization, Committee of Experts on Native Labour,
Discussion of Questions
Nos 1–18 Contained in Part I of the Draft Questionnaire on Forced
sitting (4 December 1928),
reproduced in International Labour Office,
Committee of Experts on Native
Labour: Minutes
(International Labour Office, 1929) 11 (‘
Second Session, Second Sitting
Ibid 18–20;
International Labour Organization, Committee of Experts on Native Labour,
Discussion of Questions Nos 19–29 Contained in Part I of the Draft
Questionnaire on Forced Labour
(5 December 1928), reproduced in International Labour Office,
Committee of
Experts on Native Labour: Minutes
(International Labour Office, 1929)
International Labour
Organization, Committee of Experts on Native Labour,
Opening of the
sitting (4 December 1928),
reproduced in International Labour Office,
Committee of Experts on Native
Labour: Minutes
(International Labour Office, 1929) 4.
See International Labour
Forced Labour: Joint Memorandum of the British League of Nations
Union and the Anti-Slavery and Aborigines Protection Society
(CENL No 12, 15
June 1927) 2–3;
CENL First Session, Fifth Sitting
CENL Second Session, Second
CENL Second Session,
Second Sitting
supported Mr Lejeune’s point, suggesting that ‘the inhabitants of
Madagascar had on one occasion been informed
that they could not be forced to
work if they did not wish to do so’ with ‘[t]he result that for six
months it was impossible
to obtain a worker at any price’ and further
stated that ‘[i]t was the first duty of a Government to encourage industry
among the natives under their charge’: ibid.
For some interesting
reflections on Mr Taberer’s approach and role in South Africa in the
period, see Keith Breckenridge, ‘“We
Must Speak for
Ourselves”: The Rise and Fall of a Public Sphere on the South African Gold
Mines, 1920 to 1931’
(1998) 40(1)
Comparative Studies in Society and
CENL Second Session,
Second Sitting
addition, Mr Fremantle, Taberer, Merlin and Lejeune all united to challenge
language indicating that ‘[t]he practice
of instructing ...
[administrative] officers to persuade or encourage workers to engage themselves
under contract is objectionable
and resort should not be had to it’:
International Labour Organization, Committee of Experts on Native Labour,
Discussion on CENL No 5: Contract Labour
sitting (6 December 1928), reproduced in International Labour
Committee of Experts on Native Labour: Minutes
(International
Labour Office, 1929) 47.
In particular, Taberer
supported such measures on the grounds that ‘it was almost impossible for
natives to meet taxation without
seeking employment’: International Labour
Organization, Committee of Experts on Native Labour,
Discussion on Parts II
and III of the Draft Questionnaire on Forced Labour (Continued)
sitting (7 December 1928), reproduced in
International Labour Office,
Committee of Experts on Native Labour:
(International Labour Office, 1929) 58 (‘
CENL Second
Session, Seventh Sitting
’). The French delegates also challenged
recognition of the indirect compulsion created through land policies. French
resulted in the term ‘unjustified’ being added before
‘restrictions’ in the language condemning indirect
through ‘render[ing] difficult the gaining of a living by independent
unjustified
restrictions as to the possession, cultivation or
use of land’: International Labour Organization, Committee of Experts on
Native Labour,
Discussion of Part III on the Draft Questionnaire on Forced
Labour (Continued)
sitting (7 December
1928), reproduced in International Labour Office,
Committee of Experts on
Native Labour: Minutes
(International Labour Office, 1929) 60–1
(emphasis in original) (‘
CENL Second Session, Eighth
CENL Second Session,
Eighth Sitting
Albrecht Gohr also opposed taking a strong stance against vagrancy laws,
suggesting that ‘[a]ll members of the
Committee would agree that persons
who had no regular means of subsistence or who obtained them from sources which
they were unwilling
to declare, should be treated as vagrants’ and further
observing that ‘in all the countries of the world, vagrants were
work in reformatories or similar institutions’: at 62.
International Labour
Organization, Committee of Experts on Native Labour,
Discussion of Parts II
and III of the Draft Questionnaire on Forced Labour
sitting (5 December 1928), reproduced in International Labour
Committee of Experts on Native Labour: Minutes
(International
Labour Office, 1929) 29–30. Even while objecting, Merlin conceded the
substantive point, observing that the
policies in question ‘might have an
indirect effect in forcing natives to work’: at 29
International Labour
Organization, Committee of Experts on Native Labour,
Discussion on Document
CENL No 2: Contract Labour
December 1928), reproduced in International Labour Office,
Committee of
Experts on Native Labour: Minutes
(International Labour Office, 1929) 38.
International Labour
Organization, Committee of Experts on Native Labour,
Discussion on Document
CENL No 5: Contract Labour
December 1928), reproduced in International Labour Office,
Committee of
Experts on Native Labour: Minutes
(International Labour Office, 1929) 48.
This resistance would
not carry through to the final convention, however, in which the obligation to
immediately suppress forced
labour for private purposes was restored:
Labour Convention
CENL Second Session,
Second Sitting
This was the thrust of
Taberer’s recognition, for instance, while arguing in favour of the
taxation of local populations, that
‘it was almost impossible for natives
to meet taxation without seeking employment’:
CENL Second Session,
Seventh Sitting
CENL Second Session,
Second Sitting
CENL Second Session,
Eighth Sitting
1929 Forced Labor
Report and Draft Questionnaire
was largely the same as the 1927
a Report on Forced Labour
, with the incorporation of the amendments agreed
by the Committee of Experts on Native Labour, as well as a supplement
highlighting
laws — primarily negative, occasionally positive —
adopted in different colonial territories since the original report:
1929 Forced Labour Report and Draft Questionnaire
Ibid 1. The report also
called into question the previous frequent use of the terminology of
ILC Twelfth Session,
ILC, Sixth Sitting
British Empire was responsible for discussion of the subject being delayed until
1929 rather than 1928: see ‘Our London
Correspondence: The League and
Forced Labour’,
The Manchester Guardian
(Manchester, 15 October
ILC Twelfth Session,
ILC, Sixth Sitting
) 44 (Mr de
Quevedo, Government Delegate, Portugal).
Ibid 58 (Sir Granville
Ryrie, Government Delegate, Australia). See also at 57.
Ibid 53–4 (Mr
Cayen, Government Adviser, Belgium). Mr Cayen continued by observing that
‘[i]t would be impossible to
leave out of the world’s circulation
that part of the world’s wealth which is lying unused in the[]
colonies’ and
suggested that that wealth should be used to
‘finance[] and remunerate[]’ the ‘civilizing task’: at
International Labour
Conference,
Forced Labour: General Discussion (Continued)
sitting (3 June 1929) (Mr von Rechenberg,
Government Substitute Delegate and Adviser, Germany), reproduced in League of
International Labour Conference: Twelfth Session
(International
Labour Office, 1929) vol 1, 81 (‘
ILC Twelfth Session, ILC, Seventh
ILC Twelfth Session,
ILC, Sixth Sitting
Rao, Workers’ Adviser, India).
Furtwängler later echoed the same point:
ILC Twelfth Session, Seventh
Furtwängler, Workers’ Adviser, Germany).
ILC Twelfth Session,
ILC, Sixth Sitting
Rao, Workers’ Adviser, India).
ILC Twelfth Session,
ILC, Nineteenth Sitting
(Hadji Salim, Workers’ Adviser, Netherlands).
ILC Twelfth Session,
ILC, Sixth Sitting
Rao, Workers’ Adviser, India)
ILC Twelfth Session,
ILC, Seventh Sitting
Ross, Workers’ Adviser, British Empire).
Ibid 75 (Mr Wong,
Workers’ Adviser, China).
ILC Twelfth Session,
ILC, Sixth Sitting
Jouhaux, Workers’ Delegate, France). Mr Matsuoka, a Japanese
Workers’ Delegate, made a similar point, calling
for forced labour not to
be ‘limit[ed] and regulate[d] ... but [rather] ... abolish[ed] ...
entirely’: at 56 (Mr Matsuoka,
Workers’ Delegate, Japan). Matsuoka
also challenged the slavery/forced labour binary by suggesting that ‘even
most enlightened country the working classes have not yet succeeded in
escaping from the position of paid slaves’: at 56
ILC Twelfth Session,
ILC, Seventh Sitting
Furtwängler, Workers’ Adviser, Germany).
The Committee on Forced
Labour consisted of government representatives of the British Empire, France,
Italy, Germany, Portugal, the
Netherlands, Belgium, South Africa, India, Japan,
Liberia and Nicaragua; employers’ representatives of the same countries,
with the exception that Spain and China replaced Liberia and Nicaragua; and
workers’ representatives of the same countries,
with Italy and China
replaced by Sweden and the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes: League of
International Labour Conference: Twelfth Session
(International
Labour Office, 1929) vol 1, LXII–LXIII.
International Labour
Conference,
Minutes of the Committee on Forced Labour: Fourth Sitting
sess (1929) 8 (‘
ILC Twelfth Session, Committee on
Forced Labour, Fourth Sitting
Ibid 12. Mr Topalovitch
further pointed to ‘the solidarity between the workers of the metropolitan
country and the workers
in the colonies, a solidarity which was increasing every
day with the improvement of the means of communications’, a solidarity
which required, he suggested, the ability ‘for trade unions in the
metropolitan country to extend to the colonies’: at
International Labour
Conference,
Minutes of the Committee on Forced Labour: Fifth Sitting
sess (6 June 1929) 9.
International Labour
Conference,
Minutes of the Committee on Forced Labour: Ninth Sitting
sess (10 June 1929) 13 (‘
ILC Twelfth Session,
Committee on Forced Labour, Ninth Sitting
Vernon went on to suggest ‘it was a primitive method of which the British
Government did not approve, and he did not
defend it’, this condemnation
was hard to square with his praise for the approach a moment before:
International Labour
Conference,
Minority Report
sess, reproduced in League
of Nations,
International Labour Conference: Twelfth Session
(International Labour Office, 1929) vol 1, 1011 (‘
International Labour
Conference,
Article 408: Report of the Committee on Article 408
sitting (17 June 1929), reproduced in
League of Nations,
International Labour Conference: Twelfth Session
(International Labour Office, 1929) 394.
International Labour
Conference,
Forced Labour: Discussion of the Report of the Committee
(Continued)
sitting (20 June 1929),
reproduced in League of Nations,
International Labour Conference: Twelfth
(International Labour Office, 1929) 529 (Mr Ma, Workers’
Delegate, China) (‘
ILC Twelfth Session, ILC Twenty-Third
’); International Labour Conference,
Forced Labour:
Discussion of the Report of the Committee (Continued)
sitting (20 June 1929), reproduced in League of Nations,
International Labour Conference: Twelfth Session
(International Labour
Office, 1929) 549 (Mr Kupers, Workers’ Delegate, Netherlands). The workers
did have one success in the
concluding discussions. Unable to obtain agreement
to include reference to freedom of association, the workers proposed language
that called for ‘a definite procedure ... [to] be established to allow
forced workers, as well as all other native workers,
to present all their
complaints relative to the conditions of labour to the authorities and to
negotiate concerning them’:
Minority Report
) 1012. The language was adopted by 61
votes to 26:
ILC Twelfth Session, ILC Twenty-Third Sitting
International Labour
Conference,
Fourteenth Session: Forced Labour, Item I on the Agenda
(International Labour Office, 1930).
See International Labour
Conference,
Minutes of the Committee on Forced Labour: Second Sitting
sess (13 June 1930);
ILC Twelfth Session, Committee on Forced
Labour, Third Sitting
ILC Twelfth Session,
Committee on Forced Labour, Third Sitting
International Labour
Conference,
Minutes of the Committee on Forced Labour:
sess (14 June 1930) 7.
Mr Suzuki, a Japanese
workers’ representative, for instance, argued that the
‘theoretical’ absence of forced labour
in Japan disguised a reality
in which ‘forced labour’, or perhaps even ‘slavery’, was
‘concealed under
the term “long-term contract”’,
something the convention did not cover: International Labour Conference,
Forced Labour: Discussion
(25 June 1930), reproduced in League of Nations,
International Labour
Conference: Fourteenth Session
(International Labour Office, 1930) 278.
International Labour
Conference,
Forced Labour: Final Votes
sitting (28 June 1930), reproduced in League of Nations,
International Labour Conference: Fourteenth Session
(International Labour
Office, 1930) 480–1.
For more on Diagne, see
G Wesley Johnson, ‘The Ascendancy of Blaise Diagne and the Beginning of
African Politics in Senegal’
(1966) 36(3)
Africa: Journal of the
International African Institute
235; Irving L Markovitz, ‘The
Political Thought of Blaise Diagne and Lamine Gueye: Some Aspects of Social
Structure and Ideology
in Senegal’ (1969) 72(4)
21; Mamadou Diouf, ‘The French Colonial Policy of
Assimilation and the Civility of the Originaires of the Four Communes (Senegal):
A Nineteenth Century Globalization Project’ (1998) 29(4)
Development
Minority Report
ILC Twelfth Session,
ILC, Nineteenth Sitting
ILC Twelfth Session,
Committee on Forced Labour, Ninth Sitting
Forced Labour
) art 2(2).
Forced Labour
(Indirect Compulsion) Recommendation
For some thoughtful
reflections on the evolution of ‘soft law’ as a term, see Anna di
Robilant, ‘Geneaologies of
(2006) 54(3)
Journal of Comparative Law
Report of the Ad Hoc
Committee on Forced Labour
, UN ESCOR, 16
sess, Supp No 13, UN
Doc E/2431 (1953) (‘
1953 Report
’). This sidelining doubtless
to an extent stemmed from the Ad Hoc Committee’s mandate, which called on
it to study ‘forced
or “corrective” labour ... employed as a
means of political coercion or punishment for holding or expressing political
views’ specifically: at para 9. For further context on the
, also known as the ‘Mudaliar Committee Report’, see Maul,
Human Rights, Development and Decolonization
) 202–8; Anne-Charlotte Martineau,
‘Forced Labour’ in Matthew Craven, Sundhya Pahuja and Gerry Simpson
International Law and the Cold War
(Cambridge University Press,
2020) 271, 276–82.
In this context, this
article provides an important international complement to work that has
highlighted similar moments of opening
and contingent redefinition of
understandings of the boundaries of “forced” and “free”
labour on the national
level. For important studies of such issues in the United
States and United Kingdom, see Forbath, ‘Ambiguities of Free Labor’
); Robert J Steinfeld,
Contract, and Free Labor in the Nineteenth Century
(Cambridge University
Press, 2001).
authorities’ attempts to justify their power and policies on the basis of
“development” constituted at
best a partial victory, however. While
more sophisticated colonial powers attempted to burnish the new developmental
justification
for colonialism, workers’ delegates and others were well
aware of and highlighted the limitations in the manner in which the
being deployed, voicing a criticism of colonial power that would only grow
stronger in subsequent decades.
Moses DE Nwulia,
Britain and Slavery in East Africa
(Three Continents Press, 1975); Lauren
Benton, ‘Abolition and Imperial Law, 1790–1820’ (2011) 39(3)
Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History
355; Jenny S Martinez,
The Slave Trade and the Origins of International Human Rights Law
University Press, 2012); Lauren Benton, ‘Review: The Slave Trade and the
Origins of International Human Rights Law,
by Jenny S Martinez’ (2013)
Victorian Studies
); Matthew Craven, ‘Between Law
and History: The Berlin Conference of 1884–1885 and the Logic of Free
Trade’ (2015)
London Review of International Law
31; Erpelding
Perhaps most disturbing,
in retrospect, was the colonial powers’ firm support for collective
punishment, as clear a demonstration
of the racist, rule of law and human
rights-violating reality of colonial law as one might imagine. For more on the
connection between
public order and labour coercion in interwar European
empires, see Martin Thomas,
Violence and Colonial Order: Police, Workers and
Protest in the European Colonial Empires, 1918–1940
University Press, 2012).
While the early Cold War
conflicts that led to the
Convention concerning the Abolition of
Forced Labour
were an exception in this context, as they highlighted
certain forms of state-driven forced labour, they too imagined such forced
labour as relatively exceptional, helping, in a different way, to obscure the
potential for a more general discussion:
Convention concerning the Abolition
Forced Labour
, opened for signature 25 June
1957, 320 UNTS 291
(entered into force 17 January 1959). See, eg, Sandrine Kott, ‘Abolition
of Forced Labour Convention’ in Akira Iriye
and Pierre-Yves Saunier (eds),
The Palgrave Dictionary of Transnational History: From the Mid-19th Century
to the Present Day
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2009); Maul,
Human Rights,
Development and Decolonization
) 202–11; Sandrine Kott,
‘The Forced Labor Issue between Human and Social Rights,
1947–1957’ (2012) 3(3)
Humanity: An International Journal of
Human Rights, Humanitarianism, and Development
A similar point has been
recognised in the context of trafficking: Elizabeth Bernstein,
‘Militarized Humanitarianism Meets Carceral Feminism: The Politics of
Sex, Rights, and Freedom in Contemporary Antitrafficking
Campaigns’ (2010)
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society
FitzGerald, ‘Vulnerable Bodies, Vulnerable Borders: Extraterritoriality
and Human Trafficking’
(2012) 20(3)
Feminist Legal Studies
Sanja Milivojevic and Sharon Pickering, ‘Trafficking in People, 20 Years
On: Sex, Migration and Crime in the Global Anti-Trafficking
Discourse and the
Rise of the “Global Trafficking Complex”’
(2013) 25(2)
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
; Sallie Yea
‘Trafficked Enough? Missing Bodies, Migrant Labour Exploitation, and
the Classification of Trafficking Victims in Singapore’
(2015) 47(4)
1080; Sallie Yea,
Trafficking Women in Korea: Filipina
Migrant Entertainers
(Routledge, 2015).
The three developments
considered below are not the only ways in which the limits of the
Labour Convention
may be challenged. The discussion below mostly highlights
the first and second elements of the highlighted clause in the
Forced Labour
(Indirect Compulsion) Recommendation,
for instance. The Recommendation also
challenged the use of vagrancy and pass laws to indirectly coerce workers.
Unfortunately, both
vagrancy and vagrancy-type laws, along with other laws which
penalise poverty, remain globally commonplace today: see, eg, Christopher
Roberts, ‘Discretion and the Rule of Law: The Significance and Endurance
of Vagrancy and Vagrancy-Type Laws in England, the
British Empire, and the
British Colonial World’
(2023) 33(2)
Duke Journal of Comparative and
International Law
; Jean Galbraith et al, ‘Poverty Penalties as
Human Rights Problems’
(2023) 117(3)
American Journal of International
Contemporary immigration law regimes, moreover, which coerce labour
in ways analogous to pass laws, also remain a major mechanism
through which
workers are driven into precarious and coercive forms of work: see, eg, Cathryn
Costello, ‘Migrants and Forced
Labour: A Labour Law Response’ in
Alan Bogg et al (eds),
The Autonomy of Labour Law
(Bloomsbury, 2015) 189;
Strauss and McGrath (n
); Virginia
Mantouvalou, ‘Structural Injustice and the Human Rights of Workers’
(2020) 73(1)
Current Legal Problems
Forced Labour
(Indirect Compulsion) Recommendation
See also Hila Shamir,
‘A Labor Paradigm for Human Trafficking’
(2012) 60(1)
; Chuang (n
Mantouvalou, ‘Structural Injustice and the Human Rights of Workers’
) s II(a)–(b).
While not explicitly
emphasised, the connection between freedom of association and these other rights
was perhaps implicit at several
points in the original discussions, including
when Rao drew a connection between labour conditions and political repression,
Mr Backlund emphasised that ‘the progress of ... peoples towards
emancipation was intimately bound up with the establishment
of the right of
association’ and when Topalovitch emphasised the importance of the right
to freedom of association to the development
of international solidarity:
Twelfth Session, ILC, Sixth Sitting
ILC Twelfth Session, Committee
on Forced Labour, Fourth Sitting
See ibid. See above n
See above n
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.02 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter