URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/DTLJ/2000/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:54:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
White, Steve --- "Comment: Discovery of Electronic Documents" [2000] DigTechLawJl 1; (2000) 2(1) Digital Technology Law Journal 1
Comment: Discovery of Electronic
Steve White
White SW Computer Law
Introduction
Discovery involving electronic documents, such as email or software
source code, poses many issues that do not arise as commonly
with traditional
paper documents.
These issues include:
Working out which documents are discoverable or not:
task is much more non-trivial than it was in the past, having regard to the
quantity of data that businesses today produce.
Numerous Copies:
The ease of duplication and the propensity
to have multiple copies of data (in various versions for backup and other
leads to multiple intermediate versions of the same document being in
existence years after the final document was created. The
strict obligation to
discover copies of all documents becomes particularly important in this regard.
Unforeseen Copies:
Many copies of a document may be created
by machines in the ordinary course of processing such documents. These documents
information stored in each different document can be very significant and
can have real impact on the proceedings. However, without
significant technical
expertise and understanding of the computer systems involved, these documents
are often lost or not discovered.
Are the known documents recoverable?
In many cases, backup
storage techniques may have utilised superseded hardware and software and the
examination of the media can
be very difficult when the original equipment is
not compatible with modern equipment. For example, tape backups have over the
years utilised different recording formats and smaller and smaller tape spooling
devices and these simply are not usable unless
you have a tape reader that is
designed to read and house that particular sized tape cartridge or reel.
Who has control of the documents?
When off site records are
involved, it should be asked in whose possession and control the data is in and
whether such documentation
should be subpoenaed rather than discovered; for
example, web site logs stored by an Internet Service Provider.
Additional Costs:
The abovementioned factors all mean that
discovery is a complex and expensive exercise, the costs of which could exceed
in dispute. Particular consideration needs to be given to the costs
involved in ascertaining which documents are discoverable or
not, searching for
such documents and retrieving data included in the document.
This comment will examine these issues in more detail in the light of
recent case decisions.
Preliminary Discovery of
Electronic Documents
To understand the importance of electronic documents it is useful first
to look at its applications in a preliminary discovery scenario.
In matters involving information technology disputes or copying of
electronically stored materials, preliminary discovery of electronic
can play an important role in collecting evidence and identifying potential
defendants and causes of action. Often such
cases involve incidents in which
software or other electronic data is more crucial to the determination of a
matter than may be
the case in a normal commercial transaction which has been
documented electronically.
In the matter of
A2B Telecommunications Pty Ltd v Hinkley &
the plaintiff sought
an order pursuant to Rule 32.05 that the defendants make discovery of specific
documents. The plaintiff alleged
that the first defendant, Adam Hinkley
("Hinkley") had been an employee of the plaintiff from October 1995 until
September 1997
and, during the course of his employment, had developed source
code for certain computer software applications. The plaintiff further
that, prior to resigning from the employ of the plaintiff (without notice) and
moving to Canada, Hinkley deleted or encrypted
all copies of the source code on
the computer systems of the plaintiff.
In related proceedings,
Hotline Communications Ltd & Ors v Adam
Hinkley & Ors
Communications ("Hotline") obtained in 1998, by way of an Anton Piller order,
copies of source code for various software
applications and related materials
from Hinkley and other parties. Hotline claimed, amongst other things, that
Hinkley had deleted
certain source code from computers at Hotline
Communications' premises in Canada and had left in similar circumstances to
of his departure from A2B.
A2B sought preliminary discovery of the materials obtained by Hotline by
way of the Anton Pillar order to determine whether the source
code developed for
Hotline by Hinkley was the same, or substantially the same, as the product
developed by Hinkley during the course
of his employment by A2B.
It was found by Warren J that, notwithstanding A2B's suspicions, A2B
could not know of any similarity between the respective source
code until it had
the benefit of inspection of the documents it sought to be discovered. Following
inspection, litigation was subsequently
commenced by A2B against Hotline,
Hinkley and other parties based upon the similarities found between the source
code, the other
electronic information which was discovered and the analysis
that this made possible.
An application for preliminary discovery need not be for specific
documents; it may also be used in order to identify a respondent.
London Economics (Aust) Pty Ltd v Frontier Economics Pty Ltd
example of a matter in which the applicant sought discovery by certain parties
then employed by the respondent, who had been
formerly employed by the
applicant, of materials including, amongst other things, computer programs, data
files, computer tapes
and CD-Rom disks containing relevant information. The
applicant satisfied the Court that, in compliance with Federal Court Rules
15A rules 3 and 6, it had made reasonable inquiries to elicit the relevant
information and its inquiries had been unsuccessful.
In following Gobbo J in
G Breschi & Son Pty Ltd v AFT Ltd
, Finkelstein J found
that whilst it was not a legitimate use of Order 15A, rule 3 for parties to be
examined about their own involvement,
the rule can be used in a case where there
are many prospective defendants, none of whom have been sufficiently identified
as potential
defendants, to ascertain who might be the proper defendant.
Electronic documents may be particularly useful in such discovery because
they often contain a record of who has accessed, modified
or printed the
document and the time and date of such use. However, applicants must bear in
mind that the cost of such electronic
discovery may be high and, as in
, the applicant may be required to pay the costs associated with
Post issue discovery was first introduced in nineteenth century English
equity procedures and aims to provide the parties access
to all of the relevant
documentary evidence in each party's possession so as to prevent being
"ambushed" at trial. The process
involves an exchange of lists of documents
which are usually verified by an affidavit, following which each party may
inspect the
non-privileged documents set out in the opposing party's list.
Discovery is an invasion of the privacy and confidentiality of litigants,
but is incorporated into legal procedure because the public
interest in ensuring
justice is done between parties is considered great enough to outweigh the
interest in maintaining confidentiality.
However, discovery is not directed
towards assisting a party on a "fishing expedition". Only documents which relate
to the matter
in issue are discoverable, with it being sufficient justification
that the document would, or would lead to a train of inquiry which
would, either
advance one party's case or damage that of his adversary
The Federal Court rules Order 15, rule 15 requires that the Court be
satisfied that an order for discovery is, at the time when the
order is made,
necessary in the interests of a fair trial
It is common practice
for parties to categorise and limit the documents which they will seek and
provide access to. The choice
of such categories should be related to the
pleadings in the matter to assist in minimising the scope of discovery to a
A party is not compelled to discover a document which would tend to
subject him to a penalty and discovery will not be ordered in
proceedings which
are analogous to proceedings to enforce a penalty
A party may also
refuse to produce any document that may tend to bring him into the peril and
possibility of being convicted as
, which may be useful
in cases where electronic documents provide evidence of criminal activity such
as copyright infringement.
However, seeking to avoid discovery on such a basis
may prejudice a party's credibility.
Where a party has been ordered to give discovery, they are under an
ongoing obligation to discover any document not previously discovered
would be necessary to comply with the order
Thus, in cases
where further backup tapes are located or data is successfully recovered that
was previously unreadable, a supplementary
affidavit of documents must be
prepared and supplied to the other party.
After a directions hearing pursuant to Order 10, a party may, unless the
Court otherwise orders, require any other party to provide
Although there is no express limit on discovery, the Federal Court may limit
discovery under Order 15 rule 3 where appropriate.
In cases involving vast
quantities of electronic documents, the parties may be able to request that the
scope of inquiry in relation
to the electronic records be limited to avoid the
sometimes great expense of recovering data, where there is little chance of
information being supplied.
Criticisms of
Common criticisms of discovery include:
The objectives of discovery are not achieved due to discovery
being used as a delaying tactic, a fishing expedition or as a process
the other side's litigation costs; and
Even when useful, discovery is too costly.
If the costs of complying with orders for discovery are excessive this
should be brought to the attention of the Court. In cases
involving vast
quantities of electronic data, accurate estimates of the cost of providing
information in a useable form should
be determined and, where appropriate, used
to limit the required scope of investigation. If discovery orders are made by
there may be no consideration by the Court of the reasonableness of
discovery, or analysis of the possible costs and benefits of
the process.
Discovery ought not to be used by litigants as a weapon with the purpose
to delay, harass or drive the other party by exhausting
their litigation funds
or by otherwise forcing an early settlement. Demanding or producing an
overwhelming amount of irrelevant
documents or withholding documents can impose
a high cost, as can excessive legal argument about access to documents.
Options for controlling discovery through more intervention by the Court
include: a) keeping the level of discovery proportionate
to the type of case; b)
encouraging parties to confer and concur on the scope of discovery; and c)
greater use of 'informal discovery'
involving the exchange of relevant documents
without the need for verification.
Some of the principles relevant to an application for discovery were
summarised by Finn J in
Pasini v Vanstone
as follows:
A party does not have an unqualified right to discovery under the
Federal Court Rules.
General discovery will not be ordered as a matter of course,
discovery commonly being ordered only in relation to particular issues
defined categories of documents.
The rules of court do not place on judges the responsibility of
determining for the parties which of their respective documents are
required to
be discovered. Judges have not traditionally assumed such a role.
Where a proceeding is one for judicial review, discovery in that
proceeding is not to be treated otherwise than according to the
principles applicable in civil proceedings. Nonetheless, the nature of judicial
review proceedings is commonly such either
that the occasion for making an order
will not arise or that discovery will only be ordered in relation to a
particular issue or
Whether or when discovery will be ordered depends on the nature of
the case and the stage of the proceedings at which the discovery
With the rules of Court having prescribed the method by which
parties can obtain discovery or further discovery, and having regard
constraints imposed on discovery, it is impermissible to attempt to achieve
discovery through resort to the subpoena process.
These principles do not outline the circumstances in which a Court will
regard an order for discovery as necessary in the interests
of a fair trial,
however, important considerations must be the nature of the case and the stage
of the proceedings at which discovery
In relation to discovery orders in doubtful cases, Brennan J (as he then
W.A. Pines Pty Ltd v Bannerman
stated: "sufficient
is shown to ground a suspicion that the party applying for discovery has a good
case proof of which is likely
to be aided by discovery". This was contrasted
with the case where "the proceeding is essentially speculative in nature".
In matters involving vast quantities of electronic records, the hurdle to
surmount in relation to showing that a party is "likely
to be aided by
discovery" should perhaps be set somewhat higher, in order to avoid the
situation where one party is forced to sift
through huge amounts of
documentation for items which they contend will be of little assistance to the
other parties to the litigation.
Before extensive data recovery is required, the
parties should be given the opportunity to depose as to what the electronic
are likely to consist of and why these materials are likely to be of
little assistance to the other parties.
Problems associated with
Discovery of Emails and Other Electronic Documents
The Federal Court Rules define the word "document" to include any
material, data or information stored by mechanical or electronic
This definition says nothing about whether such electronically stored documents
must be in a readable format or not. As a result,
any data stored by the
organisation must be considered when providing discovery.
Despite conventional backup strategies that usually result in periodic
overwriting of backup media, there is the possibility that
copies of documents
may exist dating back several years due to lapses in applying the backup
strategy or retention of copies which
would normally have been discarded. For
example, when a backup tape is determined likely to be unreliable it may be
not re-used rather than being discarded. This could mean that years
of data will need to be reviewed to determine whether it contains
discoverable documents or not.
Usual back up procedures will need to be reviewed during litigation. The
obligation to not destroy relevant evidence during litigation
needs to be taken
into account so that electronic documents that only exist in electronic form on
backup tapes are not destroyed
by subsequent overwriting.
In the matter of
BT (Australasia) Pty Ltd v State of New South Wales
& Anor (No 9)
a large amount of
discoverable material existed as e-mails, backup tapes and other electronic
documents. BT (Australasia) Pty Ltd
("BT") filed a motion which claimed that
Telstra Corporation Ltd ("Telstra") had failed to comply with its discovery
obligations
in respect of electronic communications such as e-mails and other
electronic documents, and had failed to take appropriate steps
to prevent the
destruction of discoverable documents, including documents in electronic form.
In this matter, Telstra was found to have backup tapes dating back
several years despite standard procedures being in place that
would normally
prevent such long term storage by overwriting data tapes. In his judgment,
Sackville J was unsympathetic to the
concern that reviewing and retrieving
stored data is difficult and time consuming. His honour stated that "...I do not
technical sophistication is a prerequisite to a litigant or its
advisors making inquiries to ascertain whether discoverable electronic
communications or documents have been recorded and retained in a retrievable
A similar stance was taken by Mansfield J in
NT Power Generation Pty
Ltd v Power & Water Authority
, where the
respondents sought an order limiting the discovery of e-mail communications to
those which existed in hard copy form.
His Honour was not persuaded that, in the
interest of justice, the respondents ought to be excused from giving discovery
communications retained only electronically, notwithstanding the time,
expense and effort involved in doing so.
Given that the Court is quite comfortable with ordering the wide scale
review of e-mail correspondence, this may have implications
for employers'
obligations in relation to employees' privacy.
There have been several incidents, particularly in the US, involving
employer access to employee e-mail files. Employees more and
more commonly send
"personal" messages by e-mail rather than communicating by telephone or face to
face, which means there are
written records of statements that once would never
have been recorded and there is a common, unfounded assumption that anything
sent by e-mail is private.
Although there is undoubtedly an expectation that an employee's e-mail
will be confidential, most computer systems are structured
in a way that will
allow access to any stored data. Could an employer use indiscreet e-mails
located during the provision of discovery
to, for example, dismiss an employee
if the messages would not have otherwise been read?
Employers should consider consultation with employees in relation to
e-mail usage and monitoring and the implementation of well-publicised
understood policies. Employees should be briefed so as to inform them of the
backup and storage of data. In most computer systems,
"deleting" an e-mail does
not totally remove the document, but merely makes it more difficult to retrieve.
Employees should be
warned not to expect privacy within the email system, that
even "deleted" e-mail may be retrieved and that the company may read
messages. Companies with international operations may need to consider their
alert the Court to the fact
that orders for discovery may lead to breaches of such obligations.
The rules governing the use of email, particularly to external parties,
should be carefully considered, as it is common for e-mail
correspondence to be
less carefully worded than other forms of correspondence, particularly when it
is not proof read before being
sent. Employers should also consider the use of
messages to reflect the often preliminary thoughts or ideas of an employee that
may not have been reviewed by the employer, yet
e-mail may be construed by the
Court to reflect the employer's view.
Once a policy has been developed in relation to the use and storage of
email and other electronic documents, it is important for
management to liaise
with the information system managers in relation to backup procedures. It is
commonly considered that backup
information should be saved for long periods
with the view that "longer is better". Particularly if an organisation is in a
prone industry, there should be established procedures to delete
electronically stored documents from the backup media.
Of course, such procedures need to be implemented on the assumption that
the organisation has adequate records of documentation that
would be of
assistance to it in the course of litigation, stored elsewhere. The removal of
backed up materials should be done in
a systematic way to reduce the likelihood
of a heavy burden in relation to discovery being forced upon the organisation,
than from the view of destroying all possibly incriminating evidence.
Should there be a requirement for the term of retention being at least as
long as any applicable statute of limitations or regulatory
review period? At
the moment, there are no such restrictions in Australia specifically directed
toward electronic documents, but
this may be an area of change in the future as
more and more documents are stored only in electronic form.
However, having a backup and purging policy in place is only effective if
the policy is implemented correctly. For example, in the
case of discarded
backup tapes, are they simply thrown in the rubbish or is an effort made to
physically destroy the media so that
any stored data is irretrievable?
Similarly, storage media that has been overwritten may be able to be manipulated
in order to
recover the earlier recorded material if the time and effort is
Internal housekeeping will reduce the burden of discovery, but it does
not mean that copies of electronic documents will not be stored
by, for example,
the recipient of email messages, on disks and backup tapes of intermediate
external IT systems used to transmit
the email message, third party internet
service providers or merely on employees' laptops. Should a party's obligations
in relation
to discovery be interpreted so widely as to encompass all these
possible data repositories? It would seem unlikely that such an
order would be
made unless there was a very high probability that further relevant material
would be retrieved that is otherwise
not available.
It is very dangerous to assume that, merely due to thoroughly implemented
internal periodic deletion of electronic records, further
copies of certain
documents do not exist externally to the organisation's IT system. While
inquiries regarding third parties' backup
procedures may have been made, if
there is no control over the implementation of those procedures or subsequent
changes to the
procedures the possibility of copies of documents being in
existence must not be discounted. As an example, a programmer may keep
backups indefinitely due to previous experiences involving data loss. When
information has been recorded, even inadvertently
or without the knowledge of
the parties, it may be admissible as evidence, unless the Court considers such
intermediate or third
party storage as analogous to the interception of
telephone conversations.
The possibility also exists that a party may claim that lawyer-client
privilege for electronic documents has been waived as a result
of intentionally
giving a copy to a third-party for reasons other than providing legal advice,
such as for the purposes of communication.
Even if e-mails themselves are not recorded by third parties, automatic
recording of information for billing purposes (documenting
the message
transmission time, time and date of transmission, author address, and recipient
address) may be relevant if one party
is aided by the confirmation of
communication between parties regardless of the content of such communication.
For instance, where
one party may be claiming that a message had been sent on a
particular day, and the other party denies receiving it on that day,
log could be introduced as proof of the fact that the message was sent. This may
be particularly useful if the parties
are in dispute in relation to the timing
of offer and acceptance in contractual negotiations. An e-mail log could also be
to show that discovery provided does not include all e-mail messages
exchanged between the parties.
The application of the rules governing discovery need to be thoroughly
considered in this new business environment. Consideration
needs to be given to:
Greater emphasis on particular discovery;
Greater emphasis on who is responsible for the costs of discovery
at first instance;
Greater emphasis on complete indemnity costs being awarded in
circumstances where discovery is ordered and is later found to be completely
unnecessary;
The party seeking discovery's strategy - What documents does it
need? Who has those documents? What costs are involved? Is the request
practical? Does it need discovery experts?
The party resisting discovery's strategy - Is the request
relevant? Is the request necessary? Who is responsible for the cost?
The person from whom discovery is being sought - prediscovery
strategy - what records should be kept and for how long?
Whether procedural rules should be amended to take account of the
large amounts of commercial data that is only stored in electronic
Whether the Court should be assisted by any third party such as a
special referee in relation to such discovery applications; and
Whether or not discovery is being misused.
This paper is a guide only and should not be used
as a substitute for legal advice, readers should make their own enquiries and
seek appropriate legal advice.
[1999] VSC 76.
Proceeding No. 7673 of
Federal Court Rules Order 15A
[1999] FCA 932.
[1988] VicRp 14
[1988] VR 109.
[1959] HCA 23
(1959) 103 CLR 341.
Percy v General
Motors-Holden's Pty Ltd
[1975] 1 NSWLR 289.
Commissioner of Taxation; Ex parte Briggs
(1987) 13 FCR 389.
Commonwealth
(1983) 153 CLR 281.
Federal Court Rules
Order 15 rule 7A.
Order 15 rule 1.
Lord Keith of Kinkel
Harman v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[1983] 1 AC 280
380 as cited with approval by Spender J in
Mackay Sugar Co-Operative
Association Ltd v CSR Ltd
(1996) 137 ALR 183
[1999] FCA 1271.
[1980] FCA 79
(1980) 41 FLR 175.
Order 1, rule 4.
[1999] FCA 1669.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter