URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kang, H H --- "Use of role play and interview modes in law clinic case rounds to teach essential legal skills and to maximise meaningful participation" [2013] LegEdDig 29; (2013) 21(2) Legal Education Digest 46
Use of role play and interview modes in law clinic case rounds to teach essential legal skills and to maximise meaningful participation
Use of role play and interview modes in law clinic case
rounds to teach essential legal skills and to maximise meaningful
participation
Clinical Law Review
, Vol. 19, No. 1, 2012, pp 207-250
Law clinic rounds are meetings of all of the students in the clinic and their
supervising attorneys, including the clinic professors.
In these rounds, which
occur periodically, the participants exchange information about the projects on
which they are working, discuss
issues they are working through, identify next
steps, and ask their classmates for assistance in thinking through the issues in
With law clinic rounds, the instructions that students receive beforehand
vary quite a bit, from requiring very little preparation
(in fact none other
than involvement in a clinic case) to extensive. For example, our clinic’s
case rounds a decade ago much
more resembled a law firm meeting, where students
were not required to prepare in advance but were told that they were expected to
talk about the case they were handling, recent developments, and next steps in a
conversational, unstructured manner. Other clinics,
on the other hand, provide
specific, written instructions on the types of issues to cover. This approach is
similar to the one that
our clinic now requires for the students’ very
first case rounds – that students be prepared to provide a brief overview
of their cases, including information about their clients, the clients’
goals, the case status, and expected next steps.
Many rounds, especially regularly occurring rounds, are purposefully
unstructured – or relatively so – to give students
room to talk and
to learn as events occur. Giving this kind of freedom to students is essential
to their learning because aspects
of law practice that these novice student
practitioners themselves might reveal as important may not necessarily be those
professors may identify as a topic of discussion: what is obvious to us
professors may not be obvious to the novice practitioner,
and this gap may
provide an important opportunity for instruction.
In sum, rounds that are relatively unstructured capitalise on teachable
moments that naturally occur during the informational exchange.
In contrast,
highly structured rounds may discourage these discussions that lead to valuable
insights because the participants may
think that these issues stray too far from
the agenda.
Aside from rounds that rely on developments in the case to provide fodder for
the ‘aha’ moments that teachers find rewarding,
some rounds may also
explore specific topics or a given case in depth. In addition, there are rounds
that are called ‘case
presentations’, which are made by students
presentation skills and to seek their colleagues’ advice.
Rounds may also differ in the frequency with which they occur. Some clinics
hold rounds almost every week, whereas others hold them
just a handful of times
per semester.
In addition to serving as a forum for discussions between student peers and
their more experienced professors, rounds in many clinics
also appear to serve
the functions of – and take the form of – meetings that any
organisation typically convenes.
The essence of rounds is the communication that takes place among the
student-lawyers and their supervising attorneys (including,
of course, clinical
law professors) who comprise the law firm. This communication is essential in
most clinics because they operate
as law firms, and their members must
communicate about what the law firm is doing. Such meetings make communication
within the law
firm efficient by providing a forum where information is
exchanged among the members of the firm.
A discussion board or email may arguably be more efficient for communicating
a majority of the information that law clinic students
and professors must have
to be a team on a case. The reason that rounds happen face-to-face is, however,
to focus on the
interaction,
not simply on transmission of information.
Information sharing in these rounds typically occurs in the form of a
presentation where students describe the basic facts and status
of their cases,
what has happened in the case since the group last met, the particular decision
at issue, and the next steps the
student expects to take in the case. (Because
these rounds involve case presentations, clinical professors might use the two
case presentations and rounds, interchangeably). If there are significant
developments in the case such as a court appearance, the
student in charge may
give a lengthier report.
Rounds provide a face-to-face opportunity for novice professionals to observe
the many reactions of their classmates to the factual,
legal, social, emotional,
and political dimensions of their cases. That is, to the extent that advocacy
depends on how the audience
reacts to the advocate’s presentation, the
classmates’ empathy, agreement, puzzlement, or even anger may signal the
or weaknesses of the case, and such reactions may give the advocate an
opportunity to adjust the presentation. What students learn
face-to-face interchanges is that the legal force of an argument does not alone
make a case.
Regular meetings also serve to affirm the group’s identity and the
participating individual’s sense of belonging to the
group, and clinic
rounds serve to affirm the students as practising law together with other
students. By getting a larger picture
of the clinic docket, the students may be
able to see a correspondingly broader picture of what the clinic is trying to
for its various clients. For example, the cases in our clinic may
involve different administrative agencies and different forums,
but students see
that there is a theme to the cases we handle: fossil fuel based energy
generation hurts low-income communities and
communities of colour.
Beyond communicating the basic facts of a clinic case, rounds broaden the
students’ experience, and provide a teaching opportunity
training and teaching substance and procedure. Rounds expose students to cases
beyond the ones they are handling that
often involve different legal and factual
issues, clients, and procedural postures.
In clinics that handle litigation or engage in long-term policy work, rounds
provide students with the opportunity to see the full
potential progression of
their cases through other cases, even though in a given semester, the students
may not be able to see how
their own cases play out. They may be able to infer
from the progressions of other cases what could happen in their cases in the
Case rounds also provide an opportunity to teach substantive law in context.
In our clinic, where the docket includes cases that are
in both administrative
and judicial forums, case rounds provide an opportunity to teach administrative
law and civil procedure. Because
many students are not intensely exposed to
statutory and regulatory schemes by the time they arrive at the clinic, case
expand the students’ knowledge and, in the context of real
cases, provide opportunity to test and apply the lessons students
learn in other
While rounds have become an essential part of clinic instruction for all of
the educational opportunities they offer, there are inherent
challenges. Some of
the challenges include engaging the quiet student, as well as students who are
not assigned to the case that
is being discussed. Another challenge is ensuring
that professors provide enough structure so that these rounds, which tend to
clinical problems as they arise, maximise their educational potential.
Finally, clinical professors face the challenge of allocating
class time between
skills and substantive law training, on the one hand, and rounds, on the other:
there are so many substantive
subject areas and skills that students must learn
that case rounds, despite the educational value that the professors may
in them, may be neglected.
Case rounds that simultaneously combine several functions – such as
sharing information about the clinic docket and skills training
designs such as role plays can overcome some of these challenges. These
multipurpose rounds can provide a safe forum
for students to learn and practice
essential lawyering skills while delivering as much educational value as
traditional rounds.
We use a role play in which a student presenter assumes the role of an
opponent in her case, with her classmates assuming the role
that the student or
her client normally plays in the real case. The presenter’s classmates
(sometimes referred to in this article
as the ‘audience’) find out
the facts of the presenter’s case mostly through the presenter’s
answers to questions.
These rounds simultaneously provide information about case status, teach
skills, and provide the learning opportunities that are unique
A necessary starting point for determining the kinds of rounds to hold is to
determine the professor’s ultimate goals for the
rounds. It may also be
necessary to do an assessment of the students’ skills to determine the
students’ needs.
For our clinic’s role play rounds, I had in mind a list of goals based
on an assessment of my students’ needs and a set
of strategies to achieve
my teaching goals.
1. Students must understand the nature of persuasion and storytelling.
Competent entry-level lawyers must understand the nature of persuasion
and storytelling.
Potential Strategies for Achieving the Goal:
reading and explicit instructions asking students to think about storytelling
modes. Make time to discuss and reflect on story
lines that worked and why in a
debriefing session after students have a chance to tell their stories.
Instructors can also ask students
to identify an occasion when someone else was
successful or unsuccessful in persuading them and describe why.
2. Students must understand the other party’s arguments and
motivations and prepare an effective response. Goal:
Competent entry-level
lawyers must understand the other parties’ motivations, goals,
perspectives on facts, and legal analysis.
In other words, effective lawyering
involves understanding the other side’s story, and responding to it
effectively. Without
this preparation, lawyers can fail to effectively
anticipate and deflect opposing arguments, engage in preparatory factual and
research, and apprehend the true terrain of the client’s battle.
Potential Strategies for Achieving the Goal:
Have the students assume the
role of the opponent or some other party involved in the case. Students should
reflect on the experience
to see how they saw the case differently after the
presentation.
3. The presentation should be logically organised and contain critical and
relevant information. Goal:
Lawyers are called on to make presentations of
all kinds, most of the time to people who know less about the case than they do.
organisation or delivery ruins even the best story, as we all know. In
addition to organisation, competent lawyers must pay attention
elements and the potential trajectory of their case. The presentation should
thus ideally convey accurate information
goals, the procedural posture of the case, legal and factual issues (both
to the case), and next steps. As Professors Krieger and
Neumann explain, there are at least three models of organising facts: by
elements, chronology, or through a story mode. Students should begin to
experiment with different modes of storytelling to
learn which works best for
their stories.
Another important aspect of giving a presentation that novices neglect is the
importance of practicing a presentation to ensure that
the information that must
be delivered can be delivered within the allotted time.
Potential Strategies
for Achieving the Goal:
Provide explicit instructions that set forth the
professor’s expectation about organisation and content. The professor may
students to read about the three models of organising facts. Mostly,
however, providing students with an opportunity to give presentations
reflect and assess how they could be improved should lead to developments in
both the content and delivery of the presentations.
4. The audience should be fully engaged. Goal:
The instructor should
create a forum in which the audience is comfortable participating. Ideally, the
audience should participate
by paying attention to the content of the
presentation, actively thinking about the case, and contributing to
identification of legal,
factual, and ethical issues that the presenter must
consider to represent the client effectively.
Potential Strategies for
Achieving the Goal:
Rounds should be formally structured as a session in
which relatively short answers follow the listeners’ questions. Short
from the presenter are critical because overly long answers often fail
to engage the other participants.
5. The audience should learn the art of asking good questions, and the
presenter should pay attention to what the questions reveal
presentation. Goal:
Good questions bring to the surface unexamined
assumptions; introduce the potential for different interpretations of facts and
ambiguities in certain facts; and highlight aspects of a problem that
may have been neglected. Despite the critical function of questions
learning, I have observed that audience participation in traditional rounds is
generally limited to a few questions. In
many cases, not everyone participates.
Some students are afraid to ask questions. Students thus need to be encouraged
to ask questions
and have more opportunities to practice the art of asking
questions in a supervised setting.
In addition to learning to ask questions, learning to
questions is also a fundamental entry-level skill for lawyers. In oral argument,
for example, learning to listen to the judge’s
question and assessing the
judge’s thinking are critical skills for an advocate.
Strategies for Achieving the Goal:
Provide modelling. Provide timely
questions are good
at certain times.
One of the deficiencies that immediately became evident when we first
instituted this structured role play rounds was that students
had very little
experience asking questions, and that their lack of experience impeded the flow
of the presentation. Students literally
The first time the students tried the question-and-answer session, we
professors did not guide the questions. The result was that
the presentation
came out fairly jumbled. The presentations had little chronological or logical
coherence because the questions,
which were student driven, were not organised,
and students failed to ask follow up questions. After several failed tries, we
that instructor guidance was critical to ensure that the questions
followed some order –
chronological or grouped by subject
matter. Instructors must also ‘slow down’ the students to ensure
that they stay on
a given topic for a sufficient time to obtain all of the
relevant facts, and to guide them to do presentations in a clear, organised
I learned the importance of guidance also when I saw a video of Professor
Deborah Epstein teaching client interviewing skills to students
in the Domestic
Violence Clinic at Georgetown University’s Law School. Professor Epstein
designed a simulation in which she
plays the client whom her students in her
Domestic Violence Clinic interview. The video shows two successive interviews.
In the first
interview, two of the students in the class team up to interview
the professor-client. The team elicits some basic facts about a
woman whose
husband wakes her up in the morning and beats her. The client states that her
husband woke her up and ‘messed with
her’. After the first
interview, the details of the abuse are sketchy. In the second interview,
Professor Epstein again plays
the client, but she also steps out of role to
guide her students in asking follow up questions to elicit specific facts in
chronological
order. In response to specific follow up questions about what the
client meant when she used certain words such as ‘messed
and taking the client through what happened that morning step by step, the
client reveals that, when she said that
her husband ‘messed with
her’ when he woke her up, she meant that he threw water on her as she lay
in bed, pulled her
by the hair to the floor from the bed, and kicked her with a
heavy boot.
When Professor Epstein reveals those facts, the students are shocked, as I
was in watching the video, and they realise that they missed
those facts in the
first interview. They are then forced to reflect on the difference between the
two interviews – why the
second interview that was conducted in detail in
chronological order resulted in critical information they missed the first time.
Although the purpose of the demonstration was to illustrate how a class can be
designed backwards with goals in mind, I also took
away from it that it is
important for instructors to guide and model the questions that students should
ask when they are novice
interviewer-interrogators.
The instructor can also help guide the presentation by asking logical follow
up questions if not asked by the student. The sequence
of questions should be
designed to allow students to build upon previous questions and responses,
provide reasons, make connections
between ideas and causes and effect, and probe
alternative universes and perspectives.
While many benefits have compelled our clinic to use the opponents rounds,
professors considering using this or other structured rounds
should consider
some of the shortcomings of the method. Some of the shortcomings include the
unsuitability of the method to presentations
involving predominantly legal
issues; the time-consuming nature of the presentations; and the challenges that
the question-and-answer
format pose to the professors facilitating the role
In law clinics around the country, case rounds are a common feature of the
seminar courses accompanying the clinic curriculum. The
role play aspect, where
our students assume the role of their opponents, has improved their ability not
only to anticipate the other
side’s legal arguments, but also to research
and discover facts and story lines that they might have otherwise overlooked.
the same time that students are learning these skills, they have had the
opportunity to learn to think like a lawyer and to gain
insights about
professional reasoning, judgement, and values. Combining the elements of
traditional case rounds such as reflection
with opportunities to practice
essential lawyering skills of storytelling, counter-analysis, and interrogatory
basics has had many
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (60.4 KB)
PDF format (3.98 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter