URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2018/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:50:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
de Lint, Willem; Marmo, Marinella; Groves, Andrew; Laughton, Victoria --- "Knowledge Exchange: Collaborative Reflexivity on Self-Medicated Victims of Crime" [2018] CICrimJust 9; (2018) 30(1) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 19
Knowledge Exchange: Collaborative Reflexivity on Self-Medicated Victims of
Willem de Lint,
Victoria Laughton
Collaborative research projects with service providers and their clients are
becoming increasingly important for capturing a more
comprehensive understanding
of criminological matters. This article examines the role of
academic–practitioner dialogue and
collaboration in framing the concepts
and protocols for an empirical study of
self-medication among victims of crime. It reflects on the dynamic and
nuanced encounters between criminologists, a victim support
agency and victims
of crime who identified as having self-medicated. Drawing from critical realist
reflections on multi-agency partnerships,
we offer a discussion of the benefits
and hindrances for victims of such engagements, and identify the ethical
implications of the
practice of victim research and academic–practitioner
collaboration. We reflect on the problems of authorisation, empowerment
unexpected outcomes of such research, in particular how the victims in our study
appeared to place the researchers on the therapeutic
continuum and what this
means for victim research.
collaborative research – victims of crime –
victim research –
self-medicated victims – multi-agency partnerships – Australia
Introduction
Research may be both scientific and engage in, advocate or take an activist
approach to social or political change (Levin & Ravn
2007; Belknap 2015;
Carroll 2016). In the social sciences, in particular, there is a longstanding
imperative that research makes
a case for direct societal relevance (Levin &
Ravn 2007) or ‘impact validity’ (Massey & Barreras 2013).
or activist research (Hyman 1995; Drucker 2013; Belknap 2015) may build
on the knowledge acquired from methodologically sound study
and bring this to
modest or less modest interventions in practice or policy. In this way,
researchers may not only analyse a policy
regime, but also develop or transform
a policy agenda (Edwards & Hughes 2012, pp. 436–7) and reflexively
collaborate (Banks
& Armstrong 2014) to drive a transformative agenda
(Edwards & Hughes 2012). As per Levin and Ravn (2007, p. 2), ‘engaged
research involves both researcher(s) and “researchee(s)” who work
together on problem definition and problem solving’,
which can result in
‘a joint process of agenda setting, experiments, reflection, and
analysis’ (p. 3). Despite the obvious
potential gains, there are still
only a handful of published accounts of research collaborations that reflect on
the experience of
collaboration (Banks & Armstrong 2014, p. 37).
The academic–practitioner knowledge discovery and exchange circuit is
explored in the criminology literature in different contexts
(Carlen 1985; Henry
& Mackenzie 2012; Steinheider et al. 2012; Ponton 2014; Henry 2017; Lumsden
& Goode 2017). Recent reflection
on academic–practitioner
collaboration reveals that more attention has been paid to research conducted
rather than
service providers (Goode & Lumsden 2016).
In community–university research partnerships a focus on
‘collaborative
reflexivity’, according to Banks and Armstrong (2014,
p. 37), is desirable if the object is ‘to enhance learning from
research process and contribute toward developing sustainable and ethical
research collaborations’. Praxis is, therefore,
as Levin and Ravn (2007,
p. 1) define it, where ‘researchers engage in a social field in pursuit of
solving important local
problems, while at the same time combining this with a
scientific knowledge generation process, and this may be reflexive, designed
incorporate ‘co-inquiry action research’ (Banks & Armstrong
2014, p. 37). Engaged research, therefore, has the
capacity to develop both
local knowledge and new knowledge (or theory) for the scientific community. Such
engagement in collaborative
research is considered to consist of meaningful
dialogue with participants involved in practical problem solving through a
of joint knowledge generation (Levin & Ravn 2007, p. 2). This
article shares this approach and aims to contribute to the understanding
reflexive research by maintaining that collaborative research projects produce
more than evidence-based tools for future intervention.
Victim Support Service (‘VSS’) is a statewide, not-for-profit
organisation in South Australia (‘SA’) that
has been assisting
victims and witnesses of crime since 1979, providing therapeutic and practical
support to 40,000 people affected
by crime each year. In 2011, VSS extended an
invitation to Flinders University criminologists to form a research partnership
the purpose of filling the knowledge gap regarding self-medication by
victims of crime (hereafter referred to as ‘the self-medication
project’). Self-medication is understood as the consumption of alcohol and
other drugs (‘AOD’), whether prescribed
or non-prescribed, or licit
or illicit use, in response to trauma. The self-medication project was conceived
as a way to enhance
support for victims and their families, through
collaboration between academics and victim advocates, by giving a voice to and
knowledge of victims of crime who have tried various approaches to
managing their trauma symptoms, including self-medication. How
victims cope with
unresolved trauma or post-traumatic stress disorder (Frieze et al. 1987; Ullman
2003; Morrison et al. 2011; Jordan
2013) is the subject of longstanding
criminological interest (see Jacobsen et al. 2001; Logan et al. 2002). Yet a
close look at the
literature in this area revealed that only a handful of
empirical studies internationally examine reflexive responses regarding
use and victimisation (Morrison et al. 2011; Flynn & Graham 2010;
Ullman 2003; Guggisberg 2012; de Lint et al 2017). The historic
lack of research
has meant that it has been difficult for victim support and other criminal
justice services to employ evidence-based
resources and tools to provide
information and support to victims of crime.
This article identifies how, alongside building knowledge in the victim
research space, the project represents a unique platform for
. This platform has fostered a range of positive and emancipatory
outcomes, for victims, practitioners and researchers alike. In turn,
implications for the project as well as victim research in general. By
conducting research with VSS and victims themselves,
we have been offered a
unique opportunity to reflect on how victims may use the research environment as
part of their recovery journey.
In these ways, this project contributes to the
development of a public research agenda that can influence victim-focused
policymaking
— an area that has been scrutinised by a number of academics
in recent years (see, among others, Lumsden & Goode 2017).
The article is divided into four sections. In the first section we explain
how the partnership, the project and its methodology came
the research within broader social, political and academic boundaries. After the
exploration of the theoretical
lens of critical realism in the context of victim
research offered in section two, the third section addresses the role of
academic–practitioner
dialogue and collaboration in framing the concept of
authorisation, particularly by adding layers to victims’ recovery
narratives.
We also reflect on unexpected research outcomes, in particular how
participants in the self-medication project appeared to place
the researchers on
the therapeutic continuum and what this means for victim research. In the final
section, we discuss the benefits
and hindrances of such research for victims and
research community partnerships, inclusive of the ethical implications.
of the challenges faced, lessons learned and potential future
research directions brings the discussion to a conclusion. This article
on dynamic and reflexive encounters between criminologists, VSS and
self-medicating victims of crime.
Context and background of the partnership
The first of its kind in SA, the self-medication project represented an
intensive and collaborative effort by criminologists and front-line
practitioners to address the knowledge gap concerning AOD in victims’
experiences of trauma, drawing on their voices
and reflection. Specifically, VSS
and criminologists from Flinders University established a research partnership
from 2011 to mid-2017
to address the dearth of empirical research on
self-medication by victims of crime, with consideration of the impact of
self-medication
on future victimisation, and health and welfare needs.
For victim service agency practitioners, self-medication by victims of crime
is often seen as the elephant in the counselling room.
Self-medication, through
the use of both alcohol and licit or illicit drugs, has been anecdotally linked
to victimisation by health
and other practitioners. Crime victims of all types
can experience trauma, and reactions to trauma vary in severity and duration.
For many victims, enduring a traumatic experience can leave them struggling with
upsetting emotions and frightening memories, which
can take time to overcome.
Research has suggested that AOD consumption may increase vulnerability to
greater risks and re-victimisation,
as well as criminal offending (Laslett et
al. 2015; see also Kaysen et al. 2007; Morrison et al. 2011), as part of an
enduring cycle
of violence and victimisation. However, to date it has been
difficult to determine the nature and extent of the association between
victimisation and self-medication, and this generated practitioner support for
the collaborative partnership approach employed in
the Flinders University
In SA, the non-profit VSS has been serving crime victims for nearly 40 years.
VSS provides holistic support to all victims of crime,
in the form of targeted,
pragmatic and therapeutic assistance, including counselling and advocacy court
support (VSS 2016). At the
heart of VSS is the belief that all victims of crime
should have access to high-quality, expert support. VSS services include
information
and advocacy, counselling, practical assistance, and support for
victims of family and domestic abuse. The majority of referrals
facilitated by the organisation’s longstanding partnership with South
Australia Police (‘SAPOL’). A
Memorandum of Understanding
(‘MOU’) between VSS and SAPOL clarifies procedures and roles between
staff of both organisations,
in particular, the Victim Policy Section, Victim
officers, counsellors and Victim Support Coordinators within VSS. For example,
in 2014–15, half of all new referrals to VSS
came from SAPOL, largely due
to the MOU (VSS 2016). In the same period, other referral pathways to VSS
included self-referral via
the VSS website and email (4 per cent of new
referrals), family and friends (15 per cent of new referrals), other criminal
agencies (6 per cent of new referrals), and medical professionals (3 per
cent of new referrals).
The initial connection between VSS and Flinders University researchers was
generated through a program of student internship, started
in 2009, which later
led to a consultancy and informal discussions around research issues identified
by VSS. Throughout 2010–11,
the relationship between Flinders University
researchers and VSS was strengthened by proactivity at both the senior and
junior levels
of each organisation, involving ongoing discussion of research
opportunities as well as the appointment of Flinders University graduates
roles at VSS. After obtaining ethics clearance from the Flinders University
Social and Behavioural Research Ethics Committee,
the research team designed a
survey instrument in consultation with VSS paid and volunteer staff. The
legitimacy of the research
process required buy-in or confidence from
participants in the survey instrument and its implementation, and volunteers
gatekeepers for participant recruitment (Saunders 2006; Creswell &
Plano Clark 2007). Since VSS volunteers functioned as the
intermediary in the
research process, responsible for contacting victims via telephone and assisting
them with completion of the
survey, a training program was employed to ensure
that these volunteers held appropriate knowledge and skills relevant to the
content, method and ethical parameters. Once we had a final version of
the survey, the volunteers contacted those victims who, since
December 2012, had
given consent to be contacted for research purposes. This involved a robust
screening process in that a significant
proportion of VSS clients were not
facing not only
VSS but all victim support agencies. This problem is
particularly exacerbated by the fact that many victims of crime choose to move
house or change their contact details as strategies to improve their safety or
aid their recovery process (Zorza 1995; de Lint &
Marmo 2018). Regardless,
most of the clients who were contactable agreed to complete the survey. Upon
completion, victims were asked
if they could be contacted for interviews. While
more than two-thirds (69.6 per cent, or 71 out of 102) ticked ‘yes’,
when we sought to re-engage them in 2014–15, a high percentage were
reluctant to have a one-to-one session, resulting in only
15 interviews being
conducted. This outcome is common within victim studies, however, as confirmed
by studies on hard-to-reach populations
within the wider research methodology
literature (Creswell & Plano Clark 2007; Lord & Cowan 2011). Moreover,
as noted in
further detail later in this article, there is much to be gained
from the encounter with those participants who have engaged with
the project,
which justifies an approach centred on knowledge exchange.
Between 2012 and 2016, qualitative interviews with victims (
focus group interviews with VSS counsellors (see de Lint & Marmo 2018)
2) were conducted to assist in interpreting the quantitative data from
the survey instrument (
=103). The results supported one of the initial
hypotheses presented by VSS to the researchers that the post-victimisation
is associated with a considerable increase in AOD consumption. The
qualitative interviews added depth where the survey failed to
support the other
hypothesis that validation from external network supports would reduce AOD
consumption (de Lint & Marmo 2018).
Accordingly, given that there is already
some research on the dynamic between academic researchers and support agencies
there is scope for further analysis in this area), this article
focuses on the further issue of how victims may use the research
environment may
incorporate their participation in research into their overall recovery journey.
Therefore, this article does not
analyse the focus group findings, instead
drawing from the victims’ interviews.
At the time of collection of the survey instrument, the local newspaper
The Advertiser
) ran a story on the problem of self-medication by crime
victims (Hegarty 2013). In 2015, the national media picked up on the project
ran stories at the national level, including an interview with one of the
authors on ABC TV national news (Founten 2015). Some
former VSS clients who
watched the program contacted VSS and asked to meet with the researchers.
However, these former clients could
not be contacted by the research team
because VSS’s mechanism to record client consent to be contacted for
research purposes
had not been implemented at the time these clients accessed
the service. Even if they represent a small fraction of the respondents
able to interview, they offered us an insight into victims’ AOD
consumption over time and confirmed the significance
of this enquiry into an
issue that is worth exploring more closely and systematically.
Knowledge acquisition
An important intervention into the policymaking in the mid-1980s was a
marriage of critical approaches to crime control and a realist
appreciation of
empirical data that required or suggested more respect for the lived experience
of victims of crime in real (as opposed
to ideal) communities (Bhaskar 2008;
Matthews & Young 1992; Matthews 2014). In this vein, recognising the
importance of victimology
surveys and overcoming the neglect of community crime
and victim representation in the criminal justice system emerged as objectives
of restorative justice advocates (Hough & Mayhew 1983; Jones, MacLean &
Young 1985). In much work focused on refining understanding
of and intervention
in the square of crime (representing the interrelationships between the victim,
state, community and society),
critical criminologists sought to provide
policymakers with an alternative to ‘just deserts’, ‘zero
tolerance’,
‘truth in sentencing’ and other right-of-centre
crime policy innovations (Kinsey, Lea & Young 1986; Matthews &
1992; Sim, Scraton & Gordon 1987). The agenda of critical realism concerned
the mechanisms or means that empower and disempower
community and victim in
their lived reality. Against a more emancipatory or socialist reading of state
and society, left realism
was born out of the effort to draw attention to the
circulation of offenders and victims within communities and state agencies and
to reconstitute victims as power brokers. As recounted in Walklate (2015), left
realism brought together the victim survey (see Hough
& Mayhew 1983) and the
‘lived realities of victimization’ to better express the ‘the
experiences of victimization
and offending’ (see Matthews 2014). In this
regard, support networks are conceived as either providing or blocking an
emancipatory
agenda for the marginalised population of victims of crime (Bhaskar
Authorising victims: What’s new in the
The identification or stipulation of subjects by authorised actors or knowers
is fraught. There is a long tradition that suggests
that formal intervention can
be damaging to social integration, particularly given the dilemma that such
intervention is permitted
or expected on the basis of an attribution of need
that often stipulates the signified as a one-dimensional actor (that is,
offender, client, patient or victim, for example). As is well
documented in the literature (Parsons & Bergin 2010), this tends
signified (victim) in an institutionally ladled repeat performance (a
self-fulfilling prophecy) of secondary victimisation.
On the other hand, within
victimology the act of authorising is directly connected to validation as an
important if not crucial step
in the recovery process. In this regard, to the
extent that that narrative is ideographic, a unique and non-replicable property,
the recovery of the victim as an author or co-author of victimology accounts is
regarded as a core dimension in those victimology
traditions that pay greater
attention to the power dynamic in victim constructions (such as critical
victimology: see McGarry &
Walklate 2015).
As Matthews (2009, p. 352) argues, the
grounding of social structure
from the actor standpoint is important for critical evaluation because that
structure is ontologically deep, which is to say that
it shapes and to some
extent determines how phenomena are known; it involves ‘enduring relations
between the structural position
of actors’. Capture, and testing, of novel
reconceptualisations in the discovery of possible empirical
‘realities’
is at the heart of the interaction between agency and
research actors and actions. Revision and reinterpretation or modification
subjects occur as a consequence of the bilateral exchanges between parties in
the network (which in this context include support
services, justice actors,
university representatives, counsellors and victims). In an
‘interprofessional network’
(see Hood 2012), the research actor is entwined in the mandates of both
justice and therapeutic actors. He or she seeks to (re)invest
generation into a stipulation or referent of ‘victim’ as a node in
the policy process, often (but certainly
not always) contributing to restorative
justice public policy.
For the victim of crime, the network has snakes and ladders, to use an
analogy. To put it in Latourian terms, the network comprises
materials comprising associations and entanglements (Latour 2005, p. 8). The
victim’s network of associations includes
the offender and sometimes
physical as well as psychological injury and trauma (as an obdurate object) in
addition to therapists,
police officers, prosecutors and other legal and court
workers, counsellors and psychologists or psychiatrists, and friends and
social supports (Budde & Schene 2004; Liang et al. 2005; Latta
& Goodman 2011). For some victims, their network might also
include the
media. For the victims we surveyed and interviewed, university researchers also
formed part of their network, and this
was a novelty, something that did not fit
neatly with therapeutic or justice interests and discourses. In the intersection
researcher, therapeutic discourse and juridical discourse, the
subjectivity of the victim is changed or transmogrified to align with
interests and values of these various actors/discourses
Our study involved subjects who were pre-authorised by actors, including the
police, the courts and (persons n) the therapeutic community
counsellors). For our cohort, at least, this formal network of actors had the
authority to receive and process people, to
accept or deny them. To again use
Latourian terms, they were pulled through obligatory passage points. Our cohort
underwent further
authorisation in two respects. First, they were identified or
named through the selection criteria of the interprofessional network
included the Flinders University ethics committee and the research team. Second,
they volunteered to contribute an account of
victim self-medication, an
important step in empowerment. In this way, although ‘vulnerable’,
they were willing and able
to tell their story, re-offering themselves for
validation or authorisation according to a unique (for them) set of
institutional
or discursive criteria.
The encounter
The encounter resets or modifies pre-existing network relations. It is a
moment when, following address by another actor or party,
each actor resets his
or her respective position in the support network. In this, the victim (referred
to hereafter in the female,
for simplicity) is reified and multiplied as a
signified. Already
by police and justice officials as a complainant
or witness and the therapeutic community as a victim-client, she is now
encountered
by the researcher as a source of knowledge generation. As a
, she is reflexive on victimhood. She is asked, implicitly and
explicitly, to reflect on the ideographic material that comprises her
story, and in so doing, and along with the researcher, objectifies herself.
The incorporation of the researcher into the victim network provides for a
further victim alignment. Accordingly, as per critical
realism, the
understanding of networks is expanded to take note that the researcher and
practitioner are engaged in a mode of intervention
that is reflexive and
dynamic. In practice, respondents refine the researcher reflexivity; they
incorporate the researcher node into
their formal support network. While perhaps
for some this entails an explicit rejection of a therapeutic reflexivity, it may
nonetheless
be incorporated into the narrative of recovery. In this regard, the
discourse of recovery is expansive, and adaptive to research
cues as actors
attempt to realise abstract assumptions through their own concrete examples and
experience. In addition to the victim’s
alignment of their account with
the discourse of criminal justice and therapeutic agencies, the victim modifies
their self-identity
to accommodate the perceived academic review. For example,
more than one of the respondents in the study described historical abuse
researchers that had not been previously disclosed. They did so in the context
of building a narrative account of their victimhood,
one that they set up to
assume an ‘objective’ distance from considerations of therapeutic
need or just deserts. As one
interviewee remarked, ‘I wanted to take part
in this [interview], because so many people that are victims do use, do
self-medicate
and it’s just not understood and it should be’ (VSS,
Interviewee ID012).
Exemplary also are the accounts of respondents who took the face-to-face
interview process as a way to self-reflect freely on their
situation and
recovery patterns against the grain of the therapeutic requirements. These
respondents indicated in their recounting
of how AOD consumption enmeshed with
their recovery narrative that they perceived the researcher to be distinct and
removed from
therapeutic or juridical accountability. For instance, one of the
respondents, an assault victim who was taking advanced tertiary
sociology, appeared to capitalise on the direction of the research inquiry to
reflect on her recovery narrative in greater
depth than what she had achieved in
counselling. Similarly, another respondent whose daughter was killed by his
partner, took the
opportunity to elaborate on the support he had received
inclusive of his categorisation as non-responsive to counselling. He used
research as an alternative platform to reflect on his self-identity inclusive of
what he would or would not share in a counselling
Flinders researchers were perceived as a means to reflect on the therapeutic
and juridical connections (the latter in terms of secondary
victimisation), but
at other times we were drawn into that therapeutic discourse. During debriefing
with VSS and its counsellors,
it was clear that the respondents had perceived
the researchers to be part of a therapeutic continuum. That is, in the eyes of
participants, the role of the research team had transitioned from an
exogenous position of academic review to an integrated part
interprofessional network, such that the researchers were mandated to provide
support and guidance, listen and help the victims
to build confidence to
navigate the recovery process. Where researchers ‘sit’ on the
therapeutic continuum in relation
to friends, family, police, hospital staff and
victim support agencies appears contextual and requires further exploration;
nonetheless,
victims’ positioning of them on this continuum represents an
important research outcome.
For the victim, of greatest importance is that research participation
(inclusive of insight and self-reflection) may boost or advance
their place on
the recovery narrative. In many ways, the interview supports a collaborative
reflexivity that fosters a cathartic
release. Interviewees position the
researcher on the therapeutic continuum and, to use the terms of naïve
realism, anticipate
an emancipatory outcome. The researcher-interviewee
interaction interrupts or challenges the narrative flow and therapeutic
introspection,
producing at least the possibility of greater insight into the
The researchers in this study developed an appreciation of, and began to
incorporate, at first somewhat unwittingly, the practices
if not the knowledge
and the assumption that a robust concept of ‘network of supports’
includes their interaction with
clients and the functional dynamics of the
interprofessional network itself. Universities and government agencies may
develop ethical
requirements governing research on victims, but these are
reconceptualised by researchers and practitioners in the ongoing attempt
develop formal and informal networks as obstacles or conduits. We found that
developing an intelligible narrative that connects
agency mandate with victim
recovery requires taking note of the situational context of the empirical
Victim respondents are predisposed to view the research as a context for
their recovery, and researchers, in turn, are drawn in through
the therapeutic
narrative toward viewing respondents as more or less supportive of a knowledge
agenda. However, for researchers,
knowledge generation is set up as an abstract
value which is acquired from data analysis, with respondents more or less leaky
providing that data. If theory generation is by default based on a
sterile and objective encounter, that default position was for
us, challenged by
the encounter with the emotional force of the victim respondent. This forced us
to consider a more interactive
or real time exchange of research value or
insight for respondent data.
Empirical research, like the encounter between victim, agency and research
actor, is a site in which hypotheses, conceptualisations
and expected
conclusions may shift on uncertain institutional or onto-epistemological ground.
While uncertainty is explicitly delimited
a property to be excluded by design — in most research programs it is
also a discursive space, or place of novel discovery.
By acknowledging the
uncertainty, or unpredictable dynamism, of the encounter between agency,
researcher and victim, it became possible
to recognise and incorporate the
ideographic character of both victim experience and research discovery.
Knowledge exchange: networking and partnership building
In this section, we offer a reflection on the university–community
research partnership. There is a widely acknowledged need
for collaborative
partnerships that build the capacity of support services for crime victims (see
Holder, Leary & Frost 2013;
Banks & Armstrong 2014; Belknap 2015).
Partnership encourages community participation (by victims and researchers) in
decision-making,
but also fosters the development of knowledge and targeted
strategies across a much wider range of issues (including disadvantage,
and violence) with the aim of enhancing service delivery (Goris & Walters
1999; Entwistle et al. 2007). As identified
in the wider networking literature
(see Entwistle et al. 2007), partnerships may involve diverse actors from a
range of backgrounds,
who draw on various resources including new and often
unexpected ways of thinking, which in turn can result in research that is not
conducted according to rigid and often uncritical internal systems (as is the
case in many criminal justice agencies). Reflection
on research partnerships
fosters an understanding of inter-subjective engagement, which is particularly
apropos in this field of
research (Levin & Ravn 2007). In the context of a
more iterative and encountered research design, the instruments, process and
outcome modify as actors reflect on tasks and interactions. That said, there is
scant description in the social science methodological
literature of how to
avoid the dangers of collaborative enquiry and achieve effective
inter-subjective collaborative research (see
Levin & Ravn 2007). As noted by
Drucker (2013), there are profound benefits to building strong connections
between theory and
practice including in the generation of ‘usable
knowledge’ that is, in this context, central to frameworks of support
assistance for victims. Collaboration of this kind brings together
evidence-based research, practitioner knowledge of best practice
and, crucially,
understanding of client values and needs. Although we know that research
participants and researchers are intertwined
in the knowledge-generation process
(Levin & Ravn 2007, p. 8), there is little guidance from the literature on
researcher praxis.
Hood (2012) posits a schema of interprofessional working that situates the
actors beyond the ‘naïve realist model’
emancipatory
intervention
in which causality is misrepresented and complex needs are
disaggregated and then subject to specific interventions by designated
professionals. These professionals have specific outcomes in mind, after which
there is an evaluation (Hood 2013, p. 8). Instead
of stopping at that
disaggregation and reducing a complex causal process to a closed linear system
(Hood 2012, p. 8), a much broader
and more critical foundation of expertise,
knowledge and experience is needed, which is predicated on an understanding of a
narrative, inclusive of traumatic events and significations. This can
be achieved by using critical realism (see Bhaskar 2002, 2008,
2009). Hood draws
on Bhaskar (2008) to argue that reality is more accurately encountered as a
‘product of multiple, interacting
tendencies at the underlying level of
the real’ that, although perhaps not observable, nonetheless ‘cause
things to happen’
(2012, p. 8). In Bhaskar’s (2008) schematic, the
domain of the real is comprised of the properties or structures that make
happen, the actual, where events happen, not all of which are apprehended, and
the empirical, where what happens is apprehended.
In the critical realist model,
structural properties shape a specific need; contributing as well are causal
mechanisms that are conditioned
by other mechanisms and other needs. This model
stipulates that multiple, complex and varied events and interactions are
experienced
by a victim and shape their experience/recovery, in addition to the
outcome recorded from the intervention. The implication is that
assessment frameworks can be used to inform but not dictate the judgment of
expert practitioners (Hood 2012, p. 10).
Hood’s (2012) schema also addresses ‘reflexive-hermeneutic
complexity’. In this regard, Gray (2013) describes how
‘prescriptive templates of common assessment frameworks’ provide
cognitive and conceptual schema to organise our
experience of the world and
support the application of learning or training in line with a set of rules. In
addition, professional
expertise is enacted via a social process that includes
integration of the interaction with clients and the functional dynamics of
interprofessional network itself. Hood notes that setting up the ‘expert
system’ means that each member brings ‘new
judgments and hypotheses
to bear on a situation, contributes their own actions and decisions and
establishes new interconnections.
All of this will feed into causal complexity
as well as increase the overall uncertainty of communication and
decision-making’.
(Hood 2012, p. 10)
Initially proposed to the Flinders University research team by VSS, the
research project was an inter-subjective collaboration from
the outset. While
VSS has conducted a number of client satisfaction surveys and issues-based focus
groups over the years, a practical
roadblock to such work has been the capacity
of the organisation to conduct empirical research into the victim experience.
The project
was designed with the agency’s assistance to incorporate VSS
agendas and processes. For example, the partnership directly supported
achievement of two key VSS strategic objectives, namely, ‘strengthening
research capabilities’, and ‘outputs
and advocacy of victims’.
In helping to achieve these strategic objectives, as well as carve out time
to conduct the research and support the institutional
mandates placed on
academic staff, the Flinders University researchers set about drafting grant
proposals to funding bodies including
the Australian Institute of Criminology,
the National Drug Law Enforcement Research Fund, the Attorney-General’s
of SA, and the Flinders University Faculty of Education, Humanities
and Law research funding program. The researchers were unsuccessful
external applications but received seed funding from the university to support
the development and launch of the survey and
conduct an initial literature
From a practical perspective, collaboration necessitated the adoption of
discursive strategies proposed by the partner. The partnership
enabled the
Flinders University researchers to access victims of crime, a group that is
often difficult to identify and establish
meaningful contact with and from which
it is challenging to collect data (Fisher & Lab 2010). In this project the
researchers
could not depend on the framework of trust that victims had already
established with VSS and its services; that trust was based on
a therapeutic
relationship with counsellors. After gaining access as per the agency and
requisite ethics, it fell on individual researchers
to provide sufficient
reciprocities so that highly personal information might be offered. To put it in
critical realist terms, it
required the adoption of an authentic openness to the
multiple interpretations of causes and events.
In this regard, research–community partnerships demonstrate that
advocacy and research are not mutually exclusive (Massey &
Barreras 2013);
meaningful and participatory dialogue with subjects can produce mutually
beneficial outcomes for both participants
and researchers. Indeed, it has been
identified that emotional attachment between researchers and participants
through engaged collaborative
research facilitates a more nuanced understanding
of what and, importantly, who is being studied (Jewkes 2012). Where researchers
are able to ‘understand (and share) [participants’] experiences,
situation, feelings and motives’ (Levin &
Ravn 2007, p. 5) they are
empathically engaged and create joint learning. This was evident during the
process of collecting and reviewing
the audiotapes of the qualitative interviews
self-medication study, where there was, in Levin and Ravn’s (2007, p.
2) terms, an ‘intersubjective or dialogical involvement
participants, allowing for empathy to emerge as a key variable’. Whatever
the level of engagement of the research
team with the subject prior to direct
interaction with our victim cohorts, the nature of our objectivity was impacted
at this stage
of the research.
As noted above, if we view the research as a collaboration, as we do, this
requires a position of inter-subjectivity; the researcher
interacts with
participants to acquire knowledge. In the field of anthropology, a strong
version of collaboration is referred to
as ‘going native’, a term
denoting that the researcher has lost their objective bearings and adopted the
Weltanschauung
. In the case of partnerships between
researchers and agencies, this is a
two-part process: first, it is about the research identifying and
understanding the agency’s view; and, second, the research
identifies the
subject’s views, in our case those of victims of crime. Using this twofold
approach, we rationalise research
that makes an impact in a community,
justifying the term ‘praxis.’ The ultimate objective is the
development of conceptual
tools that support the agency’s ability to
understand and support the needs of its clients — what is referred to
as solving local problems.
In the project, it was observed that participants’
‘knowledge’ needed to be interpreted broadly. This influenced
framing of the research process. To build a more nuanced understanding of the
victim interaction with AOD, it was necessary that
the researchers listen to
victims’ accounts of their trauma with minimal prompts by the researchers.
Many interviewees made
reference to the interaction with the research team in
the explication of their recovery narrative. The story-telling involved in
discussions of the recovery narrative became crucial to the project. Indeed, in
our research the acts of providing and receiving
a life story were found to have
transformative potential, not only because this could, as conceived, guide
future VSS practice, but
also because it could provide strong validation —
a factor critical to shaping the recovery process, but one that is frequently
absent from victims’ experiences of the justice system.
The therapeutic discourse has its disciplinary nomenclature and conventions.
Victims as clients or patients are meant to develop a
particular attitude
towards their recovery, for instance, one that is consistent with the resources
and protocols of the service-providing
agencies and actors. Likewise, as
juridical subjects, victims are expected to conform to a somewhat stultifying
and often invalidating
version of witness or complainant. By adopting a
deliberately inter-subjective style of interprofessional working and knowledge
in our research, we sought to develop a more open-ended space for our
signifier-subjects, which provided the authorial space for
their ideographic
accounts. Indeed, the book that we wrote based on our research featured a large
number of direct quotes from our
victim interviews.
Another product of the inter-subjective knowledge exchange utilised within
our study was the co-development of a
which featured a
synopsis of personal narratives about self-medication in a format intended to
promote awareness of crime victims’
needs. The pamphlet will be available
in hard copy for those who attend VSS, as well as the wider community (including
may not have reported their victimisation) through online media. This
represents new local knowledge, jointly created through a
research–community
partnership that emphasises the role of victims in the
research process, which will enhance VSS’s response and advocacy, as
as the experience of victims.
Encountering victims
In this final section, we reflect on some of the broader implications of the
research and the encounters mentioned above. Specifically,
we focus on a range
of ethical considerations related to undertaking an engaged collaborative
approach and the possibility that the
encounter may be dislodged from a sound
structural mooring.
Through the dynamism of reflexive collaboration, there is ample opportunity
for the modification of ethical guidelines and research
practice (Banks &
Armstrong 2014). However, it is well understood by research ethics committees
that the granularity of the requirements,
the stipulation of approved personnel,
practices and devices, and the bureaucratic burdensomeness and infrequency or
lack of timeliness
of research approvals can overburden modest research team
resources. In our experience, the divide between helpful and harmful
observations
or speech acts concerning victim reflections on their trauma
experience and recovery was a somewhat perilous liminal place. We danced
line between the therapeutic ethic of care — a disciplinary or expert
knowledge with which we have no formal association
— and the researcher
ethic of disinterested discovery. As we indicated previously, for the victim the
ambiguity of the space
that we occupied presented a means of resetting their
position in a recovery narrative. Yet, it was that space — one not
or accounted for in the ethics proposal — which ultimately
yielded the excitement of discovery. The ethical implications of
inter-subjective in this manner were not foreseen; the research team debriefed
with ethical implications were a focus of the debriefing,
and expressed the
somewhat ungrounded conviction that our interjections were not harmful and may
even have provided added insight
to victims. The extent to which participatory,
engaged and, in this regard, ethical research can lead to better or meaningful
generation, emancipatory change (Mandell 2010; Hood 2012) and positive
outcomes for victims, practitioners and researchers alike
More importantly, there appears to be a lack of capacity for evidence-based
research within the wider field of victim research. Although
much has been done
over the past four decades to improve the position of victims in the criminal
justice system, there is a distinct
in-depth research into the victim experience, in terms of both their recovery
and the nature and quality of their contact with criminal
justice services.
While VSS has sought to strategically ground its efforts around supporting the
advocacy needs of victims on a collaborative
research partnership approach, it
is clear that it faces opposition from state government actors, it works
to use the critical realist meaning, within the
‘reality’ of ‘doing research in a political and value-laden
(Massey & Barreras 2013, p. 616). In SA, the practice of
‘research’ is more internally focused on supporting existing
and justifying service provision than on finding ‘truths’. For
example, as part of the Transforming Criminal Justice
Reform Program, the SA
Attorney-General’s Department has developed a pilot Victim and Witness
Survey (‘VieWS’)
to measure victim and witness satisfaction,
including their perceptions of the quality of service provided by criminal
justice agencies,
as well as perceptions of timeliness, accessibility and
outcomes (Attorney-General’s Department 2015). The measure of victim
witness satisfaction derived from the VieWS survey will inform the performance
measures of the Criminal Justice Sector Reform
Council, but will do little in
the way of capturing in-depth knowledge of victims’ experiences of trauma
and their recovery
from crime. Collaborative approaches to research are
therefore integral to building the capacity of VSS to develop research projects,
and also to encouraging researchers and practitioners to work together to
understand the victim experience of trauma within a complex
environment of
government policy and funding arrangements. That said, significant challenges
remain since ministerial budgetary divisions
still militate against the
implementation of a holistic, multi-agency approach.
In addition, with regard to structural mooring, it is the presumed but
uncertain connection to an emancipatory authority that may
be most concerning.
There is a danger that, contrary to design or intention, researchers will
subject victims to a disciplinary power,
particularly given that victims have
traditionally experienced subjection in most, if not all, of their relationships
criminal justice system (Banks & Armstrong 2014; Belknap 2015).
As per Matthews (2009, p. 351), critical criminology must note
the influence of
social structure and the state through and on various apparatuses; and central
to realist criminology is the
intra-class and parasitic nature of victimisation and crime
perpetration.
Collaborative research projects between academics, service providers and
their clients are increasingly important for gaining a more
understanding of issues and subjects under study. Reflexive engagement has come
to be seen as a valuable resource and methodological
approach in the
criminological domain. Armstrong, Blaustein and Henry (2017) claim that
reflexivity contributes not only to a better
understanding of the researched by
the researcher but also to the analysis of broader sociopolitical implications.
The emphasis on
knowledge exchange suggests a dynamic interaction where each
party is an active contributor, rendering the empirical field an environment
which practice learns from research and vice versa.
This article has explored the knowledge acquisition and knowledge exchange
that occurs as a result of interaction among victims, a
victim services agency
and academic researchers through an analytical lens consistent with critical
realism. Through such interactions,
each participant gained a level of knowledge
and/or self-awareness in relation to their recovery narrative and
self-medication, while
also learning about other actors’ priorities,
assumptions and boundaries. Via a process of ongoing interaction with the
participating
agency, including meetings before and after each interview with
victims, the researchers were privy to the agency’s operational
well as possible organisational constraints. The triangulation of the research
field allowed for a rebalancing of power and
knowledge. This, in turn, allowed
the research team to approach the research site and experience with an awareness
of its onto-epistemological
uncertainty, the fluidity of conceptual
categorisations and the potential for unexpected findings.
Thus, at one level, it is hoped that the findings of the project will inform
evidence-based knowledge and practical support services
for victims of crime who
self-medicate with AOD in SA and elsewhere (see de Lint et al. 2017). In
addition, this article explored
how the project provided a space for elaboration
on the role of reflexive collaboration in research–community partnerships
within the victim recovery process. The dynamic, engaged and ideographic
character of the encounter between agency, researcher and
crime victim enables
the access and exchange of deeper and meaningful knowledge.
How much authorship can really be shared? This is an ethical question not
only because it necessitates consideration of the potential
exploitation of
subjects — represented in Mandell’s (2010) notion of ‘hit and
run’ or Sherman and Torbert’s
(2000) ‘data raiders’
— but also because it requires critical examination of the process of
authorising itself.
In other words, we must consider the risks of such
collaborative empowerment. Specifically, critical evaluation is needed of the
respective skillsets and capacities of researchers to serve in such a
therapeutic role, particularly given the tension between researchers’
interests in eliciting meaningful change for subjects and the more traditional
role of ‘getting data’. For example, despite
the best of intentions,
researchers, as part of the interprofessional network, may cause secondary
victimisation, with the process
of interviewing serving only to further
de-identify an individual where the individual’s stories are swept up by
the tape recorder.
In the current project, this risk was mitigated by sustained
involvement with the victim cohort (as opposed to ‘hitting and
running’), as well as reflexivity in the research process (in which
direction is taken and knowledge learned
subjects). This challenged
existing hypotheses and encouraged innovation as demonstrated by changes to
advocacy and research praxis
that serve to strengthen the
research–community partnership.
Armstrong, S, Blaustein, J & Henry, A 2017, ‘Impact and the
reflexive imperative in criminal justice policy, practice and
in S Armstrong, J Blaustein & A Henry (eds.),
Reflexivity and criminal
justice intersections of policy, practice and research
, Palgrave, London,
Attorney-General’s Department 2015,
2014–15 annual report
Government of South Australia, Adelaide.
Banks, S & Armstrong, A 2014, ‘Using co-inquiry to study
co-inquiry: community–university perspectives on research’,
Journal of Community Engagement and Scholarship
, vol. 7, no. 1, pp.
Belknap, J 2015, ‘Activist criminology: criminologists’
responsibility to advocate for social and legal justice’,
Criminology
no. 1, pp. 1–22.
Bhaskar, R 2002,
From science to emancipation
Bhaskar, R 2008,
A realist theory of science
, Verso, London.
Bhaskar, R 2009,
Scientific realism and human emancipation
, Routledge,
Budde, S & Schene, P 2004, ‘Informal social support interventions
and their role in violence prevention: an agenda for future
evaluation’,
Journal of Interpersonal Violence
, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 341–55.
Carlen, P & Christina, D 1985,
Criminal women: autobiographical
, Polity Press, New York.
Creswell, J & Plano Clark, V 2007,
Designing and conducting mixed
methods research
, SAGE, Thousand Oaks.
De Lint, W & Marmo, M 2018,
Narrating injustice survival:
self-medication by victims of crime
, Palgrave, London.
De Lint, W, Marmo, M, Groves A & Pocrnic A 2017, ‘Crime
victims’ self-medication: findings from a South Australian
International Review of Victimology
, vol. 23, no. 2, pp.
Drucker, E 2013, ‘Advocacy research in harm reduction drug
Journal of Social Issues
vol. 69, pp.
Edwards, A & Hughes, G 2012, ‘Public safety regimes: negotiated
orders and political analysis in criminology’,
Criminology &
Criminal Justice
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 433–58.
Entwistle, T, Bristow, G, Hines, F, Donaldson, S & Martin S 2007,
‘The dysfunctions of markets, hierarchies and networks
meta-governance of partnership’,
Urban Studies
vol. 44, no.
1, pp. 63–79.
Fisher, B & Lab, S 2010,
Encyclopedia of victimology of crime and
, SAGE, California.
Founten, L 2015, ‘Flinders University study finds crime victims often
increase alcohol, drug use without realising’,
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-04-06/study-finds-crime-victims-rely-on-more-alcohol-drugs/6373422.
Garfinkel, H 1976, ‘Conditions of successful degradation
ceremonies’, in J Beck, C Jenks, N Keddie and M Young (eds.),
sociology of education
, Transaction Books, New Jersey.
Goode, J & Lumsden, K 2016, ‘The McDonaldisation of
police–academic partnerships: organisational and cultural barriers
encountered in moving from research on police to research with police’,
Policing and Society
(online first), pp. 1–15.
Goris, P & Walters, R 1999, ‘Locally oriented crime prevention and
the “partnership approach”: politics, practices
prospects’,
Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies
& Management
vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 633–45.
Gorman, ME 2002, ‘Levels of expertise and trading zones: a framework
for multidisciplinary collaboration’,
Social Studies of Science
vol. 32, no. 5/6, pp. 933–8.
Guggisberg, M 2012, ‘Sexual violence victimisation and subsequent
problematic alcohol use: examining the self-medication hypothesis,’
International Journal of Arts & Sciences
, vol. 5, no. 6, pp.
Hegarty, A 2013, ‘Victims of crime falling back on drugs to cope with
The Advertiser
, 11 February,
http://www.adelaidenow.com.au/news/south-australia/victims-of-crime-falling-back-on-drugs-to-cope-with-ordeals/news-story/784c72d796ac808ffe4ceedf22f7b678.
Henry, A 2017, ‘Reflexive academic–practitioner collaboration
with the police’, in S Armstrong, J Blaustein &
A Henry (eds,),
Reflexivity and criminal justice intersections of policy, practice and
, Palgrave, London, pp. 169–90.
Henry, A & Mackenzie, S 2012, ‘Brokering communities of practice: a
model of knowledge exchange and academic–practitioner
collaboration
developed in the context of community policing’,
Police Practice and
, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 315–28.
Holder, E, Leary, L & Frost, J 2013,
Vision 21: transforming victim
services — final report
, US Department of Justice,
Washington.
Hood, R 2012, ‘A critical realist model of complexity for
interprofessional working’,
Journal of Interprofessional Care
26, pp. 6–12.
Hough, M & Mayhew, P 1983,
The British crime survey: first report
HMSO, London.
Hyman, IA 1995, ‘Corporal punishment, psychological maltreatment,
violence, and punitiveness in America: research, advocacy,
Applied & Preventive
4, pp. 113–30.
Jewkes, Y 2012, ‘Autoethnography and emotion as intellectual resources:
doing prison research differently’,
Qualitative Inquiry
vol. 18, pp.
Jones, T, MacLean, B & Young, J 1986,
The Islington crime survey
Gower, Aldershot.
Kaysen, D, Dillworth, T, Simpson, T, Waldrop, A, Larimer, M & Resick, P
2007, ‘Domestic violence and alcohol use: trauma-related
symptoms and
motives for drinking’,
Addictive Behaviors
no. 6, pp. 1272–83.
Kinsey, R, Lea, J & Young, J 1986,
Losing the fight against crime
Basil Blackwell, Oxford.
Laslett, A-M, Mugavin, J, Jiang, H, Manton, E, Callinan, S, McLean, S &
Room, R 2015,
The hidden harm: alcohol’s impact on children and
, Foundation for Alcohol Research and Education, Canberra.
Latta, R & Goodman, L 2011, ‘Intervening in partner violence
against women: a grounded theory exploration of informal network
experiences’,
The Counseling Psychologist
no. 7, pp. 973–1023.
Levin, M & Ravn, JE 2007, ‘Involved in praxis and analytical at a
Systemic Practice and Action Research
, vol. 20, no.
1, pp. 1–13.
Liang, B, Goodman, L, Tummala-Narra, P & Weintraub, S 2005, ‘A
theoretical framework for understanding help-seeking processes
among survivors
of intimate partner violence’,
American Journal of Community
vol. 36, nos. 1/2, pp. 71–84.
Lord, V & Cowan, A 2011,
Interviewing in criminal justice: victims,
witnesses, clients and suspects
, Jones and Bartlett Publishers, Sudbury.
Lumsden, K & Goode, J 2017, ‘Public criminology, reflexivity and
the enterprise university: experiences of research, knowledge
transfer work and
co-option with police forces’,
Theoretical Criminology
first), pp. 1–15.
McGarry, R & Walklate, S 2015,
Victims: trauma, testimony and
, Routledge, Abingdon.
Mandell, J 2010, ‘Advice to action research activists: negotiating
successful action research–community based social change
partnerships’,
Humanity & Society
, vol. 34, no.
Massey, S & Barreras, R 2013, ‘Introducing “impact
validity”’,
Journal of Social Issues
vol. 69, no.
4, pp. 615–32.
Matthews, R 2009, ‘Beyond “so what?” criminology:
rediscovering realism’,
Theoretical Criminology
, vol. 13, no. 3,
pp. 341–62.
Matthews, R 2014,
Realist criminology
, Palgrave Macmillan,
Basingstoke.
Matthews, R & Young, J 1992,
Issues in realist criminology
Morrison, B, Doucet, C, Thomas, B & Peterson, P 2011,
‘Practice-based perspectives: victimization and substance use’,
Victims of Crime Research Digest
4, pp. 15–21.
Parsons, J & Bergin, T 2010, ‘The impact of criminal justice
involvement on victims’ mental health’,
Journal of Traumatic
, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 182–8.
Ponton, R 2014, ‘Sharing knowledge, building knowledge: the journal as
a community of practice’,
Journal of Mental Health Counseling
36, pp. 283–7.
Saunders, M 2006, ‘Gatekeeper’ in V Jupp (ed.),
dictionary of social research methods
, Thousand Oaks, California.
Seron, C 2016, ‘The two faces of law and inequality: from critique to
the promise of situated, pragmatic policy’,
Law & Society
, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 9–33.
Sherman, F & Torbert, W 2000,
Transforming social inquiry,
transforming social action: new paradigms for crossing the theory practice
divide in universities and
communities
, Kluwer Academic, Boston.
Sim, J, Scraton, P & Gordon, P 1987, ‘Introduction: crime, the
state, and critical analysis’, in P Scraton (ed.),
Law, order and the
authoritarian state
, Open University Press, Milton Keynes.
Victim Support Service 2016,
Annual Report 2014–15
July 2018, https://view.joomag.com/
vss-annual-report-14-15/M0954750001442490404.
Walklate, S 2015, ‘Jock Young, left realism and critical
victimology’,
Critical Criminology
2, pp. 179–90.
Zorza, J 1995, ‘Recognizing and protecting the privacy and
confidentiality needs of battered women’,
Family Law Quarterly
vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 273–311.
Professor in Criminal Justice,
Flinders University, GPO Box 2100, Adelaide SA 5001, Australia. Email:
willem.delint@flinders.edu.au.
Associate Professor,
College of Business, Government and Law, Flinders University, GPO Box 2100,
Adelaide SA 5001, Australia. Email:
marinella.marmo@flinders.edu.au.
Lecturer in Criminology,
School of Humanities and Social Sciences, Deakin University, Locked Bag 20000,
Geelong Vic 3220, Australia.
Email: andrew.groves@deakin.edu.au.
Policy and Data Analyst,
Attorney-General’s Department, GPO Box 464, Adelaide SA 5001, Australia.
Email: victoria.laughton@sa.gov.au.
At the time of writing, the
pamphlet has been developed but not yet published.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (176 KB)
PDF format (416 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter