URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2024/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:38:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stephenson, Scott --- "Constitutional Shoehorning" [2024] SydLawRw 21; (2024) 46(4) Sydney Law Review 395
I Introduction
II The Concept and Its Complications
B Distinctiveness
C Identification
III Evaluating the Concept
A Positive Attributes
B Negative Attributes
1 Partiality
2 Complexity
3 Lawyers versus Clients
IV Constitutional Shoehorning in Practice
A Legal Certainty
B Separation of Church and State
C Post-Sentence Detention
D Deportation of Indigenous Peoples
V Conclusion
Constitutional Shoehorning
Constitutional shoehorning refers to a litigant using a constitutional
provision that addresses one type of concern to advance a different
concern. A litigant that seeks to protect their rights by bringing a challenge
under a federal division of powers provision
is an example. This article makes
three arguments in relation to the concept. First, it is an understudied and
distinctive move in
constitutional argumentation and adjudication, different
from implications and strained interpretations. Although challenges can
when trying to identify instances of constitutional shoehorning, they are
surmountable in most cases. Second, it has both positive
and negative
attributes. Third, it is an important feature of Australian constitutional law
due to the absence of a bill of rights.
Introduction
For a litigant seeking to protect a particular
interest, there is sometimes more than one constitutional path to
There may be an obvious
path. A litigant wants to protect access to their house from a law that purports
to restrict access for national
They could challenge the
validity of the law under a constitution’s right to shelter. But that path
might be foreclosed for
any number of reasons. The right might be limited in
relation to national security or there might be precedent that suggests the
complies with the right. As a result, the litigant might get creative and look
for a less obvious path. They may try to challenge
the validity of the law under
a provision that is concerned with the allocation of power between the two
levels of government in
a federation. If a court holds, for instance, that the
law exceeds the central government’s power to enact laws with respect
defence, the litigant may be able to protect access to their house with a
provision that appears not to be concerned with shelter.
This article studies the phenomenon of shoehorning one interest into a
constitutional provision that appears to be concerned with
a different interest.
It argues that constitutional shoehorning is a distinct move in argumentation
and adjudication, different from, for instance, implications
and strained
interpretations of provisions. There are challenges in identifying instances of
constitutional shoehorning because it
requires identifying the concern of the
litigant and the concern of the provision. However, the article suggests that
these challenges
are surmountable in many, if not most, cases. The concept
merits discrete analysis because it comes with a unique set of benefits
costs. For example, it assists with the enforcement of constitutional provisions
that might otherwise be left underenforced.
But it can also make the situation
worse for future litigants in analogous positions because the scope of
protection for the litigants’
interest depends on factors that are not
related to that interest.
The article argues that constitutional shoehorning is an important feature of
Australian constitutional law. Without a bill of
litigants seeking
constitutional protection for their rights must generally get creative, with
constitutional shoehorning being a
prominent form of
creativity.
We observe, for
example, litigants seeking protection for freedom of religion by bringing
constitutional challenges under executive
provisions,
litigants seeking protection for Indigenous rights by bringing constitutional
challenges under the head of Commonwealth legislative
power with respect to
and litigants seeking protection from post-sentence detention regimes by
bringing constitutional challenges under provisions for
the investiture of
federal jurisdiction in state
As a result, constitutional shoehorning shapes our understanding of whether and,
if so, how the
Constitution
protects individuals.
unpacks the concept of constitutional shoehorning, starting with a
history of the term and understandings of it in the Australian
literature,
before explaining how it is different from other constitutional concepts and the
challenges in identifying instances
evaluates the concept by
considering the benefits it brings and the costs it introduces to a
constitutional system of government.
provides four case studies of
constitutional shoehorning in Australia. The purpose of these case studies is to
illustrate how it
is possible to identify instances despite the challenges
mentioned in
and to demonstrate the benefits and costs set out in
The Concept and Its Complications
Constitutional shoehorning refers to the invocation of a constitutional
provision directed to addressing one type of concern as a
means of addressing a
different type of concern. If, for instance, a litigant sought to protect their
right to free speech by alleging
that a statute violated a procedural provision
dealing with the capacity of a legislative chamber to amend proposed legislation
has financial implications, we could say they shoehorned their rights claim
into that procedural provision.
The term can be traced back to the United States where it has been used to
identify the tendency of structural claims to be shoehorned
into individual
rights provisions. For example, Pamela Karlan has observed that the Supreme
Court has a ‘tendency — perhaps
[a] need — to frame questions
of constitutional structure in terms of claims of individual
The reason, she argued, is the requirement of standing:
[B]ecause constitutional standing depends on a plaintiff’s ability not
only to show that she has suffered a ‘concrete
and particularized’
injury, but also that that injury is likely to be ‘redressed by a
favorable decision,’ those
lawsuits must involve constitutional provisions
that produce remedies for the individualized injury. The upshot is that
questions of constitutional design and structure have gotten shoe-horned into
the most individual-centered constitutional
Supreme Court held that challenges to state legislative apportionment schemes
were justiciable under the “well-developed
and familiar” standards
of the Equal Protection Clause’, and
Caperton v Massey
where a challenge to
campaign financing of judicial election campaigns ‘was framed as a case
of litigants’, are cited as
In Australia, scholars have observed the process occurring in the opposite
direction whereby individual rights claims are shoehorned
into structural
provisions. David Hume and George Williams observe that one way in which rights
are protected in Australia is ‘where
the effect of a constitutional
provision or doctrine is sometimes to protect individuals, but that is not its
intention: the protection
of individuals is at best a happy
coincidence’.
Similarly, James Stellios notes that ‘the [High] Court on [some] occasions
has seen constitutional provisions that at first
sight seemed only to be
concerned with the distribution of power as providing some sort of
constitutional
guarantee’.
Finally, Geoffrey Kennett argues that one ‘method of enhancing the
protection of rights is to discover guarantees in provisions
Constitution
that do not at first sight appear to be concerned with
conferring rights’.
three sets of authors cite the High Court’s case law on
one of the case studies discussed below, as an example.
While the concept is, therefore, familiar in Australia and elsewhere, its
complications and implications are understudied. The difficulties
in identifying
instances of constitutional shoehorning as well as its positive and negative
attributes have generally not been considered
The rest of this article
is directed to studying these aspects of the concept at greater length.
Constitutional shoehorning occurs when a litigant faces some impediment to
bringing a non-shoehorned constitutional challenge to a
government act or law. A
litigant wants to protect their rights, but the constitution contains no bill of
rights. A litigant wants
to stop what they believe to be an exercise of judicial
power by the executive arm of government, but they do not have standing to
a challenge under the separation of powers provisions. A litigant wants to claim
the legislature in a federation does not have
authority to enact a particular
law, but there is precedent that suggests the legislation does fall within the
scope of that jurisdiction’s
authority. They therefore decide to get
creative. There are many forms of constitutional creativity. They could, for
instance, seek
to imply a new rule into the constitution or overturn an
unfavourable precedent by proposing a novel approach to constitutional
interpretation.
Another — and the focus of this article — is to
shoehorn their claim into a part of the constitution that addresses a
Constitutional shoehorning is especially likely to occur when courts are
willing to entertain arguments in the alternative. When a
litigant does not need
to pick between possible pathways to success, it is possible for them to make
both the more obvious and the
less obvious arguments in favour of their
position. The main challenge for the litigant is to uncover all the arguments
plausible and will potentially produce an outcome that protects their
In Australia, the absence of a constitutional bill of rights is a causal
factor. There are individuals who will seek constitutional
protection for their
rights even though the document contains no general bill of
Put another way, the
absence of constitutional rights does not mean there is an absence of demand for
rights protection. That is
especially the case if the individual is particularly
motivated to vindicate their rights — for example, if they are imprisoned
and have little or nothing to lose by prosecuting every possible argument for
their release, or if they are particularly passionate
associated with the right. In these circumstances, the absence of a bill of
rights requires the litigant to consider
Constitution
provisions that do not appear to be directed to the protection of rights can
nevertheless be used to achieve that outcome.
Distinctiveness
One question that potentially arises in respect of constitutional shoehorning
is its relationship to other forms of engagement with
Constitution
such as implications and strained interpretations. In its sharpest form, the
question can be posed as a challenge to the very existence
of the concept: is
constitutional shoehorning any different from these other forms of engagement?
For instance, if a right to a fair
trial is shoehorned into a separation of
powers provision, one might say the right to a fair trial is now an implied
constitutional
Alternatively, one might say the separation of powers provision has been
interpreted in a strained manner to protect that
While constitutional shoehorning can overlap with implications and strained
interpretations in some circumstances, it does not in
other circumstances
because they are directed to achieving different objectives. In comparison to
constitutional shoehorning, implications
and strained interpretations are not
necessarily seeking to have a provision (or set of provisions) address a novel
A litigant seeking to develop a new implication might be
seeking to expand the ways in which a provision addresses an existing concern.
For instance, if a set of provisions are directed to protecting the integrity of
the electoral process, a litigant might seek to
imply from those provisions a
requirement that the electoral commission be independent from the government.
That would not be considered
an instance of constitutional shoehorning because
it is not seeking to address a different type of concern — the implication
of electoral commission independence is also about the integrity of the
electoral process. Similarly, if one adopted a strained interpretation
provision requiring the electoral process to be conducted with integrity to mean
that the electoral commission must be independent
from the government, it would
not be an instance of constitutional shoehorning.
Constitutional shoehorning is also distinguishable from constitutional
workarounds. The latter term has been used in the United States
and Canada to
describe attempts to circumvent limits imposed on government by a constitution
— for example, to install a new
person as President of the United States
before 20 January of the year following a presidential election, which appears
to be contrary
Amendment to the
United States
Constitution
or to amend aspects of the Senate of Canada without provincial consent, which
appears to be contrary to
of Canada’s
Constitution Act
While shoehorning and workarounds may occasionally overlap, their focuses are
different and they are employed by different actors.
Workarounds are focused on
avoiding constitutional limitations while shoehorning is focused on the
employment of existing —
or even the development of new —
constitutional limitations. Governments most commonly use workarounds while
private persons
most commonly use
shoehorning.
Workarounds rely on
the fact that ‘the
Constitution
is in some sense at war with
itself: One part of the text prohibits something, other parts of the text permit
it, and the
Constitution
itself does not appear to give either part
priority over the other’.
Shoehorning relies on silences in the
Constitution
’s text: although
a provision was drafted to address a particular type of concern, it has not been
drafted in a way that
it to responding to that concern, allowing
a litigant to employ the provision in service of other concerns.
Identification
There will, unsurprisingly, be difficulties in identifying some instances of
constitutional shoehorning in practice. There are two
concerns that need to be
identified, both of which might be uncertain or contested. The first is the
litigant’s concern. We
can only identify an instance of constitutional
shoehorning if we have some idea of what the litigant is seeking to achieve or
That can generally be inferred with a degree of confidence from their
situation. A prisoner challenging the constitutional validity
authorising their detention is typically interested in securing their liberty,
not interrogating the meaning of ‘judicial
power’ within the
separation of powers doctrine. A regional government challenging the
constitutional validity of a central
government law is typically interested in
contesting the law for its impact on federalism rather than its impact on
individual rights
given that a successful invalidation for the latter reason
could be used against it in the future (that is, a regional government
generally have little interest in expanding the scope of individual rights as
these rights could be used to invalidate its own
laws and acts in the
But there will be occasions that defy the typical pattern. There will be
individuals who are solely interested in ensuring that the
separation of powers
is respected. There will be governments that want to see the expansion of
rights-based limitations on their
These situations will,
however, generally be possible to identify by the nature of the claims the
litigant is making and the nature
of the relief the litigant is
And they will be rare given the time, expense and effort of pursuing litigation
other than to pursue one’s self-interest. Indeed,
as will be discussed
below, its rarity is one of the reasons why courts might be inclined to permit
constitutional shoehorning. Shoehorning
facilitates decisions on constitutional
issues that would otherwise go unexamined because there are so few people able
and willing
to litigate some parts of the constitution since most people would
not stand to gain any tangible benefit from a successful challenge.
The second concern or interest that needs to be identified is that addressed
by the constitutional provision. This step can be understood
as a challenge that
arises with respect to either individual provisions or the entire constitution.
If with respect to the latter,
it is a fundamental challenge to the very concept
of constitutional shoehorning because it suggests that it is not possible to
a concern to any constitutional provision at all.
Beginning at the level of individual provisions, there is likely to be
uncertainty or contestation over the concern addressed by at
least some parts of
a constitution. A provision that appears to protect an individual right because
it prohibits government from
acquiring property without compensation or from
curtailing freedom of religion, for instance, could be understood as a provision
that protects the federal division of powers if that prohibition only applies to
one level of government rather than all levels of
government.
Uncertainty or contestation might also arise from a provision’s concern
changing over time. Provisions establishing the separation
of powers might
initially be understood as principally advancing a structural interest —
allocating different types of public
power to different public institutions to
ensure they are exercised in an effective and efficient manner — but, over
come to be understood as principally advancing an individual interest
— protecting individuals from the abuse of public power
by preventing
concentrations of public power in a single public
institution.
Or some provisions might address multiple concerns. The separation of powers
example just mentioned might be understood as an instance
of a set of provisions
having dual concerns. Similarly, a provision that requires the legislature to be
chosen by the people could
be understood as ensuring the legislature is
structured in a particular manner as well as guaranteeing individuals the right
A provision
guaranteeing the right to free speech might be understood as advancing both
governmental interests — ensuring the
people are free to discuss their
electoral choices — and individual interests — ensuring the people
are free to express
themselves as they
These challenges that arise with individual provisions might be said to
reveal a more fundamental challenge to the concept of constitutional
shoehorning. Unless one adopts an approach to constitutional interpretation that
fixes the meaning of a provision in time (for example,
originalism),
the concern
addressed by a constitutional provision is not determined or even knowable ahead
of time — it simply reflects whatever
concern the provision addresses from
time to time. Say, for example, a litigant is able to use the separation of
powers provisions
of a constitution to protect their individual liberty. To
consider this example to be an instance of constitutional shoehorning assumes
that those provisions were unconcerned with individual liberty
the litigation. But one could adopt an approach to constitutional interpretation
that takes no firm view about the concerns of
a provision ahead of time.
An alternative way of challenging the very concept of constitutional
shoehorning is to suggest that the concerns of
constitutional
provisions are indistinguishable. For example, one might argue that all
constitutional provisions regulate the relationship
between the state and the
people. Even provisions dealing with the separation of powers and the federal
division of powers regulate
that relationship by securing the liberty of the
Alternatively, one might
contend that all constitutional provisions regulate the relationship between the
institutions of government.
Even a bill of rights regulates that relationship by
determining which institutions are responsible for the protection of rights
— the judiciary, the legislature or some combination of the
As a result, it is not
possible to, for example, shoehorn an individual rights claim into a
constitutional provision dealing with
the separation of powers because all
constitutional provisions are concerned with the allocation of power among
institutions.
These challenges to constitutional shoehorning are serious and should not be
dismissed lightly. However, there are several responses
to these lines of
critique that significantly reduce their force. First, starting in reverse
order, the last line of challenge comes
from a level of abstraction that is too
high and thus erases real and important types of difference in constitutional
concerns of provisions relating to the
separation of powers, the federal division of powers and a bill of rights are
very different
from each other even if their
concerns might be
considered similar. A bill of rights is typically concerned with removing
particular exercises of public power
from government (even if that removal is
supervised by one arm of government) while the separation of powers and federal
of powers are not. Instead, the latter are primarily concerned with the
allocation of public power within government — horizontally
in the case of
the separation of powers, and vertically in the case of the federal division of
powers. Furthermore, to describe all
aspects of a constitution as oriented to a
single concern overlooks differences in the historical trajectory, contemporary
and conception of the state that these principles reflect. The
post-World War II trajectory of bills of rights, their contemporary
to the legitimacy of a constitution, and the scepticism they express about the
legislature’s capacity to safeguard
individual liberty are very different
from not only federalism and the separation of powers but also other aspects of
a constitution,
such as those concerned with responsible government and
‘fourth branch’
institutions.
Second, the last line of challenge also erases real and important types of
difference in constitutional text and structure. A constitution
is divided into
different provisions and chapters because those provisions and chapters are
directed to different concerns.
For instance, the inclusion of a bill of rights, but not a federal division of
powers, or the inclusion of a federal division of
powers, but not a bill of
rights, in a constitutional text is a deliberate decision about the types of
issues that the constitution
is designed to address. While the subsequent
relevance of those initial decisions is a subject of contestation in
constitutional
scholarship (that is, how closely should courts stick to the text
and structure when undertaking constitutional adjudication?), the
generally not considered to be zero.
Third, this challenge to the concept of constitutional shoehorning is apt to
confuse ends and means. The means by which courts adjudicate
cases about the
separation of powers and federal division of powers might share more with the
means by which courts adjudicate cases
example, all types of cases might involve engagement with difficult, contested
questions about
public values.
However, that does not necessarily indicate that the ends are the same. As
mentioned above, they are seeking to address different
concerns from each
Fourth, the challenge that constitutional shoehorning relies on an
originalist approach to constitutional interpretation confuses
concept’s legitimacy with its existence. Someone who adopts an originalist
approach to constitutional interpretation is
more likely to challenge the
legitimacy of constitutional shoehorning because their view is that a
provision’s concern is fixed
in time. A litigant should not, according to
an originalist approach, be able to shoehorn an individual interest into a
that was drafted to advance a structural interest. Importantly,
constitutional shoehorning still exists even if one does not adopt
originalist approach to constitutional interpretation. As mentioned above,
provisions are inserted into a constitution
for a reason
. That reason may
be difficult to determine and be contested, but a reason — or set of
reasons — for a provision does
exist from the moment it is added to the
constitution. Non-originalists might not be particularly concerned with finding
reason because they think it is irrelevant to interpretation, but it
does exist. Constitutional shoehorning is the act of adding
a new reason (or
replacing the reason) for the existence of that provision — it signifies,
for example, that the separation
of power provisions are now concerned with the
protection of individual liberty, not just (or no longer) with the efficient
of public power. A non-originalist is less concerned with the
legitimacy of this change, but that lack of concern does not deny the
of the change.
Fifth, the contention that constitutional shoehorning does not exist because
the concern or interest of a provision can change over
time reveals the
of constitutional shoehorning, not its absence. Constitutional
shoehorning is frequently, if not predominantly, the means by which
the concern
of a constitutional provision changes. If, for example, the separation of powers
provisions come to be understood as
provisions that protect individual liberty
when that was not how they were originally understood, that change generally
occurs through
litigants bringing court cases shoehorning liberty claims into
separation of powers provisions.
Sixth, disagreement or uncertainty over the classification of individual
instances of constitutional shoehorning does not necessarily
undermine the
existence of the concept. Very few, if any, constitutional concepts are entirely
free from contestation and doubt.
In Australia, for example, there is
considerable disagreement as to whether freedom of political communication is an
implied right
or a limitation on power — and if that distinction makes a
— and whether
it is an impermissibly strained interpretation of the constitutional
These controversies do not undermine implied rights and strained interpretations
as cognisable constitutional concepts.
In the case of constitutional shoehorning, many of the challenges to
individual provisions refer to peripheral cases in one of two
senses. Some are
peripheral cases in the sense that they rarely occur in practice. Going back to
an example mentioned above, it is,
for instance, not the norm that an individual
right applies to one level of government in a federation, but not the
Others are peripheral
cases in the sense that they only complicate limited instances of constitutional
shoehorning. The claim that
the right to free speech has dual concerns
(individual and governmental) only complicates constitutional shoehorning in
those specific concerns (that is, it is difficult to claim that
individual liberty has been shoehorned into the right to free speech
individual liberty may have always been a concern addressed by that right). But
it does not complicate the identification
of constitutional shoehorning in
relation to other concerns connected to the right to free speech. If, for
example, a subnational
government uses the right to free speech to protect the
federal division of powers, that is still an instance of constitutional
shoehorning
because, unless there is clear evidence to the
it is unlikely that
the right to free speech was initially inserted into a constitution to protect
the federal division of powers.
Evaluating the Concept
As mentioned above, one’s view of the legitimacy of constitutional
shoehorning is likely to vary with one’s view of the
appropriate approach
to constitutional interpretation. If one adopts an originalist approach to
constitutional interpretation, constitutional
shoehorning is likely to be more
objectionable because it can be used to circumvent the original meaning of the
constitutional
For example, if a constitution’s framers made the deliberate decision not
to include a bill of rights in the constitution and
then the provisions related
to the separation of powers and federalism are used to shoehorn large numbers of
rights into the constitution,
these acts of constitutional shoehorning are
arguably contrary to the constitution’s original
By contrast, if one
adopts a non-originalist approach to constitutional interpretation (for example,
a textualist or ‘living
tree’ approach), the fact that a particular
outcome might be contrary to a deliberate decision of the framers will be of
or even no concern.
It is, however, not just people who adopt originalist approaches to
constitutional interpretation that might have concerns with constitutional
shoehorning. If one thinks the constitution should be read as a coherent whole,
constitutional shoehorning is objectionable if it
renders the constitution less
coherent. For example, if a constitution expressly grants persons the right to a
jury trial in criminal
cases, but expressly denies that right in civil cases,
shoehorning a right to a jury trial in civil cases into provisions dealing
the separation of powers would arguably be inconsistent with reading the
document as a coherent whole. It is using one part
of the constitution to allow
what another part of the constitution disallows. By contrast, if one places more
emphasis on the meaning
of each individual provision, these types of outcomes
will be of less concern.
One’s view on constitutional shoehorning is also likely to vary with
one’s view on the types of shoehorning that predominate
in a particular
to expand protection for individual
rights in a system that has no bill of
rights, a person who thinks it is appropriate for courts to protect rights is
likely to view
this development more favourably than a sceptic of rights-based
judicial review.
Or, in a system
with a bill of rights, if constitutional shoehorning is predominantly used to
expand the enforcement of structural
provisions,
a person who thinks
the judiciary should be enforcing these structural provisions is likely to view
this development more favourably
than a person who thinks they should be
enforced through the political
The remainder of this Part seeks to evaluate the positive and negative
attributes of constitutional shoehorning in a way that does
not depend on
one’s approach to constitutional interpretation. The purpose of this
analysis is not to express a view on whether
courts should or should not permit
constitutional shoehorning — some of the attributes do not even relate to
how courts should
decide cases — but instead to highlight the
concept’s normative importance — that it has both very real
and disadvantages. While each attribute will not necessarily be
present in each instance of shoehorning, their existence will be
demonstrated by
the case studies discussed in
Positive Attributes
On the positive side, constitutional shoehorning contributes to the
enforcement of constitutional limits and thus aligns with the
rule of law idea
that no one, including the state, is above the
When the state acts, it must comply with
requirements of the
constitution, not just those that are most directly or obviously implicated. A
legislature that enacts a law
restricting a person’s speech must respect
not only any limitations imposed by the right to free speech (if one exists) but
also any limitations imposed by the separation of powers (to the extent they
exist). Constitutional shoehorning is simply a method
by which this fundamental
principle is realised. When a litigant seeking to protect their free speech
tests the constitutional validity
of the law by questioning its compliance with
the separation of powers rather than the right to free speech, they are
contributing
to the enforcement of
constitutional limits.
Importantly, constitutional shoehorning helps ensure compliance with those
constitutional provisions that might not otherwise be tested
in court. The
direct addressees of some constitutional provisions, especially those provisions
regulating the relationship between
public institutions, sometimes have little
interest in testing potential violations in court. Take, for example, a
provision that
requires legislative supervision of executive spending. In a
system of responsible government, members of the legislature may not
particularly eager to ensure executive compliance with those provisions for both
immediate political reasons (for example, they
do not want to be seen to be
standing in the way of money going to particular groups in society) as well as
more long-term structural
reasons (for example, members of the opposition
political party will benefit from the lack of supervision when they next form
government).
Or take a provision that regulates the making of agreements between
levels of government in a federation. The governments may have
little interest
in ensuring the provision is enforced if they consider it to be more efficient
to reach agreements in an informal
manner — irrespective of the rules
— and because litigation may lead to public disclosure of sensitive
information about
the political bargains that are struck as part of the
agreement-making process.
Some private persons — individuals as well as non-government
organisations — might have a greater desire in seeing these
observed. But in some legal systems, they may struggle to establish that they
meet the procedural requirements that must be
satisfied to bring a direct,
standalone challenge (such as standing). It may be difficult, though not always
impossible,
for a person to
demonstrate they have a sufficient interest in compliance with a provision
requiring, say, legislative supervision
of executive spending or
intergovernmental agreements to be made in a particular manner.
Constitutional shoehorning can be a way of ensuring constitutional provisions
of this nature are observed. It enables litigants with
a sufficient interest in
the outcome of the case — that is, standing — to bring these types
of challenges. A protestor
seeking to challenge the constitutional validity of a
law providing for their imprisonment will have standing, even if the separation
of powers rather than the right to free speech is the basis of that challenge. A
farmer seeking to challenge the constitutional validity
of a law providing for
the expropriation of their farm will have standing, even if the basis of that
challenge is not the right to
property but provisions regulating the making of
the intergovernmental agreement pursuant to which the expropriation took place.
of this article discusses several examples from Australia where this
dynamic is observed. Karlan’s article, mentioned
discusses several
examples from the United States where it has occurred, noting that challenges
based on structural provisions are
shoehorned into challenges based on rights
provisions because it is difficult for litigants to establish standing under the
Negative Attributes
The value, and indeed necessity, of constitutional shoehorning should not,
therefore, be underestimated. But the technique is not
without its costs, three
of which will be introduced here.
First, constitutional shoehorning can introduce forms of partiality into the
law that are difficult to justify from the perspective
of the interest that has
been protected through the act of shoehorning. Take, for example, the interest
of individual rights protection.
When an individual right is protected directly
(that is, without any constitutional shoehorning) by means of a bill of rights,
adjudicative process and final outcome will turn on factors that are
rationally related to the right and are therefore capable of
justification. Most commonly, the case will turn on whether the limitation on
the individual’s right is proportionate
to the end the state is
purportedly pursuing.
outcome will thus be determined by considerations such as the severity of the
limitation on the right, the strength of the reason
for limiting the right, and
whether the state had a way of pursuing that reason that was less restrictive of
the right. While the
individual might not accept the outcome if they are
unsuccessful and while the court may reach conclusions on these considerations
that we consider erroneous, the inquiry is one rationally related to the right
and is reasonably justifiable. The considerations
are connected to the right
— its scope, its importance, etc — as well as the strength of the
reasons, and the means chosen,
for limiting that right.
By contrast, when an individual right is protected by means of constitutional
shoehorning, the adjudicative process and final outcome
will turn on factors
that may bear little or even no relationship to the right. Take, for example, an
individual seeking to challenge
their detention using the separation of powers
The case may turn on
whether the detention was authorised by a member of the judiciary or a member of
the executive because the question
for the court might be whether the correct
arm of government exercised the power. In this scenario, the person’s
susceptibility
to detention could turn on the definition of ‘court’
or ‘judicial power’ rather than on their culpability,
the severity
of the detention or the purpose of the detention. Or take a parent seeking to
challenge government funding of religious
activities in state schools using the
federal division of powers rather than a freedom of religion
The case will turn on
whether the funding falls within an area of legislative competence assigned to
the central or regional level
of government. Thus, the parent’s success
will turn on the definition of a particular subject area assigned to a
level of government (for example, does the funding amount to
‘benefits to students’?) rather than on whether the funding
amounts to state endorsement of a religion or interferes with the free exercise
of religion.
If successful, the end result might be, for instance, that a person cannot be
subject to preventative detention, but only if the order
is made by a
‘judge’. Or that the central government cannot fund religious
activities in state schools, but the regional
governments can. These partial
rights are justifiable from the perspective of the doctrine into which they have
been shoehorned (that
is, the separation of powers or the federal division of
powers), but they are difficult to justify from the perspective of the interest
the litigant sought to protect. A person might rightly ask: why does a
person’s freedom from preventative detention depend
on the office of the
person who orders the detention rather than, say, the threat the detained person
poses to the community? Or
why can a central government encroach on the
separation of church and state as long as the encroachment amounts to a
to students’?
Importantly, the end result does not merely affect the litigant that brought
the case. If that were the case, one might respond to
the above questions by
stating that it is simply a risk the litigant assumed when they made a
shoehorned argument before a court.
Instead, constitutional shoehorning has
downstream effects on other people. A successful shoehorn may
protection offered to individuals in analogous positions in the future because
the scope of protection depends on factors that
are not related to the interest
that litigants want protected. The degree of protection the interest receives is
not determined by
the importance of that interest or the importance of the
reason for limiting that interest, but instead by some unrelated factor
the definition of ‘court’ or the definition of ‘benefits to
students’. Put another way, constitutional
shoehorning is particularly
vulnerable to producing decisions that do not enhance rights even though the
original litigants initiated
the proceedings to enhance rights.
Take the individual seeking to challenge their detention using the separation
of powers doctrine. If a court concludes that the individual’s
is unconstitutional because the form of detention (for example, preventative
detention) was not ‘judicial’
and thus the power to order their
detention was invalidly conferred on the judiciary, this outcome may pave the
way for the legislature
to give the exact same power to a person who is not a
judge (for example, a Minister). The separation of powers doctrine may allow,
, preventative detention to be imposed by persons who are
not judges, sitting in institutions that are not courts. This result makes
situation worse for future individuals in an analogous position because the
detention will now be ordered by a person who enjoys
fewer guarantees of
independence and impartiality than a judge, sitting in an institution that has
fewer due process protections
than a court. People will still be subject to
preventative detention, but by order of a member of the executive rather than a
of the judiciary.
Or take the parent seeking to challenge government funding of religious
activities in state schools using the federal division of
powers. If they
succeed in arguing that the law is invalid because it does not confer
‘benefits to students’, this outcome
may pave the way for even more
state funding of religious education services to meet the definition of
‘benefits’ or
it may prompt the legislature to choose an
alternative, less transparent way of funding those services. For future
individuals seeking
to protect the separation of church and state, the end
result might be worse if it leads to a much larger funding program or funding
that is subject to fewer accountability checks.
Challenges to laws that limit rights on the basis that the laws violate a
bill of rights are also vulnerable to legislative override
and circumvention.
The claim is not that non-shoehorned challenges are protective of individuals
and shoehorned challenges are not.
Instead, the claim is that shoehorned
challenges introduce partiality into the law and that partiality is not
connected to the interest
the litigant is seeking to protect. This partiality
has consequences not only for the litigant that brought the case, but also for
future individuals in similar circumstances with similar interests in need of
protection.
A second concern with constitutional shoehorning is that it renders the law
more complex and less accessible. It compresses different
legal rules and
principles into single provisions, which makes them more difficult to
understand. A right to vote that, through shoehorning,
comes to protect the
right to free speech, the drawing of electoral boundaries, the independence of
the electoral commission, the
composition of the legislature, the timing of
elections, the right to enter one’s country of citizenship to vote, and so
becomes a conceptual quagmire. This complexity can have constitutional
consequences, rendering the judiciary more vulnerable to criticism
that it has
increasing the disparity between doctrine and text. In this regard, the
potential downsides of constitutional shoehorning are
similar to the potential
downsides of drawing constitutional implications.
Constitutional shoehorning makes the scope of a person’s rights more
difficult to understand, especially for non-lawyers. When
protection for the
separation of church and state is determined by a guarantee of freedom of
religion, its scope will be determined
by, as mentioned above, factors such as
the degree of interference with the free exercise of religion and the reason for
the interference
with religion. While a layperson is unlikely to know the
law’s precise content and limits, it is likely that they can work
without great difficulty and engage in debate with other persons about the state
of the law. By contrast, when protection
for the separation of church and state
is determined by the federal division of powers, it becomes much harder for a
layperson to
work out what the law does and does not protect as well as what the
law should and should not protect. Not only does the scope of
protection now
depend on non-obvious factors such as the definition of federal provisions such
as ‘benefits to students’,
it also becomes contingent in non-obvious
ways. For example, the central government can provide funding of religious
education services
to state schools, but only if the money is first distributed
to regional governments. Furthermore, a person cannot argue, for instance,
the law should provide greater protection for the separation of church and state
because of its importance to a free society
since that consideration is
irrelevant to the scope of protection.
Lawyers versus Clients
A third concern with constitutional shoehorning that builds on the previous
two is that it privileges technical acumen over substantive
Constitutional shoehorning is an exercise in legal creativity — finding an
indirect method of protecting an interest
when the direct path is foreclosed for
some reason. As a result, it rewards technical skill in finding novel yet
plausible legal
arguments rather than the ability to substantiate the merits of
the underlying interest. That means constitutional shoehorning is
apt to reward
the lawyer more than the client. If a case of constitutional shoehorning
succeeds, the lawyer unquestionably wins as
they will be acknowledged as having
successfully crafted a creative new legal argument. But the client may very well
lose. Even if
they win the case, their victory is especially vulnerable to being
pyrrhic because the reason for success is not the reason they
brought the case.
If the state can address the reason for success, the underlying interest —
the reason the litigant brought
the case — is still vulnerable to state
abrogation. Once again, the claim is not that non-shoehorned cases never result
pyrrhic victories or that shoehorning cases always do. Legislatures can and
do overturn and circumvent successful challenges to laws
limiting rights brought
under a bill of rights.
constitutional shoehorning is particularly vulnerable to this sort of mismatch
because the reason for decision does not necessarily
bear any relationship to
the interest the litigant is seeking to protect.
Constitutional Shoehorning in Practice
One of the reasons constitutional shoehorning occurs in Australia is the
absence of a constitutional bill of rights. Without one,
individuals seeking to
challenge the constitutional validity of a government act or law for infringing
their rights must generally,
use some provision that
does not appear to be concerned with the protection of individual rights. This
Part considers a number of
examples of the technique in practice.
Legal Certainty
In 1981, Mohamed Metwally, a student at the University of Wollongong, lodged
a complaint under New South Wales anti-discrimination
legislation that the
university had discriminated against and victimised him on the ground of his
race. A tribunal upheld the complaint
and ordered the university pay damages to
Mr Metwally. While these proceedings were under way, the High Court held, in a
case unrelated
to Mr Metwally, that provisions of the New South Wales law were
invalid under s 109 of the
Constitution
for indirect
inconsistency with Commonwealth racial discrimination
legislation.
Shortly after the
High Court’s decision, Commonwealth Parliament amended the racial
discrimination legislation to provide that
it did not intend to exclude the
operation of state legislation on the same topic, and that this intention was to
have retrospective
This amendment appeared to clear the way for Mr Metwally to succeed against
the university. It is well established that Commonwealth
Parliament can enact
legislation that indicates the Commonwealth law’s intention is to not
preclude the operation of compatible
legislation.
It is also well
established that Commonwealth Parliament can enact legislation with
retrospective effect.
university therefore had to get creative. It argued that
operates as a
limitation on Commonwealth legislative power, prohibiting Commonwealth
Parliament from enacting legislation that has
the effect of retrospectively
reviving a state law that has been held to be invalid under
The argument
is a particularly creative one because
is not framed as a limitation on
Commonwealth legislative power. Instead, it is framed as precisely the opposite
— an affirmation
of Commonwealth legislative power — by declaring
that Commonwealth law shall prevail over state law to the extent of any
inconsistency
, a bare majority of the High Court accepted the
university’s argument.
crucial reason for this conclusion was their view that the provision also
functions as a protection of the people against legal
uncertainty about which
law they must obey. Gibbs CJ wrote that
Section 109
deals with ‘a matter of prime importance’ in the
constitutional framework ... Its provisions are not only critical in
the relations between the legislatures of the Commonwealth and the States, but
great importance for the ordinary citizen, who is entitled to know which
of two inconsistent laws he is required to
J stated that
‘serves the equally important function of
protecting the individual from the injustice
of being subjected to
the requirements of valid and inconsistent
laws of Commonwealth and State
Parliaments on the same
went on to describe the provision as conferring a ‘constitutional
right’ on individuals to ignore state laws
that are inconsistent with
Commonwealth law.
Several aspects of the decision are notable for the purposes of this article.
First, it demonstrates the existence of constitutional
shoehorning even if one
does not take an originalist approach to constitutional interpretation. Prior to
the Court’s decision
was understood as a
provision concerned with the operation of the federal system of government
— it regulated the relationship
between Commonwealth and state legislative
power by determining which law prevails in the event of an inconsistency. There
suggestion that it conferred constitutional rights on
individuals.
Following the
Court’s decision in
, the Court and commentators now
acknowledge that the provision has two concerns — federalism and
individual protection.
Therefore, if a litigant today seeks to protect their rights by relying on
, it might not be accurate to describe that as an act of constitutional
shoehorning because one can argue that it already addresses
the protection of
rights. But constitutional shoehorning is the process by which it came to
acquire this second concern — from
a litigant taking a provision that did
not appear on its face or from its history to deal with individual protection
and arguing
that the provision does, in fact, deal with this concern.
Second, the decision demonstrates how constitutional shoehorning can produce
a partial right. The vice of the law in
was the fact that it
purported to apply retrospectively. All members of the Court accepted that the
Commonwealth Parliament could
state that a particular law does not intend to
cover the field and, as a result, could prospectively bring about a revival of a
law that had been held to be indirectly inconsistent with a Commonwealth
The distinguishing
characteristic of the law in
was that it attempted to bring
protection offered by the
Court’s decision in
protection against retrospective laws. However, as there is no general
prohibition on retrospective laws, it is only a protection
against retrospective
laws that alter inconsistency between Commonwealth and state laws. This
partiality is what has led commentators
such as James Stellios to say the
decision lacks
— why would you have a partial prohibition on retrospectivity when
you do not have a general prohibition on prospectivity?
This partiality is a
product of shoehorning the right into a provision that is concerned with the
operation of the federal system.
The right becomes confined by that context in
that it only applies in respect of a specific type of federal interaction.
Third, the result was not necessarily rights enhancing. Most obviously, it
led to the denial of Mr Metwally’s rights —
the finding of
discrimination against him was
invalidated.
However, that
invalidation flows from the fact that the university’s right was
constitutional while Mr Metwally’s was
statutory. One would expect a
constitutional right to trump a statutory right. More significantly, however, a
general prohibition
on retrospective revival of a state statute is not
necessarily a rights-enhancing position. Retrospective revival will most
be used where Commonwealth Parliament makes a mistake — a court
finds that a Commonwealth law intended to cover the field when
Parliament did
not intend to cover the field and thus Parliament seeks to reverse the effect of
the court’s decision. If the
state law that the Commonwealth seeks to
revive is one that grants rights against the state, the prohibition diminishes
rights because
the state is the legal person who is being protected from its
retrospective application. Even if the state law that the Commonwealth
revive is one that grants rights against a private individual, as was the case
, the position might not be rights enhancing if the rights
conferred by the state law outweigh those conferred by the prohibition
retrospective revival. Therefore, the only scenario in which the prohibition
will unquestionably be rights enhancing is where
the inconsistent state law is
Separation of Church and State
In 2010, Ron Williams was sending his children to a government school. That
school had a chaplain to provide chaplaincy services pursuant
to a contract
between the Commonwealth Government and a private chaplaincy provider. Mr
Williams opposed the arrangement due to its
purported interference with the
separation of church and state. Describing himself as a secular public education
advocate, his view
was that religious services should not be present in
government schools.
Constitution
provided a direct route to challenging the contract on this
Section 116
prohibits the Commonwealth from ‘establishing any
religion’, ‘imposing any religious observance’ and requiring
‘religious test ... as a qualification for any office ... under the
Commonwealth’. Mr Williams challenged the program
challenge was unsuccessful due to the High Court’s narrow interpretation
of the provision.
There was, however, an alternative basis on which Mr Williams could seek to
invalidate the program, one which had no direct connection
to the separation of
church and state. The
Constitution
contains a set of provisions for the
regulation of executive power and legislative supervision of executive
These provisions, as
the Court noted, exist not to safeguard secularism, but instead to protect
representative and responsible government
(that is, protection of legislative
accountability of executive
and federalism. The
connection to federalism is that, because the legislative chamber designed to
represent the states — the
Senate — has limited power over
appropriation bills, it is only through requiring full statutory authorisation
that the Senate
is able to have meaningful input into the way in which the
executive spends public
Mr Williams argued that the Commonwealth’s contract with the private
chaplaincy provider was invalid on the basis that it lacked
authorisation. Funding for the school chaplaincy program had been appropriated
pursuant to the requirement in
Constitution
, but otherwise
had no statutory authorisation. The Commonwealth claimed it could enter into the
contracts to establish, operate and
fund the program without statutory
authorisation (that is, its non-statutory executive power could support the
program). The Court
holding that the contract required statutory authorisation, which it did not
have, and was therefore invalid.
The case highlights two dimensions of constitutional shoehorning. First, it
demonstrates the role of shoehorning in helping to ensure
constitutional limits
are enforced. Over 400 spending programs worth billions of dollars were being
operated in this
The effect of the Court’s decision was that all of them might have been
invalid. Absent constitutional shoehorning, it is very
possible that a case
involving this constitutional limit would not have come before the Court. It is
unlikely that recipients of
funding under these programs would have sought to
challenge their constitutional validity given that they benefitted from them. It
is also unlikely that anyone else with clear standing to challenge the programs
would have initiated proceedings to declare them
invalid. The states, for
example, have standing to initiate constitutional proceedings, but had shown
little interest in challenging
the religious funding program because it resulted
in additional services being available to state schools. While some states
Mr Williams’ challenge once it was before the
it is far from clear that
they would have brought a challenge themselves. As Shipra Chordia, Andrew Lynch
and George Williams have
noted, there remain serious questions over the
constitutional validity of many other funding programs, yet no state has sought
initiate proceedings to challenge them in the decade since
Williams No 1
was decided.
Second, the case demonstrates how constitutional shoehorning can produce
results that are not necessarily rights enhancing and can
introduce greater
complexity into the law. After Mr Williams’ success, Commonwealth
Parliament enacted remedial legislation,
seeking to give express statutory
authorisation for most programs that had previously operated without such
authorisation. Mr Williams
brought a second shoehorned challenge, arguing that
the statute authorising the funding was constitutionally invalid under the
division of powers (that is, Commonwealth Parliament did not have a head
of legislative power under which to enact the remedial legislation).
challenge was confined to that part of the statute authorising the school
chaplaincy program. Mr Williams won again. The Court
held there was no head of
power for that part of the statute. The Commonwealth’s main argument, that
it was a ‘[benefit]
to students’ under
s 51(xxiiiA)
because the Court affirmed a narrow definition of benefit, limiting it to
‘material aid provided against the human
wants which the student has by
reason of being a
Despite two successes, Mr Williams ultimately lost. The Commonwealth
continued to provide funding for chaplains in state schools by
resorting to a
third way of authorising funding for the program. The Commonwealth Parliament
enacted legislation under
Constitution
, which allows the
Commonwealth to provide funding to the states on terms and conditions that they
think fit, including a condition
that the funding be distributed to a third
party — in this case, the school chaplaincy providers. Ultimately,
therefore, the
litigation did not meaningfully advance the concern — the
separation of church and state — that Mr Williams sought to
However, it is arguable that nor did the litigation meaningfully advance the
concern — legislative supervision of executive
funding — that the
constitutional provisions sought to advance. As noted at the time, the remedial
legislation enacted after
Williams No 1
was passed by Parliament in just
three hours and gave the executive the power to spend money on anything it
wanted without further
legislative
It was, as Anne Twomey
noted, ‘an abject surrender of [Parliament’s] powers of financial
scrutiny to the Executive, and
all in an effort to save a few school
chaplains’.
The need to
grants to fund the school chaplains added a further layer of
complexity and opacity to the program — now it involved not only
agreements between the Commonwealth and the chaplaincy providers, but also
between the Commonwealth and the states.
Before moving on to the next case study, it is worth briefly mentioning the
precursor to Mr Williams’ challenge,
Pape v Federal Commissioner of
due to the conspicuous absence of constitutional shoehorning. In
the Court held that
Constitution
, provisions dealing
with the appropriation of moneys, do not confer power on the Commonwealth to
spend money. This result laid the
groundwork for Mr Williams’ challenge.
For the purposes of this article, the most remarkable fact about
Mr Pape. The case was a result of actions taken to avert the global financial
crisis that emerged in 2007–08. The Commonwealth
Government took the view
that Australia was at risk of entering a severe economic recession and sought to
stimulate the economy by
distributing one-off payments of between $250 and $900
to millions of Australians.
Mr Pape’s challenge was to the constitutional validity of those
payments, one of which he stood to receive. He was a constitutional
barrister and lecturer who opposed the expansiveness of the Commonwealth’s
financial powers.
brought the challenge solely for the purpose of seeking to enforce the
Constitution
’s provisions regulating the spending of money by the
He was not trying to
shoehorn his challenge into some other interest he was seeking to protect. The
case thus serves as further evidence
of the importance of constitutional
shoehorning to the enforcement of constitutional limits. Without constitutional
shoehorning,
the system of government would be reliant on people like Mr Pape to
enforce compliance with the
Constitution
. And Mr Pape was a rare
individual. He had to be willing to act against his immediate self-interest by
seeking to challenge the distribution
of money to himself. Furthermore, he had
to be willing to risk temporarily being the most unpopular person in Australia
he been successful, his case would have denied payments to millions of
other Australians.
was subject to intense personal attacks and threats for bringing the
The rarity of a person
with this level of conviction helps explain why challenges to many aspects of a
constitution would be uncommon
without shoehorning.
Post-Sentence Detention
A third instance of constitutional shoehorning comes from the 1996 decision
Kable v Director of Public Prosecutions
Mr Kable was coming
to the end of a sentence of imprisonment for manslaughter of his wife. In
prison, he had written threatening
letters to members of his wife’s
family. In response, New South Wales Parliament enacted the
Protection Act 1994
(NSW), which ‘provid[ed] for the preventive
detention (by order of the Supreme Court made on the application of the Director
of Public Prosecutions) of Gregory Wayne
The law empowered
the Supreme Court to make an order for Mr Kable’s continuing detention if
certain criteria were established.
The most direct ways of constitutionally challenging the legislation were not
open to Mr Kable. The
Constitution
contains no prohibition on
bills of attainder and no right not to be detained except in accordance with the
ordinary criminal sentencing
process. Prior to
, there was some
suggestion that guarantees of this nature might be inferred or implied from the
separation of judicial powers established
But, importantly, these
constitutional provisions apply to Commonwealth laws and Commonwealth courts. Mr
Kable was subject to detention
by a state court in accordance with a state
Therefore, Mr Kable — or, more accurately, his lawyers — had to
get very creative. He argued that, as Ch III also envisages
the conferral of
federal jurisdiction on state
state parliaments cannot
confer powers on state courts that undermine state courts as repositories of
federal judicial power. The
High Court agreed. It held that the law compromised
the institutional integrity of the state judicial system by asking the Supreme
Court to implement what was, in effect, a bill of
The law was
invalidated. The
doctrine was born. The move was, therefore, an act
of constitutional shoehorning in that Mr Kable protected his individual interest
not to be subject to detention through a process far removed from the ordinary
criminal process by relying on a set of provisions
that are concerned with the
allocation of judicial power in a federal system and that make no mention of
state parliaments (that
is, the institutions to which the
This successful episode of constitutional shoehorning has produced a
considerable degree of constitutional uncertainty and
controversy.
For the purposes of
this article, only one aspect requires attention. Once again, it was not a
decision that was necessarily rights
enhancing. While the decision protected Mr
Kable, it had the effect of reducing the protection for other people in similar
to him; it did not simply fail to prevent the enactment of laws that
detain people outside of the ordinary criminal process, but
made their operation
doctrine protects the judiciary, not individuals. It
prevents state parliaments from undermining the suitability of state courts
act as repositories of federal judicial power. If the judiciary is not
implicated, the
doctrine is not activated. That means state
parliaments can still arrange for the detention of individuals as long as the
order is made by someone other than a judge, such as a member of the
executive. As a result, people can still be detained, but it
must be on the
order of someone who does not enjoy the same safeguards for independence and
impartiality that a judge enjoys and
in a manner that may not have the same due
process protections as a court hearing.
That is exactly what happened to Julian Knight. Mr Knight was in prison for
committing a mass murder and was coming up for parole.
As with Mr Kable, the
Victorian Parliament did not want Mr Knight released from prison. It enacted an
amendment to the
Corrections Act 1986
(Vic) stating that the Parole Board
‘must not make a parole order ... in respect of the prisoner Julian
Knight’ except
in very limited circumstances. The Parole Board is not a
court, and its members do not enjoy the security of tenure and other protections
that are afforded to state judges. As the decision to deny parole to Mr Knight
was not made by a judge, the High Court held the
doctrine was not
relevant, and the legislation was constitutionally
Mr Kable’s case also demonstrates how constitutional shoehorning
privileges technical acumen over substantive concerns. His
success is widely
attributed to the brilliance of his lawyer’s
submissions.
As subsequent
decisions such as
underscore, the fairness or unfairness of the
treatment of the detainee is not what determines a case’s
Deportation of Indigenous Peoples
Mr Love and Mr Thoms were long-term residents, but not citizens, of
Australia. After they were convicted of criminal offences, the
Minister for Home
Affairs sought to cancel their residency visas and deport them from Australia
Migration Act 1958
(Cth). Commonwealth Parliament enacted the
Migration Act
pursuant to its power to make laws with respect to
‘aliens’ under
Constitution
. Mr Love and Mr
Thoms challenged the validity of their deportation before the High Court on the
basis that the
Migration Act
did not apply to them because they were
Aboriginal persons. They claimed Aboriginal persons could not fall within the
constitutional
description of ‘aliens’. By a majority of four to
three, the Court agreed.
Mr Love and Mr Thoms thus successfully used the federal division of powers to
protect themselves from being deported from Australia.
In countries with a bill
of rights, these sorts of claim are ordinarily dealt with as a matter of
individual rights, such as the
right to respect for private and family life:
does the deportation of a non-citizen with a long-term connection to the country
unjustifiably
infringe their right to respect for their family life? For
example, in the United Kingdom the deportation of non-citizens convicted
criminal offences has been halted to prevent violations of that right contained
Human Rights Act 1998
Alternatively, the
issue might be dealt with as a matter of indigenous rights. This has occurred in
countries including Canada, where
the rights of non-citizen indigenous persons,
albeit not in the context of deportation, have been considered under the
Constitution
’s protection for the ‘existing aboriginal and
treaty rights of the aboriginal peoples of
This instance of constitutional shoehorning illustrates two of its
characteristics, depending on the lens through which the case is
is viewed through the lens of individual rights, it introduces a
partial right. Indigenous non-citizens are constitutionally protected
deportation, but non-Indigenous non-citizens are not. From the perspective of
individual rights, that is an unusual dividing
line to draw because it means
that a person’s enjoyment of a right to remain in the country is premised
on their Indigeneity
rather than, say, their degree of connection to the country
or the nature and severity of the crime they committed.
is viewed through the lens of Indigenous rights, it is not
necessarily rights enhancing. For those people who were the immediate
beneficiaries of the decision, it shifted rather than removed their source of
vulnerability. They were moved into a legal grey zone
where they were neither a
citizen nor a visa holder
therefore, were dependent on the government to determine their legal status in
Australia (beyond the right not to be deported).
Initially, the government
demonstrated no interest in providing them with a path to attaining a secure
legal status, instead seeking
to overturn the High Court’s decision to
reinstate its power to deport
After a change in
government at the 2022 federal election, the government decided to drop the case
and offer them a path to permanent
residency or
citizenship.
Beyond the people who were the immediate beneficiaries of the decision, it is
not clear that the decision in
enhanced the constitutional status of
Indigenous persons in Australia. In previous decisions, the Court has repeatedly
‘the importance of loyalty, or allegiance, to the question of
meaning that
a non-alien is typically someone who owes allegiance to Australia. Unlike
non-Indigenous persons who are able to change
this status (for example, becoming
an ‘alien’ through renouncing their Australian citizenship), an
implication of
is that Indigenous persons can never change their
status to one of ‘alien’. That potentially means they owe permanent
allegiance to the Crown, a point stressed by some dissenters. For example, Keane
If one takes seriously the notion of ‘permanent allegiance’, it is
difficult to see how persons of Aboriginal descent
can unilaterally free
themselves from that allegiance. ... [T]he absence of a cogent explanation as to
how permanent allegiance may
lawfully be repudiated invites the query whether
other persons of Aboriginal descent not confronted with the same immediate
difficulties
[as the plaintiffs] would so blithely embrace the rank paternalism
that suffuses this argument. In this regard,
the special privilege offered to
persons of Aboriginal descent by the reciprocal arrangement urged by the
plaintiffs does not come
without cost
. To accept the argument would be to
accept limitations on the freedom of persons of Aboriginal descent to pursue
their destiny as
individuals.
concern may very well be overstated, but the point is not without any possible
merit. The relationship between the Australian
state and Indigenous peoples is a
complex one, and having an irrevocable status under the
Constitution
might not necessarily be emancipatory for, or welcomed by all, Indigenous
These observations are not intended to suggest the decision was wrong or has
produced poor outcomes. Instead, it is to suggest that
constitutional
shoehorning — using the federal division of powers to vindicate
individual or Indigenous rights — is not
without potential costs.
Constitutional shoehorning is, in some respects, an entirely predictable and
even inevitable feature of litigation and adjudication.
Litigants are
understandably going to try every plausible argument that might help them win
their case, even if that argument involves
a constitutional provision that
appears unrelated to the substantive concern that motivated their litigation in
the first place.
Why wouldn’t a litigant trying to protect their free
speech raise arguments under the right to free speech as well as the federal
division of powers if both are plausible? As this article has argued, this move
is not without its benefits. The state should be
made to obey the federal
division of powers as well as the bill of rights. However, as this article has
also argued, it can come
with costs. A win on the federal division of powers
might make the law on free speech more complex and partial — for example,
protecting speech from legislative interference by one level of government, but
not the other. From the perspective of federalism,
that makes sense, but from
the perspective of the interest the litigant was seeking to protect, namely free
speech, it does not.
The existence of constitutional shoehorning invites reflection on its
implications for constitutional design. Are there ways in which
a constitutional
text can be drafted that minimise the costs of shoehorning while leaving open
the realisation of its benefits? While
a full answer is beyond the scope of this
article, a tentative observation is that there are consequences for designing a
constitution
in a way that limits the ability of individuals to seek protection
for their fundamental rights and freedoms. As mentioned earlier,
the absence of
rights does not mean an absence of demand for rights protection. If one omits a
bill of rights or includes a partial
bill of rights, individuals will try
alternative routes to attain the protection they seek. There may, therefore, be
benefit in providing
a direct and obvious route to protection and, if there are
concerns about granting courts the power to undertake rights-based judicial
review, limit it through, for instance, legislative override
The potential lessons
from the study of constitutional shoehorning are, however, broader than this
point. The study might also inform,
for instance, debates about how narrow or
broad rules of standing should
Consequently,
constitutional shoehorning is a subject that invites further study, especially
in the Australian context where it is
a significant aspect of constitutional
litigation and adjudication.
Please cite this article as:
Scott Stephenson, ‘Constitutional Shoehorning’
[2024] SydLawRw 21
(2024) 46(4)
Sydney Law Review
DOI: https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.20732
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0. Unmodified content is free to
use with proper
attribution.
Associate Professor, Melbourne Law School, University of
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. Email: scott.stephenson@unimelb.edu.au;
iD: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5305-3304. Thanks to Farrah Ahmed,
Ashleigh Barnes, Will Bateman, Michael Crommelin, Paul Daly,
Ros Dixon, Oran
Doyle, Patrick Emerton, Marie-France Fortin, Jeff Goldsworthy, Hoi Kong, Vanessa
MacDonnell, Carissima Mathen, Douglas
McDonald-Norman, Jena McGill, Jaclyn Neo,
Peter Oliver, Mike Pal, Will Partlett, Silvia Rich, Shreeya Smith, Adrienne
Stone and Lulu
Weis for their exceptionally helpful comments and
suggestions.
There may also be
non-constitutional paths. For example, it may be possible to succeed on a common
law ground when a statutory ground
fails: see, eg,
Momcilovic v The Queen
(2011) 245 CLR 1.
The focus of this article is on the different constitutional options open to
a litigant.
The following is a hypothetical
example. However, as will be illustrated in
of the article,
it bears some similarities to real world examples of constitutional
shoehorning in Australia.
Even if one is of the view that
Australia has a constitutional bill of rights due to the presence of, for
ss 51(xxxi)
, it is at most a partial one that is
narrow in scope and substance: Rosalind Dixon, ‘An Australian (Partial)
Bill of Rights’
(2016) 14(1)
International Journal of Constitutional
Another prominent form of
constitutional creativity in the Australian context is where litigants argue for
the creation of an implied
rule or principle that results in the protection of
their interests.
The implied freedom of political communication is the most well known
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
Williams v Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 23
(2012) 248 CLR 156
Williams No 1
’). For further
discussion of this case, see below Part IV(B).
Love v Commonwealth
(2020) 270 CLR 152
’). For further discussion of
this case, see below Part IV(D).
Kable v DPP (NSW)
[1996] HCA 24
’). For further discussion of this case,
see below Part IV(C).
Pamela S Karlan,
‘Shoe-Horning, Shell Games, and Enforcing Constitutional Rights in the
Twenty-First Century’
(2010) 78(4)
UMKC Law Review
Ibid 877–8 (citations
omitted) (emphasis added).
Baker v Carr
[1962] USSC 42
Caperton v AT Massey Coal
, 556 US 868 (2009).
) 878, 880.
George Williams and David
Human Rights under the Australian
Constitution
(Oxford University
ed, 2013) 114.
James Stellios,
Stellios’s The High Court and the
Constitution
(Federation Press,
ed, 2022) 704.
Geoffrey Kennett,
‘Individual Rights, the High Court and the
Constitution
[1994] MelbULawRw 4
Melbourne University Law Review
George Williams and David
Hume do note that it is not a particularly stable way of protecting rights, but
do not go into detail as
to why that is the case: see Williams and Hume (n
See, eg, the case studies
discussed below in
This is one interpretation
of the separation of powers in Australia (ie that it has spawned a number of
implied constitutional rights):
see, eg, George Winterton, ‘The Separation
of Judicial Power as an Implied Bill of Rights’ in Geoffrey Lindell (ed),
Future Directions in Australian Constitutional Law: Essays in Honour of
Professor Leslie Zines
(Federation Press, 1994) 185; Leslie Zines, ‘A
Judicially Created Bill of Rights?’
[1994] SydLawRw 14
(1994) 16(2)
Sydney Law Review
This is another
interpretation of the separation of powers in Australia (ie that Ch III’s
provisions have been interpreted
in a strained manner in cases such as
): see, eg, Geoffrey Lindell,
‘The Australian
Constitution
: Growth, Adaptation and Conflict —
Reflections about Some Major Cases and Events’
[1999] MonashULawRw 12
(1999) 25(2)
University Law Review
Mark Tushnet,
‘Constitutional Workarounds’
(2009) 87(7)
Texas Law Review
Canada Act 1982
c 11, sch B (‘
Constitution
’); Robert E Hawkins,
‘Constitutional Workarounds: Senate Reform and Other Examples’
(2010) 89(3)
Canadian Bar Review
There are, of course,
exceptions. As noted earlier, governments will occasionally want to engage in
constitutional shoehorning.
‘Constitutional Workarounds’ (n
) 1503–4 (citations omitted).
See, eg, the scholarship on
why governments introduce bills of rights when no obvious reason (eg the
introduction of a new constitution)
exists: David Erdos,
Delegating Rights
Protection: The Rise of Bills of Rights in the Westminster World
University Press, 2010).
Pape v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2009] HCA 23
(2009) 238 CLR 1
example of where it is possible to identify the absence of shoehorning from the
nature of the relief the litigant sought.
For a discussion of this case, see
below Part IV(C).
This is the case for several
provisions in the
Constitution
ss 51(xxxi)
See, eg, Stellios (n
) 324, discussing the High Court’s
approach to the separation of powers in
A-G (NSW) v Quin
(1990) 170 CLR
This is the case with ss 7
and 24 of the
Constitution
Roach v Electoral
Commissioner
(2007) 233 CLR 162.
Adrienne Stone and Frederick
Schauer (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of Free Speech
(Oxford University
Press, 2021) chs 3–8.
For an explication of the
relationship between originalism and history in the Australian context, see
Jeffrey Goldsworthy, ‘Originalism
in Constitutional Interpretation’
[1997] FedLawRw 1
(1997) 25(1)
Federal Law Review
See, eg, MJC Vile,
Constitutionalism and the Separation of Powers
(Oxford University Press,
ed, 1997) 14; Erwin Chemerinsky, ‘The Assumptions of
Federalism’
(2006) 58(6)
Stanford Law Review
See generally Mark Tushnet,
‘Policy Distortion and Democratic Debilitation: Comparative Illumination
of the Countermajoritarian
Difficulty’
(1995) 94(2)
Michigan Law
See generally Mark Tushnet,
The New Fourth Branch: Institutions for Protecting Constitutional Democracy
(Cambridge University Press, 2021).
Williams and Hume (n
See, eg, Adrienne Stone,
‘Judicial Review Without Rights: Some Problems for the Democratic
Legitimacy of Structural Judicial
(2008) 28(1)
Oxford Journal
of Legal Studies
See, eg, Adrienne Stone,
‘Rights, Personal Rights and Freedoms: The Nature of the Freedom of
Political Communication’
[2001] MelbULawRw 13
(2001) 25(2)
Melbourne University Law
See the discussion in
Jeffrey Goldsworthy, ‘Constitutional Implications Revisited’
[2011] UQLawJl 2
University of Queensland Law Journal
(‘Constitutional
Implications Revisited’).
Most apply to both levels of
government, either expressly or as a result of judicial interpretation.
Incorporation of the United
States Bill of Rights so that it applies to the
states is the most well known example of the latter: see
Chicago, Burlington
& Quincy Railroad Co v City of Chicago
[1897] USSC 56
[1925] USSC 174
Except, of course, in the
edge case mentioned immediately above where the right applies to one level of
government, but not the other.
It is important to note that
there are a variety of approaches to originalism, some of which permit
significant departures from historical
understandings of the constitutional
text: see, eg, Jack M Balkin,
Living Originalism
(Harvard University
Press, 2014). For an example of an originalist critique of one of the case
studies discussed below in Part IV,
see James Allan,
‘“Otherness” and Identity Politics in Constitutional
IACL-AIDC Blog
(Blog Post, 21 January 2021)
<https://blog-iacl-aidc.org/cili/2021/1/26/otherness-and-identity-politics-in-constitutional-law>.
Goldsworthy,
‘Constitutional Implications Revisited’ (n
); Allan (n
For an overview of the
‘living tree’ interpretation, see Vicki C Jackson,
‘Constitutions as “Living Trees”?
Comparative Constitutional
Law and Interpretive Metaphors’
(2005) 75(2)
Fordham Law Review
A debate of this nature
occurred in relation to the interpretation of heads of federal legislative power
in Australia: should the
limitations in one head of legislative power be
interpreted so as to limit the scope of other heads of legislative power? See
Amalgamated Society of Engineers v Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd
[1920] HCA 54
It is possible to observe,
for example, criticisms of constitutional shoehorning in Australia that draw on
arguments that the country
should not have a bill of rights: see, eg, Allan (n
As is the case in the United
States: see Karlan (n
On the debate between
political and judicial mechanisms for the enforcement of constitutional
structures, see the scholarship on
process-based theories of federalism: eg
Herbert Wechsler, ‘The Political Safeguards of Federalism: The Role of the
in the Composition and Selection of the National Government’
Columbia Law Review
; Saikrishna B Prakash and John C Yoo,
‘The Puzzling Persistence of Process-Based Federalism Theories’
(2001) 79(6)
Texas Law Review
See, eg, Lord Bingham,
‘The Rule of Law’
(2007) 66(1)
Cambridge Law Journal
) discussed below Part IV(C).
For an overview of the most
common inquiries in proportionality analysis, see Aharon Barak,
Proportionality: Constitutional Rights and Their Limitations
University Press, 2012).
See below Part IV(C).
See below Part IV(B).
On the consequences of
criticising courts on this basis, see Tania Josev,
The Campaign Against the
Courts: A History of the Judicial Activism Debate
(Federation Press,
Indeed, bills of rights can
be designed to allow legislative override: see generally Stephen Gardbaum,
The New Commonwealth Model of Constitutionalism: Theory and Practice
(Cambridge University Press, 2013).
Section 75(v) of the
Constitution
is an example of an exception since it is
arguably intended to protect an individual right — namely, the right of
a court to bring certain types of legal challenge.
Viskauskas v Niland
[1983] HCA 15
(1983) 153 CLR 280.
Racial Discrimination
Amendment Act 1983
, inserting
Racial Discrimination
Palmdale-AGCI
Ltd v Workers’ Compensation Commission (NSW)
[1977] HCA 69
(1977) 140 CLR 236.
[1915] HCA 58
(1915) 20 CLR 425.
A point that was made by the
Solicitor-General for New South Wales (
University of Wollongong v Metwally
(1984) 158 CLR 447, 450–1 (Gaudron QC) (during argument)
’)) as well as members of the minority: see, eg, at
462–3 (Mason J), 486 (Dawson J).
Ibid 457–8 (emphasis
Ibid 477 (emphasis
See, eg, John Quick and
Robert Randolph Garran,
The Annotated
Constitution
of the Australian
Commonwealth
(Australian Book Company, 1901) 939.
Dickson v The
(2010) 241 CLR 491
, 503–4 [19] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne,
Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ); Williams and Hume (n
) 456 (Gibbs CJ), 460 (Mason J),
469 (Murphy J), 471 (Wilson J), 474 (Brennan J).
Stellios (n
) 469–70 (Murphy J).
Williams v Commonwealth
: School Chaplains and the Religious Tests
Clause of the
Constitution
[2012] MonashULawRw 30
(2012) 38(3)
Monash University Law
Constitution
Williams No 1
232–3 [136]
(Gummow and Bell JJ).
See, eg, ibid 192–3
[37], 203–4 [58], 205–6 [60]–[61] (French CJ), 232–3
[136], 234 [143], 235 [145]
(Gummow and Bell JJ), 347 [501], 348 [503], 353
[522] (Crennan J).
Ibid (Heydon J
dissenting).
Daniel Stewart,
Williams v Commonwealth
and the Shift from Responsible to
Representative Government’
[2013] AIAdminLawF 8
[2013] (72)
, 75; Shipra
Chordia, Andrew Lynch and George Williams, ‘
Williams v Commonwealth [No
: Commonwealth Executive Power and Spending after
Williams [No
[2015] MelbULawRw 22
(2015) 39(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
Williams No 1
) 181–2 [9] (French CJ),
223–4 [112] (Gummow and Bell JJ). This is why the Court spent little time
considering whether
Mr Williams had standing to bring the challenge.
Chordia, Lynch and Williams
Williams v Commonwealth
[2014] HCA 23
(2014) 252 CLR 416
, 459–60 [46] (French CJ, Hayne, Kiefel, Bell
and Keane JJ).
Anne Twomey, ‘Bringing
Down the House? Keeping School Chaplains Means a Surrender to the
Executive’,
The Conversation
27 June 2012)
<https://theconversation.com/bringing-down-the-house-keeping-school-chaplains-means-a-surrender-to-the-executive-7926>.
George Williams,
‘Bryan Pape and his Legacy to the Law’
[2015] UQLawJl 2
(2015) 34(1)
University of
Queensland Law Journal
As George Williams has
written, ‘[i]t takes a brave person to stand between the Commonwealth and
an offer of cash to nearly
9 million taxpayers, let alone in the midst of a
global economic recession’: ibid 38.
Ibid 62–3 (Brennan
Scott Stephenson,
‘Rights Protection in Australia’ in Adrienne Stone and Cheryl
Saunders (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of the Australian
Constitution
(Oxford University Press, 2018) 905, 922–3.
Constitution
) 127–8 (Gummow J).
See, eg, Elizabeth Handsley,
‘Do Hard Laws Make Bad Cases? The High Court’s Decision in
v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[1997] FedLawRw 5
(1997) 25(1)
Federal Law
Knight v Victoria
[2017] HCA 29
(2017) 261 CLR 306.
Jeffrey Goldsworthy,
and Judicial Statesmanship’
[2014] MonashULawRw 7
(2014) 40(1)
Monash University Law Review
) (Bell J, Nettle J, Gordon J, Edelman J;
Kiefel CJ, Gageler J & Keane J dissenting).
These decisions have
generated considerable controversy in the United Kingdom. The United Kingdom
Government mentioned them as a
reason for repealing the
Human Rights Act 1998
(UK) in its 2021 consultation paper on the subject: Ministry of Justice
(UK), ‘Human Rights Act Reform: A Modern Bill of Rights’
(Consultation Paper, December 2021) 37–8. In 2022, when the Government
proposed to replace the Act with the British Bill of
Rights, a specific
exception to the right to a family life was created for persons in this
situation: British Bill of Rights 2022
(UK) cl 8. The Bill was later abandoned
after a change of Prime Minister.
Constitution
R v Desautel
[2021] SCC 17.
) 209–10 [131] (Gageler J).
Montgomery v Minister
for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2021] FCA 1423
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs v Montgomery
, High Court of Australia, Case No
Paul Karp, ‘Labor
Drops Coalition Bid to Overturn High Court Ruling that Indigenous Australians
Can’t Be Aliens’,
The Guardian
(online, 28 July 2022)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2022/jul/28/labor-drops-coalition-bid-to-overturn-high-court-ruling-that-indigenous-australians-cant-be-aliens>;
Nicholas McElroy, ‘Aboriginal Man Daniel Love Still at Risk of Deportation
Despite Landmark High Court Ruling, Lawyer Says’,
18 July 2023)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-07-18/daniel-love-high-court-gold-coast-immigration-deportation/102614382>.
) 174 [16] (Kiefel CJ) (citations
Ibid 231 [217] (Keane J)
(emphasis added).
See, eg, Scott
Stephenson,
From Dialogue to Disagreement in Comparative Rights
Constitutionalism
(Federation Press, 2017) ch 12.
For a discussion of
standing in the constitutional context in Australia, see the special issue on
access to constitutional justice
in (2011) 22(3)
Bond Law Review
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (238 KB)
PDF format (404 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter