URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MarStudies/2008/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:16:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dirhamsyah --- "Traditional fisheries management of flyingfish on the west coast of Sulawesi, Indonesia" [2008] MarStudies 22; (2008) 161 Maritime Studies 2
Traditional fisheries management of flyingfish on the west coast of Sulawesi, Indonesia
Introduction
Area and method of study
Area of study
Methodology
Traditional flyingfish fisheries
Species diversity in Macassar Straits
Fishing ground and fishing effort in time
Fishing equipment
Fish capture production
Total flyingfish fishery household
Traditional institutional arrangements for marine resource management
Ponggawa-Sawi on flyingfish fisheries management in West Sulawesi
Solutions and their policy implications
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Traditional fisheries
management of flyingfish on the west coast of Sulawesi, Indonesia
Flyingfish is an important commercial species in several areas of eastern
Indonesia. They have been utilised for generations by local
communities that
live in the west and south coast of Sulawesi. It is estimated that more than
3,825 families, or about 19,125 people,
of the District of Majene in West
Sulawesi depend on flyingfish in the Macassar Strait. However, inappropriate
management has resulted
in inconsistent capture and production rates of
flyingfish. The inconsistency in production is the first indication of
unsustainable
fishing practices and overfishing. This is also an indicator of
the threat for the potential extinction of the species. There is
a pressing need
for a comprehensive study on sustainable fisheries management to address the
overfishing problem of flyingfish in
Macassar Straits because it is such an
important economic asset to the local communities. The study would need to
include all normal
development aspects for the fishery: biological, social,
cultural, economic, legal and institutional.
This paper analyses the institutional framework of traditional management
of flyingfish, particularly
ponggawa-sawi
relationships in District of
Majene of West Sulawesi Province. It is based on a study conducted between
February to October 2007
in the village of Mosso. This paper concludes with a
recommendation for the implementation of Community-Based Management (CBM) and
co-management in order to address the problem of overfishing and to facilitate
the development of sustainable fisheries management
of flyingfish in this area.
flyingfish,
flyingfish roe, traditional
fisheries management, ponggawa-sawi, Macassar Straits
Introduction
Flyingfish is an important commercial species in some areas of Indonesia,
particularly in Maluku, West, South and North Sulawesi provinces.
exocoetidae
) is a small pelagic fish with a unique feature of large
pectoral fins that enable it to appear to fly over the sea surface. Fifty-three
species of this fish exist in tropical and sub-tropical waters of the world, and
18 of them are found in Indonesian
Flyingfish have been fished
in Indonesia for several decades. They can be fished throughout the year.
In Indonesia, flyingfish is consumed in three forms. These are fresh, dry and
smoked fish, and the actual fish roe. The fresh form
is popular in the local
communities, while dried and smoked fish is marketed to the highland cities in
Sulawesi and Kalimantan, such
as Tana Toraja, Enrekang and
Although, in terms of
volume, the export market has not been significant, flyingfish roe has been
exported to some Asian and European
countries, such as Japan, Korea and
Lithuania. The decrease of caviar production in Russia and middle Asian
countries has increased
the demand for flyingfish roe in the international
High flyingfish roe prices in international market have resulted in the
excessive capture of flyingfish roe with corresponding decreases
population of this species. This has been dramatically indicated by the decrease
in the catch per unit effort and the total
export volume of flyingfish
A recent study of flyingfish
discovered that the size of flyingfish in Macassar Strait and Flores Sea is
smaller than in other locations.
This may be due to overfishing in that
The local fishers of Macassar Straits and Flores Sea have benefited from all
parts of this species, from the roe to its meat. There
is concern that
flyingfish may become an endangered species if more rigorous fisheries
management measures are not adopted.
Although flyingfish is a pelagic fish, it is not classified as a highly
migratory pelagic species, like tuna. Therefore, an overfished
flyingfish most probably will not be refilled by flyingfish from other
Excessive fishing and the
segregation characteristic of the flyingfish population pose a risk to the
species. Tambunan has reported
that the overfishing of flyingfish in several
area of Indonesia such as Riau, Central Java and Gorontalo, has caused the
of flyingfish in these
Integrated fisheries management is required to address the overfishing of
flyingfish in the Macassar Strait, particularly in the waters
of West Sulawesi
province. There is an urgent need for a study of the dynamic biology and ecology
of the marine fish resources in
the west Sulawesi, including the flyingfish
fishery, to support the appropriate model in order to address the overfishing
This paper describes the flyingfish fishery in west Sulawesi, Indonesia
including biology and socio-economic aspects. It also analyses
the institutional
framework of traditional management of
ponggawa-sawi
in the District of
Majene of West Sulawesi Province.
Area and method of study
Area of study
The village of Mosso is located on the eastern side of Macassar Strait. In
administrative terms, the village is under the authority
of the sub-district of
Sendana of the District Government of Majene, Province of West Sulawesi. The
District of Majene is dominated
by four seasonal monsoons. The north and south
monsoons prevail during the months of December to February and June to August
respectively.
The west and east monsoons prevail during the months of September
to November and March to May respectively. The west and east monsoons
characterised by calm waters and dry season.
Methodology
Data for the study were collected using a combination of document analysis
and semi-structured questionnaires. Interviews were conducted
with villagers,
including fishers, traders, community leaders, and the village chief. Interviews
with some government officials were
also conducted to obtain information about
fisheries policies and regulations in the local district government. Direct
observation
was also conducted in order to understand the livelihood aspects and
the relationship between coastal communities and marine and
coastal resources.
Issues that were examined included species diversity, fishing ground and time
used for fishing, fishing gear,
fish capture and production and total fishery
households involved in flyingfish fisheries management.
Traditional flyingfish fisheries
Before attempting to analyse the traditional institutional arrangements for
marine resource management in West Sulawesi Province,
it is useful to discuss
the current status of flyingfish fisheries management in Majene. The fishery is
a traditional, small-scale
fishery. Small-scale fisheries are defined as labour
intensive fisheries using relatively small, mostly family owned, crafts, and
little capital. They typically equate with artisanal
The United Nations Food
and Agriculture Organization (FAO) also defines the artisanal fisheries as
traditional fisheries involving
fishing households, using relatively small
amounts of capital and small fishing vessels which make short fishing trips,
shore, mainly for local
consumption.
The flyingfish
fisheries in Majene fit this category of artisanal fisheries.
Species diversity in Macassar Straits
Flyingfish in Indonesian are called
Ikan Terbang
. They live in deep
and clear water. Eleven species of flyingfish have been recorded in Macassar
Strait. Generally, all the species
in that area are of a similar size, with
range of 16-18 cm.
Hirundichthys oxycephalus
is the dominant species in the area. This
species comprises about 75-80 per cent of the landings for every fishing season
produces high quality roe.
Fishing ground and fishing effort in
Flyingfish spawn on the water surface above the continental shelf. The
current research of biological aspects of flyingfish in Macassar
indicates that February-September is the spawning period of flyingfish in that
area. May-June is the peak spawning
The fishing season is
usually less than six months per year, generally between February and June.
Fishing ceases by the end of July,
when the peak spawning occurs. Different from
the capture of flyingfish, the capture of flyingfish roe starts in May, when the
start to spawn. It will be finished in August-September, when the
flyingfish finish spawning.
Flyingfish live in clear water and avoid muddy
Except for the western
part of Macassar Straits, where it is bordered by Borneo Island, flyingfish can
be found in all areas of the
Strait. There are two fishing areas in West
Sulawesi Province. These include the districts of Majene and Mamuju. Today,
the decrease of total landings has caused the fishermen of Mamuju to
change their targeted fishing from flyingfish to other commercial
pelagic fishes
such as tuna and shark.
Fishing operations for flyingfish are carried out 10-15 nautical miles from
shore, using traditional wooden boats called
perahu sandeq
powered by five horse power (hp) engines or outboard engines. It is estimated
that more than 25 per cent of the total number
of fishing boats in the district
of Majene are seasonally used for this fishery. Like other traditional
communities in India,
fishing for flyingfish in West Sulawesi Province is usually conducted by day
trips. Fishing craft leave early in the morning
and return to the fishing
village in the late afternoon. As the
perahu sandeq
do not carry ice, the
fish are landed in fresh form, and are often in poor quality only suitable for
processing as dried fish after
salting and smoking. If the quality of the fish
is good when they are landed, they are marketed fresh. Generally, the fish
is used for domestic consumption. Usually, the fish capture should be
sold to the
(the main trader; discussed below) with the price
that is determined by the
always lower than the market price and this further increases his profit
The system and season of fishing operations for flyingfish is influenced by
the location of the fishing grounds and the landing station.
Fish is usually
landed in private ports. The flyingfish landed in district of Majene is usually
in the village of Mosso. Different
from the capturing of flyingfish, the
flyingfish roe is usually captured by larger boats powered by an engine of 10-20
Fishing equipment
The equipment used for capturing flyingfish is quite similar to other
equipment that are commonly used for other pelagic species.
Usually fishermen
use drift gillnets, which are very effective. This equipment has been used in
most eastern areas of Indonesia.
Usually the fishermen use nets which are about
1.5 metres wide and about 675-875 metres long. Nets are made with polyamide and
a mesh size of approximately 3.2 cm.
Traditional gear is also used by local fishermen for capturing flyingfish
roe. This instrument is called
. It is a floating trap of bamboo
or wood that is covered by coconut leaf as a nest that can encourage the fish to
place its roe.
The coconut leafs are tied to bamboo or wood and are about 1-1.5
metres wide and about 2.5-3 metres long (see Figure 1). The capture
flyingfish roe using
is very simple.
released to the sea and tied to the boat and then left for about 15-20 hours or
is filled by the roe. If the
already filled by roe, then it is pulled back to the boat for harvesting. This
technique originally follows the spawning pattern
of flyingfish, where it will
spawn on materials or objects that float at sea. However, the decreased
production of flyingfish roe
has resulted in fewer returns from this
Figure 1 Fishing gear for capturing
flyingfish and its roe
Fish capture production
Data analysis of fish landings in the Majene district reveals fluctuations in
capture production of flyingfish in the period
(see Figure 2).
Although there was a dramatic increase in production in 2007, the period of
2002-2006 showed a rapid decline. The
production in 2002-2006 decreased more
than 50 per cent (455.21 to 225.52 tons). This data indicates that the maximum
sustainable
yield of flyingfish had also decreased significantly. Several
scholars argued that the decrease in production was due to
overfishing.
Musick argued that
the quantitative level of decrease of sustainable potential could be categorised
as an indicator that the species
was under the threat of
extinction.
Total flyingfish fishery household
With a total coastline of more than 125 km and 926 km
area, the Majene community depends on marine resources for their livelihoods and
fisheries activities involve a significant
number of households. According to
2005 statistical data, more than 7,400 households in Majene include fishers,
some of these being
ocean-fishermen in the capture commercial fisheries, and
coastal pond-fishermen (aquaculture fisheries) as per Table 1. Ninety-seven
cent of all the fishermen of Majene are involved in capture
It is difficult to calculate how many fishermen of the district rely solely
on the utilisation of flyingfish because it is a part
time, seasonal fishery,
whereby the fish for flyingfish when they are available and then switch to other
pelagic fish in Macassar
Straits. However, the sub-districts of Sendana and
Banggae are the settlements where most of the fishers focus on flyingfish. It
estimated that 3,825 households, or about 19,125 residents, of Sendana and
Banggae depend on the utilisation and management of
flyingfish as their major
source of livelihood, or more than 50 per cent of the total fishers in the
district of Majene.
Women in Majene also play an important role in the flyingfish fishery through
their involvement in fish processing (salting and smoking),
distribution,
wholesale and retail marketing.
Traditional institutional arrangements for marine
resource management
Institutional arrangements are important for successful fisheries.
Institutions are created by the government or communities in order
to allocate
scarce resources and to resolve conflicts among resource users.
Sorensen and McCreary describe institutional arrangements as ‘the
composite of laws, customs, and organisations established
by society to allocate
scarce resources and competing
Institutions can
be divided into two types: formal and informal. Formal fisheries institutions
are formed through a combination of
legislation, administrative arrangements and
court decisions. Informal institutions, on the other hand, may be norms of oral
and traditional beliefs that exist in many rural and coastal
traditional communities.
Figure 2 Total Flyingfish Capture District of
Majene of 2002-2007
Source: Nurani (2007)
Traditional institutional arrangements are informal by nature and can range
from indigenous, with their origins clearly going back
many generations, to
contemporary or more ‘modern’
In terms of orientation, traditional resource management arrangements can have one of two different
emphases: environmental management
or economic
Both types have existed
in Indonesia for several decades. For example,
Minahasa, North Sulawesi
Panglima Laot
in Nanggroe Aceh
are examples of
traditional resource management oriented to environmental management. There are
two traditional management systems
that focus on economics. These are
Ponggawa-Sawi
in Sulawesi.
The traditional
institution orientation is based on the social system, the level of dependence
of local communities on the resources
and the dynamics of the local economic
For instance, the
Ponggawa-Sawi
relationship in Sulawesi is created from the dynamic of
coastal community economics. The following section analyses the institution
Ponggawa-Sawi
in order to identify options to achieve integrated
fisheries management.
Ponggawa-Sawi
on flyingfish fisheries
management in West Sulawesi
Ponggawa-Sawi
is the traditional institutional management system used
in coastal communities along the west and east coast of Sulawesi. This system,
which originally stemmed from working relationships between businessmen and
labour, has three elements: (i) the capital provider
); (ii) the
boat owner (
) and (iii) the boat crews or labour
is the capital provider who is usually also a businessman or
is the leader of the capture unit operation, with full
responsibility for this phase of the operation.
are the people who
work as labourers under the
in the capture operation. The latter
have rights to receive earnings from the profits of the full production
operation in accordance
with a prior agreement of both the
Generally, the
ponggawa-sawi
system is the working relationship
between fishermen and the capital investor due to the parties’ mutual
interdependence. The
closely related to the total and type of the equipment used. For example,
operation of beach seines is usually by two to six persons and a boat raft
) is operated by five persons.
The development of economics and banking systems has driven a change of
relationship between
. Today, there are three
first type is a simple relationship, where only
and several
exist as a group for a working operation. In this type the
has two functions. He functions as a capital provider and also
acts as the
which has responsible for capture operation. This
system usually occurs in the operation of boat raft (
cooperation between
is tied by economic
relationships. This type can be found in the operation of the
Table 1. Fishery household (RTP) of District of Majene in
Sub district
Ocean fishermen (capture)
Coastal Pond
The third type is like type one or two, where the
as the capital provider, but in the implementation, the relationship is somewhat
different. The pattern of relationship
in this type is influenced by government
and bank intervention, where the
can be a businessman, or
banker, or community group.
extension of credit or capital to the
in cash, instruments such as fishing gear, or boats. Unlike the other
operations, the production revenue sharing system in
this case is not that
normally adopted in the traditional institutional arrangement. The joint
agreement adopted in this system makes
it the duty of the
to sell all fish caught to the capital provider at the market price.
Examples of this system include the relationships between salt
fish traders from
Macassar and East Kalimantan and fishermen on coast of
A common feature of many working agreements between the
is the familial or informal relationships. The
ponggawa-sawi
system has been in practice for several generations. Although some revenue is
received by the fishermen, it cannot be denied that
ponggawa-sawi
relationship has caused a strong dependence of fishermen to the
The economic welfare of local fishermen has not yet improved, even though the
prices of flyingfish and its roe increased in national
and international
markets. This relationship gives more benefits to the
or fishermen. The share of revenue between
is not balanced. Originally, the calculation of share of revenue is
quite simple. The net revenue is divided into eight parts. Three
parts are for
nullification or depreciation costs of boat, engine and gear, two parts for boat
captain and the last of three parts
or crews. However, the
fishermen’s income is only a few US dollars per trip or fishing operation.
Table 2 shows an example of
detailed calculation of production shares per trip
of the fishing of flyingfish during an average season in August 2007.
The costs for depreciation are the responsibility of the boat owner. If the
boat owner also acts as the captain, five parts, or 62.5
per cent, of net
revenue will belong to him. The crews or
received just three parts
or 37.5 per cent of the net revenue. The total crew of each fishing boat
averages 4-5 persons. This means
or fishermen each receive
an income of Rp. 33,000 – 41,250 (US$ 3.6 – 4.5) per person per
fishing trip, see table 2.
This does not enable the economic condition of
fishers’ households to improve in accordance with the increase in the
of flyingfish.
This condition is one of the factors that has caused artisanal fishers to
switch from their traditional fishing methods to destructive
supplement their livelihood. They illegally use small mesh nets to catch small
or juvenile fish, thus further pressuring
the fish stocks in the area.
Therefore, the
ponggawa-sawi
relationship contributes to overfishing,
unsustainable fisheries development of flyingfish in Macassar Straits and also
the incidents of Illegal, Unregulated and Unreported (IUU) fishing at
the artisanal level.
Table 2. Detailed calculation of distribution shares of
fish caught production per trip in August 2007
Selling price of fish caught
Average per trip
Cost for fuel & fishing operation:
Net revenue:
Distribution of share:
Total Net Revenue divided into 8 parts
1 part = Rp. 55,000
o Cost of boat depreciation:
o Cost of engine depreciation
o Cost of gear depreciation:
o Captain and crews boat:
It is difficult to change the system of the
ponggawa-sawi
relationship
because it is part of Sulawesian culture. The artisanal fishers of the western
and southern coast of Sulawesi are bound
strongly by this traditional management
arrangement. Many programs and projects have been carried out by the government,
Usaha Kredit Menengah
(Medium Credits Enterprises). This
government credit scheme seeks to assist small to medium scale companies in
Indonesia. However,
this program also cannot find the ideal format to merge and
change the role of this traditional institution to achieve the objectives
economic improvement in the community, and to maintain the sustainability of the
marine resource base.
absence of an acceptable social mechanism to merge with the traditional
arrangement in the micro economic institutional system
created by government has
made this initiative unsuccessful. In the
ponggawa-sawi
relationship, the
social binding arrangement is often more important than the economic motives,
even if it is disadvantageous to
The cultural
importance of this traditional social binding arrangement is supported by
Jentoft, who argues that most coastal communities
favour the traditional or
informal institutional arrangements rather than formal institutional
arrangements because of the social
binding that exists in traditional
institutions.
Solutions and their policy implications
The overfishing of flyingfish in Macassar Straits is a critical problem that
should be addressed by the national and local government
through an integrated
approach. There are several fishery management approaches that have been
implemented by coastal States around
the world to address overfishing, including
seasonal closures, open and closed areas, the imitating of total catch effort
systems. Restocking and sea ranching through mariculture are
alternative strategies to address overfishing, but they require intensive
capital, specialised knowledge and technology.
Apart from the biological and ecological aspects of marine fisheries
management, the integrated approach must also address socio-cultural
local communities. Social and cultural understanding of coastal communities is
also a key element in planning and managing
coastal and marine resources. No
matter how appropriate and sound the technical and scientific approach is, it
cannot be implemented
if there are not appropriate links with social and
community values to ensure that any changes are accepted by the community. The
success of fisheries management is also determined by the socio-cultural
aspects, and failure to accommodate them will result in
non-acceptance and
failure of proposed strategies.
Community-Based Management (CBM) or Collaborative Management is an option
that can be adopted by the national and local governments
to address this
problem. The CBM and co-management concepts are approaches to enhance community
participation in marine environmental
programs. These approaches were introduced
to many regions in the world in the late 1970s and early 1980s. The primary
was to encourage and empower the local community to be involved in the
management of their environment through the design and development
of relevant
and acceptable programs.
There are several approaches in CBM. However, there is no standard for
implementing CBM, particularly for community-based coastal
resource management
(CBCRM) in the marine and coastal
The application will
depend on each situation, socio-cultural aspects, and the political atmosphere
in the sites. The concept of
CBM has been implemented in Indonesia with
different names, such as CBM,
and community-based
fisheries management (CBFM).
Although not all the implementation initiatives of CBM have been a success,
several initiatives are considered to be successful
This concept is a form
of decentralisation of fisheries and other marine resources management authority
and responsibility.
In order to develop CBFM or co-management of flyingfish in Majene using the
ponggawa-sawi
, at least three activities should be adopted by the
national and local governments. The first is a community awareness activity to
develop community understanding of the importance of managing the flyingfish for
their livelihood and for their next generations.
The community awareness should
be targeted to all fisheries stakeholders, and include fishermen,
, fish traders, and local government officials. Lessons from several
community empowerment programs indicate that implementation programs
because they have not involved one or more of the key stakeholders who can
influence change – the
is one of the
key fishery stakeholders, who by his personal and financial influence can force
the artisanal fishers to switch their
traditional fishing methods to destructive
fishing. Where illegal fishing activities are identified by law enforcement
sanctions are imposed on the
official fish landing site at Bulukumba, South Sulawesi has been closed because
all the catch was collected by the one
However, the
is also an asset who can be used by government
to change the mindset of the community towards sustainable practices. The
involvement
in fisheries management and other community
activities may be critical to the success of the fisheries management programs
areas. It is necessary for the government to involve
in all community programs and activities. Through intensive awareness and strong
law enforcement, the
can be persuaded to use non-destructive
fishing methods. The key to positive involvement of the
however, is the ability to demonstrate that his positive involvement in
responsible and sustainable fisheries management will show
a benefit to his
operation either directly, indirectly and in an acceptable time frame. It means
there is a need for an appreciation
or incentive and the realisation of a
disincentive for non-participation, for example, monitoring, controlling and
surveillance (MCS)
and deterrent enforcement actions.
The second key step is to develop a district flyingfish fisheries management
plan to address the problem of overfishing and bring
the fishery back to
sustainable levels through community acceptance of responsible fishing methods.
This activity would be expected
to create an appropriate institutional
arrangement that can manage the flyingfish fisheries in Majene. Although
flyingfish live along
the Macassar Straits, which includes more than eight
districts of west and south Sulawesi provinces, it does not mean that the
fisheries management should be established in all districts. As
mentioned above, Majene is the only district which conducts fishing
flyingfish. However, a flyingfish fisheries management plan for Majene might be
a model for other districts.
To achieve expected outcomes in community based fisheries management or
collaborative fisheries management activities, it is important
to encourage a
high level of community participation in the planning and implementation
processes. It is necessary to invite the
community to discuss and decide the
appropriate number of fishing boats and mesh net size. They are also encouraged
to develop local
fishermen organisations in order to strength the bargaining
position of fishermen in the negotiation of price and production shares
and other stakeholders.
However, there are some aspects of management that should remain the
responsibility of the local government of Majene. These include
the development
Peraturan Daerah
(local government regulations) and the enforcement of
them. Without formal regulation from the competent agency, the agreement and
decisions that are created by the community and other stakeholders are
ineffectual. Furthermore, formal regulation will be ineffective
if it cannot be
The community inputs to the management planning and the development of
appropriate regulations can also be encouraged to self-monitor
compliance with the management plan. Peer pressure from local fishermen
organisations and the use of traditional cultural
strategies can create an
environment of voluntary compliance. Such peer pressure and traditional methods
to encourage compliance
can thus reduce costs of deterrent enforcement
strategies such as patrols and court actions. However, these latter actions will
necessary to demonstrate the resolve of the community and government to
implement the plan and its supporting legal instruments with
controlling IUU activities.
The third key step is the implementation of Alternative Income Generation or
Supplemental Income Generation activity. The main objective
of this activity is
to improve the economic situation of the fisher community households. This
activity is focused on the improvement
of harvest and post harvest processing.
The traditional method of post harvest processing, such as salting and smoking
lower quality of the product. This has resulted in decreasing prices
of final landed products. This activity can be initiated by
a Non Government
Organisations or local government. Women are often the appropriate target group
for this activity, because almost
all flyingfish processing in Majene is
conducted by women. However, capacity enhancement through training is required
implementation of the program. This activity would address fish
handling and value added potential from the time of harvest, for
example, icing
and covering the catch, to the landing, timely processing and storage or direct
transport to markets to increase the
prices and marketability of the final
products, and reduce waste.
CBM and co-management are the preferred option for fisheries management
because they involve the fishers most affected, thus fostering
the idea of
making them responsible for their futures. Nevertheless, it will not be a simple
task to develop the institutional arrangements
for flyingfish fisheries
management because this fishery is firmly based on traditional management
practices like
Ponggawa-Sawi
. This is a challenge for local government to
invite the community,
and other stakeholders to become fully
involved in all fisheries management activities. Through enhanced awareness of
the importance
of coastal and marine resources for their livelihood, and
effective input into management planning and the regulatory processes,
with a stronger and more committed law enforcement capacity, the
may be persuaded to see the long term benefits of their involvement and role in
this management arrangement. This is a challenge
for local government to
encourage the community to establish a district flyingfish fisheries management
community group in Majene.
The consequence of not taking such steps in a timely
manner may result in the extinction of the flyingfish fishery.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author extends his grateful thanks to the LIPI Competitive Program on
Census of Marine Life, which has provided funds for this
research. Gratitude is
also extended to the BAPPEDA and the Fisheries Office of Regional Government of
District of Majene for their
kindness and assistance in providing project
documents for this research. The author also acknowledges the contribution of
his closest
friends, Mr Peter Flewwelling, Professor Asikin Djamali, Professor
Hari Susanto, and Dr Sutinah who provided invaluable assistance.
Research Centre for
Oceanography, Indonesian Institute of Sciences, Jalan Pasir Putih I, Ancol
Timur, Jakarta Utara, Indonesia. Email:
dirham2161@yahoo.com
Hutomo, M., Burhanuddin and S.
Martosewojo,
Flyingfish resources
(1985) (Trans by author, 2008) pp. 10
Sumberdaya ikan terbang
but no written English translation is
currently available].
As an interesting aside, it is
noted that the tourism market for flying fish fillet sandwiches has not yet been
exploited in Indonesia
as it has been in the Caribbean basin area: see Caricom
Fisheries website
http://www.caricom-fisheries.com/member/dominica. asp
at 8 August 2008.
Baso, A., Sustainable
Management of Fisheries Resources of Flyingfish in Makassar Strait and Flores
Sea: An Analysis of Bio-technique
and Social Economic (PhD Thesis, Universitas
Hasanuddin, 2004) 320pp. (Trans by author, 2008) [trans. of: Pengelolaan
Perikanan Ikan Terbang (Cypselurus spp) Berkelanjutan di Selat
Makassar dan Laut Flores: Suatu Kajian Bio-Teknis-Sosial Ekonomi but
written translation is currently available].
Ali, S.A, and N. Nessa,
Science status of flyingfish in Indonesia
Lokakarya Nasional Perikanan
Ikan Terbang, Macassar 20-21 September 2005, pp. 18-19. (Trans by author, 2008)
[trans. of:
Status Ilmu Pengetahuan Ikan Terbang di Indonesia
written English translation is currently available].
Tambunan, P.,
Information of Flyingfish in Indonesia.
Lokakarya Nasional Perikanan Ikan
Terbang, Macassar 20-21 September 2005, p. 5.
(Trans by author, 2008)
[trans. of:
Beberapa Informasi Tentang Ikan Terbang di Indonesia
no written English translation is currently available].
Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations,
Fisheries Governance-Capture Fisheries:
Governance of Small-Scale Fisheries
. FAO Glossary: see FAO website:
http://www.fao.org
at 5 November 2007.
Syahailatua, A., A. Djamali,
P. Makatipu, and S.A. Ali,
Measures structure and diversity of flyingfish in
East Indonesian Waters: A preliminary study
Seminar Nasional
Hasil-Hasil Penelitian Perikanan 2005. Fakultas Perikanan Universitas Gajah
Mada, Jogjakarta 30 Juli 2005, p. 55.
(Trans by author, 2008)
Diversitas dan struktur ukuran ikan terbang di Perairan Indonesia Timur;
Suatu studi pendahuluan
but no written English translation is currently
available].
Ali and Nessa, above n 4,
Tambunan, above n 7, 1.
Pajot, O., and C.R.
Prabhakaradu, Flyingfish Fishing on the Coromandel Coast, 1988-1991 (1993) Bay
Adopted from Sudirman and A. Mallawa, Technique of fish caught Rineka Cipta, Jakarta, 2004. (Trans by author, 2008) [trans. of:
Teknik Penangkapan Ikan but no written English translation is currently available].
Courtesy from Syahailatua, above n 10, 57.
Nurani, S., Income analysis,
MSY and MEY on flyingfish resource (Exocoitidae) in District of Majene
(Bachelor Thesis, Universitas Hasanuddin, 2007) 73 pp. (Trans by author,
2008) [trans of: Analisis Pendapatan, MSY dan MEY pada Sumberdaya
Ikan Terbang
(Exocoitidae) di Kabupaten Majene but
no written English translation is
currently available].
Dwiponggo, A.T., Sujastami,
and S. Nurhakim,
Analysis of potency and exploitation level of flyingfish
fishery in South of Sulawesi
Scientific Report 25, Pusat Riset
Perikanan Tangkap (Research Centre for Capture Fisheries) 1-12 (Trans by author,
2008) [trans of:
Pengkajian potensi dan tingkat pengusahaan perikanan torani
di Perairan Sulawesi Selatan
no written English translation is
currently available]; Ali and Nessa, above n 4, 18-22; Syahailatua, above n 10,
Musick, J.A.
‘Endangered marine fishes: Criteria and identification of North American
stocks at risk’ (1998) 23
Dinas Kelautan dan Perikanan
– Pemerintah Kabupaten Majene, Strategic Plan of Regional Task Force of
2006-2011 (2006) p. 10
(Trans by author, 2008) [trans of: Rencana Strategis
Satuan Kerja Perangkat Daerah / RENSTRA – SKPF, Tahun 2006-2011 but no
written English translation is currently available].
Sorensen, J.C. and S.T.
McCreary, Institutional Arrangements for Managing Coastal Resources and
Environments (2
ed, 1990), 1.
Ostrom, Navigating the
Institutional Landscape: Introduction and Overview (1990) cited in Torell, M.
and A.M. Salamanca (eds.) Institutional
Issues and Perspective in the Management
of Fisheries and Coastal Resources in South East Asia (2001) 2.
Manchur, W., Zurbrigg, A.
and Reichratch, S.,
Coastal Based Natural Resources Management (CBNRM) Social
Science Resources Kit: A Guide for Researchers
(2003) Environment and
Natural Resource Management
http://web.idrc.ca/en/ev-3221-201-1-DO_TOPIC.html
at 5 November 2007.
Yusran, N.I.,
institutional fisheries development of flyingfish: an alternative decision
support system
Lokakarya Nasional Perikanan Ikan Terbang, Macassar 20-21
September 2005 pp. 29-30 (Trans by author, 2008) [trans of:
Pengembangan Kelembagaan Perikanan Ikan Terbang: Decision Support System Sebagai
but no written English translation is currently available].
Purwaka, T.H. and Sunoto,
‘Coastal Resources Management in Indonesia: Legal and Institutional
Aspect’, in Torell, M.
and Salamanca, A.M. (eds.)
Institutional Issues
and Perspective in the Management of Fisheries and Coastal Resources in South
(2001) 81; Zerner, C., ‘Tracking Sasi: The Transformation of
a Central Mollucan Reef Management Institution in Indonesia’,
A.T., Hale, L.Z., Renard, Y and Cortesi, L.,
Collaborative and
Community-Based Management of Coral Reefs
. (1998) 19; Novaczek, I., Sopacua,
J., and Harkes, I., ‘Fisheries Management in Central Maluku, Indonesia,
Maritime Policy
Mantjoro, E.,
‘Management of Traditional Common Fishing Grounds: The Experience of the
Para Community, Indonesia’ (1996)
Coastal Management
Basuki, R and V.P.H.
Co-management: coastal fisheries, traditional community and
government in Indonesia
. Konvensi Nasional: Pembangunan Benua Maritim
Indonesia dalam Rangka Mengaktualisasikan Wawasan Nusantara. Makassar, 18
December, 1996 (Trans by author, 2008)
[trans. of:
Ko-Manajemen Perikanan Pantai, Masyarakat Adat dan Pemerintah di
but no written English translation is currently available];
Dirhamsyah and A. Samad Genisa, ‘Community Fisheries Resources
Management:
A Case Study in the West Coast of Aceh’
[2007] MarStudies 23
Maritime Studies
Yusran, above n 24.
Sallatang, A., Punggawa: The
Local Leader in a Rural Community in South Sulawesi (1983) (Regional Development
Research Institute,
Hasanuddin University); Yusran, M., The Ponggawa-Sawi
Relationship in Co-Management: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Coastal
Management in South Sulawesi (PhD Thesis, Dalhousie University, 2002).
Costa-Pierce, 1997 as cited
by Yusran, 2005, above n 23.
Dinas Kelautan dan Perikanan
– Pemerintah Kabupaten Majene, above n 20, 34-35.
Yusran, above n 24.
Jentoft, S. ‘The
Community: A missing link of fisheries management’
Pomeroy, R.S. and Carlos,
M.B. ‘Community-based coastal resource management in the Philippines: a
review and evaluation of
programs and projects, 1984-1994’ (1997) 21
Maritime Policy
Dirhamsyah. ‘The
Indonesian Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program: Lessons Learned in
Community – Based Reef
Management at Senayang and Lingga Islands,
Riau’ (2006) 9
Journal of Coastal Development
Crawford, B.R., Dutton,
I.M., Rotinsulu, C, and Hale, I.Z.,
Community-based Coastal Resources
Management in Indonesia: Examples and Initial Lessons from North Sulawesi
International Tropical Marine Ecosystems Management Symposium (ITMEMS),
Townville, November 1998, pp. 299-309.
Satria, A. and Matsuda, Y.
‘Decentralization of Fisheries Management in Indonesia’
Marine Policy
For examples:
Community-based reef management in Senayang and Lingga Islands, Riau that
carried out by COREMAP has been considered
as a success program by IUCN
(Dirhamsyah, above n 38.); The program of CBCRM that was conducted in North
Sulawesi has also been considered
as a success program of community development
program in that area (Crawford, et al, above n 39).
Satria and Matsuda, above n
Llewellyn, G. Review of
existing law and policies relating to migratory marine species: conservation and
commercial and coastal fisheries.
http://www.reefbase.org
at 3 April 2007.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter