URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRS/2011/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Charlesworth, Hilary --- "Swimming to Cambodia" [2011] ALRS 4
Swimming to Cambodia
Justice and ritual in human
rights after conflict
Charlesworth
Introduction
It is a great honour to deliver the second Annual Michael Kirby Lecture on
International Law celebrating Australia’s best known
and best loved
lawyer. I first met Michael Kirby in 1990, when I was a fledgling academic at
the University of Melbourne. Since then,
like so many others, I have been the
beneficiary of the warmth and generosity of his intellectual embrace as well as
his penchant
for recording each meeting photographically!
At the time of Michael Kirby’s retirement from the High Court of
Australia in February 2009 there was considerable recognition
of his roles as a
member of the High Court bench and as President of the NSW Court of Appeal. The
speeches at Michael Kirby’s
High Court farewell centred on his
contributions to Australian law and his humane and passionate character. Less
attention has been
paid to his remarkably diverse international work: Michael
Kirby has worked from 1996 for the United Nations Economic, Social and
Organization (UNESCO) on bioethics, for the World Health Organization and now
UNAIDS on HIV/AIDS (1988-1992), for the International
Labour Organization on
South African labour laws (1992-1993), and for the United Nations (UN)
Development Programme on constitutional
reform in Africa (1994, 1997). He also
served as President of the International Commission of Jurists (1995-1998). In
this lecture,
I focus on one particular period in Michael Kirby’s
international career, when, starting in 1993, he was appointed the UN
Secretary-General’s
Special Representative for Human Rights in Cambodia.
He gave up this role in 1996 on his appointment to the High Court.
After sketching Michael Kirby’s period as Special Representative, and
the international community’s engagement with the
protection of human
rights in Cambodia, I want to consider more generally the role of the
international community in such situations
and identify both the potential and
the limits of protecting human rights in international peacebuilding. I argue
that forms of regulatory
ritualism have become a feature of the international
human rights system.
The title of this lecture is drawn from a one-man performance piece devised
by Spalding Grey. I saw it in New York in 1986 and it
left a great impression on
me. ‘Swimming to Cambodia’ is essentially an autobiographical
monologue about Spalding Grey’s
trip to South-East Asia to play a minor
part (an aide to the American Ambassador) in Roland Joffe’s film about the
The Killing Fields
. But it is also much more than this; the monologue
contains meditations on Spalding Grey’s childhood, his love life and his
anxieties about his career. The monologue is hilarious and shocking at the same
time because it treats the Cambodian genocide as
a backdrop to Spalding
Gray’s self-centred woes. It also shows us how the ritual processes of
movie-making can reduce massive
violence and injustices to digestible dramas and
thus produce a distorted account of reality. My argument is that human rights
runs similar risks.
Human Rights in Cambodia
Between 1975 and 1979 the Khmer Rouge, a revolutionary movement led by a
former academic, Pol Pot, conducted a campaign of mass killings
across Cambodia,
which it renamed the Democratic Republic of Kampuchea. Estimates are that from
one to two million Cambodians were
killed in these four years, from direct
violence and from starvation and
Cambodians,
then, have suffered horrific violations of human rights; indeed even before the
atrocities of the Khmer Rouge, Cambodia
had a history of repression and
In late 1978 and early 1979, Vietnam invaded Cambodia and scattered the Khmer
Rouge. The reasons for the invasion were complex; they
included territorial,
political and humanitarian motives. The Vietnamese installed a new government
under Heng Samrin in 1979, who,
while he remained head of state, was effectively
replaced as head of government by Hun Sen in 1985. However China in particular
many other governments including the United States, Singapore, Thailand, the
United Kingdom and Australia, continued to recognise
the Khmer Rouge (alone
until 1982 and then in coalition groups) as the legitimate government of
Cambodia in protest at the Vietnamese
During the Khmer Rouge years, the UN displayed remarkably little interest in
Cambodia, with only a single, desultory, attempt made
to review its human rights
Vietnamese invasion, Cambodia attracted much greater attention at the UN, with
the invasion, rather than the genocide,
regarded as a matter of international
opprobrium.
many unsuccessful attempts to resolve the issue of Vietnam’s presence in
Cambodia, which were complicated by Cold War
politics, the Paris Peace
Agreements were adopted in October
The parties to
the Agreements were the four major Cambodian political
and nineteen
countries interested in the region, including Australia. The Agreements created
a Supreme National Council comprising
representatives from all Cambodian
political factions which then delegated all necessary powers to implement the
Agreements to the
The Agreements established the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC)
and gave it responsibility to monitor the ceasefire,
oversee the demobilisation
of the various armies and create a new political
creation of UNTAC, an initiative led by
first time that the UN had taken over the functions of government across a
designed in large part to allow China a face-saving method of withdrawing its
support for the Khmer
Strangely, the Agreements made almost no reference to the Khmer Rouge period,
or how to deal with its legacy. The preamble made an
elliptical reference to it
by stating that ‘Cambodia’s tragic recent history requires special
measures to assure protection
of human rights and the non-return to the policies
and practices of the past.’ Human rights, however, figured prominently in
the Agreements. For example Article 15 declared that:
All persons in Cambodia and all Cambodian refugees and displaced persons
shall enjoy the rights and freedoms embodied in the Universal
Declaration of
Human Rights and other relevant international human rights instruments.
Cambodia itself agreed ‘to ensure respect for and observance of human
rights and fundamental freedoms in Cambodia’ and
to allow Cambodian
citizens to engage in human rights activities. It committed to ‘take
effective measures to ensure that the
policies and practices of the past shall
never be allowed to return’ and to observe its obligations under relevant
international
human rights
other parties agreed to promote human rights in
16 of the Agreements provided that ‘UNTAC shall be responsible during the
transitional period for fostering an environment
in which respect for human
rights shall be
established a ‘Human Rights Component’ with staff responsible for
the promotion of human rights. The focus of the
Human Rights Component’s
work was human rights education, human rights monitoring during the transition
to democracy and investigating
human rights
complaints.
UNTAC’s mandate to protect human rights was novel in peacebuilding
projects. No similar provisions had been included in previous
UN-brokered peace
settlements and the human rights mandate was considered a radical
innovation.
translated its human rights mandate in various ways. It held a human rights
conference in Phnom Penh in late 1992 and the following
year UNTAC’s head,
Yasushi Akashi, proposed the appointment of a Special Rapporteur on Human Rights
to the UN Commission on
Human Rights, as allowed for by article 17 of the
Agreements.
end the role was designated as a Special Representative, rather than a
Rapporteur. The change was significant as a Special
Representative would be
appointed directly by the UN Secretary-General, with a greater chance of
identifying strong and independent
experts for this
Rapporteur, by contrast, would have been appointed by the UN Commission on Human
Rights (now the Human Rights Council),
a process subject to the intense UN
politics of regional blocs.
The Special Representative’s mandate referred to the obligation to
maintain contact with the people of Cambodia as well as with
its government; the
duty to assist the government in the promotion and protection of human rights in
Cambodia; and the task of reporting
to the United
co-Prime Ministers, Prince Norodom Ranariddh and Hun Sen, who were part of a
coalition formed after national elections conducted
by UNTAC in May 1993, gave
their full support for the work of the Special Representative in November 1993.
Michael Kirby was appointed
later the same month.
Consistently with his famed work ethic, Michael Kirby kept up an exhausting
pace in the role as Special Representative. His reports
appended his schedule in
visits to Cambodia: the days were filled with briefings and meetings across
Cambodia with all levels of
government, NGOs, embassies, workers, business
people, and the
Kirby was a sympathetic, but fearless, advocate of human rights in Cambodia.
Although his reports always pointed to some
examples of progress in human rights
protection, they also chronicled serious concerns. Unlike many other Special
Representatives
and Special Rapporteurs, Michael Kirby wrote the reports largely
himself. This may explain why they were much more direct than the
standard bland
and elliptical UN documents.
Michael Kirby’s final report to the Commission on Human Rights in
February 1996 acknowledged advances in some areas, including
an increase in the
health budget, the appointment of a woman as the Minister for Women’s
Affairs, the growth of civil society,
especially the numerous human rights
non-government organisations (NGOs), and the role of King Sihanouk in defending
human rights.
comparison to the problems he identified, however, these advances seemed modest.
Michael Kirby pointed to the obstacles in registering
an Opposition political
party and the thwarting of Opposition access to the media. He had criticised the
expulsion of politician
Sam Rainsy from the Cambodian Parliament in 1995 and
said that ‘It would be a tragedy if Cambodia were to return to a system
government where only one point of view could be given an effective
Michael Kirby also noted the spread of HIV/AIDS infection in
report chronicled the tremendous disadvantages Cambodian women faced and called
for effective protection against physical and
sexual violence and for more women
described the abuse of the rights of Indigenous peoples, the destruction of the
environment, and the corruption of the judiciary
(whose salaries were then US
$20 per month).
Other concerns Michael Kirby identified were the appalling conditions in the
prison system where prisoners contracted tuberculosis,
scabies and
malnutrition
the deportation of ethnic Vietnamese Cambodians to Vietnam, where they would
face political
persecution.
A sense of how far Michael Kirby had ruffled Cambodian political feathers
emerged in the final report with Michael Kirby noting that
in his last year
co-Prime Ministers Prince Ranariddh and Hun Sen had refused to meet with
Hun Sen thought that Michael Kirby should change his attitude towards Cambodia.
Michael Kirby responded to this criticism
in a speech in 1995, saying:
If this means backing away from legitimate and honest criticism of the
Cambodian government and institutions where I see departures
from fundamental
human rights, I am afraid that I cannot conform. It would be a betrayal of my
duty [to the UN and the international
community]. Above all it would be a
betrayal of the Cambodian people.
He added (and it is hard to disagree with this) ‘it is not in my
character to back
Michael Kirby’s replacements as Special Representative were Thomas
Hammarberg of Sweden (1996-2000); Peter Leuprecht of Austria
(2000- 2005); and
Yash Ghai of Kenya (2005-2008). In 2009, the UN Human Rights Council appointed
Surya Subedi of Nepal to the post
of Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in Cambodia for a one-year term.
The appointment of a Special
Rapporteur, rather than a Special Representative, for a one-year, rather than a
four-year, term signalled
a change in UN oversight of human rights in Cambodia.
It should be noted, however, that the Human Rights Council has moved to end
of the country mandates adopted by the Commission on Human Rights, and Cambodia
is one of the few remaining.
Almost all the issues Michael Kirby addressed in his three years as Special
Representative remain problems today in Cambodia. As Special
Representative,
Yash Ghai referred to the widespread dispossession of the lands of villagers and
Indigenous people, endemic corruption
and the constant harassment of political
observed that ‘violations of human rights and the rule of law were
systemic, were integral to the political and economic
systems through which the
government rules and [were] central to the ruling party’s hold on
Human rights workers, trade unionists and journalists have all been the targets
of political violence. These claims are supported
by evidence from both
international and Cambodian human rights
What then can we say about the success of international peacebuilding in
Cambodia? UNTAC was described by William Shawcross in 1994
international
However it is clear that this was a premature assessment. UNTAC put a great deal
of energy into organising elections in May 1993
and overcame the Khmer
Rouge-organised boycott of the
successfully arranged the return of 372,000 refugees from Thai border
unable however to guarantee a ceasefire and to disarm and demobilise the
military factions.
UNTAC also made little headway in establishing a viable system of justice and
in protecting human rights. Human rights abuses during
the UNTAC period included
the slaughter of ethnic Vietnamese, intimidation and violence leading up to the
first election in May 1993,
and the maltreatment of
was accused of failing to protect the Vietnamese adequately, and legitimising
the ethnic cleansing through establishing the
‘Safe Passage’
operation to remove the
Vietnamese.
there was evidence that UNTAC itself did not observe human rights standards: for
example its first two prisoners were held without
the possibility of a
significantly, UNTAC was unable to address the issue of accountability of
individuals for the Khmer Rouge violence, as this
was not included in its
mandate. UNTAC’s mandate expired in 1994, but the UN has continued a human
rights mission in Cambodia
through the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights as well as the ongoing mandate of the Special Rapporteur.
Despite the international community’s initial reluctance to encourage
accountability for the crimes of the Pol Pot era, the
Extraordinary Chambers in
the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC) were established after six years of
negotiation.
ECCC is unique as a Cambodian domestic court that operates with international
assistance. It has both international and Cambodian
judges. While the majority
on each panel is Cambodian, ‘super-majority’ requirements mean that
no decision can be taken
by Cambodian judges without the support of at least one
international judge, and no decision can be taken by the international judges
without the support of at least two Cambodian
trial before the ECCC was of the chief of the Toul Sleng prison in Phnom Penh,
Kaing Guek Eav who oversaw the torture and
execution of some 16,000 people
designated as enemies of the
revolution.
remaining surviving four leaders of the Khmer Rouge, including Pol Pot’s
deputy, Nuon Chea, are to face trial in 2011.This
has been a significant step in
Cambodia, engaging the Cambodian population in great numbers, with 78,000 people
attending the ECCC
hearings by early 2011. The trials have allowed public
discussion of the Khmer Rouge atrocities to an unprecedented degree. However,
concerns have been raised about whether the ECCC is sufficiently removed from
the regular Cambodian judiciary, which is both funded
traditionally been closely controlled by the ruling Cambodian Peoples’
Party. There has also been criticism of alleged
political interference in the
ECCC and corrupt employment
From a human rights perspective, there has been a great deal of human rights
talk in Cambodia but very little actual progress on the
protection of human
rights. There are many human rights NGOs, but the repressive political
atmosphere constrains their activities.
The resignation in 2008 of Michael
Kirby’s successor, Yash Ghai, the fourth Special Representative,
underlines these problems.
The Cambodian government refused to meet with
Professor Ghai on any occasion. Prime Minister Hun Sen said in a speech in late
that the UN should spend its money on ‘troubled countries such as
Kenya, Sudan, Somalia, Iraq and Afghanistan’ rather
than on Professor
criticised Professor Ghai in quite extraordinary terms as
‘deranged’, a ‘short term tourist’ and
‘lazy’, while a government spokesperson called him
‘uncivilised and lacking Aryan
At the time of his resignation Professor Ghai said ‘the government has
absolutely no interest in the promotion of human rights,
the whole state exists
on systematic violations of political, economic, social
Strikingly he went on to complain that he also did not get support from the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Phnom
Penh after the
Cambodian government’s personal attacks on him. The reason for this seems
to be that Professor Ghai was too
frank and direct in his criticisms of human
rights violations. Professor Ghai also criticised the international community
for sustaining
the Cambodian government though unconditional aid
Human Rights Ritualism
Since the end of the Cold War, questions of human rights have come to occupy
considerable space on the international agenda. They
attract support at all
levels: politically, financially and even militarily. This may be an advance on
the deference paid to state
sovereignty during the Cold War, but it also has
many critics. For example David Kennedy has argued that the international human
rights movement has become too powerful, focussing on the law and litigation and
squeezing out other emancipatory
discourses.
scholars have contended that the international human rights movement has
operated as a handmaiden to a neo-liberal economic
agenda. They have suggested
that the idea of human rights as the claim of the oppressed against tyranny has
been overwhelmed by a
version of human rights as the rights of the
entrepreneurial middle classes to economic
Tony Evans presents the promotion of international human rights as simply an
aspect of the globalisation of
production.
While human rights norms can be manipulated to serve particular economic and
political projects, I think that they nevertheless retain
moral and social
value. We do not have to subscribe to a view of rights as the immutable essence
of humanity to acknowledge that
the international human rights system can play a
role in pressuring states to lift their game in the way that they treat the
within their jurisdiction. Human rights standards may only be a
negotiated, provisional, account of the minimal conditions of lives
and worth, but they have radical potential as a set of claims that can be made
by everyone, regardless of their circumstances.
A central issue for proponents
of human rights is how international standards can be deployed to change
behaviour; in other words,
how human rights principles can regulate the flow of
events. International human rights scholars have tended to focus on the law
the sole form of regulation in the field. The concept of regulation is however
much broader than law and has been defined as ‘the
intentional activity of
attempting to control, order or influence the behaviour of
can also be understood as encompassing unintentional effects of
thus encompasses political, social, economic, psychological pressures as well as
legal rules. The most durable form of
regulation is self-regulation through
commitment to a normative order.
Regulation of behaviour through human rights standards is complex. The UN
human rights mission in Cambodia illustrates the intricate
politics of the
international human rights system. For example, in some international quarters
there has been a sense that Cambodian
culture is inhospitable to ideas of human
rights and that the Cambodians are at a primitive stage in developing human
rights ideas.
has promoted the view that the role of the international community is to guide
the Cambodians to better human rights protection.
The effect of this approach
has been to prevent the development of local human rights expertise and remove
human rights questions
Hughes has argued that the international community’s promotion of human
rights in post-conflict Cambodia can be best
understood as ritualism in the
sense that ideas of rights lost their radical political potential and become a
more technical exercise
of creating ‘responsible citizens’ in an
efficiently run state mainly through the mechanism of
this more modest goal has not been achieved, according to Hughes. There is a
widespread perception in Cambodia that protection
of human rights requires
professional, probably international, assistance and is far removed from the
daily oppression of the poor
sense, Cambodia remains in a type of permanent human rights
transition.
How can we understand the weakness of the international human rights system
in achieving political and social change in post-conflict
societies such as
Cambodia? I want to suggest that the idea of regulatory ritualism can be helpful
in this context, drawing on the
work of my colleagues, John Braithwaite, Valerie
Braithwaite and Toni Makkai. Ritualism is one of the five types of adaptation to
a normative or cultural order identified by sociologist Robert Merton.
Merton’s four other types of adaptation are conformity
(acceptance of both
normative goals and the institutionalised means to achieve them), innovation
(acceptance of normative goals but
supporting alternative (perhaps even
perverse) means to fulfill them), retreatism (resistance to both normative goals
and their formal
institutions) and rebellion (replacing normative goals and
their institutions with new
occurs when there is no acceptance of particular normative goals, but great
deference is paid to the formal institutions
that support them. It can be
defined as ‘acceptance of institutionalized means for securing regulatory
goals while losing all
focus on achieving the goals or outcomes
themselves.’
Valerie Braithwaite has elaborated the idea of ‘motivational
postures’ in the context of taxation regimes, extending Merton’s
work on responses to authority. The postures Braithwaite identifies are:
disengagement (the rejection of the legitimacy of rules);
resistance (a
challenge to rules, but acceptance of the legitimacy of authority); capitulation
(grudging compliance, but with no
acceptance of the purpose of the rules); and
commitment (believing in and actively pursuing the goals of regulation), a
in which self-regulation is most likely to
In their study of aged care in three Western countries, Braithwaite, Makkai
and Braithwaite found that nursing homes only rarely actively
regulation.
much more common for operators to avoid confrontation with regulators and to
agree to the language and techniques of regulation,
for example by filing a plan
of correction or changing a policy. This strategy usually favoured the
preservation of the
both because regulators did not have
sophisticated follow-up mechanisms and because the new plans or policies could
be observed in
a perfunctory
Braithwaite,
Makkai and Braithwaite term this ‘regulatory ritualism’.
So too in the field of human rights, rights ritualism is a more common
response than an outright rejection of human rights standards
and institutions.
Rights ritualism can be understood as a way of embracing the language of human
rights precisely to deflect real
human rights scrutiny and to avoid
accountability for human rights abuses. Countries are often willing to accept
human rights treaty
commitments to earn international approval, but they resist
the changes that the treaty obligations require.
In the UNTAC era, the Cambodian government generally participated in the
international human rights system. It became a party to four
major treaties --
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the
International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), the
Convention against Torture (CAT), and the Convention on the Rights of the Child
(CROC) in 1992,
with UNTAC’s
encouragement.
Cambodia has managed however to largely deflect the impact of these human rights
obligations. One method has been the failure to
implement treaty commitments
into national law.
Another has been Cambodia’s diffident record of reporting under the treaty
words, its participation in the international human rights system can be
understood as a form of rights ritualism. The international
community has
tacitly endorsed this ritualism, perhaps as the path of least resistance in a
political system that is inhospitable
to human rights claims. The problem of
rights ritualism is not confined to developing countries; indeed Australia is a
party to seven
of the nine core UN human rights treaties and yet has been
reluctant to fully implement their
provisions.
As we have seen, rights ritualism in Cambodia has sometimes edged closer to
disengagement at various points, for example the government’s
meet with Michael Kirby in 1996. Yash Ghai’s 2008 resignation from the
post of Special Representative suggests that
the Cambodian government may have
abandoned ritualism for active human rights resistance when faced with tough
Overall, however, the strategy of rights ritualism seems to have been successful
for Cambodia in flying under the radar of international
Human rights discourse in peacebuilding is made complex by the fact that in
post-conflict societies, as the case of Cambodia illustrates,
typically weak state institutions and struggling legal and educational systems.
The economic system is often dysfunctional
with high rates of unemployment.
Political repression makes claims of human rights difficult and dangerous, which
keeps local human
rights organisations subdued. It also leaves the field to the
internationals.
The process of international promotion of human rights after conflict
reflects the power of symbolism in international and national
Participation in international human rights processes and institutions is imbued
with symbols and rituals. Cambodia illustrates
Murray Edelman’s
observation that concentrated interests (in this case the Cambodian government)
receive tangible rewards (such
as international aid funds and political power)
while diffuse interests (for example local human rights NGOs) get symbolic
(such as statements about the importance of human rights) rather than
rewards that can make a difference or challenge the distribution
of political
The engagement of the international community in Cambodia highlights the need
to rethink strategies to protect human rights. I have
argued that the regulatory
literature may be useful in this task. The challenge is to move countries from
positions of disengagement,
resistance or capitulation to a position of
commitment with respect to the international human rights system. If, for
example, we
understand Burma as a state that has disengaged from the human
rights system, the strategy of ‘principled engagement’
best response.
China is understood as a once-active resister of the human rights regime, we can
see that it has moderated its resistance in response
to a degree of dialogue and
international
How can we work against human rights ritualism, so often present in
international peacebuilding? The regulatory literature offers
the idea of
continuous improvement, which emphasises incremental, constantly monitored
steps, rather than great leaps
‘doing better every year than the previous year in terms of a regulatory
objective’.
This can be achieved by moving from a culture that administers blame to a
culture that encourages
development that would be useful in the field of international human rights
protection. At the same time, there is a need to guard
against the process of
continuous improvement itself becoming
ritualised.
to a learning culture requires the engagement of local actors, above all. The
challenge is to translate human rights in ways
that can be invoked by local
people, connecting the international standards to specific political and social
structures and understanding
human rights principles as cultural practices than
a top-down regulatory regime; Sally Engle Merry calls this
‘vernacularisation’.
One strategy to develop a local human rights culture is to support a free media
and the professionalisation of investigative journalism,
as has happened in
also critical that the international community itself observe human rights
standards and reject immunity for
violations.
The Universal Periodic Review (UPR) process developed by the UN Human Rights
Council may be a valuable mechanism in countering human
UPR scrutinises the human rights record of all UN members over a four year
cycle, thus undermining the sense that there are some
countries with
incorrigibly bad human rights records and some countries of impeccable human
rights virtue. Because the UPR involves
peer-review, in the sense that countries
are reviewed by other countries, it may have greater clout and effect than
review by the
individual expert members of the UN human rights treaty bodies.
Cambodia was reviewed under the UPR in 2009 and the Cambodian government
accepted all 91 recommendations generated through the UPR.
The impact of these recommendations
will allow an assessment of human rights ritualism in Cambodia.
The capacity of the human rights treaty bodies and the special procedures of
the Human Rights Council to regulate human rights practices
should not be
underestimated,
Individuals can shape international systems through what John Braithwaite and
Peter Drahos have called ‘webs of dialogue and
persuasion’.
By strategic institutional engagement, individuals can enrol organisational
power (public support) to assist the pursuit of particular
normative goals, thus
creating a ‘micro-macro’ system of
strategies can include ‘model-mongering’ – identifying a clear
and powerful model for action -- or being a
entrepreneur.
Michael Kirby’s work in making HIV/AIDS a matter of international concern
is a good example of the micro-macro process by which
individuals can affect the
international arena.
Michael Kirby’s time in Cambodia not only reflects the qualities of the
man himself – his energy, courage and commitment
-- but it also brought
great honour to Australia. Michael Kirby’s name is almost invariably
brought up in encounters with international
lawyers around the globe and it has
given all Australian international lawyers a positive aura abroad. Michael Kirby
was the first
in a line of distinguished Special Representatives, a post that
has now disappeared because of political friction. His human rights
Cambodia, and more recently, underlines the significance of courageous human
rights investigations and at the same time the
delicate balance of criticism and
encouragement that is crucial to reducing human rights ritualism, and promoting
commitment to a
human rights culture.
Research Council Laureate Fellow; Professor and Director of the Centre for
International Governance and Justice, Regulatory
Institutions Network,
Australian National University. Thanks to Susan Harris Rimmer, Jessica Howley
and Henrietta Zeffert for research
assistance and to John Braithwaite, Ben
Playle and Christoph Sperfeldt for valuable
that Gareth Evans has argued that the mass killings in Cambodia do not
constitute genocide in a legal sense because all Cambodians
were targeted and
the massacres were not committed against particular national, ethnic, racial or
religious groups:
The Responsibility to Protect: Ending Mass Atrocity Crimes
Once and For All
(2008) 12. See also the remarks of William Shabas in
‘Problems of International Codification – Were the Atrocities in
Cambodia and Kosovo Genocide?’
New England Law Review
However, other scholars contend that a consensus on genocide has emerged:
see B Kiernan, ‘The Cambodian Genocide – 1975-1979’
Tatten, W Parsons and I Charny (eds),
Century of Genocide
ed, 2004) 339, 358-9; and G Stanton, ‘The
Cambodian Genocide and International Law’ in B Kiernan (ed),
and Democracy in Cambodia:
Yale University Southeast Asia Studies
(1993) 41. S Ratner, J Abrams and J Bischoff in
Accountability for Human
Rights Atrocities in International Law: Beyond the Nuremberg Legacy
ed, 2009) at 244 write that ‘the existing
literature presents a strong prima facie case that the Khmer Rouge committed
of genocide against the Cham minority group, the ethnic Vietnamese,
Chinese, and Thai minority groups, and the Buddhist monkhood.
also H Hannum, ‘International Law and Cambodian Genocide: The Sounds of
Human Rights Quarterly
The Group of
Experts for Cambodia, Report of the Group of Experts for Cambodia Pursuant to
General Assembly Resolution 52/135, 16
March 1999, UN Doc S/1999/231, A/53/850.
For a narrative-historical account, see B Kiernan,
Blood and Soil: A World
History of Genocide from Sparta to Darfur
(2007) 547.
Ibid. See also B
How Pol Pot Came to Power - A History of Communism in Kampuchea,
Australia withdrew recognition in October 1980, the Khmer Rouge continued to
receive recognition and support from China, the
United States, Singapore,
Thailand and the United Kingdom for the next decade. In 1990 Cambodia’s
seat in the UN General Assembly
reverted to ‘Cambodia’ from
‘Democratic Kampuchea’. For a detailed account, see Kiernan, above n
Ratner, ‘The Cambodian Settlement Agreements’
Journal of International Law
Ibid 4-6. See
also N Wheeler,
Saving Strangers: Humanitarian Intervention in International
Peace Agreements comprise: 1. Final Act of the Paris Conference
1663 UNTS 28
(signed and entered into force 23 October 1991); 2. Agreement on a Comprehensive
Political Settlement of the Cambodia Conflict, with
annexes on the UNTAC
mandate, military matters, elections, repatriation of Cambodian refugees and
displaced persons, and the principles
for a new Cambodian constitution
(signed and entered into force 23 October 1991); 3. Agreement Concerning the
Sovereignty, Independence, Territorial Integrity and
Inviolability, Neutrality
and National Unity of Cambodia
1663 UNTS 249
(signed and entered into force 23
October 1991); and 4. Declaration on the Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of
1663 UNTS 283
(signed and entered into force 23 October 1991). These
instruments represent an elaboration of the ‘Framework for a Comprehensive
Political Settlement of the Cambodia Conflict’ adopted by the five
permanent members of the United Nations Security Council
on 28 August 1990.
The Kampuchean
People’s Revolutionary Armed Forces; Prince Norodom Sihanouk’s
Funcinpec party; the Party of Democratic
Kampuchea (the Khmer Rouge); and the
Khmer People’s National Liberation
Agreement on a Comprehensive Political Settlement of the Cambodia Conflict,
above n 8, Section 3, Article
See B Kondoch, ‘Human Rights Law and UN Peace Operations in Post-Conflict
Situations’ in N D White and D Klaasen (eds),
The United Nations, Human
Rights and Post-Conflict Situations
(2005) 19, 86; see also Ratner, above n
Evans, above n 2,
on a Comprehensive Political Settlement of the Cambodia Conflict, above n 8,
Section 3, Article
Ibid, Article 15(2) (b).
Ibid, Article
16. See also Article
Yasushi Akashi, Opening address delivered at the Human Rights Conference, Phnom
Penh, 30 November 1992.
Statement by
Yasushi Akashi to the forty-ninth session of the Commission on Human Rights.
Following Akashi’s proposal, the
Commission adopted CHR Res 1993/6,
requesting the Secretary General to appoint a Special
Representative.
I thank Philip Alston for this
observation.
Michael Kirby’s reports as Special Representative: Situation of Human
Rights in Cambodia, 21 February 1994, UN Doc E/CN.4/1994/73/Add.1;
Situation of
Human Rights in Cambodia, 24 February 1994, UN Doc E/CN.4/1994/73; Situation of
Human Rights in Cambodia, 3 November
1994, UN Doc A/49/635; Situation of Human
Rights in Cambodia, 24 January 1995, UN Doc E/CN.4/1995/87; Situation of Human
Cambodia, 13 February 1995, UN Doc E/CN.4/1995/87/Add.1;
Recommendations made by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
matters within his mandate, 26 October 1995, UN Doc A/50/681; Situation of Human
Rights in Cambodia, 26 February 1996, UN Doc
E/CN.4/1996/93.
Situation of
Human Rights in Cambodia, 26 February 1996, above n 23, [17], [57],
Kirby, ‘Cambodia — A Departing Assessment’ (Report delivered
to the United Nations Commission on Human
Rights, Geneva, 1 April 1996)
<http://www3.lawfoundation.net.au/resources
/kirby/papers/19960401_camapr96.html>
at 13 April
Situation of Human Rights in Cambodia, 26 February 1996, above n 23
Ibid [56]-[91], [24]-[33],
[38]-[41]. See also K Cain, H Postlewait and A Thomson,
Emergency Sex and
Other Desperate Measures: True Stories from a War Zone
(2004) 45-7, 51-2 for
a description of conditions in Cambodian
Situation of Human Rights in Cambodia, 26 February 1996, above n 23,
Kirby, ‘Human Rights, The United Nations and Cambodia’ (Speech
delivered at the Peter Wilenski Memorial Lecture, Canberra,
9 September
Advisory Services and Temporary Assistance for Cambodia, 18 September 2008, UN
Doc A/HRC/9/15. The appointment was extended for
one year in October 2009 (UN
Doc A/HRC/12/25) and again in October 2010: UN Doc A/HRC/15/L.17. Professor
Subedi has conducted two
country visits (in 2009 and 2010). See Advisory
Services and Technical Assistance for Cambodia - Report of the Special
Representative
of the Secretary-General [sic] for Human Rights in Cambodia,
Surya Subedi, 31 August 2009, UN Doc A/HRC/12/40; and Report of the
Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in Cambodia, 16 September 2010, UN
Doc A/HRC/15/46. For Professor Subedi’s
reflections on his role see S
Subedi, ‘The UN Human Rights Mandate in Cambodia: The Challenge of a
Country in Transition and
the Experience of the Special Rapporteur for the
The International Journal of Human Rights
Report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Human Rights in
Cambodia, 30 January 2007, [80]-[85] UN Doc. A/HRC/4/36;
and see generally
Report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Human Rights in
Cambodia, 24 January 2006, UN
E/CN.4/2006/110.
Wall Street Journal (Asia)
, 8 September 2008.
League for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights (LICADHO) reports death
threats against human rights workers, with
no action taken by the state in
prosecuting those responsible. See LICADHO press release, “Action needed
over persecuted human
rights defenders” (25 September 2008). Accessed at
http://www.licadho-cambodia.org/pressrelease.php?perm=190
2011. See also Human Rights Watch, World Report 2011, Cambodia chapter,
commenting that at least ten journalists have
been killed in the past 15 years
and that pending legislation on non-governmental organisations and trade unions
is expected to further
tighten restrictions on freedom of association. See also
Surya Subedi’s observations in Report of the Special Rapporteur on
Situation of Human Rights in Cambodia, 16 September 2010, above n 33, [33]-[39].
Quoted in R M
Jenner, ‘UNTAC: “International Triumph” in Cambodia?’
Security Dialogue
UN Peacekeeping in Cambodia: UNTAC’s Civil Mandate
47. Trevor Findlay has argued that the head of UNTAC, Yasushi Akashi, found it
difficult to stand up to the Cambodian government:
see T Findlay,
The Legacy and Lessons of UNTAC
account of the development of the tribunal, see generally T Fawthrop and H
Getting Away with Genocide?: Elusive Justice and the Khmer Rouge
Agreement Between the United Nations and the Royal Government of Cambodia
the Prosecution Under Cambodian Law of Crimes Committed During the
Period of Democratic
Kampuchea, 6 June 2003, article 3.See also Law on the
establishment of the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia for the
prosecution of crimes committed during the period of Democratic Kampuchea, 10
August 2001, NS/RKM/0801/12, Chapter
Eav, aka Duch, was sentenced in 2010 to 35 years in prison. As at April 2011,
the ECCC is considering Duch’s appeal.
In its 2008
report, the Centre for Social Development noted that the Cambodian court system
receives only 0.28 percent of the national
budget (US $ 3.3 million) compared
with the ECCC’s budget of $ 134.4 million:
http://www.csdcambodia.org
at 11 April
Institute Justice Initiative Report,
Recent Developments in the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia
Sakada,‘Prime Minister of Cambodia criticises Yash Ghai again’
Phnom Penh Post
, 30 January 2008.
See comments
to the Human Rights Council, UN Press Release, September 15,
Radio Australia, ‘Human rights increasingly challenged in Cambodia’,
3 October 2008.
The Dark Sides of Virtue: Reassessing International
Humanitarianism
example, C Hughes, ‘Human Rights Out of Context (or, Translating the
Universal Declaration into Khmer)’ in White
and Klaasen, above n 13,
Evans, ‘Human Rights and the “Empire of Civil Society”’
in White and Klaasen, above n 13,
‘Critical Reflections on Regulation’
Australian Journal
of Legal Philosophy
C Parker, C
Scott, N Lacey and J Braithwaite, ‘Introduction’ in C Parker, C
Scott, N Lacey and J Braithwaite (eds),
Regulating Law
above n 53,
Social Theory and Social Structure
Braithwaite
T Makkai and V Braithwaite,
Regulating Aged Care:
Ritualism and the New Pyramid
Braithwaite,
Defiance in Taxation and Governance: Resisting and Dismissing
Authority in a Democracy
(2009). For an application of this theory to
peacebuilding in Indonesia see J Braithwaite, V Braithwaite, M Cookson and L
Anomie and Violence: Non-Truth and Reconciliation in Indonesian
Peacebuilding
Braithwaite et al., above n 63,
Berry, ‘UNTAC as a Paradigm: A Flawed Success’ (1995) 7
Change, Peace and Security
87, 98; and Doyle, above n 42, 45-7. Cambodia had
ratified the International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of
Discrimination
(CERD) in 1983. It is a party to the Optional Protocol to the CAT
(2007) and the Optional Protocol to the CEDAW (2011). It is worth
noting that
Democratic Kampuchea (the Khmer Rouge government) signed the ICCPR and ICESCR on
17 October 1980. These signatures were
objected to by a number of states
(Mongolia, Hungary, Bulgaria, Belarus, the Russian Federation and
Czechoslovakia) on the basis
that ‘only the People’s Revolutionary
Council of Kampuchea [is] the sole authentic and lawful representative of the
people.’ The objection went on ‘The signing of the Human
Rights Covenants by an individual, whose régime during
its short period
of reign in Kampuchea had exterminated about 3 million people and had thus
grossly violated the elementary norms
of human rights, each and every provision
of the Human Rights Covenants is a regrettable precedence [sic], which
discredits the noble
aims and lofty principles of the United Nations Charter,
the very spirit of the above-mentioned Covenants, gravely impairs the prestige
of the United Nations.’
example, CEDAW Concluding Observations, 3 February 2006, [9]-[42] UN Doc
CEDAW/C/KHM/CO/3.
Cambodia is overdue to report on the ICCPR (due 2002), the CEDAW (due 2009) and
the CROC (due 2009). It is has met its current reporting
requirements under the
ICESCR and CAT. It is due to report on the CERD by 28 December
generally H Charlesworth, M Chiam, D Hovell and G Williams
, No Country is an
Island: Australia and International Law
Another example of resistance is the Cambodian government’s campaign to
remove Christophe Peschoux as head of the Cambodian
office of the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights. See Thomas Miller, ‘”Sometimes We
Have to Speak Out, We Cannot Remain
Silent”: Peschoux’,
25 March 2011. Christophe Peschoux suggests that one reason for
Cambodia’s sensitivity to criticism by the UN is the occupation
Cambodia’s UN seat by the Khmer Rouge until 1990. He recommends that the
UN apologise to the Cambodian people for this episode
to ‘help turn the
page of this sad chapter of the UN history in
[Cambodia]’.
See, for example, Evans, above n 2,
The Symbolic Uses of Politics
1976) 23-24.
Pedersen, ‘Prospects for Political Change in Burma’ Centre for
International Governance and Justice Issues Paper 13,
November 2009, available
http://cigj.anu.edu.au/cigj/link_documents/IssuesPapers/IssuesPaperNo.13.pdf.
Beyond Compliance: China, International Organizations, and Global
Braithwaite,
Regulatory Capitalism
Braithwaite and P Drahos,
Global Business Regulation
Braithwaite, above n 76,
Braithwaite et al., above n 63,
Human Rights and Gender Violence
(2006) 228-229. See also N D
White, ‘Towards a Strategy for Human Rights Protection in Post-Conflict
Situations’ in White
and Klaasen, above n 13,
Williams and R Rich (eds),
Losing Control: Freedom of the Press in Asia
Devereux, ‘Searching for Clarity: A Case Study of UNTAET’s
Application of International Human Rights Norms’ in
White and Klaasen,
above n 13, 293.
The Universal
Period Review mechanism was established by GA Res 60/251 (2006).
See Report of
the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review – Cambodia, 4 January
2010, UN Doc A/HRC/13/4. See also G
Sweeny and Y Saito, ‘An NGO Assessment
of the New Mechanisms of the UN Human Rights Council’
Rights Law Review
; F Gaer, ‘A Voice Not an Echo: Universal
Periodic Review and the UN Treaty Body System’
Human Rights
(2011) 15 (2)
The International Journal of Human Rights
, a special issue
on the role of the Special Rapporteurs in the development and promotion of
international human rights norms. See
also T Piccone,
Catalysts for Rights:
The Unique Contribution of the U.N.’s Independent Experts on Human
Braithwaite and Drahos, above n 77, 553-7, 560.
Ibid 494-7,
560. Fleur Adcock’s PhD in progress at the National Centre for Indigenous
Studies at the ANU makes such an argument
in the context of the Human Rights
Council’s Special Rapporteur on Indigenous Peoples.
Braithwaite
and Drahos, above n 77, 560.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (275 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter