URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JCULawRw/2024/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:07:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Madugalla, Kaushalya --- "The Quest to Achieve Balance in Copyright Law: Lessons From Library and Archive Copying Provisions in Australia" [2024] JCULawRw 11; (2024) 30 James Cook University Law Review 183
I Introduction
II An Exposition of the Nature and Extent of the Difficulty of Achieving Balance in Copyright Law in Relation to Library and Archive
Copying Provisions
III Of ‘Primary Ends’ and Monopolies: Insights from Early Copyright Law
IV Complex Interconnections Amidst Conflicts – The Situation after the Spicer Committee Report
V Still a Complicated Picture: Digital Technology and the Stakeholders in Copyright Law
VI The Complexity Continues: The Interests of Stakeholders after the Amendments in 2006
VII How to Overcome the Difficulties Associated with Ensuring the Balance of Interests in Library and Archive Copying Provisions
III Conclusion
The Quest to Achieve Balance in Copyright Law: Lessons from
Library and Archive Copying Provisions in Australia
Kaushalya K Madugalla*
While the concept of balance of interests has often been referred to in the
Australian copyright law discourse, it is also marked
by the difficulty of
striking a balance between the competing interests involved. Yet, legislative
materials relevant to copyright
statutes have neither explored the reasons for
this difficulty nor identified mechanisms to address this issue. This paper
these aspects through the lens of the library and archive copying
provisions in the
(Cth), two sections which permit
libraries and archives to make reproductions of works to supply them to users
and to other libraries
and archives respectively. This analysis is warranted
because there is a need to ensure a balance between competing interests in
context of exceptions to the exclusive rights of copyright owners; otherwise,
the interests of users can be affected in a negative
manner. This paper finds
several reasons it is difficult to achieve that balance. It also argues that
they also cause difficulty
in achieving the required balance with other
exceptions to the exclusive rights of copyright holders to the extent that they
the same interests as those protected by the library and archive copying
provisions. This paper demonstrates the need to have clarifying
legislation to
achieve a balance between the library and archive copying provisions and other
exceptions which involve the same interests.
I Introduction
The concept of balance of interests has often been referred to in Australian
to copyright statutes
refer to balance of interests as an objective to be achieved, but also that the
stakeholders in copyright law
have used the concept of balance of interests to
argue for stronger rights and
entitlements.
Furthermore, the
concept of balance of interests is very contested because, on the one hand,
Parliament has considered that the balance
has already been
while on the other hand,
the stakeholders involved have argued that that balance has not been
It is also true to say that the difficulty of achieving a balance between the
competing interests involved has often been discussed
and commented upon in
Australian copyright law. Legislative materials regarding copyright statutes
make it clear that achieving the
balance between interests is a difficult
However, it is interesting to
note that these materials have not explored either the reasons for this
difficulty nor possible mechanisms
to overcome it. It is also interesting to
note that this issue has persisted from the inception of the current copyright
in 1968 until the present date, indicating that it has not been
addressed all this time; hence the need to analyse it in order to
discussion regarding how to overcome it.
This paper analyses the difficulty associated with balancing the competing
interests involved in copyright law, to identify and examine
mechanisms to
overcome this issue. It analyses the problem through the lens of
(Cth) (the ‘
(the ‘library
and archive copying provisions’) and amendments to that Act which made
significant changes to those provisions.
These sections permit libraries and
archives to make reproductions of works for users and other libraries and
archives. The reason
for selecting these two provisions is because the tension
between the interests of stakeholders involved in copyright law is explicitly
manifested in legislative materials regarding them. Therefore, analysing the
difficulty in relation to the library and archive copying
demonstrates how this issue persisted from the 1960s onwards. It also provides
insights regarding the best way to address
This paper begins by analysing the nature and the extent of the difficulty
associated with achieving a balance between competing interests
in copyright law
in relation to the Act’s library and archive copying provisions to
demonstrate the gravity of this issue.
It then identifies and analyses possible
reasons why that difficulty has persisted to this day, to explain why that has
Finally, it identifies and analyses mechanisms that would help
to overcome this issue, to determine how an appropriate balance between
competing interests can be achieved.
II An Exposition of the Nature and Extent of the
Difficulty of Achieving Balance in Copyright Law in Relation to Library and
Copying Provisions
The library and archive copying provisions permit libraries and archives to
make reproductions of works for supplying to users and
other libraries and
When analysing the
history of these provisions, it is clear that their origins lie in the
as enacted in 1968 and that they have been substantially
modified at several points since in response to major developments in
technology.
In each of the amending statutes there has also been reference not
only to the multitude of interests of stakeholders that are affected
library and archives provisions, but also the difficulty of achieving a balance
between them,
Achieving that balance cannot be underestimated, because, while the
provisions are exceptions to the exclusive rights of copyright
owners, they are
also critical to ensure access to materials held in libraries and archives. If a
balance cannot be reached between
those competing interests, there is a
possibility that the latter could be narrowly
interpreted.
As a result, access to
materials held in libraries and archives can be lessened to the detriment of the
interests of users.
The importance of achieving a balance between the conflicting interests
associated with the library and archive copying provisions
is heightened by the
fact that the
uses a phrase which it does not define. That
phrase is ‘accessible to members of the public’, in relation to
terms ‘library’ and ‘archives’ have been
defined in the library and archive copying
provisions.
Therefore, the meaning
of ‘accessible to members of the public’ is critical to determine
which libraries and archives
can use the library and archive copying provisions
to make reproductions of materials for the purposes mentioned therein. It means
that unless a library or an archive is ‘accessible’ to the extent
required it cannot use the library and archive copying
provisions to excuse what
would otherwise be infringements of copyright law.
When applying the phrase ‘accessible to members of the public’,
the concept of balance becomes relevant because it is
a factor that has been
thoroughly considered in legislative materials regarding copyright statutes
which have introduced or amended
provisions.
However, it is also the
case that those legislative materials refer to the difficulty of achieving the
balance between competing
interests in copyright
Therefore, it is necessary
to examine them to identify and analyse possible reasons for the difficulty in
achieving that balance
and to examine mechanisms that could address the
III Of ‘Primary Ends’ and Monopolies:
Insights from Early Copyright Law
As the library and archive copying provisions were introduced by the
in 1968, the balance envisaged in the legislative materials
accompanying this statute is relevant in this analysis. As this statute
mainly based on the
Report of the Committee Appointed by the Attorney General
of the Commonwealth to Consider What Alterations are Desirable in the Copyright
Law of the Commonwealth
(the ‘Spicer Committee
the balance
envisaged in it is particularly relevant. That balance is between the interests
of copyright owners, users and the general
and the Report’s
articulation of balance conveys that the interests on all sides have to be
acknowledged.
However, the effect of that acknowledgement in the Report is mitigated by the
fact that it recognised the interests of authors over
and above the interests of
other stakeholders. That is clear from the Report, where it is stated that
that the ‘primary end’ of copyright law
is to reward authors for their contribution to society and to encourage them
make further creations.
these assertions establish the ascendancy of authors’ interests over those
of others and it therefore tilts the balance
in favour of authors. It also
dilutes the assertion made immediately afterwards, that research and education,
which are the interests
on the other side of the balance, should not be unduly
restricted.
From this statement in the Report it can be expected that the balance of the
library and archive copying provisions would lean more
towards the interests of
creators and would, therefore, tend to be narrow in scope. True enough, the
Spicer Committee recommended
that after a library has copied a non-periodical
work, it must, within a reasonable time, give notice to the copyright owner
the portion of the work that has been copied and of the identity of
the recipient of the copy.
Furthermore, the Report recommended that libraries be able to copy more than one
article from a periodical if they are regarding
the same subject
The Spicer Committee’s inclination to give more weight to copyright
owners’ rights is reflected in the original
passed in 1968. Accordingly, libraries are permitted to make copies of works to
supply to other libraries to the extent
provided in the relevant sections if
they are unable to obtain permission from the person who is authorised to give
such permission.
Moreover, where
a library copies works for users for their private research and study, those
copies cannot be used for any other
Clearly, these
provisions give priority to the interests of creators and thereby restrict the
instances where works can be copied
for the benefit of users.
The Spicer Committee Report demonstrates that the balance it recommended was
formulated in utilitarian terms. That is clear from its
assertion that authors
should receive benefits for making creative works and that they should be
encouraged to make further
Utilitarian theory
states that copyright law is regarded as a ‘utilitarian bargain’,
where incentives are provided to
rights holders to create and disseminate
knowledge and culture.
the utilitarian balance is regarded as indeterminate since there is an absence
of evidence to demonstrate where the optimal
balance in copyright law can be
If that is the case, it is
clear that the utilitarian formulation of the balance is one reason why there is
an apparent imbalance
inherent in the library and archive copying
provisions.
The Spicer Committee’s acknowledgement that copyright is a
also demonstrates the
utilitarian underpinning of the Report. In a state of monopoly, one party can
determine the rules and regulations
which govern the market. In the case of
in order to access copyright works. Accordingly, if authors are to be
encouraged to make more creations, they would have to be given
power to decide
the prices that users have to pay for accessing their works and could also deny
access to those users who are unable
to pay those prices. This shows that it
would lead to a monopoly and, since the Committee referred to copyright law as a
it further indicates that utilitarian theory is a factor making it
difficult to achieve an appropriate balance between the competing
It is also important to note that the Spicer Committee refers to several
metaphors in its report: the notion of rewarding authors,
where it states that
the law should ensure that authors should be rewarded for their contribution to
and the notion of
pirates, where it refers to pirating
broadcasts.
The notion of reward
is an agricultural image, which invokes the idea of a farmer sowing seeds and
reaping the fruits of their labour,
in the same way that an author would spend
his labour on his work and receive income from
The notion of pirates is a
part of a group of metaphors which refer to users as predators, parasites,
poachers and free riders.
creates the impression of robbers at sea who operate outside the
who are associated with
lawlessness and violence.
The metaphors used in the Spicer Committee Report are relevant to
understanding how these images make it difficult to achieve the
required balance
in the statute. When they portray authors as stakeholders who deserve rewards,
it strengthens the weight that is
given to their interests. When they portray
users as those who are outside the law who should be kept under control, it
weakens the
weight that is given to their interests. If users’ interests
are affected in this manner, they will not have full force when
balanced against the interests of copyright owners. From this perspective, it is
clear that metaphors used in the Spicer
Committee Report make it difficult to
strike an appropriate balance in copyright law.
IV Complex Interconnections Amidst Conflicts – The
Situation after the Spicer Committee Report
As the recommendations of the
Report of the Copyright Law Committee on
Reprographic Reproduction
(the 'Franki Committee
regarding library and
archive copying provisions were incorporated into the
the balance envisaged
in that report is also relevant to this analysis. That balance is, again,
between the interests of copyright
owners and the interests of copyright
The striking feature of
the Franki Committee Report is the subtle interconnections that can be
discovered between these diverse interests,
which makes it another reason it is
difficult to strike an appropriate balance.
For example, there are interconnections between interests which are usually
placed on either side of the scale, such as those of writers
and the public.
According to the Franki Committee Report, writers would like to have their works
copied and it would serve the public
According to this
argument, enhancing the interests of writers would be essential to enhance the
interests of the public and yet
it hardly applies in practice, as strengthening
the interests of writers would curtail the interests of the public. Furthermore,
the interconnections between these interests makes it difficult to separate them
and allow them to be weighed against each
Furthermore, there are interconnections between interests which are usually
placed on the same side of the scale, such as those of
libraries and those of
users as well as those of libraries and those of the community. The link between
the interests of libraries
and the interests of users is where libraries copy
materials on behalf of students and other users, so that they can use them as
The link between the
interests of libraries and the interests of the community occurs, in particular,
through services such as inter-library
loans, which enhance community access to
materials which may not otherwise be obtainable, especially when
‘elaborate library
facilities’ are not readily
interconnections demonstrate how tightly woven these interests are and also
explains how it can be difficult to separate them,
and to compare and contrast
The metaphors used in the Franki Committee Report when it referred to the
diverse interests involved in copyright law provide another
reason why it is
difficult to strike an appropriate balance. According to the Report,
reprographic reproduction is common in educational
institutions
and authors require
more control over such technologies to ensure that they receive appropriate
rewards in such circumstances.
The Report invokes the image of farmers using fences on their lands to prevent
others from stealing fruit which rightfully belongs
This type of metaphor
justifies the imposition of control on access to works by copyright owners and
thereby tilts the balance of
the scale in their favour.
V Still a Complicated Picture: Digital Technology and
the Stakeholders in Copyright Law
The library and archive copying provisions were significantly amended by the
‘Digital Agenda Act’
), including by introducing provisions
that enable libraries and archives to make reproductions of materials using
digital technology.
For that reason, that statute is also relevant to this
analysis. It is important to note that the interests of copyright owners were
also given more weight by that statute when it came to its library and archive
copying provisions. It is evident from the Explanatory
Memorandum to the Digital
Agenda Bill, that the legislation was intended to ensure that libraries and
archives can use new technologies
as long as the economic rights of copyright
owners are not unreasonably
prejudiced.
Clearly, this gives
priority to the interests of copyright owners, since it allows exceptions to the
exclusive rights of copyright
owners to operate but only as long as they do not
infringe on those rights.
The priority that the Digital Agenda Act afforded the interests of copyright
owners is clear when considering those of its provisions
which permit libraries
and archives to make reproductions of materials using digital
technology.
Although the
interests of creators and users have been formulated in this statute in such a
way that they are opposed to each
there are instances where
there are mutual benfits. Creators can be users of the works of others and users
can become creators when
they use copyright works of other to make new
creations. In particular, it has been said that when creators integrate existing
into their own creations they become
Therefore, it is clear that the interests of creators and users overlap and that
they are not mutually exclusive.
Similarly, users become creators when they actively engage with existing
creations such as when they create ‘mixtapes, photoshop
When stakeholders
in copyright law, who are often pitted against each other in their separate
roles act in the role of the other,
it is difficult to separate and balance
their two competing interests. Therefore, the fact that their interests are not
exclusive can be considered as a reason for the difficulty in striking
a balance between those interests.
The restrictions imposed by the
Digital Agenda Act
can also be
understood from the utilitarian perspective. This theory is useful in
understanding the role of information as an emerging
pure public good (as
opposed to a private good).
the case of private goods, producers determine how many goods they will supply
to the market, and consumers determine how many
of those goods they will
In the case of public goods
however, consumers do not have an incentive to disclose how many public goods
they will buy. They will
also be able to use those goods even without paying for
and it is not possible to
prevent that use.
That being the case market failures will result which, in turn, require
government intervention through means such as creating exclusion
mechanisms.
Since ss 49 and 50
are about access to information, it can be considered that the library and
archive copying provisions are concerned
with public goods and, therefore, a
result of market failure, for which the government intervenes by creating
exclusion mechanisms.
When s 49(7B) prohibits libraries and archives from
displaying materials acquired in an electronic format without ensuring that
cannot copy or communicate them, it amounts to a legal and a technological
exclusionary mechanism.
In addition to s 49(7B), s 49(5) and s 50(7B) can also be considered as legal
exclusionary mechanisms. Section 49(5) prohibits libraries
and archives from
reproducing the whole or more than a reasonable portion of works other than
articles if those works are commercially
Similarly, s 50(7B)
prohibits libraries and archives from supplying reproductions of works acquired
in an electronic format to other
libraries and archives unless that work is not
commercially available.
will be regarded as ‘commercially available’ if a copy of it cannot
be obtained ‘within a reasonable time
at an ordinary commercial
It is important to
note that both ss 49 and 50 are exceptions to copyright owners’ exclusive
economic rights and those two
exceptions are expected to support the interests
of users. If they have the opposite effect, it will give more weight to
owners’ rights which will tip the balance in favour of copyright
The metaphors and other words used in relation to the
Digital Agenda
are also relevant in this analysis. The word ‘protection’
has been used in relation to this statute, where a reason for
amending the
in 2000 was the need to improve the level of protection
provided to copyright owners.
The metaphor of receiving rewards for hard work is also used in this this
statute, where it was the impetus behind the 2000
amendments.
It conveys the idea
of hard work which deserves rewards and evidently this impression gives
preference to those who own the copyright.
Therefore, it is clear that these
metaphors are another reason why it is difficult to achieve an appropriate
balance between the
competing interests.
VI The Complexity Continues: The Interests of
Stakeholders after the Amendments in 2006
(Cth) made significant
amendments to the library and archive copying provisions, namely by providing
that only those libraries and
archives which are ‘accessible to members of
the public’ can make use of the library and archive copying
provisions,
significant for this analysis. Although it aimed to achieve a balance between
the interests of copyright owners and
it is clear that it gave
more weight to the interests of copyright owners. As the Explanatory Memorandum
to the Bill noted, ‘copyright
is the exclusive right to authorise, and to
prohibit, a number of specific acts in relation to protected
‘copyright is the right to stop copying by other
The absence of
reference to other interests, such as those of users, indicate this amendment is
inclined towards copyright owners’
Furthermore, the interests considered in the
(Cth) are linked in complex ways. The balance considered in this paper
is between the interests of copyright owners and
and it is clear that the
interests of these stakeholders are interconnected. Scassa’s work explains
this connection, where
time-shifting and space shifting technologies which are
used by users are considered as different versions of
consumption
that is beneficial to copyright
It is significant to
note that the
(Cth) introduced
legal mechanisms to regulate time-shifting and space-shifting
technologies,
which demonstrates
a statutory recognition of that interconnection.
A number of metaphors and other words used in the Explanatory Memorandum to
the Copyright (Amendment) Bill 2006, such as protection,
control and piracy,
convey distinct impressions about the interests which the Act was intended to
address. When it is stated that
individual authors and artists have an interest
in receiving copyright
‘protection’,
distributed
and that it also
includes the right to stop others from
it gives the impression
of property owners guarding their fences against those who might enter their
properties without permission.
When it is stated in the Explanatory Memorandum to the Copyright (Amendment)
Bill 2006 that it is getting easy to commit
and that copyright law
protects creators from ‘free-riding’ which affects their motivation
it gives the
impression that users are like pirates, robbers at sea who operate outside the
and that their activities
should be curtailed. Evidently, it would have a negative effect on the
recognition of the interests of
users which would make it difficult to strike
the balance between the interests involved.
VII How to Overcome the Difficulties Associated with
Ensuring the Balance of Interests in Library and Archive Copying Provisions
The analysis in the foregoing sections of this paper examines four possible
reasons for the difficulty in achieving balance between
the interests associated
with copyright law, in relation to the library and archive copying provisions.
It demonstrated that the
difficulty in achieving a balance persisted not only
when these provisions were first introduced but also when they were subsequently
amended. If an appropriate balance cannot be made when applying the library and
archive copying exceptions in copyright law, it seems
clear that those
provisions would be applied narrowly to reduce their scope and, thereby, to
strengthen the interests of copyright
Therefore, the legislative intention behind the statutory amendment which
introduced the ‘accessible to members of the public’
to the library
and archive copying provisions becomes relevant
The objective of the
is to ensure that exceptions
provide reasonable access to copyright
Furthermore, the
Explanatory Memorandum to the Copyright (Amendment) Bill
states that exceptions in the
had not been amended to
keep pace with copyright owners’ rights which had been
When ‘accessible
to members of the public’ is applied according to the objective behind the
it was intended that
it would extend to include libraries and archives which provide reasonable
access to copyright materials.
In that case, the concept of balance of interests can be used to the extent
it ensures reasonable access to materials when determining
the meaning of
‘accessible to members of the public’ in the context of ss 49 and
50. Whenever the interests involved
in the library and archive copying
provisions are featured in other provisions of the
argued that the same approach can be adopted, where the concept of balance of
interests can be used when applying those provisions,
to the degree that it
upholds reasonable access to materials. Furthermore, it would be beneficial to
have legislative intervention
in this area in the form of legislation which
clarifies the meaning of this phrase and provide guidance about the instances in
the library and archive copying provisions apply.
III Conclusion
From the analysis in this paper, it is clear that the difficulty in striking
a balance in copyright law has far-reaching effects.
In the case of the library
and archive copying provisions, the difficulty in striking an appropriate
balance between the interests
indicate that applying these provisions would be
narrowed to the detriment of users. Since the library and archive copying
are exceptions in copyright law, the inability to achieve a balance
between the interests involved would mean that copyright owners
could benefit
even in instances which are expected to benefit users. There is a possibility
that this state-of-affairs would persist
in relation to other exceptions in
in the library
and archive copying provisions are involved. Therefore, in the
case of these provisions, having legislation which clarifies the meaning
‘accessible to members of the public’ would help to strike the
balance between the interests involved in these sections.
Having such
legislation would also benefit other exceptions in copyright law which involve
the same interests as that of the library
and archive copying provisions.
* PhD (UNE), LL.M (London), LL. B (Colombo). This paper is based on several
legal aspects considered in the author&#82
PhD thesis.
Horn refers to the copyright holders’ argument that they
require ‘increased protection and opportunity to benefit’
the effects of developments in technology can be balanced with their need to be
rewarded: Ant Horn, 'Creators and the Copyright
Balance – Investigating
the interests of copyright holders, users and creators'
[2004] AltLawJl 31
(2004) 29(3)
Alternative Law Journal
‘As far as possible, the
exceptions replicate the balance struck between the rights of owners and the
rights of users that
has applied in the print environment’: Explanatory
Memorandum to
('Explanatory Memorandum to Digital Agenda Bill') 3.
For example, in their
submission to the Australian Law Reform Commission’s copyright inquiry in
2012, the ‘Copyright
and Digital Economy’, the Australian Digital
Alliance and Australian Libraries Copyright Committee have argued that fair
provisions in Australia do not support an ‘effective
balance’ in copyright law:
Libraries Copyright Committee and Australian Digital Alliance ‘Copyright
and the Digital Economy, Submission by the
Australian Digital Alliance and
Australian Libraries Copyright Committee to the Australian Law Reform
Commission’ (2012) 67.
For example, Senator Wright in
the second reading of the
stated that the stakeholder
interests involved in Copyright Bill 1968 are conflicting and that it is
impossible to address the needs
of all stakeholders: Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 11 June 1968, 1 (Wright, Senator). MP
McLelland in the parliamentary debates made during the second reading of
stated that it is very difficult
to strike the balance in copyright law:
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
Representatives, 27 June 2000, 18341 (Robert McClelland, MP). According to MP
Roxon, ‘In this copyright area those
different interest groups are often
pitted against each other, which makes it a tricky balancing act at any
time’: Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
Representatives, 27 June 2000, 18352 (Nicola Roxon, MP).
Section 49 provides that
libraries and archives may make reproductions of works for supplying to users
and s 50 provides that libraries
and archives may make reproductions of works
for supplying to other libraries and archives. The term ‘work’ is
as ‘... a literary,
dramatic, musical or artistic work’.
Examples of the exclusive
rights as recognised in
are the right to
reproduce the work in a material form, the right to publish the work, the right
to perform the work in public, the
right to communicate the work to the public
and the right to make an adaptation of the work. Examples of moral rights that
protected under the
are the right to attribution
of authorship under
, the right not to have authorship falsely attributed
and the right to integrity of authorship under
Sections 49(9)
define ‘library’ as ‘a library all or
part of whose collection is accessible to members of the public directly
through interlibrary loans’. These two sections also define
‘archives’ as ‘archives means an archive all
or part of whose
collection is accessible to members of the public’.
For example, the
the Copyright Law Review Committee: Report of the Committee Appointed by the
Attorney General of the Commonwealth to Consider
What Alterations are Desirable
in the Copyright Law of the Commonwealth (‘Spicer Committee Report’)
on which the
enacted in 1968 was based, it is stated in page 8
that when making their recommendations, their work essentially involved
the balance between interests involved in copyright law.
See above n 4.
Report of the Committee
appointed by the Attorney General of the Commonwealth to consider What
Alterations are Desirable in the Copyright
Law of the Commonwealth,
(Report, 1959).
‘In arriving at our
recommendations our task has essentially been one of balancing the interests of
the copyright owner with
those of copyright users and the general public’:
as enacted in 1968.
s 49(3)(a).
Spicer Committee
(n 11) 8, 9.
Ezieddin Elmahjub and
Nicolas Suzor, 'Fair Use and Fairness in Copyright: A Distributive Justice
Perspective on Users’ Rights'
[2017] MonashULawRw 8
(2017) 43(1)
Monash University Law
Spicer Committee Report
See Patricia Loughlan,
'Pirates, Parasites, Reapers, Sowers, Fruits, Foxes.. The Metaphors of
Intellectual Property'
[2006] SydLawRw 12
Sydney Law Review
‘The read-across from
piracy to copyright may have begun from that of a sea robber who operated
outside all law and could be
put to death without trial’: William St
Clair, 'Metaphors of Intellectual Property' in Ronan Deazley (ed),
and Property : Essays on the History of Copyright
(Open Book Publishers,
2010), 338.
Loughlan (n 25) 217.
Report of the Copyright Law Committee on Reprographic
Reproduction
(Report, October 1976).
For example, the Franki
Committee’s recommendation in paragraphs [3.34] and [4.21] of their report
that library and archive
copying provisions should apply regarding archives was
incorporated in
1980. As this is a significant
amendment of the library and archives provisions, it assumes relevance for this
The terms of reference of
the Franki Committee in para [1.01] proceeds as ‘[t]o examine the question
of the reprographic reproduction
of works protected by copyright in Australia
and to recommend any alterations to the Australian copyright law and any other
the Committee may consider necessary to effect a proper balance of
interest between owners of copyright and the users of copyright
material in
respect of reprographic reproduction’.
According to Franki
Committee, writers of scientific articles in journals consider copying by
libraries as an efficient way of disseminating
their works and there is a
‘great public need’ for such materials to be available without
restrictions:
Franki Committee Report
(n 29) [3.12], [3.13].
Murray mentions how the
notion of balance involves separating interests into two ‘brass
bowls’: Laura Murray, 'Copyright
Talk: Patterns and Pitfalls in Canadian
Policy Discourse' in Michael Geist (ed),
Extremism” to “Balanced Copyright” Canadian Copyright and the
Digital Agenda
(Irwin Law, 2010) 15, 23.
Franki Committee Report
explains how users need to have their own copies of materials for making notes
and for using them along with
other materials:
Franki Committee Report
29) [3.04].
Ibid [4.03], [4.06].
Ibid [1.01].
Ibid [1.20].
Loughlan discusses about the
image of a farmer fencing off the land to keep away unauthorised entrants such
as thieves and poachers:
Loughlin (n 25) 220.
Explanatory Memorandum to
Digital Agenda Bill (n 2) [69], [85].
On page 2 of the Explanatory
Memorandum to the Digital Agenda Bill, it is stated that ‘Creators and
owners of copyright material
are concerned that they do not have effective means
of redress or remuneration in relation to use of their copyright material on
Internet’. On the same page, it is stated that ‘[u]sers of copyright
material, such as libraries, archives and educational
institutions, are
concerned about being able to obtain reasonable access to copyright material
available on the Internet.’
Murray (n 33) 24.
‘[W]ith the advent of
the digital age and new media such as the Internet, information becomes closer
and closer to a pure public
good as a consequence of the virtually costless
nature of information reproduction’: Robert Cunningham,
Information
Environmentalism: A Governance Framework for Intellectual Property Rights
(Edward Elgar, 2022).
Samuel Trosow, 'Economic
Analysis and Copyright Law: Are New Models Needed in the Digital Age?' (1999)
Legal Reference Services Quarterly
Samuel Trosow, 'The Illusive
Canadian Journal of Law and Jurisprudence
Section 49(7B) postulates
that making reproductions of materials according to s 49(5A) does not amount to
meaning that reproducing materials against this
provision amounts to copyright infringement. Section 49(5A) allows institutions
as libraries and archives to display works acquired in the digital format
within their premises and this section also makes it clear
that it is the
responsibility of these institutions to make sure that users can’t
reproduce these materials or communicate
them outside the premises of those
institutions.
Section 49(5) states that
and (2C) of the
permit reproductions of works other
than articles, as long as an authorised officer of a library or an archive has
declared that
it is not possible to obtain a copy of those works within ‘a
reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price.’.
. According to
, when a work in the electronic format is reproduced for
supplying to other libraries and archives,
does not apply unless an
authorised officer makes a declaration that the work in question cannot be
obtained ‘within a reasonable
time at the ordinary commercial
Section 50(4)
is about situations where making reproductions under
does not amount to infringement of copyright. It indicates that reproducing
materials under
for purposes mentioned therein without satisfying the
commercial availability test amounts to copyright infringement.
Explanatory Memorandum to
the Digital Agenda Bill (n 2) 7.
See s 49(9) and s 50(10)
introduced by this statute.
Explanatory Memorandum to
the Copyright (Amendment) Bill 2006 ('Explanatory Memorandum to Copyright
(Amendment) Bill 2006 ') 7.
Terese Scassa, 'Interests in
the Balance' in Michael Geist (ed),
In the Public Interest: The Future of
Canadian Copyright Law
(Irwin Law, 2005) 41, 61. Time shifting is where
broadcasts are copied for later use; format shifting is where works can be
in different formats: Explanatory Memorandum to Copyright (Amendment)
Bill 2006 (n 56) 8.
Scassa (n 60) 61.
See page 13 of the
Explanatory Memorandum to Copyright (Amendment) Bill 2006 (n 56) to see how the
legislature considered different
options and ultimately adopted the option of
introducing new exceptions for time shifting and format shifting.
Explanatory Memorandum to
‘The read-across from
piracy to copyright may have begun from that of a sea robber who operated
outside all law and could be
put to death without trial’: St Clair (n 27)
Explanatory Memorandum to
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (73.4 KB)
PDF format (390 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter