URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawSocCConsc/2024/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:47:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Croucher, Rosalind --- "Making Rights a Reality - the Need for a Human Rights Act in Australia" [2024] UNSWLawSocCConsc 4; (2024) 18 UNSW Law Society Court of Conscience 11
B Dissenting Report
MAKING RIGHTS A REALITY – THE NEED
FOR A HUMAN RIGHTS ACT FOR AUSTRALIA
Rosalind Croucher AM
I The International Bill Of Rights And
The Absence In Domestic Law
On 10 December 1948, the United Nations (‘UN’) adopted the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
to provide a
roadmap to guarantee the rights of every individual
everywhere.
The declaration was
drafted in response to the horrors inflicted on countless people and communities
during the terrible conflict
of World War II, including Jewish people, ethnic
minorities, people with a disability and people of diverse sexualities and
It was born of an international consensus that all nations needed to
work together to create a better, more inclusive and respectful
world for all
human beings. An Australian, Dr HV Evatt, or ‘Doc Evatt’ as he
was known, was in the Chair of the General
Assembly at that landmark moment. On
10 December 2023, we marked its 75
anniversary.
What was distinctive about this Declaration was its move away from an
international law that was about the rights of
among themselves,
to an international law of
rights, which conferred rights on
individual people.
That moment, in 1948, was celebrated and marked across Australia. The Hon
Michael Kirby AC CMG, in delivering the opening keynote
address at the
Australian Human Rights Commission’s ‘Free + Equal Conference’
on 7 June 2024, recalled how, as
a 10-year-old primary schoolboy in 1949, his
teacher, Mr Gorringe, gave him a copy – as was every schoolchild in
The UDHR provided the foundation stone for a pair of binding conventions in
the 1960s – the International Covenant on Civil
and Political
and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
– and the combination
of rights guaranteed in these two covenants ‘represent the most
authoritative universal minimum
standard of present international human rights
Together with the UDHR,
these three instruments are known as the ‘International Bill of
Australia was a founding signatory to each of these instruments and, as a
nation, we stepped forward in embracing the commitments
of these great
documents. Australia has signed and ratified each of the key international
treaties since then – and it has
not been a party-political exercise. Both
sides in our system of Westminster government – and in equal measure
signed and ratified them, undertaking obligations to the
However, in practice, little has been done to enact the rights and freedoms
protected by these instruments into Australian law, in
our own Human Rights Act,
despite the aspirations perhaps encouraged in the schoolchildren of Michael
Kirby’s young years –
and repeated attempts to do
This means that the rights and
freedoms enshrined in these international human rights instruments are not
enforceable in Australia at the federal level. The promises of
our Commonwealth Government to the world, while genuine, are not backed
in practice, and the willingness to do so has also fluctuated greatly over the
intervening decades.
While we do have strong rhetoric of the importance of rights and freedoms in
Australia, the domestic
legislative
protection of them is strikingly
limited, with specific human rights instruments enacted only in the Australian
Capital Territory
(‘ACT’), Victoria and
Queensland.
From the perspective of
the jurisdiction of the Australian Human Rights Commission
(‘Commission’), the absence of implementation
of the treaty
commitments is also still unfinished legal architecture. When put on a permanent
foundation in 1986, the Commission
was designed in tandem with an accompanying
Australian Bill of Rights Act.
The Bill was passed in the House of Representatives, but did not survive the
Senate. More recently, the idea was the principal recommendation
of the National
Human Rights Consultation led by Fr Frank Brennan SJ, over a decade ago, with
its report in 2009.
It also did
not progress.
The principal purpose of this article is to highlight the five-year program
of work of the Australian Human Rights Commission, which
has been central to
re-advocating the case for a national Human Rights Act – as a key piece of
a revitalised human rights framework
in Australia. Part II outlines the
Commission’s ‘Free and Equal’ report. Parts III and IV focus
on why we need
a federal Human Rights Act and the differences such an Act would
make. Part V of the article considers the report of the Parliamentary
Committee on Human Rights, the majority of which strongly supported the
Australian Human Rights Commission’s recommendations,
particularly in
relation to a Human Rights Act. The opportunity is also taken to rebut arguments
made in a dissenting report The
final section of the article, Part VI, offers
some final reflections.
II Free And Equal – Revitalising
Australia’s
Human Rights Framework
Its title drawn directly from the first sentence of the first article of the
UDHR, ‘All human beings are born
free and equal in dignity and
’ (emphasis added), the Free and Equal project produced two
major Position Papers – on discrimination law reform (December
and a model Human Rights
Act for Australia (March 2023)
– and its final report in December 2023, with the aim of revitalising our
human rights framework.
completion of the work, and the challenges to come, were the focus of the
‘Free + Equal conference’, held in June
The Commission’s model Human Rights Act is based on conceptual
‘bookends’ of responsibility and accountability.
It is strongly
democratic and is anchored in the strength and supremacy of parliament.
Responsibility
of public authorities to consider and act compatibly
with human rights in policies, legislation and practice – through a
duty as exists in the state and territory Human Rights Acts and added
duties to ensure the effective participation of indigenous
peoples, persons with
disability and children, and to ensure equal access to justice. The model
provides enhanced parliamentary scrutiny
and a comprehensive implementation of
human rights, across the ICCPR and ICESCR.
Accountability
through actionable breaches for individuals,
interpretive provisions that align the understanding of human rights to
international
jurisprudence, a national human rights indicator index to measure
progress on human rights over time, and an annual statement to
parliament in
relation to human rights priorities.
Together, responsibility and accountability through a Human Rights Act and
Human Rights Framework support a cultural shift towards
‘rights-mindedness’ becoming part of the national psyche, not just
an afterthought.
The Commission’s National Human Rights Framework is built on the
following five pillars:
1. Comprehensive and effective protection of human rights in legislation
through the introduction of a national Human Rights Act.
2. Federal discrimination laws to be modernised to ensure their effectiveness
and to shift the focus from a reactive model that responds
to discriminatory
treatment to a proactive model that seeks to prevent discriminatory treatment in
the first place.
3. The role of Parliament in protecting human rights is strengthened, through
reform to the processes for parliamentary scrutiny and
the introduction of new
oversight mechanisms for Australia’s human rights obligations.
4. A national human rights indicator index is introduced to independently
measure progress on human rights over time.
5. An annual statement to Parliament on human rights priorities is made by
the Government.
The Framework will be supported by a national human rights education program,
an effective and sustainable national human rights institution
and vibrant and
robust civil society
organisations.
Each of these
elements has a role to play in an integrated human rights framework.
III Why Do We Need A Human Rights Act?
There is currently an implementation gap between the human rights standards
that Australia has agreed to internationally in promises
to the world, and the
protections in our laws, policies and processes of government.
The Australian
Constitution
protects some rights through
limitations
on the power to pass legislation but does not confer rights on individuals
– unlike the United States
Constitution
– and mechanisms to raise
complaints of breaches of human rights, apart from the four Discrimination
are extremely limited. The
Commission has had a complaints jurisdiction, anchored in the international
treaties, since its outset,
but without any redress to remedial pathways its
effectiveness is very limited, the only conclusion being a report to the
Attorney-General.
In 2017, even the obligation of the Attorney-General to table these reports was
And here we are,
decades later, with report number 160-plus, still making recommendations which
have no possibility of effective
The existing mechanisms are simply insufficient and do not provide the human
rights protections that all people in Australia are entitled
Our experience with Royal Commissions into Robodebt, and the abuses
experienced by persons with disability and in aged
have exposed egregious
human rights breaches, and shown how our existing systems are just not
A primary benefit of a National Human Rights Framework is that it will
provide the foundation to foster a culture of respect for human
throughout the whole of government and across the country, and enhance
‘rights-mindedness’ in policy, law and
decision making.
Parliamentarians and public officials should be required to consider the
human rights impact of their actions. And they should be
required to favour
options that positively protect human rights and justify that their chosen
actions cause the least possible harm
to people’s rights.
To achieve this, we need a Human Rights Act and a revitalised human rights
IV How Would A Human Rights Act Make A Difference?
Responsibility
‘Culture’ would be anchored in a framework of human rights. The
public service would have a
positive duty t
o act compatibly with human
rights and consider human rights when making decisions. A human rights-based
approach would improve trust
in government decision making, due to guaranteed
rights protections, and the increased transparency and accountability it would
Public trust enhances respect for the law, provides greater legitimacy
for authorities and institutions, and deepens social
By considering the human rights impacts of a proposed law or policy
, there is also a reduced likelihood that decisions will breach
human rights and therefore the risk and costs of court action are
Dealing with human rights breaches
after the fact
can give rise to
vast consequences – including unexpected costs from failing to consider
human rights early.
Robodebt led
to a resulting class action and prompted its own Royal Commission. Dealing with
human rights issues early has obvious
economic benefits.
Accountability
Through Parliamentary Scrutiny
The Commission’s Position Paper on a national Human Rights Act includes
a review of the effectiveness of the parliamentary scrutiny
of human rights at
the federal level, with a particular emphasis on the role of the Parliamentary
Joint Committee on Human Rights
The Commission argues that the work of the PJCHR is inherently constrained by
the limited legal protection of human rights in Australian
law. The single
biggest change that can improve the effectiveness of the PJCHR is for its work
to occur in conjunction with a Human
Rights Act. This would provide:
● stronger accountability measures for public servants to fully
consider human rights (in accordance with the proposed positive
● ensure that laws, policies and programs are developed with the full
engagement of affected communities (in accordance with
the proposed
participation duty and the role of the PJCHR to assess the adequacy of this
participation);
● ensure there is domestic guidance on human rights standards and
obligations over time that can assist in the quality of consideration
rights issues; and
● increase the weight that public servants and parliamentarians attach
to human rights considerations, due to the possibility
of people whose rights
are restricted having a cause of action to have those impacts addressed.
These proposed reforms to the parliamentary review of human rights are
complementary to the need for a Human Rights Act – not
a substitute for
Through Interpretation of Legislation
With respect to judicial consideration of legislation generally, the
Commission recommends an interpretive clause:
All primary and subordinate Commonwealth legislation to be interpreted, so
far as is reasonably possible, in a manner that is consistent
Parliament could still reach a conclusion, and express its intention in
legislation clearly, that is at odds with human rights commitments,
hurdles for being able to do this, and the constraints around it, would be far
stronger. The accountability in human rights
terms would be far higher, and the
leverage for people seeking to challenge decisions much more potent.
Through Complaints Pathways With the Possibility of Remedies
This is a singular point of difference with other models. The
Commission’s proposed rights are all amenable to enforcement by
bodies and courts. Unlawful actions and decisions in relation to all rights in
the Human Rights Act should give rise to
a standalone cause of action. This
would provide clarity and consistency and enable the enforcement of rights in
accordance with
Australia’s international obligations.
The Commission advocates a Human Rights Act complaints system that mirrors
the unlawful discrimination jurisdiction. This would mean
that there would be a
requirement for complainants first to bring a complaint to the Commission, and
if conciliation fails, or is
inappropriate, the complaint would be terminated by
the Commission and the complainant could then move onto the courts (or
for adjudication. The same processes that currently exist for
unlawful discrimination would apply in the human rights context (including
the termination grounds, and representative complaints processes).
The Commission’s existing human rights complaints jurisdiction would be
replaced by this new approach.
It would be an evolution, not a revolution, of the Commission’s
long-standing jurisdiction.
An accessible complaints process would reduce the impact of a Human Rights
Act on the judicial system. Litigation need not be the
only port of call for
people who wish to make a complaint alleging a breach of human rights. Rather,
it is a necessary
last resort
when other avenues have failed. It provides
the leverage, the tools, for accountability and improved decision making. But
litigation is not the point
. It is the positive duty of public
authorities to get it right in the first place – by developing policies
and framing decisions
through the lens of human rights.
V The Parliamentary Joint Committee
On Human Rights Report
Majority Report
Just after the Commission released the second Position Paper, the
Attorney-General requested the PJCHR to inquire into a Human Rights
expressly referring to the Commission’s work. On 30 May the PJCHR released
its report,
providing a strong
endorsement of the Commission’s recommendations for a revitalised human
rights framework, and a Human Rights
Act, based on the Commission’s
The report observed a ‘clear need’ for a comprehensive and
enforceable rights-based
– to ensure a
‘fair go’ for all.
It agreed that existing protections were
‘piecemeal’.
Submissions received ‘overwhelmingly’ favoured (87.2%) an
Australian Human Rights Act
the PJCHR was reassured by the experiences in the three jurisdictions with such
instruments: the ACT, Victoria and Queensland.
It said these showed human rights
legislation ‘could help embed a rights-respecting
not led to overwhelming
litigation’.
The report made 17
recommendations,
including the
enactment of an Australian Human Rights Act that broadly reflects the
Commission’s model. The Act would protect
rights based on those under
international treaties to which Australia has agreed to be bound. This includes
the right to freedom
of religion and a prohibition against advocacy of national,
racial or religious hatred.
The Act would include basic aspects of economic, social and cultural rights,
such as the rights to education, health and social security.
The framing of
cultural rights, and a right to a healthy environment, would be informed by
consulting with Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples.
This is a clear reflection of the Commission’s recommendations in
relation to ICESCR. Many of the most pressing human rights
concerns facing
people in Australia relate to economic, social and cultural rights (under
ICESCR). These include access to adequate
health care, education and
and the restriction of these rights is often linked to
civil and political rights – like the right to non-discrimination.
ICESCR rights are also closely linked with the realisation of
self-determination for Indigenous peoples and are essential to meeting
‘close the gap’ targets, which address socio-economic indicators of
disadvantage.
The Australian public strongly values economic and social rights, indicating
that the lack of implementation of ICESCR does not reflect
the democratic will
of the people. This was a clear outcome of the 2009 National Human Rights
Consultation. Priorities identified
The right to adequate housing, the right to the highest attainable standard
of physical and mental health, and the right to education
are particular
priorities for the
The Act would impose a positive duty on public authorities to comply with and
properly consider human rights in their decision-making
and actions. They could
still impose limits on human rights where parliament permits or where the limits
are reasonable and justifiable.
The positive duty would be directly enforceable by a federal court, where
conciliation is not appropriate. Courts would also need
to interpret statutes so
as not to breach human rights, so far as is reasonably possible.
The majority report supported the Commission’s recommendations for
increased parliamentary scrutiny through the PJCHR
It also recommended
extensive human rights education in schools and the broader community, in part
to drive the cultural changes
needed to fully realise rights.
By contrast, a minority of the committee, the Coalition members, recommended
an Australian Human Rights Act not be introduced. The
report of the majority of
the Committee expressly traversed the arguments against a Human Rights Act
— and answered them
comprehensively.
Dissenting Report
There will be much analysis of the dissenting report. If an Exposure Draft
Bill were to follow, which would be the ideal next step
in law reform, that is
when the model put forward can be subject to further full public consultation
and review, which would be a
welcome next
For now, I would like to unpack, or rather unravel, the various threads of
objection, using headings to reflect the gist of those
objections.
We don’t need one
The dissenting report opposed the introduction of a Human Rights Act on the
basis that it would ‘weaken our parliamentary democracy
and politicise our
judiciary’.
It said that
rights were composed ‘in a politicised way’ and that parliament was
‘surrendering its responsibility
to defend human rights, by throwing open
the interpretation of an Act which contains excessive uncertainty to final
determination
by an unelected and unaccountable
judiciary’.
Such points are more of the old tropes of objection with respect to the
of a Human Rights
Some other concerns about
specific wording of rights can be navigated when any Exposure Draft Bill is put
to public consideration.
The model also sets out a sensible framework for
navigating the intersection of varied rights and freedoms.
As a general observation, I agree that the absence of a Human Rights Act does
not mean that we do
have a strong tradition of rights and freedoms
— we do — and they go back directly to the Magna Carta of 1215 and
Bill of Rights Act 1688,
it does mean that the rights and freedoms enshrined in the international human
rights instruments, and which Australia has promised
to the world that we will
respect domestically, are not directly
enforceable
in Australia. This
means that rights and freedoms can be conveniently ‘distanced’,
where the politics of the day chooses
to push the issue, with little
accountability or channels of challenge.
As to the charge of ‘weakening’ our democracy, the
Commission’s model, endorsed by the majority of the PJCHR, rather
strengthens
our democratic and rule of law principles. It is a
parliamentary
by preserving
parliamentary supremacy
in a model based on dialogue. It
enhances democracy
by improving the
quality of public debate and enabling minority and vulnerable groups to have a
voice in decisions that affect them
(through procedural duties) and to hold
decision makers accountable.
As stated in the majority report:
The statutory model of a HRA respects parliamentary sovereignty –
ensuring our elected representatives can continue to make
the laws Parliament
deems necessary. But with a HRA in place, Parliament would need to expressly
consider human rights when making
laws, and importantly, public authorities,
including government departments, agencies and the Australian Federal Police,
to consider rights when making decisions and act compatibly with
rights (unless Parliament had directed them to do otherwise). ...
The committee considers that there is a clear need for a rights-based legal
framework. Our current piecemeal approach to human rights
protection is not
adequate to ensure rights and freedoms are properly respected, protected or
promoted. The committee considers that
a HRA would be a framework by which the
public sector can look at legislation, policies, practices and service delivery
and consider
their impact on
individuals.
The Guardian
on 30 June 2024 and reflecting his keynote
contribution to the Commission’s Free + Equal conference on 7 June,
Michael Kirby
expressed his disappointment with the committee members on the
liberal side of politics in their rejection of a Human Rights Act.
Instead, he
said, they presented the argument of Sir Robert Menzies and Sir Owen Dixon,
‘the great chief justice of Australia
in those days’ that
‘parliament does not need the additional accountability that a Human
Rights Act would
Why then, Mr Kirby asked, have our governments needed to apologise? He
referred specifically to the apology to all members of the
LGBTQ+ community by
the NSW premier, Chris Minns, on 6 June, following the example already set in
other states. ‘We’re
sorry’, Minns said, ‘for every
person convicted under legislation that should never have existed; for every
person that
experienced fear as a result of that legislation ... for every life
that was damaged or diminished or destroyed by these unjust laws.’
‘Why have we needed an apology from the NSW Premier,’ Kirby
Why did we need an apology to the stolen generations? Why have we needed so
many royal commissions to uncover the countless incidents
by which Australian
governments and their laws have trampled on people’s basic human
Mr Kirby said that a Human Rights Act is ‘precisely the tool Australia
needs to ensure that parliament is held to account for
upholding human rights,
and to give people access to justice in case their rights are violated or simply
We do have strong and stable democratic institutions that we should rightly
be proud of, but this has not prevented human rights abuses
by departments and
nor the eventual
recognition of our Commonwealth, state and territory leaders of the need to
The weakness in the existing framework of protection, and especially the
COVID-19. That
framework simply was not good enough.
Mechanisms to raise complaints of breaches of human rights at the federal
level, apart from the four Discrimination
are extremely limited. Our
general human rights complaints jurisdiction, referable to the international
treaties and without any
redress to remedial pathways, is very limited. The only
conclusion is a report to the Attorney-General. Speaking in relation to this
function at its inception, then Attorney-General, Senator the Hon Peter Durack,
said, somewhat expectantly, that the reports would
ensure that governments and
parliaments were ‘aware of situations in which there needs to be a
redefinition of the rights of
different individuals’ and that this would
‘stimulate them to take appropriate
But in 2017, even
this obligation of tabling was removed.
Having been responsible for signing over 50 of these human rights complaints
reports in my seven years as President of the Australian
Human Rights
Commission,
and observed the
care and diligence of the Commission’s mediators and lawyers, and the
respectful engagement we have established
with the principal responding
department, the Department of Home Affairs, I acknowledge that it is an
important jurisdiction. Important,
yes, but deeply dismaying, with essentially
no possibility of effective remedy.
And during COVID-19, the Commission received hundreds of complaints under
this general human rights jurisdiction from Australians
locked out of their own
We heard heartbreaking stories of people separated from dying relatives, in
need of urgent medical assistance in Australia, and yet
who could not get any
engagement from their government to consider their personal situation. The
existing legal protections were
simply ineffective and basically disregarded by
the government. It took us months even to find a relevant part of the
Commonwealth
to act as respondent to these complaints, landing eventually with
the Department of Infrastructure.
The existing mechanisms are simply insufficient and do not provide the human
rights protections that all people in Australia are entitled
Without comprehensive legal protection, education and other measures to
promote an understanding of human rights, and the processes
for monitoring
compliance with them, Australia is not fully meeting its obligations to ensure
that the human rights of all Australians
are respected, protected and fulfilled.
We are also letting so many people down – when human rights abuses
continue hidden
and unseen.
To say that our existing protections are good enough is not only complacent,
contemptuous
of those we have let down.
A Human Rights Act is not the only answer, and it will not work by
itself. This is why the Commission recommended that it be accompanied
substantial reform to embed consideration of human rights into the planning and
development of legislation and policy. This substantive
structural reform,
endorsed strongly by the majority of the PJCHR, will lead to a greater level of
rights-mindedness and ultimately
better human rights outcomes.
It didn’t make a difference in Victoria
The Coalition members said that, during COVID-19, the Human Rights Charter in
Victoria did not protect citizens from ‘draconian
overreach’,
nor had the
human rights instruments in the ACT, Victoria and Queensland ‘influenced
any positive outcomes’.
They considered that the Commission’s model ‘would simply entrench
the failures of these existing state and territory’
provisions.
In contrast, Rob Hulls, the instigator of the Victorian Charter of Rights and
Responsibilities spoke strongly at the Commission’s
Free + Equal
conference about how the Charter had been vital in cultural change in the public
sector, moving consideration of rights
impacts ‘from the periphery of
government to the core’
and that it was the cultural change that was ‘more important, probably,
than any other part of the
He said that the
impacts had included ‘something as simple’ as getting a shower
curtain for a woman in aged care to protect
The rejection in the dissenting report of the validity of the specific
illustrations of the effective and positive impact that the
legislation in the
ACT, Victoria and Queensland had had in those jurisdictions, trivialises the
very real and human story of people
like the woman of whom Rob Hulls spoke
compiled by the Human Rights Law Centre, upon
which those illustrations drew.
With respect to some limitations in effectiveness during
dissenting report argued as a reason for showing the ineffectiveness of Human
Rights Acts in places like Victoria, rather
undermining
the case for
human rights protections in legislation, they suggest where such protections
strengthened –
as in the proposed model included in the
PJCHR report. Such an argument also ignores the real and practical impact that
Rights Acts
have during COVID – as set out in a
specific section of the
The majority report cited the Victorian Equal Opportunity & Human Rights
Commission, which described the Charter as ‘a vital
mechanism to frame
concerns expressed by organisations and community members that public health
measures unfairly limited their human
rights’. VEOHRC highlighted
instances of direct Charter impact:
The Charter required that public authorities considered and acted in
accordance with human rights in decisions made by them to introduce
public health measures, as well as in the implementation of public health
orders. The Charter remained relevant to decisions
by the Chief Health Officer
public health orders.
Furthermore, in 2021 the government introduced a new legal
framework to manage pandemics – setting out how the Charter applies
making of pandemic orders, with new checks and balances designed to further
embed human rights considerations into government
And as the Hon Pamela Tate AM KC observed in evidence before the Committee in
August 2023,
at least people ... were able to come to a court and have a court carefully
dissect whether the particular restrictions that had been
placed on their
freedom, including a curfew, were a defensible interference with human rights,
given the importance of the objectives
of the curfew, or whether, in fact, they
were a breach of an obligation of human rights ... There was a provision of an
framework which enabled people who had a grievance to have that
grievance intelligently considered in a formal and analytical
Surrendering to an “unelected and unaccountable
The dissenting report said that ‘it is against the public interest for
the Parliament to surrender their responsibility to defend
human rights to the
unelected judiciary’.
ignores the fact that the role of the judiciary remains unchanged.
Given the clear constraints of the separation of powers, the
Commission’s model retains the principle of parliamentary supremacy.
is no power for the courts to declare legislation invalid on the basis that it
is incompatible with human rights.
Instead, the Human Rights Act would be a powerful statement by the Parliament
that departments, agencies and public servants should
act in a way that is
compatible with human rights, and that legislation should be interpreted, so far
as reasonably possible, in
a way that is compatible with human rights.
The role of the courts would be to carry out these two tasks set by
Parliament: determining human rights disputes, and interpreting
legislation.
And litigation is
the point. In the context of the unlawful
discrimination jurisdiction under the federal Discrimination Acts it is the
possibility of litigation
that provides the leverage to the whole process
of seeking redress and, in appropriate cases, a pathway to enforceable remedies.
And only a small percentage of conciliated matters ever get anywhere near a
court. But without the possibility of a remedial pathway
to the courts, we are
stuck with the existing paper tiger jurisdiction of human rights complaints. The
recommended cause of action
would make the Commission’s model stronger
than the state and territory models and more effective.
As one committee member expressed it during the hearings for the inquiry, the
late Peta Murphy MP, the benefit of a Human Rights Act
‘is not necessarily
the litigation that one might be able to commence based on it, but the benefit
of driving a human rights
culture within the Public
And, moreover,
concerns about an increase in litigation have not manifested in relation to
human rights instruments in Australia,
the UK or New
As for the remark about our judiciary being ‘unelected’, this is
of our judiciary and the bulwark of its independence.
The dissenting report seems overly reflective of the US model of rights
protection, which is a constitutional one. The Commission’s
a constitutional model. It is
like the US. It is a
dialogue model – one recommended in the National Consultation
Committee’s report in 2009. Dialogue
models grant each branch of
government a distinct role to play, in line with the ordinary institutional
functions each performs.
Most significantly, they do
involve the
ability of the judicial branch to override legislation of the parliament. The
‘quasi-Constitutional’ in
It will create excessive uncertainty in
determination
The dissenting report says that human rights involve ‘abstract and
vague concepts’
judges are not equipped to deal with and the consequence of this would be an
increased politicisation of the judiciary that
would be entirely undesirable.
Parliamentarians, they said, are ‘more capable of weighing community
expectations as opposed
They referred to
the experience in the UK, stating that the PJCHR’s equivalent body in the
Human Rights Committee ‘can
be a more effective defender of human rights
than a judiciary acting under the framework of a Human Rights
What this argument
ignores is that the Human Rights Committee is working through the lens of the
UK’s own Human Rights Act
– and not the international treaties which
are the lens for the PJCHR – and the UK Courts have a jurisdiction under
Act, which even includes a power to declare legislation incompatible with
the Human Rights Act.
With respect to the ‘excessive uncertainty’ in interpretation,
all legislative provisions – indeed also common law
require interpretation and, through interpretation, develop jurisprudential
certainty. That is the role of our independent
judiciary. Common law concepts
like ‘foreseeability’, the ‘neighbour principle’, the
‘reasonable man’,
and concepts included in legislation, may all be
attacked similarly. The model proposed focuses on setting out rights, including
economic, social and cultural rights, in a way that would be justiciable.
What the Commission’s model provides is a
ground between
a constitutionally-suspect approach that would grant too much interpretive power
to the courts to alter the meaning
of legislation and an approach that would
simply be akin to the existing common law principle of legality. The model also
a sensible framework for navigating the intersection of varied rights
and freedoms.
Some other concerns about the specific wording of rights can be navigated
when any Exposure Draft Bill is put to the public for consideration.
The AHRC model departs from international
This argument is made in the dissenting report in two ways. First, it is said
that the Commission’s model does not use the
language of
articles 7 and 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
in relation to freedom
of religion. This was addressed in the PJCHR draft by inserting the exact
language from the Convention. The
Commission’s model was a bit tidier, but
it’s not a matter of real concern.
Secondly, it is said that a general limitations clause, based on a
proportionality test, departs from the variety of different limitation
in the ICCPR.
But for a Human Rights Act to be workable, it needs to be easy to understand
and apply, and we considered a single limitation clause
to be preferable to
separate limitation clauses for each right. The Commission’s proposal,
focused on proportionality, is consistent
with guidance from the Human Rights
Committee that rights can only be limited when the limitation is necessary,
reasonable and proportionate
to a legitimate object.
We don’t need a Human Rights Act because we have an
enviable human rights tradition
The Coalition members of the PJCHR contended that ‘Australia’s
enviable human rights tradition is secured within the very
fabric of Australian
society, rather than through legislation or constitutional
provisions’.
I agree that a Human Rights Act is ‘not a guarantee of achieving
protection of human
designed to be. It is a mechanism of building responsibility through cultural
change and providing tools of accountability
and remedies — those
conceptual bookends referred to earlier.
In his powerful opening keynote speech at the ‘Free + Equal
conference’ in Sydney on 7 June, Michael Kirby said that ‘sometimes
you need some deep principles as tools’. ‘Parliament doesn’t
always fix things up’, he said, ‘Parliament
is good in fixing up the
problems of majorities.’.
In the complementary second part of the keynote presentation, Australian lawyer
Jennifer Robinson, speaking of her experience in
the UK with the Human Rights
Act, said that it was ‘a modest but fundamentally important step’
and that it was the impact
in ‘the upstream’ that had been much more
significant than litigation.
one example of its practical application, she said that ‘the only
thing’ that then stood between Julian Assange and
the extradition demanded
by the US for so long was the Human Rights
Without the tools that a Human Rights Act would provide, to build a culture
and a responsibility of rights-mindedness, we are left
passive system
of rights protection
. And in a passive system of rights protection –
‘the very fabric of Australian society’, to which the Coalition
members of the Committee referred, human rights abuses may go unchecked until
the case becomes so compelling that the Government
establishes a Royal
Commission.
Our experience with Royal Commissions into Robodebt, the abuse experienced by
persons with disability and in aged care, have exposed
egregious human rights
breaches, and show how our existing systems are just not adequate. Complacency
and a rosy glow about the ‘incomparably
robust’ nature of democracy
in Australia are shown to be
The need for better human rights protections in Australia can be summarised
by one simple proposition: we should have proper protection
of human rights at
the national level because everybody’s human rights matter, all of the
time. Access to human rights protection
should not depend on where a person
lives, or which level of government carries the responsibility.
This has to change. Not another Aged Care or Robodebt Royal Commission!
VI Final Thoughts
Australia was, proudly, a founding signatory to each of the three
international instruments that together comprise the ‘International
of Rights’, but without comprehensive legal protection, education and
other measures to promote an understanding of human
rights, and the processes
for monitoring compliance with human rights, Australia is not fully meeting its
obligations to ensure that
the human rights of all Australians are respected,
protected and fulfilled. For a country that prides itself on giving the fair go,
and which values decency and dignity, it is troubling that we do not give
meaning to our long-held values in our national legal framework.
And yet there is a state of denial by some about this lack of protection
– as is so palpably evident in the dissenting report.
Commission’s recent national conference on human rights on 7 June,
Professor George Williams described this denial as
akin to walking into a
thunderstorm and pretending that you have an umbrella.
Let’s protect people’s rights instead of having another
generation of Royal Commissions forensically examining the damage
we inflicted
on people by not respecting their rights in the first place. Or, after
generations of harm, to see our state and national
leaders apologising for
actions of the past.
‘Our governments are good at many things’, said Michael Kirby,
and ‘we are one of the world’s oldest parliamentary
democracies’. But he reminded us,
it was our government that enabled the stolen generations, the dispossession
of Indigenous land, the laws oppressing women, LGBTQ+
people and people with
disabilities. The aged care and robodebt royal commissions make it clear that
anyone’s human rights
can be trampled by government decisions at any time
– not just people in minority groups. History shows that parliament and
public officials do not always do well at protecting individual human rights.
Particularly for minorities.
That is why we need to embed the principles espoused in the UDHR in our
national laws, as tools to support parliament in protecting
human rights. Doing
so will ensure members of parliament are mindful of the core principles that
unite us as human beings. It will
oversee are consistent with those
principles.
Mr Kirby’s hope was that future generations would read these core
principles in a national Human Rights Act – on their
tablets and iPads
– much as he cherished the copy of the UDHR that his teacher, Mr Gorringe,
gave him as a 10-year-old.
Then they will know their rights are, finally, protected by the law of this
country. Parliament will still have the last word, but
the people will have new
means to get action before inquiries and apologies are needed.
Rosalind Croucher is an Emeritus Professor at Macquarie
University. President, Australian Human Rights Commission (30 July
7–29 July 2024).
This article draws on themes that the author has developed over
a series of presentations on the Free and Equal work of the Australian
Rights Commission and the National Lecture for the Australian Institute of
Administrative Law 2024. I am appreciative of the
comments by the anonymous
Universal Declaration of
Human Rights
, GA Res 217A (III), UN GAOR, 3rd sess, 183rd plen mtg, UN Doc
A/810 (10 December 1948). The Charter of the United Nations was signed
June 1945 which led to the establishment of the UN as an international
organisation designed to end war and to promote peace,
justice and better living
for all mankind. See:
<https://www.un.org/en/sections/history-united-nations-charter/1945-san-francisco-conference/index.html>.
‘History of the Declaration’,
United Nations
<https://www.un.org/en/about-us/udhr/history-of-the-declaration>.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights
, opened for signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS
(entered into force 23 March 1976) (‘
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
, opened for signature 16 December
(entered into force 3 January 1976)
Manfred Nowak,
UN Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights
(NP Engel, 2
ed, 2005) xx. It
took another ten years for the Covenants to enter into force.
Apart from the Second Optional
Protocol to the ICCPR on the abolition of the death penalty, which likely would
have been supported
by both sides of politics, it is an equal split for the
remaining 20 signing and ratification moments.
Andrew Byrnes, Hilary
Charlesworth and Gabrielle McKinnon,
Bills of Rights in Australia: History,
Politics and Law
(UNSW Press, 2009) (‘
Bills of Rights in
), attempts are summarised in ch 2, ‘A Short history
of Australian Bills of Rights’.
Human Rights Act 2004
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Human Rights Act 2019
Bills of Rights in
(n 8) 29–30.
Attorney-General’s
Department (Cth),
National Human Rights Consultation Report
September 2009) 18: see Recommendations 17–31 (‘
National Human
Rights Consultation Report
‘Free and Equal
– A National Conversation On Human Rights’
Australian Human
Rights Commission
(Web Page, 10 December 2021)
<https://humanrights.gov.au/our-work/rights-and-freedoms/publications/free-and-equal-reform-agenda-federal-discrimination-laws>.
‘A National
for Australia’,
Australian Human Rights Commission
Page, 7 March 2023)
<https://humanrights.gov.au/human-rights-act-for-australia#:~:text=Australia%20has%20strong%20sense%20of,how%20they%20can%20be%20protected.>.
Australian Human Rights
Commission,
Free & Equal: Revitalising Australia’s Commitment to
Human Rights: Free & Equal Final Report 2023
(Final Report, 2023).
‘Free + Equal Human
Rights Conference 2024’,
Australian Human Rights Commission
<https://humanrights.gov.au/free-and-equal-human-rights-conference-2024>.
Australian Human Rights
Commission (n 14) 22.
Racial Discrimination Act
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
Discrimination Act 1992
Age Discrimination Act
The different complaints jurisdictions are considered in Rosalind Croucher,
‘“Seeking Equal Dignity Without Discrimination”—The
Australian Human Rights Commission and the Handling of Complaints’
Australian Law Journal
Human Rights Legislation
Amendment Act 2017
(Cth). The previous s 46 required the Minister to cause a
copy of every report to be tabled within 15 sitting days after the report
received by the Minister. The 2017 amendments made the reporting requirements in
relation to human rights and ILO 111 complaints
discretionary
32A. Item 17 in the amending legislation states that such ‘discretionary
reports ... are not required to be tabled’:
Explanatory Memorandum, [66].
The explanation offered is that the amendment ‘is not intended to reduce
public scrutiny of Commission
reports. Rather, it is intended to reduce the
administrative and resource cost of producing reports for the Commission’:
Explanatory
Memorandum, [67].
They are published on the
Commission’s website:
<https://humanrights.gov.au/our-work/legal/publications>.
Care, Dignity and
Respect: Royal Commission into Aged Care Quality and Safety
(Final Report,
February 2021);
Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme
(Report, July
Royal Commission into Violence, Abuse, Neglect and Exploitation of
People with Disability
(Final Report, September 2023).
‘Trust In Public
Institutions: Trends and Implications for Economic Security’,
Department of Economic and Social Affairs
(Web Page, July 2021) <
https://www.un.org/development/desa/dspd/2021/07/trust-public-institutions/
Luke Henriques-Gomes,
‘Robodebt: Court Approves $1.8bn Settlement for Victims of
Government’s “Shameful”
The Guardian
(online, 11 June 2021) <
https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2021/jun/11/robodebt-court-approves-18bn-settlement-for-victims-of-governments-shameful-failure
Australian Human Rights
Commission,
Position Paper: A
Human Rights Act
for Australia
Paper, March 2023) 251. This formulation was developed by the Law Council in its
Human Rights Charter policy.
However, because human
rights claims are different in kind from complaints of unlawful discrimination,
the Commission proposes additional
termination grounds to apply to human rights
complaints. These would enable a claim to be fast-tracked to the court where
an imminent risk of irreparable harm.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into
Australia’s Human Rights Framework
(Full Report, May 2024)
Inquiry into Australia’s Human Rights Framework
Ibid 299 [9.7].
Ibid xvii [1.1].
Ibid xvii [1.3].
Ibid 57 [5.2].
Ibid 299 [9.7].
Ibid 299 [9.8].
Ibid xxi–xxviii.
National Human Rights
Consultation Report
(n 11) 96. The Commission noted that many of the most
pressing human rights concerns facing people in Australia relate to economic,
social and cultural rights, especially access to adequate health care, education
and housing: Australian Human Rights Commission,
‘Submission to the
National Human Rights Consultation Committee’,
Australian Human Rights
(Submission Report, 2009) 9. The Committee commissioned a Colmar
Brunton Social Research report in support of its conclusions: Colmar
Social Research,
National Human Rights Consultation—community research
(Report, 2009).
Inquiry into
Australia’s Human Rights Framework Report
(n 27) 320–6
[9.73]–[9.89] .
[5.73]–[5.95].
A misplaced criticism in the
dissenting report: ibid 334 [1.8].
Ibid 333 [1.6].
Inquiry into
Australia’s Human Rights Framework Report
(n 27) 333 [1.7].
Bills of Rights
in Australia
See, eg, Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Traditional Rights and Freedoms: Encroachments by
Commonwealth Laws
(Report 129, December 2015) ch 2. I had the privilege to
lead this inquiry at the ALRC.
Inquiry into
Australia’s Human Rights Framework Report
(n 27) 298–9
[9.6]–[9.7].
Michael Kirby,
‘History Shows Australian Laws Have Left Minorities Marginalised. A
Would Help Fix that’,
The Guardian
(online, 30 June
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/article/2024/jun/30/australia-human-rights-act>.
of this OpEd reflects Mr Kirby’s remarks in his keynote address
at the Free + Equal Conference, 7 June 2024.
Kirby (n 44).
Inquiry into
Australia’s Human Rights Framework Report
(n 27) 75–8
[5.55]–[5.64].
Racial Discrimination Act
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
Discrimination Act 1992
Age Discrimination Act 2004
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate, 25 September 1979 (Peter Durack,
Attorney-General).
The first report I signed as
President was number 119.
Inquiry into
Australia’s Human Rights Framework Report
(n 27) 346 [1.78].
Ibid 346 [1.77].
Rob Hulls (Speech, Free +
Equal Human Rights Conference, 7 June 2024) 00:52:32.
Ibid 00:54:19.
Ibid 00:53:23.
‘Charters of Human
Rights Make Our Lives Better: Here Are 101 Cases Showing How’,
Rights Law Centre
(Web Page) <
https://www.humanrightsact.org.au/101-cases
Human Rights Law Centre
’). See also Caitlin Reiger,
‘Australia is the Only Liberal Democracy Without a
Human Rights Act
– That Could Finally Change’,
(Blog Post, 11 June
<https://rightnow.org.au/opinion/australia-human-rights-act-change/>.
Inquiry into
Australia’s Human Rights Framework Report
[1.78]–[1.79].
Human Rights Law
(n 55) 58–65, Cases 89–101
<https://www.humanrightsact.org.au/101-cases>.
Inquiry into
Australia’s Human Rights Framework Report
(n 27) 68 [5.31].
Ibid 69 [5.32].
Ibid 333 [1.7].
Ibid 337 [1.30].
Inquiry into
Australia’s Human Rights Framework Report
(n 27) 314 [9.52].
Ibid 88 [5.93]. See, eg, the
submission of the Law Council of Australia, quoted at 88 [5.92].
Ibid 338 [1.37].
Ibid 338 [1.31].
Ibid 338 [1.33].
Ibid 337 [1.29].
Inquiry into
Australia’s Human Rights Framework Report
(n 27) 334 [1.13].
Ibid 335 [1.17].
Michael Kirby,
‘Revitalising Australia’s Human Rights Framework’ (Speech,
Free + Equal Human Rights Conference,
7 June 2024) 00:13:46.
Jennifer Robinson (Speech,
Free + Equal Human Rights Conference, 7 June 2024) 00:26:39.
Ibid 00:29:13.
Inquiry into
Australia’s Human Rights Framework Report
(n 27) 336 [1.24].
Kirby (n 44).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (120 KB)
PDF format (314 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter