URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/37.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Allsop, J --- "Continuing judicial education: the Australian experience" [2013] LegEdDig 37; (2013) 21(3) Legal Education Digest 18
Continuing judicial education: the Australian experience
Judicial Review
, Vol 10, No.4, 2012, pp 439-454
As with the need for continuing education in other professions, the need for
continuing judicial education is now widely accepted
in Australia. Judicial
education bodies have provided programs for Australian judicial officers since
the late 1980s. Unlike other
professional education however, the purpose of
continuing judicial education extends beyond the need to improve professional
and performance. The ultimate purpose of judicial education is to
improve the quality of justice within the paradigm of reconciling
‘divergent and to some extent inconsistent requirements of public
accountability, judicial independence, and efficiency
in the administration of
The Australian court system operates at the Commonwealth, State and Territory
Within these jurisdictions, the judicial system is one of three branches of
government comprising the executive, the legislature and
the judiciary. There is
a separation of the judicial branch from the other branches of government to
provide a structural mechanism
for supervision of the lawfulness of the exercise
of power by the executive and the constitutionality of legislation by
Parliament.
Judicial independence is an inherent requirement of this system and
is a central value of the rule of law. Within this system, the
duty of a judge
is ‘to administer justice according to the law, without fear or favour,
and without regard to the wishes or
policy of the executive government’.
An essential attribute of judicial independence is judicial skill and
Australia is a common law system in which judicial officers are appointed by
the executive branch of government. A successful and
lengthy legal career,
usually as a barrister or solicitor or, sometimes, as a legal academic, is
almost always a precondition for
judicial appointment. Most judges are appointed
aged above 50, some below the age of 50. Judicial appointments are based on
The Australian system moves experienced legal professionals within an
adversarial system to a judicial position. It is expected that
the new judge has
that stock of knowledge built up in his or her career so that he or she can
commence work immediately. The place
of judicial education at this point is to
assist in the transition from advocate to impartial adjudicator.
In Australia, in recent years, there has been public discussion about whether
the appointment of judges should rest solely with the
executive. Some have urged
independent advisory bodies to recommend appointments.
In 2008, the federal Attorney-General introduced new processes for appointing
judges and magistrates to federal courts, including:
(1) broad consultation to
identify suitable persons; (2) notification of appointment criteria; (3) notices
in the media seeking expressions
of interest and nominations; and (4) the
appointment of advisory panels to assess expressions of interest and nominations
develop a shortlist of suitable candidates.
In 2009, a Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee of the national
legislature inquired into Australia’s judicial
system and the role of
federal judges. The inquiry examined: (1) procedures for the appointment and
method of termination of judges;
(2) the term of appointment, including the
desirability of a compulsory retirement age; and (3) the merit of full-time,
or other arrangements.
The Committee recommended limited reform to the judicial selection and
appointment process, including the adoption of a protocol for
appointments to
the High Court, greater transparency by publicising the number of nominations
and applications received for each
federal vacancy, and the wide advertising of
vacancies. The Federal Government announced in October 2010 that it would adopt
recommendation in part, but would preserve the appointment of judicial
officers by the executive government.
Vacancies for positions as a District Court judge, magistrate or specialist
tribunal member are advertised in the media and a selection
panel comprising the
head of jurisdiction or authority, a retired judicial officer, a prominent
community member and a leading member
of the profession is convened to assess
candidates. The selection panel makes recommendations to the Attorney General
who advises
the Governor about judicial appointments. The Governor, with the
advice of the Executive Council, formally appoints a judicial officer
Constitution
1902 (NSW).
A judicial officer in Australia holds office during good behaviour: Since the
Act of Settlement 1701
(UK), a judge enjoys security of tenure as a
necessary protection against the undue influence of other branches of government
can only be removed from office following an address from both Houses of
Parliament for proven misbehaviour or incapacity.
In New South Wales, a judicial officer can only be removed following the
tabling in both Houses of Parliament of a report by the Conduct
Division of the
Judicial Commission of NSW. The Conduct Division is constituted when a complaint
made to the Judicial Commission
ability is not summarily dismissed and is referred to the Conduct Division in
Judicial Officers Act
. In December
2009, the federal Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee recommended
the establishment of a federal judicial
commission modelled on the Judicial
Commission of NSW.
Given that the grounds for removal of a judicial officer are for proved
misbehaviour or incapacity, the necessary aims of judicial
education must be to
promote the highest standards of behaviour befitting judicial office and to
foster judicial capacity. Because
a successful legal career is a precondition
for judicial appointment, judicial education is directed at already experienced
professionals. The need is better expressed not as a need for judicial
, but rather for judicial
, which focuses on
induction, orientation and transition to the Bench, and then on a continuous
renewal of professional education
and a sharpening of judicial skills. It is
beyond doubt that the judicial function requires professional skills of a very
high order.
It is also necessary for judicial officers to have appropriate knowledge in
the subject matters of the disputes to be heard. Appellate
court judges are
required to formulate, elucidate and elaborate general principles of law and
where relevant, policy, and identify
possible error and correct possible
The overarching purposes of judicial education are to facilitate just and
efficient dispute resolution, and to preserve judicial independence
accountability. Judicial education provides a mechanism to achieve this by
equipping judges to serve their courts, which in turn,
serve the community. Both
the individual accountability of judicial officers and the institutional
accountability of courts enhance
the quality of the administration of justice.
By providing an effective program of judicial education, judicial independence
accountability are not opposed, but work towards the same end.
Formal judicial education commenced in common law countries in 1963 when the
American National Judicial College was established and
then Chief Justice Warren
Burger called for judges nationally to participate in continuing judicial
Australia followed the North American lead some 20 years later with the
formation by judges of the Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration
(AIJA) in 1975. In his 1983 Boyer lectures broadcast on ABC radio, then Federal
Court Justice Michael Kirby called
for formalised judicial education to assist
newly appointed judicial officers in their transition to the Bench. It took
another decade
before any permanent funding and infrastructure was dedicated to
judicial education with the formation of the Judicial Commission
1986 and the AIJA Secretariat in 1987. In 1986, legislation was enacted in
New South Wales to establish the
Judicial Commission of NSW as both a
judicial complaints and judicial education body run by the executive government.
The legislation
was enacted in response to a perceived crisis in public
confidence in the justice system in the wake of criminal charges against
Court judge, the conviction of a former Chief Magistrate, and allegations of
inconsistent sentencing in the District Court.
Judicial pressure on the
government led to substantial amendments to the legislation and the Judicial
Commission was ultimately established
as an independent statutory corporation
with its staff wholly independent of the Public Service. The vitally important
features of
the Judicial Commission are that it is independent from the
executive and it deals with
complaints about judicial officers and
the education of judicial officers
The Judicial College of Victoria began operating in November 2002 to provide
judicial education, professional development, publications
and resources for
judicial officers. It is funded by the State government as is the Judicial
Commission of NSW. No other Australian
State has a similar dedicated
organisation.
At the national level, the Judicial Conference of Australia was formed in
1993. Its governing council is drawn from judges and magistrates
Australian jurisdictions. The Judicial Conference organises annual colloquiums
and produces resources and publications in
relation to the ‘public
interest in maintaining a strong and independent judiciary within a democratic
society that adheres
to the rule of law’. The National Judicial College of
Australia (NJCA) was established in May 2002 following an inquiry and
recommendations of the Australian Law Reform Commission. This organisation is
controlled by a governing council, the majority of
whose members are judicial
officers and is funded by contributions from the Commonwealth and some State and
Territory governments.
The College provides professional development for
Commonwealth judicial officers and other participating States and Territories
plans and coordinates judicial education at the national level for federal
and State judicial officers. The AIJA continues to provide
research, educational
resources and publications in relation to court administration and the judicial
system. The AIJA has developed
courses in relation to gender awareness, cultural
awareness, court technology and case management. It is funded by the Standing
of Attorneys-General and by subscription income from its
membership.
Along with formal judicial education bodies, most courts in each federal and
State jurisdictions, with the exception of New South
Wales, have had for many
years their own education committee, and many courts run annual conferences and
professional development
Because Australia’s justice system operates at both the federal and
State levels, and there are different court structures at
each State, Territory
and Commonwealth level, formalised judicial education has developed
incrementally in federal and State jurisdictions
over the past two decades.
Until the formation of the NJCA in 2002, there had been no attempt to plan and
coordinate judicial education
at a national level unlike the position in
Britain, Canada, America and New Zealand.
The diffuse structure of judicial education in Australasia became the focus
of a review undertaken by the NJCA in 2009. Mr George
Thomson of the National
Judicial Institute of Canada conducted a wide review into the NJCN’s work
and he recommended a more
collegiate approach to judicial education by the
various State and national bodies referred to above together with the New
Institute of Judicial Studies. The Australian Council of Chief Justices
has endorsed this approach. To achieve this objective, Mr
Thomson recommended
that curriculum development be made a priority and the various bodies agree as
to which organisation would develop
particular modules of education. The
intention would then be for the organisations to share the programs they have
developed with
other organisations and trainers would be encouraged to assist in
the delivery of these programs to all jurisdictions. The aim of
this approach is
to encourage maximum return from limited funding and resources.
The Thomson review also led to two faculty development workshops being held
in Australia in 2010. The focus of the workshops was to
develop course design
skills for judicial officers with the aim to establish a group of judicial
officers with ongoing responsibility
for course design. Judicial officers
participating in the workshops were involved in designing a portion of a module
using sound
adult education design principles. The modules, once completed, may
then be used in future by the participating judicial education
bodies as part of
their curriculum.
In October 2009, a meeting of Australian and New Zealand judicial education
bodies agreed to contribute to an electronic clearinghouse/judicial
past programs and other relevant materials which would be accessible by all
judicial education bodies and by all judicial
The NJCA initiated a process in 2004 to prepare and promote a national
standard or benchmark for the amount of time and funding that
available for each member of the Australian judiciary for professional
development. This led to the development of the
standard which has been endorsed
by the Council of Chief Justices of Australia, Chief Judges, Chief Magistrates,
the Judicial Conference
of Australia, the Association of Australian Magistrates,
the AIJA and judicial education bodies. The standard was reviewed in late
and following this review, the standard continues to be:
Each judicial officer should be able to spend at least five days each
calendar year participating in professional development activities
relating to
the judicial officer’s responsibilities.
This standard need not be met in each year but can be met on the basis of
professional development activities engaged in over a period
of three years.
This standard can be met, in part, by self-directed professional
development.
Judicial officers should be released from court duties to enable them to meet
this standard. However, judicial officers should commit
some private time to
meet the standard.
The Judicial Commission works closely with the education committees of each
court in New South Wales to promote judge-led judicial
education. This is in
keeping with the Commission’s obligation to consult, and takes into
account the benefit of participant
involvement at various stages, including
program design. These committees regularly meet to discuss the proposed judicial
programs for their particular court. The Judicial Commission’s
professional staff attend education committee meetings and provide
educational
input and support. Additionally, a Standing Advisory Committee on Judicial
Education (SAC) was established with a representative
from each of the court
committees. The SAC provides general guidelines and informs each jurisdiction of
the activities in the various
courts. As well as working with the court
education committees, the Judicial Commission consults widely, and shares
information and
ideas, with other Australian and international education
The Judicial Commission recognises that effective judicial education has to
be based on sound adult education design principles and
focus on experiential
and interactive learning, that is, learning based on experience and enhancing
judicial skills. The Commission
has been influenced by the work of David Kolb
and the National Judicial Institute of Canada.
The content of these interactive sessions includes: (1) communication skills;
(2) courtroom management skills; (3) efficiency skills;
(4) judgment writing
skills; and (5) social and cultural awareness training.
The Commission continues to provide some traditional ‘black
letter’ style law sessions and material to update judicial
officers on
current legal developments and emerging trends.
Although not universally agreed in Australia, the Judicial Commission’s
view is that examining complaints about judicial officers
allows the Commission
to monitor patterns in the nature and scope of complaints that may be addressed
in specific judicial education
sessions. Information gathered from complaints is
used to develop specific education sessions on topics such as effective
communication, domestic violence, sexual assault issues and cultural
awareness training.
The Commission offers an extensive conference and seminar program for
judicial officers, ranging from induction courses for new appointees
specialist conferences on specific aspects of law, procedure and judicial skills
and techniques.
Some educational sessions are held during court time; many others are
conducted after court hours and on weekends in judicial officers’
time. Approximately 1550 days of continuing judicial education were attended
by judges and magistrates between July 2009 and
June 2010. Attendance by
judicial officers at the Commission’s programs is voluntary.
The Judicial Commission, along with other judicial education bodies in
Australia, has conducted successful judgment writing and oral
workshops for judicial officers in recent years. These interactive workshops
ability to write and deliver clear,
concise, well-structured judgments.
The Commission has also offered judicial officers the opportunity to
participate in field trips, visits to gaols and correctional
centres, and
weekend visits to Aboriginal communities with the aim of increasing awareness
among judicial officers about contemporary
Aboriginal society, customs and
traditions, and their effect on Aboriginal people in the justice system. Other
Australian judicial
education providers run similar programs.
The Commission’s conference program is supplemented by an active
publishing program. The Judicial Commission provides to each
New South Wales
judicial officer a full range of publications on appointment, including: (1) a
bench book relating to their court’s
practice and procedure (
Court Bench Book
Criminal Trial Courts Bench Book
Sentencing Bench Book
Equality before the Law Bench Book
Civil Trials Bench Book
Sexual Assault Handbook
Judicial Officers’ Bulletin
The Judicial Review
Sentencing Trends and Issues papers
; (9) education monographs; (10)
research monographs; (11) DVDs on
The Role of the Judge, Concurrent Evidence,
Circle Sentencing
; and (12) conference paper database.
The Judicial Information Research System (JIRS) is an online decision support
system available for all New South Wales judicial officers.
It contains
information on all aspects of sentencing law, including case law, legislation
and sentencing statistics. It is designed
to provide judicial officers with
timely information to assist in decision-making and is updated regularly. JIRS
is the most effective
and direct way to communicate information about the latest
legal developments. The system operates as an intranet.
All educational sessions conducted by the Judicial Commission are evaluated
for their effectiveness in order to: (1) ensure that the
sessions provide useful
assistance and benefits to judicial officers in the performance of their
professional duties; and (2) provide
sessions meet the needs of judicial officers.
All judicial officers are encouraged to provide feedback based on specified
learning objectives for each educational activity by completing
The Chief Justice of Western Australia, the Honourable Wayne Martin, recently
observed that this is an exciting time for judicial
education in Australia. The
aims of judicial education will continue to be the promotion of the highest
standards of behaviour befitting
judicial office and to foster judicial capacity
and skills. The purposes of judicial education will continue to be the
development
of judicial skills, the preservation of judicial independence and to
provide individual and institutional accountability. Australian
education providers are now slowly but surely working towards a more collegiate
and national approach to the design and
delivery of education programs which
will meet the diverse needs of judicial officers.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (713 KB)
PDF format (3.39 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter