URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntTBLawRw/2004/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Irish, Charles R; Peng, Shin-Yi --- "The Personalities and Policies Affecting US Trade with East and Southeast Asia: The Implications of the Trade Promotion Authority" [2004] IntTBLawRw 3; (2004) 9 International Trade and Business Law Review 45
The Personalities and Policies Affecting US Trade with East and Southeast Asia: The Implications of the Trade Promotion Authority
Introduction
The Environment of US Trade Policies
The Domestic economy
The Domestic Politics
Congress and the President on international economic affairs
The even split between the Democrats and the Republicans
The widespread sense of being treated unfairly
The US in World Politics
The Realities of International negotiations
People involved in the formulation of US international trade policies
Members of the executive branch
Key Members of Congress
The Content and Context of the US trade policies: the background of the renewal of the fast track authority
Trade policies of the Bush Administration
A close examination of the Bush Administration’s recent actions affecting international trade
Tempered protectionism for the American Steel industry
Agricultural subsidies – from liberalisation to protectionism and back
The road from the Multifibre agreement to the Agreementon Textiles and Clothing
The US position on LDCs’ adherence to the TRIPs Agreement
The implications of the Singapore-US Free Trade Agreement
Free trade or protectionism: which will it be for the Bush Administration?
The trends and prospects in the Coha Round: the impact of the passage of TPA on future US trade negotiations with Asian economies
‘Either progress or collapse’: is the bicycle falling down in Doha?
The price to pay at Doha for achieving the TPA
The prize to gain at Doha after the TPA struggle
Asia’s possible responses
The possible extension of FTA: racing towards regional trading arrangements?
The potential positions and alliances in the WTO
The Personalities and Policies Affecting US Trade with
East and Southeast Asia: The Implications of the Trade Promotion
Charles R Irish
& Shin-yi Peng
Introduction
There is a close economic interdependence between the US and East and
Southeast Asia. Economic relations between the US and Asia comprise
goods, services and capital, and the movement of people for temporary employment
or permanent migration. Between the US
and East Asia, exports from the US to
East Asia have exceeded those to any individual country except Canada and over
two million
jobs in the US were dependent on the East Asian market in the early
In Southeast Asia, trade between ASEAN
has tripled over the past decade. In mid 1997, the East and Southeast Asian
region experienced the most sudden reversal
of growth of any region in the last
50 years outside of war conditions. The economic interdependence between US and
the East and
Southeast Asian market, however, was not dramatically changed by
the Asian crisis. Currently, the US is the largest market for ASEAN
and ASEAN is the third largest overseas market for the US.
US exports to ASEAN reached US$23.1 billion in the first half of 2001,
from the same period of 2000.
US investment in the ASEAN region at
the end of 2000 stood at slightly under US$52 billion, roughly five times as
large as current
US investment in China.
US investment in ASEAN at
the end of 2003 stood at slightly over US$88 billion, according to figures from
the US Department of Commerce.
However, in the first 11 months of 2003, US
investment fell more than 24% from 2002.
The following tables illustrate East and Southeast Asia’s present close
economic links with the US.
Two-way goods trade between the US and East Asian
(Figures in US$ billions)
The US Trade Deficit Or Surplus (US$)
Two-way Goods Trade (US$)
Deficit, $69 billion
-US exports to Japan totalled $57.6 billion -US imports from Japan totalled
$126.6 billion
The US’s 3rd largest export market7
Deficit, $13 billion
-US exports to Korea totalled $22.2 billion -US imports from Korea totalled
$35.2 billion
Deficit, $83.0 billion
-US exports to China totalled $19.2 billion -US imports from China totalled
$102.3 billion
Deficit, $15.2 billion
-US exports to Taiwan totalled $18.2 billion -US imports from Taiwan
totalled $33.4 billion
10th (and the 5th largest market for US agricultural products)
Surplus, $4.4 billion
-US exports to Hong Kong totalled $14.1billion -US imports from Hong Kong
totalled $9.7 billion
Table 2 Two-way goods trade between the US and ASEAN Economies
(Figures in US$ millions)
US EXPORTS TO ASEAN
US IMPORTS FROM ASEAN
Philippines
Table 3 Trade in services between the US and East Asian
US EXPORTS OF PRIVATE COMMERCIAL SERVICES (INCLUDING MILITARY AND
GOVERNMENT) (US$)
US IMPORTS OF SERVICES (US$)
$34.2 billion
$17.2 billiom
$6.9 billion
$4.2 billion
$4.6 billion
$2.8 billion
$4.7 billion
$3.7 billion
$3.8 billion
$4.1 billion
Table4 The US FDI (foreign direct investment) in East Asian
US FDI (US$)
US FDI CONCENTRATION SECTORS
$55.6billion
Automobile, telecommunications and finance
$9.4 billion
Manufacturing, banking, and petroleum
$9.6 billion
Electronics manufacturing, petroleum, and financial sectors
$7.7 billion
High-tech, finance and wholesale sectors
$23.3 billion
Finance, wholesale services, and manufacturing sectors
The East and Southeast Asian economies have grown faster and more steadily
than any other region in the world. Their past success
has depended largely on
the access opportunities to foreign markets in the last few decades. Their
continued prosperity still relies
on the availability of a free and fair global
market. The above tables illustrate that Asian export dependence on the US is
quite substantial. This means that access to the US market continues to be
crucial for Asian economies. The US trade policy, therefore,
plays a significant
role in the continued economic growth of East and Southeast Asia.
The Environment of US Trade Policies
The US is a large, complex society. Its government is every bit as large and
complex as the society it serves. It is not surprising
then that the environment
affecting trade policies is composed of several different factors which are
often somewhat inconsistent,
and sometimes directly contradictory. The overall
environment has four interrelated components: the domestic economy, the domestic
political picture, the international economic and political situation and the
realities of international negotiations.
The Domestic economy
With a GDP of about $10 trillion, the US economy is the largest in the world.
The US is also the world’s largest exporter with
exports of more than $1
trillion; and it is by far the world’s largest importer, with imports of
close to $1.5 trillion. Although
clouded by uncertainty of war and sluggish
economic growth, the US economy is not depressed. In fact, forecasters show that
the American
economy is expected to grow by a respectable 2.7% in 2002, and 3.4%
Therefore, it does not appear that the economy should be a
major concern for US trade policy makers, save that:
for the last few years, the US has had an enormous deficit in its current
account, which certainly contributed to the rapid recovery
of East and Southeast
Asian regions from the 1997 financial crises. The current account deficit is
continuing to grow. For 2003 it
is forecast to be over $500 billion and will
exceed 5% of the US GDP. If that happens, the US current account deficit will be
times greater than the entire Thai economy. The US will need net capital
inflows of $2 billion per day to sustain it. No wonder that
the IMF considers
the US current account deficit to be one of the biggest threats to the world
the dollar appears to be somewhat overvalued relative to the currencies of
most other industrialised countries and many emerging market
currencies. For
example, according to The Economist’s recent Big Mac index,
the Japanese yen appears to be 19% undervalued against the dollar, the
Australian dollar is 35% undervalued, and over half of the
emerging market
currencies are more than 30% undervalued;
thirty years ago, the US economy was largely self-sufficient. Trade
accounted for about 11% of the GDP and was often regarded as not
having a major
impact on economic growth. Today, the American economy is much more integrated
into the world economy, with trade
accounting for close to 30% of GDP and
exports responsible for about one-quarter of US growth. The greater importance
of international
trade also has increased the number of people adversely
affected by the inevitable dislocations caused by import competition and
technological change. In the 1960s the losers were relatively few and fairly
predictable – textiles, steel and shoes.
However, as trade expanded, so
too did the list of losers who were widely regarded as strengths in the American
economy – consumer
electronics, automobiles, machine tools, and
semi-conductor chips. Although the expansion of trade also increased the number
of winners,
the losers have tended to seek government support for protection
from imports, while the winners have focused on doing business in
globalised economy.
The effects of these changes in the US economy are the subject of continuing
debates; but they certainly raise questions about the
sustainability of American
economic prosperity and they increase the sense of economic insecurity.
The Domestic Politics
There are three significant elements of the American political scene
affecting international trade policies: The first is the extraordinary
the US Congress to influence international trade policies; second is the almost
perfectly even split between the Democrats
and the Republicans in national
politics, with neither side possessing a clear mandate; and, third, is the
widespread sense among
the American public that the US is not treated fairly in
international trade or business.
Congress and the President on international economic
The basic structure of the American system of government anticipates
continuing tension between Congress and the President. During
the last few
decades this tension has been clearly evident in the struggle between Congress
and the President for supremacy on international
economic policies. Congress and
the President have overlapping responsibilities on international economic policy
matters. Congress
generally is responsible for enacting laws. Congress also has
the power ‘to lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts and excises’
and ‘to regulate commerce with foreign nations’. Thus, on
international trade and investment matters, it is Congress
that has broad powers
and it guards these powers very carefully. This is critical to understanding US
international economic laws
and policies: it is Congress, not the President,
which has broad authority to make laws determining US international economic
Congress also is very conscious of its extraordinary powers in
international economic policy matters and is not shy about asserting
The President and other members of the executive branch are responsible for
administering the laws passed by Congress. The President
is also given authority
to conclude treaties and to conduct foreign affairs. The President’s
treaty-making power is limited
somewhat by the requirement that many treaties
have to be approved by Congress. In addition, most treaties to which the US is a
are not self-executing. Instead, before the treaties become effective
within the US, Congress has to pass implementing legislation.
There is, however,
one mechanism available to the President which is somewhat independent of
Congress – the conclusion of ‘executive
agreements’ which do
not require congressional ratification. Over the last several decades,
presidents have made increasing
use of executive agreements, sometimes with the
tacit approval of Congress, but occasionally in the face of congressional
opposition.
Some of these executive agreements have involved very important
international economic issues, so the President also is able to influence
significantly international economic policies. American participation in the
original General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in 1947
and the American
financial assistance for Mexico in 1994-95, for example, were both accomplished
through executive agreements. Even
with executive agreements, however, the
President has to be conscious of Congress since an agreement that runs contrary
to the mood
of Congress is likely to invite some form of congressional
retaliation.
Congress is composed of over 500 members and it would therefore be too
unwieldy for Congress itself to negotiate international economic
foreign countries. Congress, therefore, delegates the authority for negotiating
bilateral and multilateral trade and investment
agreements to the executive
branch. Thus, Congress really holds a very powerful position in developing
international economic laws
and policies: a great amount of the authority the
executive branch has to negotiate agreements affecting international commerce
from an express and limited delegation of authority from Congress.
Furthermore, the delegation of power extends only to the negotiation
agreements; final approval of the agreements inevitably requires a favourable
vote in Congress.
It is because of the division of responsibility between the President and the
Congress that ‘fast track’ negotiating authority
is so critical to
the conclusion of international trade agreements. Foreign governments have been
reluctant to negotiate seriously
with the office of the President because of
Congress’s very considerable power over international economic matters.
The foreign
governments understand that final approval of any agreement rests
with Congress, not the President. So, to improve the credibility
of the office
of the President, on many instances over the last 70 years, Congress has agreed
to limit its powers of review to a
simple yes or no vote on the final agreement.
In granting fast track negotiating authority to the office of the President,
has warranted that it will not accept parts of an agreement and seek to
renegotiate other parts; instead, it will vote to accept
or reject the entire
agreement. Therefore, even when it has given fast track negotiating authority,
Congress still has influence
over the negotiations by being a significant, but
behind the scenes participant in the negotiating process and then having the
voice in deciding whether to accept or reject the agreement.
The North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993 and the Uruguay Round of
multilateral trade agreements in 1994 were the last occasions
fast-track authority was applied. During the remainder of the Clinton
Administration and through the first 18 months of
the Bush Administration,
Congress has been unwilling to give the office of the President fast track
negotiating authority. The Clinton
Administration sought fast track authority
three times, but Congress denied it in each instance.
The ‘authorising without realising’ NAFTA Experience
that the Congress had gone through contributed to the congressional
reluctance in the renewal of the fast track. The fast track provisions
Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 were enacted for the Uruguay
Round. The language was broad, providing for multilateral
trade negotiations
with foreign countries and bilateral negotiations with foreign countries in
sections 1102b and 1102c, respectively.
Armed with the fast track, the executive
branch pursued the NAFTA Agreement and the Congress never had an opportunity to
whether the negotiation should be initiated. Instead, it only approved
after the pact was negotiated for implementation, and when
the President
highlighted the cost of repudiation.
In December 2001, the House of Representatives agreed by one vote to trade
promotion authority (TPA), which is the current title for
fast track negotiating
authority) and on 9 May 2002, the Senate and the President agreed to a new trade
Bill that would include TPA.
The House Bill (voted in December 2001) and the
Senate Bill (voted in May 2002) differed in several crucial respects. The Senate
Bill included stronger protections for workers. Moreover, the Senate added an
exception to the President’s power to set the
terms of the trade
agreements by reserving for Congress the right to alter any provisions that
would weaken anti-dumping law protecting
US industries. The House and Senate
versions had to be reconciled and voted on again before the TPA Bill could be
sent to the President
Bush. A joint Senate-House committee set up to hammer out
a compromise Bill reached agreement on the final version in late July.
on 1 August 2002, the US Congress passed the TPA legislation. The final version
retained the worker-benefits package approved
in the Senate version but dropped
the controversial antidumping measure. However, the President would be
instructed to consult with
Congress before negotiating a trade agreement that
could undermine US antidumping laws. This TPA Bill, in force until 2007, was
by a three-vote margin in the House and was approved by the Senate only
after the Administration made major concessions to Congress
by agreeing to
increase the protection to US workers against global trade competition. The
newly granted authority will enable the
Bush Administration to move more
aggressively on the next round of trade talks within the WTO. The TPA also will
enable the United
States Trade Representative (USTR) to pursue negotiations of
bilateral agreements such as the Free Trade Agreement of the Americas
The even split between the Democrats and the
Republicans
The November 2000 elections were extraordinary because they produced a
national government evenly divided between Democrats and Republicans.
Bush lost the popular vote, but won the presidential election because of
peculiarities (many would say irregularities) in
the American voting process.
The Republicans maintained a narrow majority in the House of Representatives.
The Senate was split 50/50
until James M Jeffords (Vermont) switched from the
Republican to the Democratic Party, which gave the Democrats control at 51 to
49. The almost perfectly even split between the Democrats and Republicans means
that swing voters in Congress have great powers to
influence policies, as
evidenced by the Bush Administration’s concessions for the steel, farm and
textile issues which are
discussed below.
The widespread sense of being treated unfairly
A further political element is that the US is like many other countries
– it is always much easier for government leaders to
point at foreigners
as the cause of local problems, and that is precisely what American politicians
have done. It matters not whether
they are Democrats or Republicans, national
leaders or local officials; American politicians commonly blame foreign
governments,
foreign businesses and foreign workers for many of the problems
they face. It is very common, for example, for foreign businesses
imports into the American economy to be blamed for economic dislocations, when
in reality the dislocations are caused more
by technological changes and the
inability (or refusal) of American businesses to adapt.
There is, however, at least one element of truth in the American sense of
unfair treatment: With only a few notable exceptions in
textiles, apparel and
some agricultural products, US markets are generally much more open than foreign
markets. The quality, quantity
and prices of goods and services in the US
markets are almost always superior to that found in foreign markets. Even
paradises, such as Bangkok, Hong Kong and Singapore, do not
compare with the markets in the US for most goods and services.
Most East and Southeast economies, including China, Hong Kong, Indonesia,
Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan and
Thailand, were listed
on the USTR’s 2002 annual National Trade Estimate Report on Foreign Trade
Barriers. The US trade deficit
with China, for example, was $83 billion in 2001.
Japan, especially, was strongly criticised by the USTR Report on Foreign Trade
Barriers. The first page of the Japan section in the Trade Barrier Report began
with ‘beset with structural rigidity, excessive
regulation and market
access barriers … the US trade deficit with Japan was $69 billion in
2001’ (and the trade deficit
was $81.6 billion in 2000).
So, Americans are accurate in thinking that trade liberalisation has not been
reciprocal. The US generally has opened its markets
more than in other
countries. Many American political groups have used this lack of reciprocity to
create further hostility to international
institutions, foreign governments and
foreign businesses.
The American environmental movement claims that the trade rules under NAFTA
and the WTO are eroding the sovereignty of American government
institutions and
diminish the effectiveness of American environmental laws. The reality is that
the regional and international trade
rules have made it possible for foreign
producers to challenge US environmental laws that adversely affect imports into
the Shrimp/Turtle dispute, for example, Thailand and several other
countries challenged the US embargo on shrimp not caught with
Turtle Exclusion
Devices (TEDs). But even where the challenges have been successful and, as
occurred in the Shrimp/Turtle dispute,
it is shown that the law was more about
protecting the US shrimp industry than sea turtles,
environmental laws have not been automatically invalidated. Instead, a
successful challenge of US environmental laws is only
the first step toward a
final settlement, which may involve leaving the environmental laws in place.
Even though the US lost its
appeal in the Shrimp/Turtle case, the USTR expressed
pleasure with the appellate body’s finding that section 609 of the US
Endangered Species Act was not inconsistent with the GATT. On the other hand,
Thailand has expressed serious concern over the appellate
body’s apparent
deference to the US’s environmental protection claims. In other words,
although the US lost the legal
case, the appellate body has recognised the
potential legitimacy of unilateral measures. The future US complainants may,
ultimately be prompted to upgrade its environmental
regulations.
Organised labour in the US is hostile to trade liberalisation because of the
fear that it causes an outflow of skilled jobs to countries
with lower labour
costs and less rigorous laws on worker health and safety. The reality is that
trade liberalisation does accelerate
the process of economic evolution and it
inevitably results in economic dislocations; and for people who have lost their
a result of increased imports the dislocations are extremely painful.
However, trade liberalisation also leads to new job opportunities
always there are more new job opportunities than the jobs lost through trade
liberalisation. The advent of computer technology
and word processing software
have had devastating effects on the typewriter industry, for example, but the
answer is not to return
to a pre-computer age. Instead it is to provide
adjustment assistance to the workers displaced by the modernisation process.
in part because of the openness of the American economy and the market
liberalisations introduced by NAFTA and the Uruguay Round
agreements, the
American economy has been exceptionally vigorous in the creation of new jobs. As
a result, as manufacturing jobs
have declined in the US, the declines have been
more than offset by new jobs in services industries.
The overall
effect of the domestic political scene is to put foreign businesses and
international trade in an unfavourable light.
Within the US, there is an
undercurrent of hostility toward foreign businesses and foreign made products
and services.
In this climate of hostility, trade liberalisation
policies are very vulnerable.
The US in World Politics
Fifty years ago, the US was economically and politically pre-eminent in the
world. During the last few decades, however, the growing
prosperity in Western
Europe and East and Southeast Asia, and the increased power and sophistication
of business enterprises from
these regions have effectively challenged the US,
both politically and economically. The economic power of US trading partners is
too great to ignore. Foreign industries are so strong and US businesses and
workers are so vulnerable that the US can no longer maintain
unilaterally open
markets. Consequently, it is likely that the US’s trading partners will be
asked to make parallel commitments
to liberalise their markets.
In addition, the tragedies of 11 September 2001 and events immediately
thereafter have had a profound impact on the attitude of the
US in world
affairs. The terrorism of 11 September 2001 destroyed much more than the twin
towers of the World Trade Center. It also
ended the American sense of security
and it opened up a new era of vulnerability. The terrorist acts demonstrated
most clearly the
capacity for a few deeply committed individuals, with or
without state sponsorship, to inflict grievous harm on large numbers of
The US military campaign in Afghanistan proved the global dominance of the US
armed forces. At the same time, it has become apparent
that military power alone
cannot protect the US and US interests abroad. The US needs the co-operation of
its allies to deal effectively
with the sources of terrorism and to reduce
poverty and ignorance, which are the fertile breeding grounds for future
terrorists.
While events since 11 September have demonstrated US military superiority,
they also have shown the need for closer international
co-operation. Of course,
where US interests are in imminent danger and others will not step forward as
allies, the US Government
has made it clear that it will take whatever actions,
including preemptive actions, as are necessary to remove the threats. This
behind President Bush’s ‘axis of evil’ speech.
However, the US Government recognises that unilateral action is not the
preferred course. It may be less effective than multilateral
responses and it is
more likely to engender further hostile responses targeting US interests.
Unilateral action also will drive other
governments to seek coalitions to
counter US power.
From the above analysis of economic and political aspects, one single goal is
shown: reciprocity. Market opening concessions should
be on a reciprocal basis,
where the opportunities for US exporters of goods and services match the
opportunities for foreign exporters
in US markets.
The Realities of International negotiations
The political manoeuvres in the US may not be aimed just at the American
public. Instead, American politicians may think that it is
in the best interests
of the US to keep foreign businesses and governments confused about US
international economic policies. If
foreign businesses and governments know that
the US has an unwavering commitment to open markets and free trade, they will be
likely to deal cautiously with the US. If foreigners believe that they will
have free access to the American markets without regard
for their own trade
barriers, the American negotiators will have little chance of persuading them to
adopt economic policies that
produce domestic turmoil in their own countries.
However, if foreign businesses and governments are unclear about American
commitments
to trade and investment liberalisations, they will pay closer
attention when American politicians speak about a return to protectionist
As a result, uncertainty in American international economic policies may
actually serve American interests – it may encourage
foreign governments
to make market opening concessions in spite of strong local opposition.
It may make our threats of retaliation more credible and may influence
foreign enterprises as they decide where to locate new production
facilities.
People involved in the formulation of US
international trade policies
Members of the executive branch
The President and other members of the executive branch are responsible for
administering the laws passed by Congress. The President,
George W Bush, given
authority to conclude treaties and to conduct foreign affairs, has publicly
advocated open markets and free
trade. Some of President Bush’s major
trade initiatives are the Free Trade Agreement for the Americas, the
Singapore/US Free
Trade Agreement, and the addition of Chile to the North
American Free Trade Agreement. President Bush has also consistently pressured
the US Congress for ‘trade promotion authority’ which would greatly
enhance the Bush Administration’s credibility
in international trade
negotiations.
People responsible for international trade matters within the US Government
tend to fall into two broad categories. Ambassador Robert
Zoellick, the current
US Trade Representative and the person who appears most responsible for
international trade policies and laws,
is a good example of one category. He is
clever, with a Phi Beta Kappa from Swarthmore College and a JD and
Master’s in Public
Policy from Harvard,
magna cum laude
. He has had
eclectic work experience, having worked in various positions in the US Treasury,
the State Department, Fannie Mae (the
largest housing finance investor in the
US), senior adviser for Goldman Sachs, and as an academic at Harvard and the US
Naval Academy.
Ambassador Zoellick also has impressive credentials in support of
free trade:
He worked as the lead State Department official in the negotiations on NAFTA
and the Uruguay Round.
He played a key role in the establishment of the Asia Pacific Economic
Cooperation group (APEC) and was instrumental in securing ‘fast
track’ negotiating authority for the first Bush administration.
In February 2002, David Spooner was appointed the special textile negotiator
within the USTR’s office. Mr Spooner’s background
fits the other
common profile among government officials working on international trade issues.
He has a close association with Congress
on a specific industry in the US
private sector. Before his appointment as special textile negotiator, Mr Spooner
was an adviser
on textile trade issues for House of Representatives member Sue
Myrick, a Republican from North Carolina. Not surprisingly, the US
industry has a significant presence in Representative Myrick’s legislative
district and Mr Spooner’s appointment
as special textile negotiator
insures that the textile industry has easy access to USTR’s office
whenever textiles trade matters
Donald Evans, the US Secretary of Commerce, a Texas educated engineer and
oilman, also seems to fit the profile of people with close
experience and
empathy for the US private sector. This is consistent with the US Commerce
Department’s mission of being supportive
of US businesses both at home and
Key Members of Congress
As indicated earlier, it is Congress, not the President, which has broad
authority to make laws determining US international economic
policy. The
division of responsibility between the President and the Congress ensures the
TPA is so critical to the conclusion of
international trade agreements. However,
in granting TPA to the office of the President, Congress has warranted that it
accept parts of an agreement and seek to renegotiate other parts;
instead, it will vote to accept or reject the entire agreement.
Therefore, even
when it has given TPA, Congress still has influence over the negotiations.
Senate Majority Leader and Finance Committee Chairman Hugh Leatherman
(Republican, Florence) and House Ways and Means Committee Chairman
Bobby Harrell
(Republican, Charleston), key members of the Congress, play a major role in
trade policy. Due to the considerable powers
of Congress to influence trade
matters, Senators Leatherman and Harrell, who are currently serving as chairmen
of powerful committees,
are therefore crucial to helping push through trade
Dick Gephardt and Ernest Hollings, two protectionist members of Congress, are
also significant to the formation of the US trade policy.
Dick Gephardt
(Democrat, Missouri) has shown protectionism trade policy by the positions he
has taken in the following matters:
he led the Democratic Congress members to demand that the TPA include
adequate assurances that require the US trading partners to
respect core labour
rights as defined by the International Labour Organisation, including a ban on
child labour and environmental
protection;
he led the House Democrats to vote against granting China PNTR.
As for Senator Ernest Hollings (Democrat, South Carolina), he emphasised
protectionism by the position he has taken in the following
with Dick Gephardt, he demanded that the TPA include adequate assurances on
labour rights and environmental protection;
he led critics of the merger of a US telecommunications company,
VoiceStream, and a German telecommunications company, Deutsche Telekom,
stressing the national security concern.
he was the first to sponsor the Online Privacy Protection Act, which was
opposed by many trade associations because the Bill may stifle
the development
of e-commerce and e-trade.
The Content and Context of the US trade policies:
the background of the renewal of the fast track authority
Trade policies of the Bush Administration
The official international trade policy of the Bush Administration is no
different from that of the previous administrations going
stated policy is unequivocal support for open markets and trade liberalisation.
In furtherance of this policy,
one of the major objectives of the Bush
Administration has been to obtain ‘trade promotion authority’ (TPA)
from Congress
in order to proceed with the Doha round negotiations, the Free
Trade Agreement of the Americas and other bilateral and regional trade
initiatives.
The Bush Administration also continues the tradition of previous
administrations in applying the ‘bicycle theory’ of trade
negotiations: that is, it is imperative to continue negotiating for market
opening agreements in whatever form possible, because
once the negotiating
process stops, market opening measures, like a cyclist, fall over (or, in a
trade sense, move toward protectionism).
When the Bush Administration did not
have TPA, it had no ability to undertake major trade negotiations. However,
consistent with
the bicycle theory, the Bush Administration focused on bilateral
trade agreements, such as the one being negotiated with Singapore,
that have been proposed by Ambassador Zoellick.
In spite of the constant rhetoric in support of free trade, the Bush
Administration’s recent actions affecting international
trade seem to
raise serious questions about the Bush Administration’s commitment to free
market principles. The recent actions
involving the imposition of protective
tariffs on steel imports and the reintroduction of significant farm subsidies,
for example,
seem very much at odds with free market principles and they have
been sharply criticised by US trading partners as ‘hypocritical’
‘obscene protectionism’. A close examination of these actions
suggests a more complex interaction between a commitment
to free trade and the
remarkable power of key members of Congress and well organised special interests
to influence trade policies.
It is clear that the Bush Administration, in
seeking short-term political gains, has squandered an opportunity to take a
stand in favour of free trade. It also appears, however, that the
pandering to key members of Congress and special interests in ways
antithetical
to free trade has been mitigated somewhat by steps taken in other
which have tended to favour free trade principles. In addition, what appears
at one level to be pandering to influential Congress
people and special
interests may on another level be the development of a negotiating position
designed to maximise the ability of
the USTR to secure market opening
concessions in agriculture and other heavily protected industries.
A close examination of the Bush
Administration’s recent actions affecting international trade
Tempered protectionism for the American Steel
On 5 March 2002, the Bush Administration announced the imposition of
safeguard tariffs ranging from 8% to 30% on steel imports in
order to provide
temporary relief for the beleaguered US steel industry.
1980 and 1998, 32 American steel companies were driven into bankruptcy with the
loss of over 40,000 jobs. Faced with this
predicament, the Bush Administration
initiated a section 201 investigation by the US International Trade Commission
(USITC). The
USITC found unanimously that the American industry was being
injured and recommended safeguard tariffs to slow the import surge until
normal economic conditions returned.
The decision has been excoriated by other trading countries, including Asian
economies. Following the imposition of US safeguard measures,
South Korea
and Japan have held a joint meeting on the issues and agreed to co-operate
with each other, as well as work with China
to avoid any trade
conflict that might arise from the US action to strengthen its import
restrictions on foreign steel. In June 2002,
the WTO DSB ‘panel on
steel’ was established. The panel now has seven complainants: EC, Japan,
Korea, China, Switzerland,
Norway and New Zealand; and 14 third parties: Brazil,
Chinese Taipei, Switzerland, Norway, Japan, Korea, Thailand, Canada, China,
Mexico, Turkey, Venezuela and Cuba. The complainants launched an immediate
complaint in Geneva against the US and claimed that
the US steel industry was
making foreign rivals pay the price for its own overexpansion of capacity at a
time of slowing demand.
The complainants said that the tariffs were
a blatantly protectionist response to the US steel industry’s own
problems. The
US, on the other hand, argued that the tariffs are permitted under
WTO rules which allow temporary restraints on trade if imports
are causing
serious harm to domestic industries.
The announcement in August 2002 that the new measures will exclude countries
that have signed free trade agreements with the US –
Canada, Israel,
Jordan and Mexico, and developing countries with limited exports to the US who
are also exempted,
has been greeted with approval from major
trading partners, including the 15-nation European Union and Japan. As the
exemptions have
been granted, the EU and Japan have both backed off from threats
to impose immediate sanctions although they are continuing to pursue
against the US’s action.
As indicated above, the US Congress has great powers over international trade
policies. This means that individual members of Congress,
especially swing
voters, can exercise enormous influence to obtain results favourable to their
constituents, even at the expense
of injury to the national wellbeing. The
current trade disputes over steel offer a prime example. It is claimed that
imported steel
is the principal cause of the problems facing the US steel
industry. The reality, however, is that for the last 40 years US steel
have become less and less productive relative to world production standards.
During the same period, managers in the US steel
industry have failed to
modernise in order to meet new competitive challenges. The result is that many
US steel producers are seriously
uncompetitive precisely because the workers and
managers have failed to respond to the pressures for change. It is true that
surges and global over-capacity have hurt the US steel industry,
especially as a result of the economic crises in Russia and East
and Southeast
Asia in the late 1990s. A major cause of the uncompetitiveness in the US steel
industry is largely due to poor management
decisions that have failed to adjust
to changing business conditions and a lack of productivity in the work force. In
other words,
US steel is uncompetitive more because of its own inaction than
external market forces.
The very controversial decision of the Bush Administration to impose
safeguard tariffs of up to 30% on steel imports, however, had
little to do with
the merits of the case brought by the US steel industry. It was done simply to
improve the political prospects
of the Republicans in several steel producing
states – Ohio, Pennsylvania and West Virginia in particular.
As mentioned earlier, the even split between the Democrats and Republicans
means that swing voters in Congress have great powers to
influence policies, the
steel tariffs being an illustrative consequence. The decision to impose the
tariffs is inevitably the result
of domestic political necessity and is not
representative of any basic policies other than short-term political concerns
international objectives.
Even where the US steel industry is involved, it also is important to note
that sometimes international relations do matter. While
the initial foreign
response to the steel tariffs decision was exceptionally hostile, in the months
following the decision the criticisms
have become less and less strident largely
because of the Bush Administration’s liberal exemptions and exclusions
products subject to the new tariffs. The European Union, for example,
was one of the early leaders seeking retaliation, but it has
delayed adopting
retaliatory measures because of the growing list of exemptions and exclusions.
Agricultural subsidies – from liberalisation
to protectionism and back
Agriculture is a heavily protected industry in the US, but it is even more
heavily protected in the European Union, Japan and many
other US trading
partners. Criticism of the US’s agricultural trade policies thus needs to
be tempered somewhat by the fact
that the critics themselves generally have more
protectionist policies for agriculture than the US. Nonetheless, the recent
of US agricultural trade policy seems wholly inconsistent with active
support for open markets and, until late July 2002, it also
seemed that the US
was moving backwards towards greater protectionism.
As part of the Uruguay Round negotiations and as a result of considerable
pressure from the US, WTO member countries agreed to establish
a more fair and
equitable agricultural trading system. Under the Uruguay Round’s Agreement
on Agriculture, ceilings on trade
distorting subsidies were set at $60 billion
annually for the European Union, about $30 billion for Japan and $19 billion for
US. It also was agreed that negotiations would be continued in 2000 with the
goal of obtaining even further liberalisations. In 1996,
in action consistent
with liberalisation of agricultural trade, the US passed a farm Bill that
sharply limited agricultural subsidies
to about $10 billion, which was well
below the US limit set in the Uruguay Round. In November 2002, at the Doha
Ministerial in November
2002, the US also insisted that agricultural trade
liberalisation be a central element of the new round of multilateral
negotiations.
The 2002 Farm Bill, signed into law by President Bush in May 2002, appears to
destroy much of what had been accomplished in agricultural
trade liberalisation
in the preceding decade. The farm Bill raises the level of federal subsidies by
over 80%, with enormous increases
in subsidies for soya beans, wheat and corn;
it introduces new subsidies for peanuts, lentils, chickpeas and dairy products;
it reestablishes subsidies for honey, wool and mohair that were cut in the
The 2002 Farm Bill represents an apparent triumph of short-term electoral
politics over long-term trade policies. In supporting the
Farm Bill, however,
the Bush Administration’s strategy is similar to that behind its
imposition of the protective tariffs on
imported steel. It is expected to gain a
political advantage in the November 2002 ‘mid-term’ elections for
congressional candidates in Iowa, Missouri and South Dakota, all of
which have large, powerful farm lobbies. On the other hand, the
prospects for
increased subsidisation of US agriculture have taken much of the pressure off
the Europeans and the Japanese, who have
been consistently reluctant to agree to
agricultural trade liberalisations.
The May 2002 Farm Bill was followed in July 2002, by the announcement from
the Bush Administration of an ambitious proposal to cut
agricultural tariffs and
domestic subsidies as part of the Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations.
The proposal would eliminate
more than $100 billion in trade distorting domestic
supports by 2010 and also lower the average tariff on farm products from 62%
The proposal was sharply criticised by US major trading
partners, although it is by far the most ambitious liberalisation scheme
put forward for global agriculture. It appears, therefore, that the Bush
Administration is seeking agricultural trade liberalisation
at the multilateral
level at the same time it is supporting greater subsidisation for US farmers.
From a strategic perspective, the
US farm subsidies will be used in a
multilateral level of negotiation as bargaining chips that the US can give up in
exchange for
important concessions from the rest of the world.
The road from the Multifibre agreement to the
Agreementon Textiles and Clothing
Up to the end of the Uruguay Round, trade in textile and clothing were
governed by the rules of the Multifibre Agreement (MFA) through
negotiations. The predecessor of the MFA, which allowed developed countries to
impose quotas on clothing and textile imports
from developing countries, was
introduced in the late 1950s. The WTO Agreement on Textile and Clothing (ATC)
replaced the MFA and
set out a transitional liberalisation process progressively
to enlarge existing quotas until their ultimate removal. Starting in
accordance with ATC obligations, these quantitative restrictions must
Under the MFA the US sought time for its domestic industry to adjust to
‘cheap’ imports from developing countries. This
adjustment has taken
almost 50 years. During the Uruguay Round, the American Textile
Manufacturers’ Institute strongly opposed
that the quota phase-out provisions of the ATC would completely dismantle the
provisions of the MFA and throw the US textile
and clothing market wide open to
large Asian suppliers, which would result in the loss of over one million jobs
in the domestic textile
and apparel manufacturing sector and hundreds of
thousands of additional jobs in related domestic supplier industries, such as
and chemicals.
The ATC brings textile trade under GATT. Most observers believe that benefits
from phasing out the MFA would accrue to low wage Asian
producers whose textile
trade has been constrained by the MFA quota agreements. The textile industry is
probably the most protected
sector of the US economy, but the level of foreign
penetration of the US market over the past 25 years has grown very dramatically.
Between 1984 and 1994 the share of the imported textiles increased from 31.4% to
50.2% of the US market – indicating a high
degree of foreign involvement
in even the most protected industries.
In particular, Asian
economies’ market share in US textile imports in 2001 was 49.7%, making
them the largest supplier of textiles
to the US textile market.
Asian textile exporting nations, however, are still increasingly impatient
and clothing sectors
and are pressing the US to speed up the dismantling of the old MFA.
The US textile industry has been attaching protection against the flow of
imports from Asia to the 2002 TPA Bill. The strategy to
attach the two issues
together has successfully blocked Asian countries’ attempts at Doha to
speed up the quota elimination
At Doha, while Asian
textile exporting countries proposed a new method for the application of the ATC
which is scheduled to come
into effect in January 2005,
Mr Robert B
Zoellick was under pressure from the US Congress not to yield ground on
textiles. The Congress opposed any further concessions
in the textile sector
beyond those already agreed in the Uruguay Round. Any concession made on
textiles at Doha could lead to the
US Congress denying the Administration the
fast track authority it seeks. To gain the all-important support of lawmakers
from southern
textile states for TPA, the Republican House leadership and the
White House had promised Congressman Jim DeMint (Republican,-South
Carolina) to
take steps to limit textile imports. In addition, the formation of the American
Textile Trade Action Coalition was announced
on 14 May 2002. One of the main
strategies for the coalition is to push the Bush Administration to keep the
promises made in the
TPA vote of December 2001.
For Asian textile
exporting countries the road from MFA to ATC is a rather bumpy ride, caused
largely by the very considerable political
power of the US textiles and apparel
industries.
The US position on LDCs’ adherence to the
TRIPs Agreement
Before adopting TRIPs, developing countries deliberately removed the
pharmaceutical industry from the patent system. TRIPs provides
for increased
patent protection, culminating in 2006 when all nations, including the less
developed countries (LDCs), must comply
with its provisions. A World Bank study
found that merely establishing the institutions necessary for implementing the
TRIPs Agreement
would cost each country as much as $150 million, often exceeding
their national health budgets.
For most of the LDCs, their citizens
cannot afford expensive medications. In light of the AIDS crisis, they must use
compulsory licensing
as a way to offer cheaper medication.
Since the TRIPs strengthened patent protection laws, lack of access to
HIV/AIDS drugs due to the price increase is an internationally
South Africa, India, Brazil and some East and Southeast
Asian countries such as Thailand, China and Indonesia, where the AIDS crisis
needs an urgent remedy, are the focus of international attention.
Article 8 of the TRIPs does permit the use of compulsory licensing to respond
to any crises in public safety or health and to promote
public interest in the
areas of socio-economics and development. Many LDCs argued that compulsory
licences should be granted when
drugs that are capable of curing or hindering
the disease exist, claiming that if, for example, the AIDS crisis in Thailand is
‘national emergency’ Thailand should be able to grant compulsory
licences legally under TRIPs. However, developed countries,
specifically the US,
interpreted the TRIPs Agreement narrowly. As argued by the Pharmaceutical
Research and Manufacturers of America,
the conditions in those LDCs are not
‘extremely urgent’.
In fact, the US had threatened to impose trade sanctions on some governments
such as South Africa and Thailand over pharmaceutical
policies. In mid 1999, the
US held firm in its support of strong intellectual property protection and the
official government position
was that the government did not support the
compulsory licensing of patents. The US took this position because its economy
is increasingly
moving away from basic manufacturing and toward high-technology
industries, including biotechnology and pharmaceuticals. However,
by the end of
1999, the US began to change its approach.
The Clinton
Administration declared in December 1999 that the US trade law related to
intellectual property should remain sufficiently
flexible to respond to
legitimate public health crises. Subsequently it issued an executive order
entitled ‘Access to HIV/AIDS
Pharmaceuticals and Medical
Technologies’, stating that in administering sections 301–10 of the
Trade Act of 1974, the
US shall not seek the revision of any intellectual
property law that regulates HIV/AIDS pharmaceuticals or medical technologies.
of mid March 2001, the Bush administration has indicated that it would not
reverse Clinton’s order, but has continued to
oppose strongly the attempts
by developing countries to relax patent rules under TRIPs.
The US strategies toward Africa shifted dramatically following the 11
September incident. Furthermore, domestic NGOs such as Médicins
Frontières which support lower costs for critical medicines as against
higher profits for the pharmaceutical companies
also produces considerable
pressure. At the summit in Doha, Mr Robert Zoellick made a surprising compromise
on affordable access
to pharmaceuticals for poor countries facing medical
emergencies, softening the US position on the LDCs’ adherence to the
In Doha, the ‘Declaration on the TRIPs Agreement and Public
Health’ was established.
The declaration states that
countries can use the TRIPs agreement to issue compulsory licences and also
determine the grounds on
which such licences can be granted. The LDCs are given
time until 2016 (as opposed to 2006 presently) to introduce legislation for
product patents. All countries are free to decide whether the domestic situation
constitutes a ‘national emergency’ in
health under the TRIPS
agreement. Although the declaration was a political but not legal text, TRIPs
Council formalised the declaration
and approved a decision extending until 2016
the transition period during which LDCs do not have to provide patent protection
pharmaceuticals.
The concession at Doha, of course, led to trouble in the US Congress, where
Mr Zoellick faced a tough battle in winning TPA approval.
Until congressional
disapproval surfaces, however, this appears to be an unusual example of where
the very substantial political
power of the pharmaceutical industry is
outweighed by American public opinion as advocated by domestic and international
The implications of the Singapore-US Free Trade
The ongoing bilateral negotiation between Singapore and the US on free trade
agreement (FTA) is actually in its final stage. The US
currently has FTAs with
Canada, Mexico, Israel and Jordan, while Singapore has FTAs with New Zealand and
Japan, and recently concluded
another with the four-members of the European Free
Trade Association.
During the US-Singapore bilateral negotiation, 121 US groups and individuals
have submitted comments to the US Trade Representative
when the US surveyed the
public on the proposed US-Singapore FTA. Among others issues, Singapore has been
pressured by American interest
groups to remove or liberalise existing barriers
in the financial services as well as strengthen its intellectual property
enforcement.
In addition, the US manufacturers fear that free trade
could lead to job losses and a flood of cheap goods from South-east Asia.
Before the Bush Administration achieved TPA, it was concentrating its
energies on bilateral free trade agreements, such as the one
being negotiated
with Singapore. The Bush Administration sought to use a series of bilateral
agreements to secure market opening
measures in those countries. They were also
used to create broader pressure in other countries so they are more amenable to
round of multilateral trade negotiations once the Bush Administration
obtains TPA. As mentioned earlier, the fast track trade Bill
has been signed
into law on 8 August 2002. The Bush Administration now faces no obstacles in
concluding the FTA with Singapore. The
newly granted TPA will enable Ambassador
Robert Zoellick to complete the FTA with Singapore, possibly by the end of
Free trade or protectionism: which will it be for
the Bush Administration?
Examining the Bush Administration’s recent actions affecting
international trade produces conflicting conclusions. It does seem
when short-term politics collide with the trade liberalisation agenda, the
former triumphs. The steel tariffs, the 2002
Farm Bill and the protectionist
pressure coming from the textile and apparel industries all demonstrate the
primacy of short-term
political interests over longer term trade
liberalisations.
On the other hand, the Bush Administration has taken important steps
inconsistent with its domestic political interests, as evidenced
by the long
list of exemptions and exclusions from the steel tariffs, the new multilateral
proposal for liberalising global trade
in agriculture and the softer position on
TRIPs enforcement. It is not entirely true, therefore, to say that the Bush
Administration
has abandoned free trade and open markets; it is just that they
may have to give way to short-term political interests.
The congressional passage of the TPA Bill is a victory for American
businesses interested in competing in the global market. It took
eight years for
the Congress to return to the fast-track authority and restore broad
presidential authority on negotiating international
trade issues. Now, armed
with the TPA, the Bush Administration can press ahead with global trade talks,
pursue regional pacts and
bilateral FTAs.
The trends and prospects in the Coha Round: the
impact of the passage of TPA on future US trade negotiations with Asian
‘Either progress or collapse’: is the
bicycle falling down in Doha?
The price to pay at Doha for achieving the TPA
Apparently, the Bush Administration is a believer of the ‘bicycle
theory’ of trade negotiations. In application of the
theory, approaches
and mechanisms have been sought by the Administration prior to the passage of
the TPA. However, in the multilateral
trading arena, the political concessions
made by the Administration as part of the struggle to gain the TPA, including
the tariffs
on steel, the support for the Farm Bills, and the slowing down of
the textile industry liberalisation, have eroded the US’s
moral authority.
Those actions by the Bush Administration will make it harder for the executive
branch to make full use of the newly
granted authority to negotiate at the Doha
In essence, the entire WTO system is merely a set of moral proscriptions on
conduct. The effectiveness of this multilateral system
indeed depends on whether
members have incentives to preserve their reputations as a free trade advocate
rather than be labelled
as a protectionist. Increasing the credibility and
legitimacy of the most powerful trading nations such as the US is the foundation
for building up such ‘moral restraints’. Recognising that a credible
multilateral legal framework exists, WTO members
would act to avoid being called
a ‘rule-breaker’. It will be difficult for the US to persuade other
member nations to
tender into further WTO negotiations and abide by WTO
provisions if the US is viewed as a flagrant betrayer of the WTO. The recent
actions have robbed the US of the moral high ground on trade.
In the multilateral context, President Bush has to pay a high political and
economic price for ensuring the Congress Members backed
the TPA. The concessions
made to the US domestic protectionists weakened the US’s position to
encourage its trading partners
to adopt more liberal trade measures.
The essence of the use of ‘soft power’, as Professor Joseph S
Nye advocated, is that if the US represents values that
others want to follow,
it will cost the US less to lead the world. As a leader in trade liberalisation,
the influence of the US in
the multilateral forum should not depend on economic
threats or retaliations, but on the US culture and values. The new WTO Doha
Round is a test of world leadership, and the road ahead is bumpy for the US to
mobilise support from other WTO members.
The prize to gain at Doha after the TPA struggle
The division of policy power between the executive and legislative branches
has made it difficult for the Administration to act on
its economic interests.
Fast track serves as a means to bridge the separation of powers and to integrate
trade policy and domestic
politics. The newly granted authority provides the
Administration the momentum it needs in order to get the multilateral
negotiation
conclusions implemented, enabling the US officials to promise, and
to keep those promises in the Doha Round of multilateral trade
negotiations.
The domestic movements toward protectionism in steel, farm products, and
textiles and apparel may be designed to enhance the negotiating
position of the
USTR in the Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations. By increasing
protection in the US, the Bush Administration
is giving Ambassador Zoellick more
to concede in the multilateral negotiations. It also seems that in all trade
negotiations, whether
multilateral, regional or bilateral, the Bush
Administration is setting the stage for an emphasis on trade reciprocity. In
of the US dominance in global affairs, the economic power of US trading
partners is too great to ignore. Foreign industries are so
strong and US
businesses and workers so vulnerable that the US can no longer maintain
unilaterally open markets. Instead, the Bush
Administration is likely to seek
market opening concessions on a reciprocal basis, where the opportunities for US
exporters of goods
and services match the opportunities for foreign exporters in
US markets.
Indeed, the US domestic protectionism is a means to lead to reciprocal
liberalisation of international trade, by emphasising the concept
of reciprocity
– paying the price of liberalisation and reciprocating adequately to
trading partners for more concessions.
As commentators noted,
central attributes of reciprocity are equivalence and conditionality (one nation
acts only on condition that others do likewise).
In the case of
US-Asia Trade, the US obtains no surplus for itself unless East and Southeast
Asian economies reciprocate. The recent
US domestic protectionism, therefore,
will indirectly secure from its trading partners parallel commitments to
liberalise their markets
in steel, farm products and textiles.
Moreover, the Doha Round negotiation can help the US to direct the domestic
political pressure elsewhere. Many WTO negotiation issues
are actually
‘secondary disputes’ brought to the international level after the
‘primary conflicts of interests’
between domestic consumers and
domestic and import-competing producers when the issues cannot be settled
domestically.
In such ‘domestic policy nature’ issues,
a multilateral regime would assist the US in overcoming protectionist pressure
at home. The upcoming multilateral negotiation would provide US officials
reasons to fend off such pressure. After all, the steel,
agriculture and
textiles producer community constitutes a considerably potent political force
within the nation. The combination
of their current plight and the mushrooming
cost of government support programmes are heavy and growing financial burdens
US. Doha could be the place to demonstrate that the US has been
sustaining the agricultural, steel, and textiles sectors, which are
than international comparative advantage would justify.
Asia’s possible responses
The possible extension of FTA: racing towards
regional trading arrangements?
It is generally agreed that although FTAs may cause ‘trade
creation’, which occurs when the removal of trade barriers
leads to new
trade among members that previously did not occur, it would on the other hand
cause ‘trade diversion’, which
occurs when the formation of a
preferential trading arrangement merely diverts trade away from non-members to
Such trade (and investment) diversion is economically
inefficient, resulting in increased levels of high-cost production within the
region at the expense of lower-cost production from outside the region.
The basic GATT objective of increasing economic wellbeing can best be
achieved under MFN principle. Departure from the MFN principle
will cause a
shift in trade from efficient suppliers outside the FTAs, to inefficient
suppliers inside it, driven by the desire to
take advantage of trade
preferences.
It therefore undermines the spirit of multilateral
The debate on whether FTAs and WTO are complements or substitutes is beyond
the scope of this paper. The phenomenon of countries racing
toward regional
trading arrangements, however, should be given particular attention when
assessing the implications of the US trade
policies affecting East and Southeast
Asia. The potential effect of trade diversion is happening as evidenced from the
increase in
Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) in recent years. As of the year of
2001, there are 240 regional trading arrangements – 172 are
in force and
68 under negotiations. A total of 80 came into being after the creation of WTO
As one commentator suggested, ‘if you cannot beat them, join
Eventually, Singapore’s negotiations for a FTA
with the US could lead to wider economic linkages between the US and Southeast
Asia. However, regarding the possibility of an ASEAN-US FTA, in 2003 Mr Zoellick
stated that it would be too premature to talk about
road maps of FTA between
ASEAN and the US since Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos are in the very early stages
of development and are not
yet members of the WTO.
Mr Zoellick’s statement may conflict with the major rationales for the
FTA exception under the WTO/GATT framework. FTA shares
the goals of freer world
trade because it involves fewer countries and is more flexible. FTAs can be
tolerated under the WTO because
it can serve as a stepping stone to freer world
Regional agreement may provide incentives for a few
countries to reduce barriers first among themselves and later with others, as
countries adjust to the reduction of protective trade barriers. Regionalism, to
some degree, can be considered as a preparatory step
and it is believed to help
bring about global free trade sooner.
The governments of East and Southeast Asia should take seriously the
possibility of negotiating a free trade agreement with the US.
It is the Bush
Administration’s policy to press forward with bilateral trade agreements
as it waits for authority to undertake
broader agreements. One of the principal
advantages of a free trade agreement, as Canada and Mexico discovered when
Canadian and
Mexican steel producers were exempted from the 30% tariffs on
imported steel, is that it is possible to put oneself within the protected
rather than outside it.
The potential positions and alliances in the
As early as a 1996 WTO meeting in Singapore, developing countries were
beginning to unite behind a rough agenda. In the 1999 WTO summit
in Seattle,
trade alliances were emerging among the countries of Africa, Asia and Latin
America, with increasingly sophisticated
demands for greater access to developed
countries. The South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC)’s
common position
signals to the world that a consensus on
the WTO agenda for future negotiations cannot be reached without taking into
consideration
regional groups. The united position taken by SAARC, which
accounts for less than 1% of world trade, suggests that a larger united
of developing countries is possible at the WTO.
East and Southeast Asian economies should act collectively to involve
themselves more in future WTO meetings. As a large group, Asian
representatives will have enhanced credibility and negotiating power to
safeguard their countries’ legitimate
interests. Instead of being
responsive only to past problems, they should identify the issues of greatest
relevance and significance
for them and ensure those issues are placed before
the WTO future negotiation agendas. There are some undeniably critical factors
in a negotiation, such as who drafts the rules and what particular aspects of
international trade the agenda covers. Technically,
the negotiation agendas may
favour one type or class of nations over another, and may allow some nations to
be merely treated equally
under the rules as established but not treated equally
in the real world. During the Uruguay Round, there was a western agenda, driven
by the US, that placed intellectual property issues at the forefront.
There was also a developed state agenda that focused on trade-related
environment and labour standards
These were not priority concerns
for the East and Southeast Asian Economies.
In the past, the deliberations at GATT meetings primarily reflected the
interplay of trade policy interests of the EU and the US East
and Southeast
Asian concerns in the negotiations, as one commentator stated, was to pay
‘lip service to multilateral rules,
but barriers in markets abroad have
often been resolved through all kinds of short-term and less than transparent
market-sharing
mechanisms and arrangements’.
Due to the lack
of intellectual preparation on trade policy issues, East and Southeast Asian
economies have been unable to play more
significant roles in international
discussions of trade policies. They have tended to be passive observers and
followers on most
of those issues – standing at the receiving end and
focusing on ‘damage limitation’.
Through a collective position, Asian economies could play a significant role
in the question of how the WTO will evolve during the
21st century.
An Asian economic integration, driven by self-interest would allow those
economies to put their full voice together and express their
need in future WTO
negotiations. To cope with the protectionism of the US trade policy and
safeguard their legitimate interests in
the pressing trade disputes over the US
steel safeguard measures, textile quantitative restrictions, strict patent
protection, etc.
An examination of the Bush Administration’s recent actions suggests
that its international trade policies produces conflicting
conclusions. While
advancing toward the destination of ‘free trade’, the government is
pedalling backwards toward protectionism
in some respects. A complex interaction
between a commitment to free trade and the remarkable power of key members of
Congress to
influence trade policies is evidenced by the steel tariffs, the 2002
Farm Bill and the protectionist pressure coming from the textile
and apparel
industries.
When short-term politics collide with the trade liberalisation agenda, the
former triumphs. If the political concessions made by the
Bush Administration on
the steel, agricultural and textiles sectors as part of the struggle to gain the
TPA are the ‘necessary
price’ to advance the case of free trade, it
is now for the Bush Administration to prove that the TPA was worth it.
It took eight years for the Congress to return to the fast track authority
and restore broad presidential authority on negotiating
international trade
issues. The newly granted TPA ensures that the ‘bicycle’ will be
running, not falling down. Before
the Bush Administration obtained TPA, it was
concentrating on bilateral free trade agreements. Now, with TPA, it may go
beyond bilateral
and regional. Given that the US officials now have more to
concede, negotiations on a reciprocal and mutually advantageous basis
definitely be emphasised during the Doha Round of multilateral negotiations.
The Bush Administration has been setting the stage for an emphasis on trade
reciprocity. The Farm subsidies and steel tariffs will
be used as bargaining
chips that the US can give up in exchange for important concessions from the
rest of the world. The domestic
movements toward protectionism may be designed
to enhance the negotiating position of the USTR in the Doha Round of
multilateral
trade negotiations. By increasing protection in the US, the Bush
Administration is giving Ambassador Zoellick more to concede in
the multilateral
negotiations. The recent US domestic protectionism, therefore, will secure from
its trading partners parallel commitments
to liberalise their markets.
On the other hand, economic globalisation does not necessarily mean blanket
prescriptions of global application. East and Southeast
Asian economies must
develop at their own pace to meet their circumstances and needs. They should act
collectively to involve themselves
more in future WTO meetings. As a large
group, Asian countries’ representatives will have enhanced credibility and
negotiating
power to safeguard their countries’ legitimate interests. An
Asian economic integration driven by self-interest would allow
those economies
to join their voices together and express their common need in the future WTO
negotiations – to cope with the
protectionism of the US trade policy and
safeguard their legitimate interests in the pressing trade disputes over the US
steel measures,
textile quantitative restrictions, strict patent protection, and
the emerging issues regarding genetically modified organisms, as
well as labour
and environmental standards.
* Director, East Asian Legal Studies Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Volkman-Bascom Professor of Law, University of Wisconsin
Law School. **
Associate Professor of Law, National Tsing Hua University (Taiwan) SJD 2000,
University of Wisconsin, Madison. 1 Atan,
C, ‘NAFTA-America’s way of
joining pacific dynamic gravy train’ (1993)
Business Times
November. 2 ASEAN comprises 10 countries: Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand
and Vietnam. 3 ‘US
agree on work program to boost trade and investment’ (2002)
International Inc, Asian Economic News
, 8 April. 4 ‘US business
leaders urge unlocked ASEAN market potential’ (2001)
Xinhua General
News Service
, 16 September.
. US investment in ASEAN at the end of 2003 stood at slightly
over US$88 billion, according to figures from the US Department of Commerce.
However, in the first 11 months of 2003, US investment in China fell more than
24% from 2002.
2002 National Trade Estimate Report on Foreign Trade Barriers
www.ustr.gov/ reports/nte/2002/index.htm at 5 July 2002.
In 1999, Mexico surpassed Japan to become the US’s second largest
trading partner. From 1993 to 2000, US-Mexico trade grew
at an annual average
rate of 16%. See
Trade Commission of Mexico Newsletter,
www.mexico-trade.com at 12 August 2002.
US Department of Commerce.
National Trade Estimate Report on
reports/nte/2002/index.htm at 5
Foreign Trade Barriers
, www.ustr.gov/
The Economist,
August (US edition).
‘The big MacCurrencies’ (2002)
The Economist
, 27 April,
From Here to Free Trade Essays: Post Uruguay Round Trade
1998, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1–44.
As explained in succeeding paragraphs, in three instances, Congress
refused to give the Clinton Administration fast track negotiating
This was partly due to congressional resentment at being by-passed in the
bail-out of Mexico in 1994–95.
See Destler’s
Review of the NAFTA Approval Process
Institute for International Economics.
The Congress would have to vote yes or no on a trade pact within 90 days
after the President submitted it.
Turtle Island Restoration Network v Evans
, US Federal Circuit
Court of Appeals, Nos 001569, 1581, and 1582 (21 March 2002). In examining the
legislative history of the shrimp
embargo legislation, the Court of Appeals for
the Federal Circuit concluded that there seemed to be more concern with
the US shrimp industry than with protecting sea turtles. See also
International Trade Reporter
at pp 549–50 (28 March 2002).
Shaffer, G, ‘International trade-WTO-quantitative
restrictions-environmental protection-endangered species-US import ban on
shrimp’ (1999) 93 AMJIL 507.
It also diverts attention from the real political problems facing the
United States: the need for coherent action to combat the
multi-faceted threats
of terrorism; the failure of the government to focus on middle class
‘entitlement’ programs, such
as social security; a welfare dependent
underclass now in its third generation of welfare dependency; and the
inadequacies of our
system of primary and secondary education.
President George W Bush, ‘The President’s State of the Union
address’, speech delivered at The United States Capitol,
Washington, DC,
29 January 2002, www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2002/01/20020129-11.html at 21
October 2002.
Joseph Nye, the Dean of Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government, is
the leading proponent of ‘soft power’. He describes
soft power as
the ability to attract others to achieve the desired outcomes. The key to
developing effective multilateral responses
on security and trade matters is for
the US to use ‘soft power’, which means getting others to want to
act in a fashion
consistent with US interests. Through effective use of soft
power, the US will be able to fashion coalitions of power largely without
to US policy objectives.
It is clear that the uncertainty about US international trade policies
have influenced governments. The Canadian Government agreed
first to the
Canada/US Free Trade Agreement and then to the North American Free Trade
Agreement because of concerns over growing
US protectionism. Similar concerns
also have prompted many foreign based multinationals to locate production
facilities in the US
to guard against the protectionist threats.
House Democratic leader Dick Gephardt of Missouri stated: ‘To ensure
improved living standards at home and abroad, trade policy
needs to enhance
human rights, reaffirm worker rights and promote environmental
protection.’
Permanent Normal Trade Relation.
The new measures exclude countries that have signed free trade agreements
with the United States: Canada, Israel, Jordan and Mexico.
Developing countries
with limited exports to the United States are also exempted.
South Korean steel exports to the United States totalled 2.01 million tons
There was no immediate reaction from China, which was also targeted by the
tariffs announced by the Bush Administration.
Moore, MO, ‘Steel protection in the 1980s: the waning influence of
Big Steel?’, in Krueger, AO
The Political Economy of
American Trade Policy,
1996, 73–132.
727 exemptions covered 3.2 million metric tons of steel, which was close
to 25% of the 13.1 million metric tons of steel that had
been included in
President Bush’s March tariff order.
At the Doha meeting of the WTO, Ambassador Zoellick agreed to put US
anti-dumping laws on the negotiating table in the upcoming
round of trade
negotiations. The anti-dumping laws are hated by most of the world, but loved by
uncompetitive industries and their
congressional representatives in the United
States. The anti-dumping laws are especially supported by the US steel industry
in fact, members of Congress from steel producing regions have played a
major role in structuring the anti-dumping rules now in existence.
See ‘Bush the antiglobalizer’ (2002)
The Economist
May, 14–15. 32 See ‘US proposes cuts in farm subsidies’ (2002)
Financial Times
, 26 July, 6.
GATT, WTO, and the Regulation of International Trade in
1997, Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing Limited.
Testimony: American Textile Manufactures Institute House Ways and Means
Trade Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations,
Federal Document
Clearing House Congressional Testimony, 5 November 1993.
United Press International, 3 August 1995.
www.WTO.org/statistics/.
Kaur, H, ‘Mexico’s problem so close to us, so far away from
God’ (2001)
Business Times
‘Rules on Textile Industry among most difficult to implement:
minister, Agence France Press’ (2001) 11 November.
India: Textiles may Deadlock Talks at Doha Meet, FT Asia Africa
Intelligence Wire
, 12 November 2001, available on LEXIS/NEXIS.
As mentioned earlier, the even split between the Democrats and Republicans
means that neither party has any clear mandate. The consequence
is that swing
voters in Congress have great powers to influence national and international
issues. The example of Representative
Robin Hayes clearly illustrates this
power. In the House of Representatives’ vote on the new trade Bill,
Representative Robin
Hayes, a Republican from a textile district in North
Carolina, agreed that he would vote in favour of the new trade Bill and TPA
exchange for the House Republicans agreeing to eliminate a rules of origin
preference for textiles under the Caribbean Basin Initiative.
The rules of
origin preference is an important trade benefit for several of the small, poor
countries in Central America and the
Caribbean. The rules of origin preference
also is consistent with US national trade policy of seeking to promote economic
and democratic institutions through favoured access to the US markets.
However, it is opposed by the textile industry and its elected
representatives
and, in the current political climate, there is a good chance that the rules of
origin preference will be removed
from US trade laws.
‘Poor nations may decide Doha meet outcome’ (2001)
, 10 November.
Park, RS, ‘The international drug industry: what the future holds
for South Africa’s HIV/AIDS patients’ (2002)
11 MNJGT 125.
Nerozzi, MM, ‘The battle over life-saving pharmaceuticals: are
developing countries being ‘Tripped’ by developed
countries?’
(2002) 47 VLLR 605. PRMA stated: ‘In an environment of strong protection
for patent rights, TRIPs provides
limited exceptions where, in cases of extreme
urgency, compulsory licensing may complement generally high levels of
protection. Unfortunately,
at this time, these conditions do not prevail in
countries where compulsory licensing is practiced.’
Collins, T, ‘The pharmaceutical companies versus AIDS victims: a
classic case of bad versus good? A look at the struggle between
international
intellectual property rights and access to treatment’ (2001) 29 SYRJILC
‘Agreement at Doha to soften TRIPs provisions’, FT Asia Africa
Intelligence Wire (2001)
, 14 November.
Paragraph 7 of the Doha declaration says: we agree that the LDCs’
members will not be obliged, with respect to pharmaceutical
products, to
implement or apply sections 5 and 7 of part II of the TRIPs agreement or to
enforce rights provided for under these
sections until 1 January 2016.
‘FTA: US groups Pressure for changes to S’pore laws’,
Singapore Press Holdings Limited’ (2001)
The Business Times
After the TPA Bill passed, Mr Robert Zoellick said that the first trade
agreement likely to be completed is with Singapore, possibly
by the end of 2002.
The US-Singapore FTA was launched on 16 November 2000. The final round was in
Singapore between 11 and 17 November
2002, and the Agreement was concluded on 15
January 2003. Singapore guarantees zero tariffs immediately on all US goods, and
FTA ensures that Singapore cannot increase its duties on any US product. In
services, the US-Singapore FTA provides the broadest
possible trade
liberalisation. Market access in services is supplanted by strong disciplines on
regulatory authority.
Nye J, JS.,
The Paradox of American Power,
2002, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 8–9.
Swan, AC, ‘’’Fairness’’ and
‘’Reciprocity’’ in International Trade section
the Rule of Law’ (1999) 16 AZJICL 37.
Petersmann, E-U (ed),
International Trade Law and the GATT/WTO Dispute
Settlement System,
1997, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 86.
Nau, H (ed),
Domestic Trade Politics and the Uruguay Round,
New York: Columbia
University Press, 204.
Holliday, GD, ‘Effects on trade with non-member countries’
(1993) 3 Mex Trade & L Rep 13.
Jacob Viner in his classic 1950 analysis of customs union casts serious
doubt on the net economic benefit of creating a FTA or CU.
He argued that the
formation of a CU or FTA would result in both trade creation and trade
diversion. See generally Steinberg, RH,
‘Antidotes to regionalism:
respects to trade diversion effects of the North American Free Trade
Agreement’ (1993) 29
Stan J Int’l L 315.
Jackson, JH
International Economic Regulations,
Several technical analyses have provided evidence that the framers of
NAFTA disregarded the spirit of the MFN principle embodied
in WTO/GATT. In
addition to the strict rules of origin, the dispute resolution under NAFTA is
also a controversial issue. See Thomure,
JC, ‘The uneasy case for the
North American Free Trade Agreement’ (1995) 21 Syracuse J Int’l L
Choong, W, ‘S’pore FTAs will benefit Asean’ (2001)
Singapore Press Holdings Limited, The Straits Times
(Singapore), June.
Ariff, M, ‘The US-ASEAN free trade area option: scope and
implications’, in Schoot, JL
Free Trade Areas and US
Trade Policy,
1989, 201–15.
‘US agree on work program to boost trade investment’ (2002)
Asian Economic News
Jackson, J,
The World Trading System: Law and Policy of International
Economic Relations,
1989, Cambridge: MIT Press, 141. See also Pescatore, P
Handbook of WTO/GATT Dispute Settlement,
1995, New York:
Transnational Juris Publications, 26.
Within the SAARC region, the Commerce Ministers endorsed a collective
position rejecting calls for expanding the trade agenda and
insisted that their
concerns needed to be addressed upfront and in the first instance.
See generally (2001)
, 28 August,
www.hinduonnet.com/thehindu/2001/08 /28/stories/05282512.htm at 30 September,
The fact is that, at the international level, the changes in the
multilateral forum are the results of complex interactions between
the domestic level, the transformations in the WTO are the results of
interactions between private businesses and governments.
The main players in the
Uruguay Round, therefore, were the US and the EU domestic export industries. The
Uruguay Round negotiation
agenda, therefore, was designed to protect best those
industries.
McRae, DM, ‘From sovereignty to jurisdiction: the implications for
states of the WTO’, in Buchanan, MA
The Asia-Pacific
Regime and the Expanding Borders of the WTO: Implications, Challenges and
Opportunities,
1996, University of Victoria, British Columbia, Centre for
Asia-Pacific Initiatives.
Deardroff, A
The Emerging WTO System and Perspectives
from East Asia,
1997, Washington: Korea Economic Institute of America, 259.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (229 KB)
PDF format (166 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter