URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AULegHist/2008/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:35:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Connors, Libby --- "Sentencing on a Colonial Frontier: Judge Therry's Decisions at Moreton Bay" [2008] AULegHist 3; (2008) 12(1) Legal History 81
Sentencing on a Colonial Frontier: Judge Therry’s Decisions at Moreton Bay
Sentencing on a Colonial Frontier: Judge
Therry’s Decisions at Moreton Bay
LIBBY CONNORS
When the 1840s diary of the young barrister Thomas Callaghan was published,
Justice Keith Mason made a note in the foreword about
the inward preoccupations
of the bar:
The forensic activity recorded by Callaghan is usually that of the lawyers, as
if the main events were the spats between counsel
or instances of judicial
rudeness. Little was perceived or chronicled about the human dramas of the
litigants, some of whom were
facing capital
The death penalty certainly loomed large at the sittings of the supreme court
on circuit to Moreton Bay in the 1850s where no fewer
than 27 cases involving
Indigenous men and women as defendants many of whom faced the death penalty were
presented. Interracial conflict
in the north was played out not only on the
geographic frontier but also a cultural frontier, one that relied on police
and court rooms. Legal processes in New South Wales had undergone
significant reform since the chief justiceship of Francis Forbes,
non-admission of Aboriginal evidence, the wide ambit of the law of aiding and
abetting and the lack of criminal appeal processes
even in cases of capital
punishment made the law’s application unreliable in frontier cases in the
1850s. Hanging juries added
to its apparent uncertainty and make the role of
judges and the bar in these proceedings all the more important to the social
An understanding of the court’s operation at Moreton Bay thus
requires an understanding of not only the political and legal
context of the era
but also the social relations and preoccupations of its main players.
This paper explores only one small aspect of that story but one which draws
on the biography of Sir Roger Therry, judge of the supreme
court of New South
Wales from 1846 to 1859, to reconstruct some of the tensions of the courtroom in
an important capital trial in
1854. It outlines the operation of the circuit
courts at Brisbane and three frontier attacks which resulted in the arrest and
of several young Indigenous men. Therry was the presiding judge in the
trials of three of these men at three separate assizes; they
for the murders of William Boller and William Waller in November
for the murder of Mary Shannon in May 1853 and
for the murders of William Boller and Andrew Gregor
in November 1854. Roger Therry’s personal background is surveyed to try
resolve the discrepancies in the sentences he handed down in these cases before
drawing some conclusions about the contribution
of these events to contemporary
studies of the frontier.
After almost a decade of complaints about the administration of justice in
the north, the New South Wales circuit system was extended
to include Brisbane
in 1850. One of the supreme court judges and crown law officers or their
representatives travelled via steamer
to the northern town each May and November
from 1850 to 1855. In 1856 the pressure of business forced three criminal
sittings in
January, May and November and finally in 1857 a resident judge,
Samuel Milford, was appointed.
The New South Wales country circuits were not comfortable; the Brisbane leg
often took up more time than had been scheduled owing
to storms and other
weather conditions delaying the steamer’s
The range of accommodation
at Brisbane was limited. It was also deemed inappropriate for the judge to take
hotel accommodation with
other members of the bar and on the first circuit Judge
Therry and Attorney General Plunkett were forced to share a government cottage
in uncomfortable circumstances.
The court room too was rudimentary; the court sat in the top floor of the old
convict barracks which remained the town’s most
imposing building and
dominated the southern end of Queen Street. The town lockup and the lockup
keeper’s quarters were uncomfortably
close; they were on the ground floor
immediately below the judge’s room and court. In the unreformed prison
system of 1850s
New South Wales gaolers and lockup keepers still frequently
lived on-site in close proximity to their charges. In 1858 Judge Milford
requested substantial modifications to the judge’s chamber and the lockup
below as the noise from the lockup keeper’s
nursery continually disturbed
The Brisbane circuit was also not very lucrative. Young barrister, Thomas
Callaghan, kept a record of his fees and costs when on circuit
at Maitland,
Berrima and Parramatta court sittings in the 1840s for at times he only just
made a profit.
There was little
competition for briefs at Brisbane. Judge Therry allowed solicitors to appear at
the first circuit and they were
again allowed in November 1852 owing to the
absence of barristers in private practice. The only two members of the Sydney
appear with any regularity were William Purefoy and the new colonial
arrival Peter Faucett.
Purefoy was
a senior member of the bar by this
and Faucett later became
solicitor-general and judge of the supreme court of New South
For the crown, the
attorney general, J.H. Plunkett, and the criminal crown solicitor, John Moore
Dillon were also frequently in attendance,
while the three judges of the supreme
court of New South Wales, Chief Justice Alfred Stephen, John Dickinson and Roger
Therry appeared
in rotation.
Although criminal trials at the Moreton Bay Circuit in the 1850s differed in
important ways from modern criminal trials, the fundamental
principles of
criminal justice such as the presumption of innocence, testing of circumstantial
evidence and requiring proof beyond
reasonable doubt had been successfully
incorporated by the judges of New South Wales since
Therry himself had used
his address at the opening of the first circuit court in Brisbane in May 1850 to
instruct the public and
jurors on ‘a few of the leading principles of
evidence’ and to warn that ‘conscientious judgment must be exercised
... on the evidence, and the evidence only, adduced on the
The judge regarded
his address as of such significance that on his return to Sydney he had it
It was an important statement in a district still contending with frontier
violence. From 1845 to 1847 there were several incidents
which sent shockwaves
through the white community; three in particular would be re-visited by the
supreme court in the 1850s at sittings
over which Therry presided. The first
took place on a March evening in 1845 when a group of Ningy Ningy men said to
have been led
by Dundalli speared the German missionary, John Hausmann, then
ransacked and burnt his hut in an isolated area about 38 kilometres
Brisbane. The injured Hausmann survived after a fearful night journey to the
Nundah mission settlement through the bush.
This was followed by a more
audacious morning assault on a station on the Upper Caboolture River on 18
October 1846; men from several
different traditional owner groups killed the
station owner, Andrew Gregor and his female servant, Mary Shannon; Mrs
three children, all under six years of age, were unmolested, her
husband who had been some distance from the station buildings heard
daughters scream and turned to see ‘a great number of Blacks’ coming
from the creek; he fled on foot in the
direction of the neighbouring station,
followed by a young, part-Aboriginal boy of 10 or 11 years of age who had also
been working
more than a 100 yards away. Then, on 10 September 1847, some of the
men who were said to have participated in the Gregor station
raid attacked a
party of three sawyers killing one of the men instantly, fatally wounding
another and injuring a third who survived
and became the only witness in the
subsequent trials.
The significance of these attacks in customary law and their meaning to the
traditional owner groups have been explored
but it is important to
note that not all Europeans at the time were convinced of their criminal
culpability. Stephen Simpson, the
Commissioner of Crown Lands, Protector of
Aborigines during Governor Gipps’ term and magistrate for the district of
Bay, was reluctant to lay full blame on the traditional owners for these
acts of aggression. In his official report for 1846, he
recorded that he had
warned Mr Gregor about the insecurity of his station, on one occasion
‘having found the Station in charge
of a single hutkeeper ... fortunately
the Aborigines of these parts are by no means of sanguinary habits, or the loss
of life would
His response to
the 1847 attack was even less condemnatory; his official report for that year
noted that ‘as they were sawyers,
a class of men but too apt to give
provocation, it is difficult to say who may have been the
aggressors’.
The community’s reaction, however, was inflamed by a new arrival in the
district, the
Moreton Bay Courier
. Its first edition appeared just four
months before the Gregor attack in June 1846. The
ensure its popularity by making itself ‘the scourge of the black
population’ and used reports of racial attacks
to build a sense of
community among the whites of the district. To this end the new paper frequently
found itself at odds with Sydney
journals such as the
Sydney Morning
which drew attention to its one-sided
reporting of interracial violence in the district in the years
Soon after the Gregor
had called for reprisals as ‘life and property
are entirely at the mercy of ruthless savages, who require to be promptly
It repeated its demand for retribution a few weeks later
euphemistically labelling it as ‘Anglo-Saxon
By 1849 it was
using ‘bush opinion’ to argue against the application of the law to
the Indigenous population on the grounds
that ‘it is well known ... that a
systematic favouritism is extended to the aboriginal natives, at the expense of
settlers and their
The presence of the supreme court was thus an important measure to re-assert
the ideology of law on the northern frontier and a trained
and experienced
judiciary a potentially powerful check on hanging juries comprised of local
whites. Justice Therry appears eminently
suitable for the task. His class
background and his formal training marked him as someone above the immediate
concerns of the northern
colonists. No book length biography of Sir Roger Therry
has been written, but Professor John Bennett’s detailed introduction
the 1974 facsimile edition of Therry’s
Reminiscences of Thirty Years
Residence in New South Wales and Victoria
provides assessments of Therry
from many of his contemporaries. Although the biographer of John Hubert Plunkett
notes that no one
in the colony could match the Attorney General’s
pedigree of Irish aristocracy, Bennett regards Therry’s family background
highly. The
Australian Dictionary of Biography
entry records Edmund Burke
as his father’s ‘guardian’; Bennett explains that his role was
as a Protestant patron
to preserve the family’s claim to their ancestral
lands which could have been denied to them as Catholics. It was Burke too
encouraged Roger Therry’s father to go into the legal profession and
supported his involvement in the campaign for rights
Born in 1800, Roger was John and Jane Therry’s third son and it seems
he learnt well the importance of an influential patron
and of the campaign for
Catholic legal rights. At Trinity College Dublin he studied with other young
Irish Catholics inspired by
the political campaign for Catholic emancipation.
Among this student network was John Plunkett, a gifted future lawyer who would
follow Therry to New South Wales where they would both play leading roles not
only in the colony’s legal system but in advocacy
for legal rights.
Roger did not complete his degree; instead he went to London to take up law
where he was called to the Bar in
Bennett says that there is
no evidence that he actually practised as he was earning his income from writing
law reports for the English
press. He publicly contributed to the campaign for
Catholic emancipation when he published
A Letter to the Right Hon. George
Canning on the Present State of the Catholic Question
in 1826. Bennett is
generous in his assessment of Therry’s political activism in this period.
‘Therry could,’ he
writes, ‘with some satisfaction, regard
himself as a significant contributor – and at his age no less significant
to the reforms attained under the Roman Catholic Relief Act
His efforts bore
fruit not only as a Catholic but for him personally. In this period he imitated
his father in winning for himself
an influential patron although it was to be a
short-lived relationship. In 1827 Prime Minister George Canning appointed him as
private secretary to assist him in writing and editing his speeches for
publication. Canning apparently thought highly of Therry
however he died in
office in August that year, preventing the bestowal of further favours on his
young protégé. To
complete the collection of the Prime
Minister’s speeches Therry sought help from Canning’s colleague,
William Huskisson.
As Secretary of State for the Colonies it was Huskisson who
secured Roger Therry’s appointment as Commissioner of the Court
Requests at New South Wales in
In New South Wales Therry was permitted to take private work as well as
fulfilling his commissionership duties. Plunkett who arrived
in 1832 to fill the
position of Solicitor General often passed him private cases but he was also
called on at times to do crown work
owing to the excessive load that fell to the
Attorney General’s office.
In 1833 at the request of the Catholic chaplain, Therry took the defence of the
runaway convicts from Major Mudie’s infamous
estate. Although the legal
defence was unsuccessful, an anonymous pamphlet which attacked the inhumane
attitudes of Mudie’s
supporters appeared the following year.
Mudie believed Therry was the author
and attacked him relentlessly in his book,
The Felonry of New South
support for Governor Bourke’s reforms to limit the excessive number of
floggings ordered by magistrates made
him unpopular with the Exclusive pastoral
interest and was a factor contributing to his loss, by one vote, in his first
public office, the election for Chairman of Quarter Sessions, in
Therry also risked colonial opinion by continuing to publicly defend his
religion and churchmen, leading to struggles with Anglican
Archdeacon Broughton.
As early as 1834 his religious advocacy had earned him a reprimand from the
Colonial Office
and by 1837 in
the midst of contestation over the Quarter Sessions the
Sydney Herald
denounced him as ‘a political and religious partizan
These religious and political struggles did not alienate him from his social
network. Therry and his wife naturally shared social
as well as professional
relations with the Plunketts as well as with the small circle of educated
Catholics in the colony. One of
the more important members of this set was the
influential newspaper editor William Augustine Duncan. Although a Scot, Duncan
a Catholic-convert and radical journalist won the support of the Catholic
clergy and emancipist Irish and as a result was appointed
editor of the
Australasian Chronicle
soon after his arrival in the
Among the causes
these three leading Catholic opinion-makers espoused were Indigenous legal
rights. Therry assisted Plunkett with
the prosecution of the second Myall Creek
trial in 1838 and wrote of these horrific events with compassion in his
Reminiscences
his later career as a civil servant and magistrate at Brisbane, took a strong
stand on the rights of traditional owners
in cases before the lower
Plunkett in his official
capacity pressed repeatedly for legislation to allow Aboriginal evidence and
Therry too spoke publicly and
passionately in support of the
Rather than retreat from colonial political battles, in 1843 Therry decided
to stand in the first ever elections for the partly-elected
legislative council.
His participation reveals three important character traits relevant to his
future career as supreme court judge.
Having weathered the storm of public
opinion over convict and Catholic rights in the 1830s, Therry showed he could
just as readily
accommodate the views of the old colonial elite. The solicitor,
George Allen, described Therry as ‘a government officer and
Whig in his principles’. However his nomination for the seat of Camden in
1843 was supported by the Macarthur family
who labelled him as ‘of liberal
conservative principles, (that is a supporter of Government in all its measures
they have for their object the general good of the governed), and as
an enemy to all rash
innovations’.
shock to William Duncan who had used his paper to satirise the ‘landed
oligarchs’ and their defenders. One of
his headlines in 1841 had angrily
demanded ‘Shall This Colony Be Completely
Macarthurised?’
refused to change his political colours even for a Catholic as prominent as
Therry. The young Catholic barrister, Thomas Callaghan,
sought to mediate
between the two. He recorded his discussions with Duncan at some length:
I said that I thought Therry had acted indiscreetly in mixing himself up so much
with the Macarthurs, but that I believed his indiscretion
could only injure
himself alone. Duncan said that he had not deserted Therry but that Therry and
the Catholics of Cumberland had
deserted him ... He mentioned the subserviency
of Therry’s character but I contended that this was confined to his manner
was not in his real nature and I dwelt upon the importance of securing
Therry’s election ... (He charged Therry with
subserviency).
Therry’s political enemies had a field day. The
The most scathing
assessment came from the political warhorse, John Dunmore Lang, who combined a
slur of sycophancy with that of
ambition: ‘He was a Government officer,
and, even as such, was notoriously a mere Vicar of Bray, who always
man that was in
, as the readiest way of getting
Perhaps more important than Therry’s ability to swing on major issues
of the day was his ready exercise of influence to remove
Duncan. In less than a
fortnight after Callaghan’s failed mediation the former bookseller and
radical journalist was dismissed
from the editorship of the
Australasian
and as he explained to Thomas when he passed him on the streets of
Sydney, it was Therry who had had him
It was harsh retribution
for a man of Duncan’s standing; he continued to promote the working
man’s cause in a new paper,
Weekly Register
, but by December
1845 he was bankrupt and in 1846 Governor Gipps rewarded him for his
anti-squatter political stands by giving him
the post of Sub-Collector of
Customs at Moreton Bay. In his diary Callaghan often bemoaned Therry’s
ungenerosity of spirit
towards him, contrasting Roger with the friendliness and
kindness of his wife and with the absent John Plunkett. ‘How differently
Attorney-General would have acted towards me in this matter!’
he lamented as he waited to hear from Therry as to whether he
was to receive a
government appointment.
had withstood many personal attacks during his public career but showed that he
could also act ruthlessly.
Among the myriad personal anecdotes sprinkled through Callaghan’s diary
there is also a telling one about Therry’s reaction
to a professional
sneer in the courtroom from barristers a’Beckett and Windeyer. Erroneously
imagining the laughter came from
Callaghan, Therry stopped mid-argument and
requested ‘that I should restrain my
risibility’.
The dignity
of the court and of his professional behaviour weighed heavily on Therry and he
guarded them both fiercely. His successful
election to the seat of Camden meant
that Therry was present for the elected members’ attack on the
‘Schedules’,
a political showdown with Governor Gipps in October
1843 in which the anti-government MPs queried the salary of every officer of
crown including the governor’s. They negatively assessed the contributions
of even the most minor officials before starting
on the supreme court and the
attorney-general. The humiliation was too much for Roger Therry who gave one of
his most powerful political
speeches in response to Richard Windeyer’s
Did he want New South Wales to follow the American example, ‘where Judges
went into Court with cigars in their mouths, and
in shirt sleeves’, or
took their place on the bench in Tweed? Would he dispense altogether with the
wig and gown? ... There
was more, all of it leading to Therry’s conclusion
that [Windeyer] and his tribe ‘would cripple the administration of
in some of its most important departments’ if ever they got their
The dignity of the court and its officers was sacrosanct.
Therry finally achieved his goal of appointment to the Supreme Court of New
South Wales on 26 February 1846.
He had put himself forward on a number of
He and Plunkett had
both been unfairly overlooked because of their religion in the controversy over
the replacement of the chief
and third justices of the supreme court in
but Therry eventually won
appointment as resident judge at Port Phillip on 31 January
resigning his seat in the
Legislative Council at the same
It was a brief sojourn
before taking his place on the New South Wales bench the following year.
The opening of the first circuit court at Moreton Bay fell to Therry in May
1850 and it immediately presented both the attorney-general
and the judge with
an opportunity to comment on the applicability of the law in frontier
situations. Three soldiers of the Eleventh
Regiment were tried for shooting at
the local Turrbal people at this sitting. The solicitor given leave to represent
the soldiers
complained in his address that ‘the continued prosecutions of
whites, while the blacks were not interfered with, was calculated
confidence to the latter in their depredations’. Plunkett who had already
given his address was provoked into a reply
which emphasised legal precedents.
Therry however was blunt and to the point. He used the occasion to remind the
Brisbane audience
that he himself had been responsible for leading the
prosecution against two Indigenous men who had been publicly hanged in the town
It was an important
counterpoint for this northern audience given the colonial preoccupation with
the Myall Creek trials
important roles Plunkett and Therry had played in them.
Therry’s next appearance in Brisbane was at the circuit court sittings
in November 1851 where he presided over the first of
the supreme court
prosecutions arising from the Gregor attack to be heard
Getting the defendant,
Mickaloe, before the court had proved to be difficult. Two local officials,
William Duncan and John Ferriter,
had taken the bench for the committal of
‘Jemmy Parson alias Paddy alias Mickaloi’, with the hearings spread
over a fortnight
in August 1851. Duncan infuriated local opinion by refusing to
commit Mickaloe for the Gregor station attack instead insisting that
necessary to await advice from the attorney-general. The problem was identifying
the defendant who was known by six different
names according to witnesses at the
committal hearing. The confusion over identity was compounded by Ralph Barrow,
the young boy
who had fled the station and was now about 15 or 16 years old, as
he gave evidence which was inconsistent with that he had given
at the inquest in
1846. When the bench questioned him on some of these points, he contradicted
earlier statements and began to cry.
Duncan, reacting to the pressure that had
been applied to the youth by a white community excessively eager for a
committal, eventually
sentenced the boy to a week in gaol for prevarication. The
controversy did not end there. The district’s renowned interpreter,
Davis, who as a runaway convict had lived with the Ginginburra for 14 years,
refused to interpret unless his expenses were
paid and also found himself in
gaol for contempt of court. When the 10 year old daughter of Mrs Shannon and the
interpreter Tom Petrie
both denied the defendant was the Jemmy Parsons named at
the original Gregor inquest, it appeared unlikely that the attorney-general
would proceed with any trial of Mickaloe for
Moreton Bay
which had editorialised against the bench over these proceedings was
triumphant when an illiterate, ex-convict sawyer, James Smith,
then asked to see
the prisoner and declared that he had been present at the attack on the sawyers
Dillon as crown
prosecutor decided to put Mickaloe in the dock for the 1847 murders but the
question of identity had still not been
satisfactorily resolved. At the November
assizes William Purefoy took the defence and
addressed the jury for the prisoner, commenting forcibly on the probability that
arose from the demeanour of the prisoner, and the
testimony of Davis, that Smith
might be mistaken in the identity of the prisoner.
Although Therry ‘summed up with great care’, the jury took only
‘a few minutes’ to return with a verdict of
Given the attention that had been drawn to the contradictory evidence, it is
not surprising that Therry was concerned about young
Mickaloe’s identity.
At the end of the sittings he requested the police magistrate to make further
inquiries to provide him
with more definite evidence about the young Indigenous
man. As this was not forthcoming his advice to the Executive Council when
to consider the awarding of the capital punishment in December 1851 was that
Mickaloe should be reprieved but that
the prisoner is to be detained in the Brisbane Gaol ... three months and then
sent quietly to Wide Bay to join his own Tribe with
an intimation that his life
would be endangered if he returns to the neighbourhood of
Therry’s solution appeared a resourceful one; it had the benefit of
getting Mickaloe out of the vicinity of Brisbane to placate
local white feeling
but also to instil his tribe with fear and gratitude for his return in accord
with the age-old deterrence model
of criminal justice.
However the decision met with opposition from leading local figures. There
was no direct line of communication between Brisbane and
Wide Bay and the only
available sea passage was via Sydney. Francis Bigge, a Brisbane Valley
landholder who happened to be in Sydney
at the time of the Executive Council
decision, was concerned that such a journey would be deemed a ‘special
mark’ which
‘would only embolden the Aborigines of those districts
& probably lead to further loss of
John Wickham,
Police Magistrate for Brisbane, was troubled by the logistics of getting
Mickaloe to Wide Bay and recommended that
he be released from Brisbane Gaol to
find his own way home to which the Colonial Secretary’s office consented
in April 1852.
On 26 May 1852 gaol officials at Brisbane released Mickaloe in the township
with a warning. He, his friends and supporters then carried
out a series of
reprisals on settlers to the north as he made his way to his own country at Wide
Bay. He was re-arrested for theft
arising from one of these raids but the
non-appearance of a witness at the November 1852 assizes saw him held over to
appear again
before Justice Therry in May 1853. On Wednesday 18 May 1853
Plunkett opened the case against another young man, Mickie, who had allegedly
been involved in the Gregor Station attack. According to the
Moreton Bay
the Attorney-General ‘said that he had declined taking the
course that was open to him and [indicting] the prisoner for the
murder as there
was only one witness to his identity, and this event was so long
instead young
Mickie was tried for stealing from Gregor’s station and found guilty. The
next morning however, the repeated
non-appearance of a witness again forced the
release of Mickaloe from custody, and the following day, Friday, Plunkett
second indictment against Mickie for the wilful murder of Mary
Shannon, after all. In opening the case
the Attorney-General alluded to the accusations that had been brought against
him of eagerness to prosecute whites for acts against
blacks, and reluctance to
proceed against the aborigines for outrages on the whites. These accusations he
indignantly repudiated,
and declared his full determinat[ion] at all times to
act legally and according to the dictates of his own
conscience.
Peter Faucett took the defence of Mickie assisted by local solicitor Robert
Little and his cross-examination again brought out the
impressions’ of Ralph Barrow, the only witness, now 17 years old and
recalling events of seven years ago. In
his final address Faucett was reported
as ‘dwelling with much force upon the evident defects of memory in the
only witness,
and upon the probability, even if the prisoner had been present,
that he had no part in the intention to murder.’ The jury
took about an
hour to reach their verdict of guilty but Therry, alerted by both the
Attorney-General and the defence to the weaknesses
of the case, refused to pass
sentence of death. As was the custom of the day, Therry instructed that
‘death recorded’
be entered in the Judgment Book, meaning that
Mickie’s actual sentence would be decided later by the judge upon his
recommendation
to the Executive
Plunkett’s second prosecution of Mickie did not spare him from
political attack. The following week the
Moreton Bay Courier
its editorial over the Attorney-General’s ‘tone of deep
feeling’ when he had addressed the court about
‘outrages which he
said were perpetrated upon the aboriginal natives by the European
settlers’. Overlooking the severity
of Mickie’s treatment, the
editorial went on to complain about the release of Mickaloe, ‘once more
turned loose upon
society, to continue his career of crime and blood, should his
savage nature prompt him to do so.’ Its conclusion bewailed
amiable philanthropists whose persons have always been safe from the fate so
frequently recorded in this document’
and hoped that they would
‘transfer a portion of their compassion from the murderers to the
murdered’. It was a statement
that impressed Justice Therry. For the
conviction of Mickey did provoke complaint, and from an unexpected quarter, to
which Therry
was forced to reply.
Frederick Walker, the commandant of the Native Police, then stationed at
Durundur just 80 kilometres north of Brisbane and in the
heart of the
traditional lands from which many of the attacks on Europeans were supposed to
have originated, sent ‘a private
account’ to the colonial secretary,
Edward Deas Thomson, expressing concern about events in the district. The Native
had originally apprehended Mickie but Walker confided ‘I can give
the Attorney General a half a dozen more [boys] under the
same warrant. All I
have to do is go round the different stations’. He wanted ‘an
amnesty for every one included in that
warrant’. He objected to the fact
that Mickie had been convicted of the murder of Mrs Shannon which he presumed
accessory after the fact’ for ‘he was a mere boy at
the time and ... the murderers, made every boy woman and child carry
forwarded Walker’s communication to Plunkett and Therry for their
opinions. Plunkett was brief. He pointed out that
the correct conviction was for
‘aiding and abetting’ and that
as the life of the Convict has been spared (in the humanity and expediency of
which I entirely concur) I see nothing in the case
of Mickie to call for further
consideration at
Therry on the other hand wrote at length and with some indignation; he
thought some of Mr Walker’s mode of expression ‘very
unsuitable’; he explained the law of aiding and abetting and its
applicability to Mickie’s case. He did concede that
‘no doubt there
are shades and degrees of guilt in the participation each had in the commission
of the crime and it is for
this reason that I recommended the commutation in
Mickey’s case.’ It was his concluding paragraph, however, which
the sentiments of the
Moreton Bay Courier
Mr Walker’s letter does not in the slightest degree alter my opinion as to
the propriety of that commutation and I venture
further to suggest that
tho’ Mr Walker’s sympathy may be very commendable, it appears to me
that the fate of Mr Gregor
and his servant is not without some claim to sympathy
too, and that it should not be too exclusively bestowed on those who breach
It was a harsh conclusion since Frederick Walker had been five years
continuously in the field facing the day to day reality of frontier
Commandant Walker was officially reprimanded for his comments made ‘under
feelings of excitement’.
The most sensational case was left to Therry’s last appearance in
Brisbane. In May 1854 the Djindubarri elder, Dundalli, was
captured and
committed on five counts, including the murders at Gregor’s Station and of
the sawyers at the Pine River. The
Moreton Bay Courier
as emotional as
ever had wanted a special commission to try
but his case went to trial
as usual at the next assizes in November 1854. The crown cases were taken by
William Purefoy while Peter
Faucett took Dundalli’s defence. Purefoy
proceeded with only two of the five indictments, the murders of William Boller
of Andrew Gregor. The crown’s main witnesses were again the ex-convict
Smith and the much interrogated Ralph Barrow.
The attack on the sawyers was dealt with first. At the time of the original
inquest in September 1847 James Smith claimed to recognise
one Gubbi man
although he could not name him and was unable to identify any of the other
participants in the assault. Subsequently
some Indigenous workers on nearby
Whiteside Station were alleged to have stated that Dundalli was involved and
from that time on
Smith confidently asserted Dundalli’s
Seven years later
Smith’s insistence that Dundalli was present left Faucett with little room
to mount a defence. After brief
recounting of events by the witnesses for the
crown, Faucett concluded with
an eloquent and powerful appeal to the jury on behalf of the prisoner, and
closed his address with some strong comments upon the
insufficiency and the
mockery of the protection said to be thrown around the blacks by the British
Government.
It was not a plea that could win favour with the presiding judge but Faucett
who had only arrived in Sydney in 1852 seemed unaware
of Therry’s stand in
this regard. Therry ‘in charging the jury, expressed his emphatic dissent
from these sentiments.’
Myall Creek was yet again invoked. ‘The law was equally careful of the
life of a black as of a white, and within his own experience,
he knew of no less
than seven cases where white men had been executed for the murder of aboriginal
natives’, Therry stressed,
before summarising the evidence ‘at
Dundalli was found guilty – the press reports vary as to whether the
jury took 15 minutes or an hour to reach their decision
– and the court
moved on to hear a case of wounding with intent and another of horse stealing
before returning to Dundalli
and his second indictment. His trial for the murder
of the squatter Andrew Gregor was the last trial for the day and for this
session. Having provoked Therry’s ire earlier in the day Faucett
tried a new tactic to win some sympathy from the judge and
jury. He objected to
the fact that Dundalli was shackled while in the dock. William Purefoy conceded
it was not normal procedure
but argued that Dundalli was an exception he
‘being a savage of great strength and daring’ and called the
to provide evidence of Dundalli’s attempted
Therry, however,
acknowledged the principle of his right to be unfettered and was about to order
the removal of the heavy irons when
Faucett withdrew his objection, claiming
that he was satisfied with ‘the admission of the prisoner’s
The trial proceeded with Dundalli in chains in the dock and Ralph Barrow, now
18 years old, in the witness stand. Despite the lack
of time to prepare, Faucett
was familiar with Barrow and the issues of the case having taken the defence of
Mickie before Justice
Therry in May 1853. His cross-examination proved that
Barrow ‘had no idea of how long ago the event occurred. He also ... did
not know the names of any other blacks
Knowing how this
same weak evidence had failed to create doubt in the minds of Mickie’s
jurymen, Faucett addressed them on
the discrepancies and called John Clements
Wickham to the stand. Wickham was the most senior official in Brisbane, was
recently appointed
Government Resident, and was the magistrate who had conducted
the Gregor inquest and heard Barrow’s original testimony at the
the raid. Wickham made clear that Barrow had named ‘several other
blacks’ as being present at the
Over the past eight years Barrow had given different evidence at each
committal hearing and supreme court trial. Therry had presided
at three trials
which drew on Barrow’s testimony either directly or indirectly, yet he
undercut Faucett’s argument completely.
The judge in his summation of the
issues for the jury insisted that ‘from first to last’ Barrow
‘had maintained
that Dundalli had struck the blow which killed Mr
Gregor’. It was an extraordinary statement. The Clerk of Petty Sessions
merely to open the Brisbane Bench Book to show that the judge was wrong on
Furthermore, given
the propensity of Brisbane juries in these interracial cases to affirm guilt it
was hardly necessary. At the end
of a long day, the jury ‘retired for a
few minutes’ before returning with a verdict of
Between Purefoy’s declamations that the court room would be
‘unsafe’ should Dundalli be unfettered, Faucett’s
retreat from
having the defendant unmanacled and Therry’s interventions to undermine
the defence arguments, the brief press
reports of Dundalli’s trials
reverberate with tensions. Faucett may well have felt slighted by the
judge’s dismissal
of his arguments but the evidence suggests that the
stress went beyond any sensitivities among members of the bar. The signals come
from Therry himself - the destabilising factor was the defiant personality
facing his white accusers and defenders from the dock.
Other than the Myall Creek trials, Dundalli’s is the only interracial
case that Therry gives any attention to in his
Reminiscences
. His sense
of intimidation in Dundalli’s presence can still be felt through this
account even though it was written nearly
10 years after the trial. The gaolers
had dressed Dundalli in European dress and the dreadlock coils that were a
feature of men’s
hair in south-east Queensland had been washed and cut
European style.
Even without the
overt signs of Indigenous physicality, Dundalli conveyed a sense of
‘formidable ... ferocious strength’,
according to Therry. He towered
over the judge who described him as ‘the largest man I ever looked
upon’ and recorded
the presence of six constables in court to guarantee
security during his trials.
much of Therry’s time in the colonial court system had been spent
defending the liberal model of the law and its application
across the racial
divide. Here he was faced with an Indigenous defendant who refused to be
grateful, refused to respect those who
sought to help him and showed nothing but
contempt for British law. Nor was he a man who could be readily patronised
neither young, nor weak, nor cowered. According to Therry,
despite evidence that Dundalli spoke English well, he disrupted the trial
beckoning to a settler he recognised in the court and asking him to offer the
judge a bribe of sixpence. At another stage in the
hearing he addressed the
judge directly, ostensibly offering to row him back to Sydney. Disrespect for
the solemnity of court ritual
and for his dignity as judge was deeply disturbing
for Therry. He failed to recognise these incidents as a rejection of the
authority. In his view they could only be ‘distressing ...
indications of marked inferiority of
Dundalli’s disdain for the colonial court, however, is consistent with
his contempt for his gaolers and fellow prisoners; he
refused to see the
Catholic chaplain on the eve of his execution and until the noise of the
construction of the gallows reached his
solitary cell he had refused to believe
that they would dare to hang him. Even at the end, when he mounted the gallows
and saw his
people gathered in the scrub on the hill opposite the gaol, he
refused to recognise the authority of British law. Dundalli yelled
address to his countrymen – his message was not to respect British law but
to avenge his death according to customary
As a colonial judge of the New South Wales supreme court Therry was brought
face-to-face with the limits of a colonial office policy
which insisted that
there could be no state of war on the Australian frontiers. An imperial policy
which refused to see Indigenous
Australians as enemy subjects of a rival power
could only criminalise their behaviour once they were defined as British
The injustice of this policy as it applied to young men involved in
group action was softened by legal procedure which required individual
to be proven and by judicious use of the power to commute the most severe
penalty. A man whose social networks included
Irish aristocracy and British
prime ministers found it easy to look upon these young men not as enemies but as
‘untutored savages’
to be pitied and protected. When confronted by a
man whose opposition and disdain could not be silenced, however, Therry
with mutual contempt; he failed to recognise any integrity in
Dundalli’s position and decried Dundalli’s lack of intelligence
his ‘savage ferocity’ in his memoirs. Paternalism gave way to the
colonial discourse of dehumanisation of Therry’s
political opponents,
those settlers who had opposed any legal rights for indigenous Australians.
Therry’s portrayal of Dundalli’s ‘marked inferiority of
mind’ is completely out of step with witnesses from
Dundalli’s long standing enemy, the
Moreton Bay Courier,
begrudgingly acknowledged both his intelligence and his
leadership.
There were no
appeals from the community over Therry’s awarding of the death penalty. In
this case Frederick Walker was one
of many northerners who had confidently
asserted Dundalli’s guilt in these
and by December 1854
Walker was on his own downhill spiral toward alcoholism. The judge’s
advice to the Executive council was
the last and only avenue of review. On later
reflection in Sydney Therry did reconsider his instructions regarding the
witness Ralph
Barrow. Although he had been sentenced to death for both murders,
the Executive Council minute regarding Dundalli’s execution
referred only
to his responsibility for the murder of William
Therry thus upheld the integrity of the legal process while eradicating the
challenge to the sovereignty of British law that Dundalli
represented. The
formal processes of the court room effectively rendered traditional law and
authority invisible. Within its walls
traditional lawmen were re-cast as
criminals and their enforcement of its customs as ferocious savagery. These
defects were compounded
by the non-admission of Aboriginal evidence which in
practice left indigenous defendants mute while the formality of the trial
required their passivity. In the resulting newspaper reports Dundalli
the defendant is sidelined, a barely visible person in the
court room. The value
in focusing on the discrepancies in Therry’s sentencing is that they
require a shift in the historic
gaze so that the image of a man who had refused
to play the part of a pitiable savage becomes foregrounded. The means to achieve
this shift in focus are few and racially-biased consisting of brief press
reports of circuit court trials and a few pages of a nineteenth
century judicial
autobiography. It is remarkable that for all this, they fail to erase the
evidence of Indigenous agency. The Moreton
Bay cases highlight the importance of
the individual judge’s role in asserting the sovereignty of British law
and denying the
validity of Aboriginal resistance on the frontier.
Senior Lecturer in History,
University of Southern Queensland. I would like to thank The Honourable Justice
J Jerrard, Queensland
Court of Appeal, for providing feedback on this paper.
J M Bennett (ed),
Callaghan’s Diary
(2005) iii.
Libby Connors,
‘birth of the prison’ and the death of convictism: the operation of
the law in pre-separation Queensland 1839 to 1859
, (D Phil, University of
Queensland, 1990) 312-313, 315-317.
Moreton Bay
19 May 1852.
Col Sec to PM Moreton Bay 18
April 1850 in Government Resident Moreton Bay, RES/A3 QSA; J.M. Bennett
‘Introduction’
in Roger Therry,
Reminiscences of Thirty Years
Residence of New South Wales and Victoria
, (facs ed, 1974) 28.
Milford to Colonial Secretary
13 June 1858, Letter no. 58/1966, Clerk of Works Moreton Bay IL: 1856-59 WOK/1
Bennett, above n 1, 58, 66,
Based on newspaper reports of
the sittings.
Moreton Bay Courier
18 May 1850, 16 November 1850, 25 May
1851, 15 November 1851, 19 May 1852, 26 November 1853, 27 May 1854, 25 November
1854, 2 June
1855 and 24 November 1855;
Moreton Bay Free Press
November 1852, 17 May 1853.
Bennett, above n 1, xvi; J M
A History of the New South Wales Bar
W B Perrignon
‘Faucett, Peter (1813-1894)’ (1972) 4
Australian Dictionary of
Above n 2, 316-317.
G.D. Woods,
A History of
Criminal Law in New South Wales: The Colonial Period 1788-1900
(2002) 3-5.
Moreton Bay Courier
18 May 1850.
Letter to the Right Hon.
Wm. E. Gladstone M.P.
, Sydney 1850; Bennett, above n 4, 53 n.102.
Libby Connors,
‘Traditional Law and Indigenous Resistance at Moreton Bay,
1842-1855’ (Pt I)[2005]
ANZLH E-Journal
107; Libby Connors,
‘Traditional Law and Indigenous Resistance at Moreton Bay, 1842-1855, Part
ANZLH E-Journal
Refereed Paper No 11, 1.
Report on the State of the
Aborigines for the year ending 31 December 1846, Stephen Simpson,
The Simpson
, (1979) 23-24.
Annual Report on the State
of the Aborigines in the District of Moreton Bay for the Year ending the
December 1847, CCL Moreton Bay in Colonial Secretary
Correspondences: 1848: CCL (1) 4/2811 SRNSW
Denis Cryle
‘”Snakes in the grass” The press and race relations at Moreton
Bay 1846-47’ (1992) 11
Brisbane The Aboriginal Presence: Brisbane
History Group Papers
Moreton Bay Courier
24 October 1846, 21 November 1846.
Moreton Bay Courier
22 September 1849.
‘Introduction’ above n 4, 12
Ibid, 13. Currey gives the
date as 1827; C. H. Currey, 'Therry, Sir Roger (1800 - 1874)', (1967) 2
Australian Dictionary of Biography
‘Introduction’ above n 4, 36.
John Molony,
Architect of Freedom: John Hubert Plunkett in New South Wales 1832-1869
Bernard T. Dowd, Averil F.
Fink, 'Mudie, James (1779 - 1852)' (1967) 2
Australian Dictionary of
264-266; Bennett, ‘Introduction’, above n 12, 42.
James Mudie,
The Felonry
of New South Wales
(first published 1837, 1965 ed.) esp 64
‘Introduction’, above n 4, 30-31.
‘Introduction’, above n 4, 38.
9 March 1837 cited in
Molony, n 24, 26 n 57.
Peter Cochrane,
Ambition: Foundations of Australian Democracy
(2006) 54-55.
Reminiscences
of Thirty Years Residence of New South Wales and Victoria
ed 1863). 271-286.
Connors, above n 2, 169-70;
Cryle, above n 17, 69, 71-78; John Mackenzie-Smith,
The Scottish Presence at
Moreton Bay, 1837-59: Collected Insights
, (2005) 181-82.
Bruce Kercher,
Child: A History of Law in Australia
, (1995) 16-17.
Cited by Bennett, above n
4, 33. See also the
’s criticism of him as ‘a violent
politician’; cited by Molony, above n 24, 45.
Cited by Cochrane above n
(Emphasis in original)
Bennett, above n 1, 162.
For examples see ibid, 161
(Emphasis in original) Lang
Colonial Observer
cited by Bennett, above n 4, 54 n. 129.
Bennett, above n 1, 164.
Bennett, above n 1,75; see
also 86, 124, 137, 140, 150.
Cited by Cochrane, above n
‘Introduction’ above n 4, 25.
Bennett, above n 8, 19-21.
Molony, above n 24, 60-67;
J M Bennett,
Sir William a’Beckett: First Chief Justice of Victoria
Bennett ‘Introduction
above n 4, 22.
Currey, above n 21,
Moreton Bay Courier
20 May 1850; Libby Connors, ‘The theatre of justice: Race relations and
capital punishment at Moreton Bay 1841-59’ (1992)
Brisbane The
Aboriginal Presence: Brisbane History Group Papers
Connors, above n 2, 343.
Within weeks of the attack,
one Indigenous man, Constable, had been arrested and tried by the supreme court
Sydney Morning Herald,
30 November 1846;
R v Constable
1846 Supreme Court, Criminal Jurisdiction: Clerk of the Peace: Brisbane 9/6357
Moreton Bay Courier
16 August 1851, 23 August 1851; Prison no. 356 in Prison Register: 1851 PRI 1/25
Moreton Bay Courier
16 August 1851, 30 August 1851
Moreton Bay Courier
15 November 1851
Letter no. 51/90 Colonial
Secretary’s Office to Police Magistrate Brisbane, 22 December 1851 in
Letters addressed to the Government
Resident Moreton Bay by the Colonial
Secretary, Sydney, 1851. RES/A3 QSA
Francis Bigge to Col
Secretary, 30 January 1852 enclosure in L/no. 52/3069 Colonial Secretary Letters
Received Main Series: 1852
4/3075 SRNSW
Police Magistrate Brisbane
to Col Secretary 10 April 1852 L/no. 52/3069 Colonial Secretary Letters Received
Main Series: 1852 4/3075
Moreton Bay Courier
21 May 1853
Ibid. The paper spelt
Mickie’s name as ‘Mickey’ and the defence counsel’s as
Ibid. Death was commuted to
seven years hard labour on the roads or other public works. Justice Therry to
Col Sec 11 July 1853,
L/no. 53/6065 in bundle beginning 52/3069, Col Secretary
Letters Received Main Series: 1852 4/3075 SRNSW; Prison Register: 1853 PRI
QSA Gaol No. 152; Supreme Court, Criminal Jurisdiction, Judgement Book: Brisbane
Circuit Court, 1852-53 4/5745-5753 SRNSW.
Commandant Native Police to
E.Deas Thomson, 11 July 1853, L/no. 53/6063 in bundle beginning 52/3069, Col
Secretary Letters Received
Main Series: 1852 4/3075 SRNSW
AG to Col Sec 29 July 1853
L/no. 53/6617 in bundle beginning 52/3069 Col Secretary Letters Received Main
Series: 1852 4/3075 SRNSW
AG to Col Sec 29 July 1853 L/no. 53/6617 in bundle beginning
52/3069 Col Secretary Letters Received Main Series: 1852 4/3075 SRNSW`
J Therry to Col Sec 9
August 1853 L/no. 53/6955 in bundle beginning 52/3069 Col Secretary Letters
Received Main Series: 1852 4/3075
Governor’s notings on
Moreton Bay Courier
10 June 1854.
Inquest papers in
(1854) Supreme Court, Criminal Jurisdiction: Clerk of the Peace,
Brisbane, 9/6378 NSWRC.
Moreton Bay Courier
25 November 1854
Moreton Bay Free
, 28 November 1854
Moreton Bay Courier
25 November 1854
Moreton Bay Free
, 28 November 1854.
Moreton Bay Courier
25 November 1854.
Deposition and Minute
Books: Register – Depositions 06/02/1846-31/10/1846 Series 753 Item 518884
Moreton Bay Courier
25 November 1854;
Moreton Bay Free Press
, 28 November 1854.
Moreton Bay Courier
27 May 1854;
Illustrated Sydney News
, 16 Dec 1854
Therry, above n 31,
Ibid, 288-289.
Moreton Bay Courier
6 January 1855; Connors, ‘Part II’, above n 14, 9-10.
Therry, above n 31,
Moreton Bay Courier
6 January 1855, 13 January 1855.
Walker, above n 60.
Col sec to Gov Resident, 13
December 1854, Letter no. 54/145 Letters addressed to the Government Resident
Moreton Bay by the Colonial
Secretary, Sydney, 1854. RES/A5 QSA
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (277 KB)
PDF format (668 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter