URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlSSWC/2010/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Guthrie, Robert; Aurbach, Robert; Fronsko, Andrew --- "Workers' Compensation and Economic Downturn Predictions and Reflections" [2010] IntJlSSWC 5; (2010) 2(1) International Journal of Social Security and Workers Compensation 41
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION AND ECONOMIC DOWNTURN
I INTRODUCTION
II DEFINING ECONOMIC DOWNTURN AND RECESSION
III A BRIEF CHRONOLOGY OF THE 2007-09 GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS
IV RESEARCH INTO THE IMPACT OF ECONOMIC DOWNTURN ON WORKERS’ COMPENSATION
V THE IMPACT OF RECESSION ON THE MIX OF WORKERS IN THE WORKPLACE
VI CONCLUSIONS
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION AND ECONOMIC DOWNTURN
PREDICTIONS AND
REFLECTIONS
This article reviews the literature in relation to the effects of economic
downturn on workers’ compensation schemes drawing
on international studies
to comment on the particular circumstances in Australia. It reflects on whether
economic indicators can
be used to predict workers’ compensation claims
behaviour and notes the difficulties in using particular indicators as a guide
to possible workers’ compensation outcomes. It concludes that whilst the
research dealing with the relationship between economic
downturn and claims
behaviour has doubtful predictive value in relation to workers’
compensation matters, it is possible that
some of the learning from this area of
study can be applied to occupational health and safety issues so as to prevent
increased rate
of injury and claims as the economy recovers.
I INTRODUCTION
This article will explore a range of issues related to the effect of economic
downturns and recessions on workers’ compensation
systems. The
consequences of the global financial crisis of 2007-09 have heightened interest
in financial markets and insurance and
have lead to considerable focus upon the
effects of the downturn on compensation systems and the insurance schemes that
them. In this context it seems appropriate to take a fresh look at
the available literature to assess whether any predictions can
relation to the effects of economic downturn on workers’ compensation
schemes. This paper will be divided into five
parts. In the first instance it
will note how recession has been defined and will set out the characteristics of
recession and economic
downturn. Then the paper will provide a brief chronology
of the 2007-09 economic downturn. It will consider employer attitudes to
recession in the context of workers’ compensation and, in the manner of a
case study, the effects of past recessions on the
Australian economy. The
analysis in this article is confined to those aspects which are likely to have a
direct effect upon employment
and consequently upon workers’ compensation.
The third part of the article will review the available research on the effects
of recession and economic downturn on workers’ compensation and will then
consider the impact of the economic downturn and
recession upon the insurance
industry. Part four will speculate upon some of the possible responses which
flow from economic downturn,
including how it may affect the demographics of the
workforce and whether the mapping of economic downturn provides any predictive
models in relation to workers’ compensation. Finally, the article will
draw together these related themes in an attempt to
synthesise the existing
research in this area and reflect upon the interrelationship of workers’
compensation and occupational
health and safety.
II DEFINING ECONOMIC DOWNTURN AND RECESSION
The standard definition for a ‘recession’ is a decline in the
gross domestic product (GDP) of the locality for two or
more consecutive
This definition does not take into account consideration of changes in the
unemployment rate, nor any issues relating to consumer
and business confidence.
The reference in this definition to quarterly data makes it difficult to
pinpoint when a recession begins
or ends. In effect the determination of a
recession based on this commonly applied definition can only be done after the
a consequence this may prevent prediction of certain outcomes of a
recession in advance – the outcomes may have already been
realised by the
time that the recession has been officially declared.
In the context of workers’ compensation it is useful to observe that
the key focus for employers and insurers (and indeed workers)
is first upon the
continued profitability and viability or sustainability of business, and in so
far as it affects workers, the issue
of employment. The use of the standard
definition for recession to, in effect, pre-emptively raise a red flag for
employers in relation
to their capacity for continued production levels is
problematic because the effects of downturn have probably already become
operationally
important by the time a recession is officially declared.
Needless to say, there are considerable arguments among economists as to the
definition and measurement of a recession; however, for
the purposes of this
paper it is more important to consider whether the onset of an economic downturn
generally, rather than recession
in particular, can be used to predict any
outcome for workplace injury and compensation matters. The National Bureau of
Research defines a recession at the time when business activity has
reached a peak and starts to fall, until the time when business
activity bottoms
By this definition the average recession, according to the National Bureau
of Economic Research, lasts about one year. This approach
may in fact be more
useful when considering issues in relation to occupational health and safety and
workers’ compensation.
It is usually possible to observe a peak in
business activity and to note an economic downturn without the need to calculate
in fact there have been two consecutive quarters of negative growth.
A Characteristics of Economic Downturn
Whilst it is possible to argue about the technical definition or the timing
of the onset of a recession, it seems clear that there
is little argument in
relation to the characteristics of recession and economic downturn. The
characteristics of economic downturn
and recession universally appear to be the
1. Contracting employment and rising unemployment as businesses retrench
workers in an attempt to control their costs.
2. Inventory reductions and significant price discounting, which in turn can
lead to lower inflation rates. Lower inflation rates
usually arise because there
is a coupling between job losses and reduced consumer spending leading to
reduced demand and a tendency
to suppress prices.
3. With reduced consumer spending, and inventory reductions there is often a
commensurate lowering of demand for products. In response
to the reduced demand,
production is often scaled back.
4. As a consequence of the declining levels of production there are often
higher levels of unutilized production capacity during a
period of economic
downturn and recession.
5. Reductions in production and jobs usually lead to a fall in business
confidence and reduced profitability as underutilized production
becomes evident.
6. There is often a decrease in fixed capital investment spending because
there is insufficient demand to justify the purchase of
new capital items.
7. Usually there is a fall in demand in imports due to the general downturn
in consumer spending and spending on capital items.
8. Consistent with all of the above, it is usually symptomatic of economic
downturn that there is increased government borrowing usually
arising from an
increase in government spending and an increase in government projects creating
an economic stimulus designed to
employment.
These characteristics will form the backdrop against which we explore the
effects of economic downturn upon workers’ compensation
III A BRIEF CHRONOLOGY OF THE 2007-09 GLOBAL FINANCIAL
To put the current downturn in context it is useful to trace the events
leading to the so-called 2007-09 global financial crisis (GFC)
period 2005-06 during which time the housing market in the United States
experienced a significant growth in sub-prime
loans to home
It is not intended to detail the precise nature of sub-prime loans suffice
to say that many borrowers obtained loans which put their
income and outgoings
in precarious balance. When interest rates increased in 2007 in the United
States there was a significant increase
in loan defaults and subsequently the
largest decline in house prices for 25
As mortgage defaults
increased the US banks announced their first sub-prime
In January 2008 the US Federal Reserve Bank announced that it would cut
interest rates to counter the effects of these sub-prime
difficulties.
Throughout the early part of 2008 global financial institutions continued to
announce losses from sub-prime
investments.
In February 2008 the
Northern Rock Bank in United Kingdom was nationalised consequent upon its
In March 2008 financial services firm JP Morgan Chase acquired the Bear
Stearns hedge fund after that fund
Later that month Opes Prime went into
receivership.
With these collapses the major pillars of the UK and US banking and
financial system began to crumble. In March and April 2008 the
Reserve Bank announced further interest rates cuts in an attempt to stem the
tide of losses.
During May to August 2008 the credit crunch emerged and in June and July
2008 the United States Securities Exchange Commission announced
rating agency
reforms and short selling restrictions all in attempt to prop up the financial
At the same time in United Kingdom the real estate market declined as prices
fell. At about this time the financial crisis moved
from the finance markets to
the real economy.
Job losses started to emerge in the United States, the United Kingdom and
most other advanced economies. In Australia trade in ABC
Learning shares was
suspended and signaled that Australia was now a part of the global financial
From September to October 2008 the crisis deepened with the takeovers of two
major US financial institutions, mortgage lenders Freddie
Mac and Fannie
At the same time the Bank of America purchased Merrill Lynch and Lehman
Brothers moved into
bankruptcy.
In Australia the Australian Securities and Investment Commission banned
‘naked short
and similar steps were taken in the US and
Meanwhile in Ireland the government guaranteed bank deposits to prevent a
run on the banking system in that
In consequence of the poor performance of the banking and finance sector
6-10 October 2008 emerged as the worst week on the United
States stock market in
In October 2008 the Reserve Bank of Australia reduced interest rates by one
and similar adjustments occurred in US and
Late in 2008 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) warned of a systemic
meltdown in financial
institutions.
In Iceland the banking system collapsed and in Switzerland and Netherlands
large financial institutions received government
The Australian government announced a massive stimulus package in October
In November 2008 in the
United States the automobile industry lobbied the government for support under
threat of enormous job
In Australia in November 2008 the Reserve Bank lowered rates by .75 per
and at the same time the G 20 nations followed Australia’s lead with a
pledge to restore growth. Importantly the IMF forecast
a global recession at
In December 2008 the Reserve Bank of Australia lowered interest rates a
further one per cent as unemployment began to grow in
An additional stimulus package was announced in Australia in February
whilst in this month the
Reserve Bank of Australia announced another one per cent interest rate
Global forecasts predicted growing unemployment and falling rates of growth
as the Australian unemployment rates reached five per
cent with a prediction
that it would rise to seven per cent in the following year. By May 2009 the
Australian economy avoided a technical
recession with a second quarter growth
rate of .4 per cent prompting the Reserve Bank of Australia to hold interest
rates steady.
In October 2009 market indices showed improvements in the markets in the UK,
the US, Japan and Australia.
Two features emerge from these series of events so far as the context of this
article is concerned. First the GFC was precipitated
by sub-prime losses which
in turn placed enormous strain on financial and banking institutions and in time
caused significant declines
in growth and most importantly investment income.
The decline in investment income is an important aspect of the discussion below
as this affected the profitability of insurers and in particular workers’
compensation insurers. Second, the GFC caused, in
some economies, an uneven
growth in unemployment across industries, for example in the US in the
automobile industry and in Australia
in the mining industry. As will be
discussed this could result in uneven developments in the growth or decline of
compensation claims.
A Employer Attitudes to Economic Downturn in the
Context of Workers’ Compensation
As a precursor to considering the research literature in relation to the
effects of economic downturn on workers’ compensation
it is useful to
reflect upon the results of a survey of United States companies conducted in
mid-2008. In that survey 23 per cent
of employers who responded said that a
recession would cause an increase in workers’ compensation claims. 62 per
cent of those
employers surveyed predicted that there would be no change in
relation to workers’ compensation claims and only 6 per cent
surveyed said that the effect of recession would be a decrease in claims
activity. Nine per cent of employers did not know
what the outcome of recession
would be on their workers’ compensation premiums and
These perceptions indicate a widespread expectation, at least within the US
business community, that when there is a downturn in
economic growth there is
likely to be an increase in workers’ compensation claims. This perception
may be driven by the expectation
that as workers come to fear job losses they
may find it attractive to seek income support through the workers’
compensation
system. Some employers perceive that claims made by workers under
these circumstances are more likely to be
fraudulent,
and some employers
expect that those workers who are currently performing light work due to past
injury may, upon losing their employment,
seek to reactivate an old
workers’ compensation
These employer perspectives do not appear to be supported by the available
That research, in
relation to workers’ compensation and the effects of economic downturn,
will be discussed in more detail
below; however it is as well to note that the
published research from a variety of sources provides mixed results and it is
not surprising
that employer perceptions on these matters are also mixed.
B The Effect of Past Recessions upon
Whilst this article will consider a range of international literature, this
part briefly considers the effects of recession in Australia,
principally,
because internationally it is the jurisdiction with the most long-standing
workers’ compensation schemes. In Australia
there were two recessions in
recent times which are worthy of note. Australia experienced a recession between
1982 and 1983 and again
in the early
The characteristics of
the 1982 recession were a steep decline in gross domestic product commencing
in 1983. Thereafter there was a reasonably rapid
rise in gross domestic product into positive growth throughout most of the 1980s
with some decline around 1985. A second recession occurred with a rapid decline
in gross domestic product around 1991-92 (once labeled
by the then Australian
Treasurer as ‘the recession that we had to
). An important characteristic of the recession in the 1980s was that there
was a significant rise in unemployment and this trend
was also mirrored in the
1990s recession, when unemployment also moved up sharply. Analysis of labor
market economics in Australia
shows that, after the recession of the 1990s,
there has been a trend downwards for the last decade in relation to
unemployment. The
most noticeable feature of the economic downturn that
commenced in Australia in 2007-08 is that there was only a relatively modest
increase in unemployment and a decline in employment growth. This has occurred
despite the fact that the downturn in economic activity
has not resulted in a
technical recession in
The rise in unemployment and decline in employment rates experienced during a
recession may be felt differently in different industries.
For instance, the
Australian Bureau of Statistics reports that, during the recession which
occurred in the 1990s, the most significant
rises in unemployment were felt in
the areas of finance and insurance, retail construction and manufacturing. The
question of where
an economic downturn will be most strongly felt appears to be
related to larger factors in the global economic environment. For example,
is evidence that during the 2007-09 economic downturn in Australia there has
been a sharp rise in unemployment in the mining
sector, particularly in Western
Australia, that has resulted from declining demand for raw materials and
precious metals.
This feature did not appear in previous economic downturns, and reflects
changes in demand for those materials on the world market.
Research into the impacts of the recession on workers’ compensation
schemes is further hampered by the lag in the collection
of data concerning
injury rates and injury severity, as measured by expenditures for benefits. Of
necessity, injury severity can
only be measured as the claims mature. It is as
important to understand whether workers are returning to work after injury in an
economic downturn as it is to understand how often they make claims under those
circumstances. This data must await, amongst other
things, the healing process
undergone by the worker. As a consequence almost all commentary in relation to
the effect of economic
downturn upon accident rates and workers’
compensation is retrospective. This highlights the importance of being able to
the onset of economic downturn and predict, in general terms, likely
stakeholder behaviours. Only by doing so will the employer have
a chance to
implement practices designed to mitigate the impact of the downturn –
waiting until the actual effects are documented
places them fatally
‘behind the power curve’.
There seems little doubt that an important feature of economic downturn and
recession is the loss of business confidence. The data
trends in relation to
business confidence and business economic conditions appear to travel in the
same direction.
As production
declines so does confidence. The interesting phenomenon which has occurred in
Australia during the 2007-09 period of
the global financial crisis has been the
relatively early upswing in employer and business confidence. Various currently
data suggests that Australian business confidence is starting to
conditions.
We do not speculate
upon the reasons why a business confidence appears to be returning but it is
worthy of comment in relation to
what effect this may have in relation to
employment. Some economic commentators have predicted that, notwithstanding that
has been able to avoid technical recession, there is an expectation
that unemployment will grow.
the time of writing there is no evidence of a sudden upsurge in
unemployment.
In fact whilst it
was originally thought that unemployment would grow to approximately 7.5 per
of the workforce in 2010, the current predictions suggest that this may well
be reduced to about 6.7 per cent or less of the
If business
confidence appears to be rebounding, and a corresponding reduction in adverse
pressure on employment follows, this can
be expected to have a significant
impact on workers’ compensation scheme performance. This is because there
is a clear link
between the capacity of injured workers to return to work and
the availability of employment.
Prediction of confidence levels has also remained elusive. It has already
been mentioned that there has been a sharp decline in employment
in the mining
industry in Western Australia. The brunt of the unemployment impact in that
industry lagged considerably behind the
recognition of the beginning of the
economic downturn. Confidence levels did not drop in Western Australia until
late in 2008 and
in September 2009 there was a suggestion that confidence levels
in the mining industry may have started to
This may reflect the
nature of the industry, the relative importance it has in the overall economic
mix in Western Australia or a
combination of factors.
As far as the Australian historical record seems to indicate, the principle
variables in the impact of economic downturns seem to
be the magnitude of
increases in unemployment, the focus on one or more economic sectors that are
susceptible to current global economic
pressures, and variations in business
confidence that may reflect the relationship the industry has to the overall mix
of employment
in the affected economy. These, in turn, affect the workers’
compensation scheme performance during these periods by impacting
availability of jobs available to a previously injured worker. As will be
discussed below, job availability may have a significant
impact on worker
behaviour towards the workplace.
IV RESEARCH INTO THE IMPACT OF ECONOMIC DOWNTURN ON
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION
The effects of the economic cycle on workers’ compensation systems have
been the subject of a number of studies in a number
of jurisdictions. The
results may not always be transferable across systems although the findings are
of interest and provide a reference
point for predicting possible outcomes of
economic downturn. For example, a study by Hartwig undertaken across 34 States
of the United
States and covering the period 1980 to 1995 showed that changes in
the economic growth rate was associated with disproportionately
responses to claim frequency and real cost of claims per
During the period of the
study a 1 per cent increase in real GDP was associated with an equal and
corresponding increase in claim
frequency and 1.64 per cent increase in real
claim costs per worker. Hartwig noted however that the effect of the 1990-91
in United States was that during this downturn, the trend towards
increased claims frequency and severity reversed. The end of the
reversed the acceleration in the downward trajectory of frequency and claims
Hartwig concluded that
economic activity is an important determinant of workers’ compensation
claims frequency and severity.
He also observed that in a period of economic expansion premiums will be
affected such that with the expansion of payroll premium
volumes will increase,
although the average cost of claims may rise in line with wage inflation which
usually accompanies tight labour
markets. In turn with employment growth in
hazardous industries following an expansion premium volume should be further
Data compiled by the
New York based Insurance Information Institute which reviewed the effects of
four recession periods in United
States showed that workplace injury incidence
rates declined.
Such research
needs to be tempered with research which also shows that reforms in occupational
health and safety laws have influenced
the decline in workplace
However it also has been
observed as the recession in United States has deepened during the period
2008-09 that workers might respond
by reactivating or filing claims for a range
of injuries where they perceived that jobs were threatened. Ceniceros reported
respect that
[e]mployees off the job due to a legitimate injury now may be more motivated
to extend the life of their workers comp benefits when
their jobs may soon be
eliminated or they already have been downsized, say brokers, third-party
administrators and risk managers.
Despite economic conditions, though, most
employees will resolve their claims as soon as is medically possible if
employers treat
them fairly and with respect, said Dave Dolnick, risk manager
for La Mesa, Calif., construction company The Brady Cos. But job losses
pressing workers and some may be motivated to extend a claim, Mr. Dolnick and
others agree. "‘What we have observed,
both somewhat with our own
(limited) claims and also in chatting with...peers, is that claims that are
otherwise legitimate become
much more difficult to resolve in this kind of a
market, when the injured worker doesn't have the option of a job to go back
Mr. Dolnick
comments seem consistent with a study of the Massachusetts workers’
compensation system by the Workers’ Compensation
Research Institute which
found that there were two major effects of recession on costs and outcomes in
workers’ compensation.
Firstly, changes in employment tend to be
concentrated among those workers with less experience, both in specific industry
and in the workforce generally. In recession companies tend to retain
their most experienced workers and as conditions improve less
experienced
workers are re-hired. Secondly, workers may change their behaviours to maximize
the duration of claims, or file claims
for occupational disease or cumulative
During the period
2008-09 some United States employers were successful in negotiating reduced
workers’ compensation premiums
on the basis of reduced workforces and
reduced payroll. In turn this meant declining premium income for some US
Research in the United Kingdom undertaken by Davies and Elias in 2000
suggested that there may be gendered responses to downward
economic cycles with
males being affected by economic cycles to a larger extent than
In 2005 Davies and
Jones noted the relationship between ‘boom’ periods and the rise in
injury rates and concluded that
[p]eriods of relatively high economic growth are associated with increases in
workplace injury rates. Based upon the severity of recent
business cycles,
moving from a ‘recession’ to a ‘boom’ has been estimated
to contribute to approximately
an 11 to 12% increase in the rate of major
injuries among employees.
Such pro-cyclical relationships were most prevalent in areas of the private
sector characterised by a relatively high share of male
employment… Within
the construction sector, moving from a ‘recession’ to a
‘boom’ has been estimated
to contribute to approximately a 12-14%
increase in workplace injury rates among male employees. Within the
manufacturing sector,
moving from a ‘recession’ to a
‘boom’ has been estimated to contribute to approximately a 4-7%
increase in
workplace injury rates among both male and females
In 1998 researchers in Australia observed that a rise in the
unemployment rate might discourage compensation claims if workers were
authors noted there may be some gendered effects of economic downturn and boom
suggesting that in some occupations (such
as sales work) women will have a
greater propensity to claim or suffer injuries than men where there is an
expansion in labour force
participation.
undertaken for New South Wales WorkCover by Borooah and Mangan found that the
higher the rate of unemployment the lower
the likelihood of an injury being
severe and that there is a greater likelihood of the injury being via a single
A study of the claim rates and the business cycle in Ontario, Canada
relating to the period 1973 to 1993 involving claims for back
pain and strains
and pains in the upper extremities revealed that in Canada there was an
relationship between unemployment and claim rates for back
injuries, that is to say, as unemployment increased claims for back injuries
Boone and van Ours in a
study involving data from 16 Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and
Development (OECD) countries confirmed
that in economic downturn the rate of
workplace accidents goes down. They concluded however that cyclical fluctuations
in workplace
accident rates were largely explained by reporting behaviour of
workers and were not necessarily related to changed or increased
safety. Their reasoning was based on the notion that reporting an accident
affects the reputation of a worker and may increase
the probability of
dismissal. In times of economic downturn, when the unemployment rate was high,
workers in employment were keen
to do everything possible to retain their jobs
and therefore refrained from reporting injuries.
A survey by the Institute for Work & Health (IWH) in March 2009 noted a
range of possible factors explaining the trend of the
declining number of claims
for workers’ compensation during economic downturn as follows:
1. There are fewer inexperienced workers in the workforce as job hiring
2. The least safe equipment is taken out of use as production declines.
3. The pace of work is slower.
4. Workers fearing job loss may defer filing claims.
5. Hazardous industries experience the largest decline in
employment.
The IWH noted that despite the drop in claim rates during recession which US
research confirmed, it was possible that wage replacement
workers’ compensation costs will rise if duration of claims
Despite the fall in claims frequency reported during an economic downturn, a
number of issues of concern have emerged in the literature.
First, some research
has noted that despite falls in frequency of claims, costs per claim
simultaneously rose; in particular medical
recessions as minor injuries were less likely to be reported. For example, study
of costs by the Workers’ Compensation
Research Institute in New Jersey,
United States showed that total system costs increased by 8.8 per cent a year
from 1989 to 1991
during a period of recession in that jurisdiction. A large
part of this cost can be attributed to medical services which were increasingly
utilized as claims durations
Further, in line with
other research that study showed there was concern that wage replacement (or
indemnity) costs would rise as
during recession, either because employees may find that they have no job to
to or employers are less flexible in offering modified work for partially
disabled returning workers.
of the growth in duration rates were said to have come from the construction
industry and some from the manufacturing industry.
It was found that average
duration of total disability increased from 8.8 to 23.0
Second, it has been suggested that there is evidence that the higher the
unemployment rate the lower the likelihood of reported injury
holds only up to a
certain point. A literature review undertaken by WorkCover New South Wales found
that when unemployment rose to
a level of about 7-8 per cent the relationship
appears to reverse, and as unemployment rates rise above 8 per cent, increasing
unemployment
tended to result in an increase in the number of injuries.
This research also found that as the age of the workforce increased, the
severity of injuries increased and frequency of injuries
related to sustained or
repetitive exposures increased. In addition, consistent with the research of
Davies and Elias as feminisation
of the workforce increased, the number of
injuries increased along with injuries related to sustained or repetitive
exposures. As
the use of casual labour traineeships and apprenticeships
increases so does the severity of injuries sustained
While economic downturn may reduce workers’ compensation claims it
only did so if unemployment levels were below 8 per cent
suggesting of the
influence of the moral hazard phenomenon whereby workers have a greater
incentive to claim as unemployment
Schmidt noted in this regard that
[t]he established positive relation between the growth rates of the workplace
injury and illness incidence rate and job destruction
points to moral hazard, as
laid-off workers have an incentive to use the workers’ compensation system
as a social safety net.
Although the evidence was established for aggregate data
only, the finding agrees with evidence of moral hazard in the workers’
compensation system established by Krueger (1988, 1990) at the level of
US commentators have suggested that due to the limited income support provided
by the US social security system when dismissal
and redundancies increase the
employer-employee bond or trust is broken, which leads to the predicament that
‘desperate unemployed
workers will scramble for any benefits they can
find: while unemployment insurance provides support for just 26 weeks, workers
can help pay the bills for
Other US commentators suggest that as the 2008-09 economic downturn will
lead to increased job losses it is likely that more workers’
compensation
claims and not less will result as employees lose their
Third, it has also been suggested that recessions are ‘characterized by
increased use of the [workers compensation] system,
longer duration claims and
more frequent and larger lump sum
settlements’
the pressure for a quick settlement. The implication is that insurance companies
may be able to exploit a worker’s
need for a speedy settlement by offering
less favourable terms. Workers would have greater incentive to make a quick
settlement in
times of recession as they were likely to be in greater need of
money. Hence the reasons why the costs of the lump sums increase
(if they do)
constitute an area that needs further investigation and
A The Effect of Economic Downturn on Workers’
Compensation Insurers
Workers’ compensation insurers like all other insurers derive profits
not just from the surplus of premium income over claims
costs, but also from
income earned from
investments.
A report by the United States Council of State Governments noted that during
the 1990s investment in stocks and bonds by insurers
was high which resulted in
strong profits during the economic boom of that period. However during 2001-02
net investment income in
the property/casualty insurance industry fell 7.1 per
cent and an estimated 4.9 per cent in 2002 as stock and bond profits fell.
This report highlights another paradox of economic downturn in relation to
workers’ compensation insurance. As claims decrease
with contracting
employment there may be pressure on insurers to raise premiums due to declining
investment income. The reliance
on investment income by the private insurance
market necessarily creates some instability in the system where there is
overreliance
on this source of
When underwriting is undertaken with anticipated returns of investments
factored in, and the anticipated returns do not materialize,
insurers are
generally forced to raise premiums, provided the statutory scheme permits this.
Higher premiums can force economically
marginal employers into further distress,
creating adverse pressure on business confidence, staffing patterns and recovery
downturn. As noted above, these factors also can impact indirectly on
claims making behaviour. Ironically poor administrators of
compensation systems may seek refuge in the excuse of declining investment
income to disguise otherwise inadequate
performance, a factor which is discussed
The Australian workers’ compensation insurance landscape is
characterised by a mixture of private and public systems with some
variations. For example in Western Australia, the Northern Territory and
Tasmania workers’ compensation schemes are
privately underwritten. In
other States and the Commonwealth the workers’ compensation schemes are
underwritten by public monopolies.
Hybrid models exist where public monopolies
contract out the administration of claims. Such a system exists in South
Australia, New
South Wales and Victoria. Overlaid with the mixture of private
and public insurance in Australia is the variation in scheme liabilities.
Northern Territory and South Australia workers rights to bring a common law
actions against their employers for workplace
injury arising from negligence has
been abolished. In all other jurisdictions common law rights have been modified
generally by limiting
the ability of workers to make common law claims. In most
instances this has been done by the imposition of threshold requirements
upon medical assessments which require workers to establish that they have
suffered a permanent impairment of the whole of
their body at a specified
statutory threshold before they can commence a common law claim. The mixture of
public and private underwriting
of workers’ compensation schemes in
Australia creates different environments in which different responses to changes
in economic
circumstances may be expected. Theoretically, public monopoly
insurers have a greater capacity to withstand fluctuations in market
forces, and
in practice, political forces create conditions where they are less likely than
for-profit insurers to respond quickly
variations.
underwritten schemes may be more susceptible to such fluctuations, as regulatory
forces require them to fund their liabilities
at much higher levels, and profit
motivation counsels a flexible response to the market.
This susceptibility to fluctuations is exacerbated by the nature of the
claims themselves. Workers’ compensation claims are
regarded as
‘long tail’ claims. Once an injury occurs, the claim may persist for
a number of years, with long term medical
care entitlements a particular
concern. The finalization of claims in some jurisdictions may be problematic.
For example in South
Australia where the payment of lump sum to finalise a claim
is specifically discouraged, the payment of indemnity benefits routinely
persists over a course of many years in the case of severe injuries. In other
States where common law entitlements are still available,
there is a greater
capacity to reduce the potential for long tail claims. The effect of the long
tails is to create a discontinuity
between the funding of the claim through
collection of premium and the payment of the claim, which may occur in an
environment that
is subjected to different economic pressures than those
anticipated when the liability was incurred.
In privately underwritten schemes there is no governmental exposure to market
fluctuations, but the privately underwritten liabilities
are required to be
fully funded. As a result, an important aspect of the privately underwritten
scheme is that there must be a capacity
for insurance premiums to fluctuate with
market pressures. That is to say, where insurers are able to show that there is
a declining
profit ratio there needs to be a mechanism by which insurance
premiums can be adjusted. The failure of a system to allow for a reasonable
adjustment of premium rates to insulate private insurers against extensive
losses may result in some insurers making a business decision
to stop providing
insurance in that market, as an alternative to becoming insolvent. There have in
fact been a number of insurance
insolvencies in Australia, but it is probably
not the case that movements in the workers’ compensation market could be
as the sole cause. The most notorious failure in the Australian
insurance market in most recent years was the HIH insurance collapse,
have been indirectly related to variations in claims behaviour in relation to
workers’ compensation matters in international
markets, but was probably
more related to aggressive underwriting practices, based upon expectations of
returns on investment of
premium income prior to the funds being needed to pay
claims and the failure of those investment returns to materialize. Where
chose to discount premiums too deeply to gain a competitive edge in
the market, the downturn of investment income, rather than changes
behaviour, created the crisis.
Public monopoly insurers may be better able to withstand, at least in theory,
market fluctuations and thereby hold premium rates at
more stable levels.
However there is also the potential for public monopoly insurers to be
politically manipulated, whereby premium
rates are artificially maintained at
low levels giving rise to unfunded liabilities. In the past however, underfunded
liabilities
are usually traceable to poor administrative practices and loss in
investments and equity
Another feature of the workers’ compensation insurance market is that,
by law, insurance is compulsory. This compulsory nature
has a tendency to
stabilize the market. When an economic downturn hits, the business decision to
go without insurance is not legally
open to employers, regardless of the other
financial pressures they experience. Scheme administrators may see a small rise
in avoidance
of the compulsory insurance obligation, but it is not enough to
affect the viability of either monopoly or privately funded insurers.
conditions do, however, affect the behaviour of privately funded insurers in the
market place, as the temptation always
exists to use premium pricing as a
mechanism for gaining advantage with regard to market share. As long as
insurance regulators are
vigilant to monitor the liability funding levels of
such insurers, the compulsory nature of the insurance creates sufficient
to support such behaviour.
The trend in Australia over the last decade has been for declining rates of
workers’ compensation premiums. In part this is
attributable to declining
rates in injury and accident in the
The causes of these
declining rates are not entirely understood, and appear to be due to a
combination of factors. Certainly increased
attention to occupational health and
safety has had an impact. There is evidence that the average age of the
workforce has been increasing,
due to increases in the average age of the
population as a whole and also due to a tendency for older workers to stay in
the workforce
longer and younger workers to postpone entry into the workforce.
This tendency seems to be exacerbated by the current economic
In addition, there is some evidence that due to the growth in and the
practice of ‘independent contracting’ many workers
are no longer
covered by workers’ compensation
Notwithstanding an environment of declining premiums, it is possible to say
that, as a general rule, private insurers in Australia
have maintained strong
profitability in the last five years preceding the economic downturn. By way of
a case study, in Western Australia
insurers have been able to maintain premiums
at relatively low levels whilst maintaining strong profitability. This is seen
the result of a range of statutory restrictions upon a worker's ability to
commence and sustain claims. In addition, the premium
rates are set by the
Premium Rates Committee which on a quarterly basis recommends maximum premium
rates by industry.
Private underwriters are bound by those maximum rates which recently were
the subject of a recommendation that they be
The recommendation
that premium rates be increased was based upon evidence produced to the Premium
Rates Committee
that there had been a significant downturn in insurer profitability probably
traceable to losses to investment income through the
downturn in equity
Thus, the Western
Australian system maintained economic viability through the current economic
difficulties due to flexibility built
into the system of rate setting and
adjustments. Similar results appear to have followed in Tasmania and Queensland
which are also
privately underwritten
Other jurisdictions have experienced differing results. In particular South
Australia, which operates under a public monopoly arrangement,
has seen the
scheme in that State suffer significant financial stress, resulting in ongoing
Although Australia has been relatively unaffected by the global financial
crisis, insurers operating on a multinational basis are,
of course, subject to
global economic influences. Consequently many insurers in Australia suffered
declining profits not because
of the downturn in the Australian economy but
because of international
influences.
In other words,
ironically whilst the rate of workplace injury and disease has declined in
Western Australian and a number of other
Australian jurisdictions and whilst the
statutory provisions operating in Western Australia, Tasmania and Queensland are
particularly
robust, there have been recommendations for a premium rate
Needless to say such an increase would not have been welcomed by employers.
However there is anecdotal evidence that some larger
employers were able to
negotiate stable premium rates, avoiding any increase on the basis of threats to
transfer their business to
Such economic
threats are not available to smaller employers. It is likely that small to
medium employers probably did experience
some rise in net premium rates whilst
larger employers were able to negotiate to reduce this impact.
V THE IMPACT OF RECESSION ON THE MIX OF WORKERS IN THE
As noted above, the mix of workers in the workplace appears to be affected by
economic conditions, and in particular, the tendency
for the average age of the
workforce to shift towards increased age has been
This phenomenon has
significant implications for workers’ compensation schemes. Older workers
tend to have a lower frequency
of traumatic injury, longer duration of injuries
and increased propensity to suffer ‘cumulative trauma’ and
‘repetitive
motion’ types of
Similarly, there is a well documented tendency for younger workers to suffer
higher levels of traumatic injury, particularly in the
earlier portions of their
tenure at a job. Since we have seen that recession can have impact on the age
mix of the workforce, those
same economic forces have a derivative impact on
workers’ compensation behaviour. If recession ages the workforce in the
that workers remain at work longer, then the claims trends of the
workforce will shift towards the claims trends of an older working
– specifically reduced frequency of accidents and increased severity (as
co-morbidity issues and societal values
complicate return to work).
Similarly, in a recession workers that have their jobs seem to be inclined to
avoid behaviours that might jeopardize their position
and so-called
‘discretionary’ claims (claims of injury that result in conditions
of growing seriousness over time, or
of a chronic low-level interference with
life or work) may be postponed. Workers in different circumstances may have the
reaction. Workers who have lost jobs as a result of economic downturn
may be inclined to file discretionary claims at the time of
layoff. Workers, who
have claimed prior to the downturn, may have a tendency to hold onto the claim
and utilize its benefits for
as long as possible, to allow time for the job
market to improve. Together, these two factors impacting workplace behaviour are
critical factor in explaining observed trends during recessionary times
A Can We Predict the Outcome of Economic Downturn on
Workers’ Compensation Schemes?
This article has attempted to isolate three major factors in explaining the
impact of recessions on workers’ compensation claims
behaviour. The
industries affected by the downturn, the degree and nature of the impact on
business confidence and the impact on
the worker mix in the workplace all have
an interrelated impact on the ultimate claims behaviour during an economic
downturn. Given
the state of the art with regard to predicting each of these
factors, the ability to utilize this analysis as a predictive tool is
somewhat limited. Although it is useful as an explanatory framework, business
confidence and the mix of workers in the
workplace are subject to the influence
of multiple independent intervening variables. More to the point, the variables
seldom line
up in a homogeneous fashion, such that the predictive indicators all
point in the same direction. An example of such mixed indicators
present in one
environment may be useful.
During the 2008-09 downturn, Tasmania has reported trends in claims frequency
that appear to run counter to those experienced elsewhere
The claims frequency has increased substantially during the downturn, where
other States are experiencing the opposite trend. Unfortunately,
the predictors
in the Tasmanian experience are not well aligned. Tasmania relies principally on
agriculture, mining, forestry and
tourism as its main
industries.
When there is a general economic downturn worldwide, a negative impact on
discretionary travel, especially to relatively remote areas
such as Tasmania,
can reasonably be predicted. Accordingly, the tourism industry in Tasmania is
one that is particularly susceptible
to the impact of the downturn. Given the
sensitivity of operators in that industry to bookings volume, and the relatively
time usually experienced by those operators with regard to their
bookings, the impact on their industry should have been apparent
at an early
stage in the downturn. Business confidence was likely adversely impacted at an
early date. Operators within the tourism
industry, who may operate with
substantial seasonal variations in employment levels, might have been led to
scale back their workforce
in place and/or fail to hire anticipated seasonal
employees. However, such a downturn has not been experienced in Tasmania.
has been very strong during the 2008-09 downturn, perhaps due to a
diversion of Australian overseas holiday travel to destinations
closer to home.
Accordingly, there was no adverse impact on the tourism sector of the economy
during this period.
The logging and mining industries were subject to a different set of
pressures that also contributed to the overall results observed.
Demand for wood
products, and in particular wood chips, slowed due to decreased
As business confidence flagged, the workforce likely reacted by trending
toward increased age, that is to say older workers remained
in the workforce
longer, resulting in a shift toward to increased claims by more a mature and
experienced workforce, with greater
claims severity and duration anticipated.
Production reductions in Tasmanian zinc and lead production started in 2000 and
to the start of the global economic
Thus, the trend in logging supported the reported outcome under the
predictive model, while the trend in tourism did not assist in
understanding the
increase in claims behaviour. The trend in mining was neutral, and may not have
had an impact. This suggests that
the analytical factors cited above are part of
a larger mix of predictive factors for claims behaviour, and that forces that
not directly tied to the impact of recession still operate and may even
remain dominant in a changing economic environment.
Similarly, the factors noted above that help explain claims behaviour during
economic contractions are themselves fairly difficult
to predict. In September
2009 it became clear that Australia had avoided a technical recession, having
only experienced one calendar
quarter of economic
contraction.
Unemployment was reported as showing a modest decline and it would have
seemed reasonable to expect business confidence to be on
Counter-intuitively, however, business confidence in September 2009 was
reported as showing a significant decline. After five months
of increasing
business confidence, the National Australia Bank survey of businesses reported a
decline in business confidence of
4 points from the August 2009 high of 18
The August outcome had, in turn, been the highest rating since October 2003.
This result occurred despite a strengthening economy,
including increased
exports to China and higher retail sales. The notion that business confidence
would fall as economic indicators
were rallying highlights the difficulty of
using business confidence as a predictor of behaviour. As an essentially
emotional response,
it is difficult to predict, and so predictions of impact on
workforce size and composition based upon anticipated moves in business
confidence are doubly susceptible to unanticipated influences. Of additional
interest is the observation of the chief economist for
National Australia Bank
that businesses are ‘repositioning their workforce capabilities in the
expectation of better times
If the impact of recessions is not sufficiently robust as a predictive
mechanism for the changes brought on as a recession unfolds,
it may still have
some utility as a predictor of claims behaviour when a recovery from such a
downturn commences.
Increased claims during a recovery period appear to be a commonly observed
phenomenon. As noted above, Brooker found, in studying
two recessions in Canada,
that unemployment rates and claims rates varied inversely with one
The reasons for this
increased claims behaviour follow from the predictive model. As business
confidence rises with the improving
economic outlook, hiring is likely. The
average age of hires in the reconstituted workforce is likely to be lower, as
experienced
and highly paid workers are more likely to be replaced with younger
and less experienced workers. Younger workers are more likely
to be injured, and
the first few months of employment is the time when workers have the greatest
risk of injury.
This occurs
because workers are at greater risk of misusing equipment during the period in
which they are initially learning its
operation, and because the worker has not
become ‘hardened’ to the physical requirements of the specific job,
and therefore
may be more easily injured by the normal requirements of the job.
Moreover, during the economic downturn, some machinery may have
been idled,
resulting in mishaps during startup. Alternatively, the economic turnaround may
have been an opportunity for the replacement
of existing machinery and equipment
with new models, subjecting both experienced and inexperienced workers to the
dangers of an adjustment
period with the new equipment. More overtime may be
worked, and workers involved in the stress of extra hours may be subject to
exposure risks. Supervisors in a growth environment are likely to
have less time to train employees properly with regard to new equipment
Psychosocial factors during a recovery are also conducive to increased claims
activity. Workers, who have postponed discretionary
claims, fearing that their
job may be forfeited during tough economic times, often feel a release of that
inhibition when the employer’s
long-term economic prospects improve. As
the workforce expands with new workers, pressures to train, or compete with, new
may impact the more experienced components of the workforce. New
routines, new schedules and new output expectations create a reaction
as well as changing physical demands. In this changing environment, with
numerous unpredictable elements, natural individual
change-aversive behaviour
and the focus that often attends novel situations may combine to create an
increased propensity to notice
and act upon small instances of discomfort that
might go unnoticed in more stable times.
If reaction during the recovery portion of an economic cycle is predictable,
then it follows that steps may be taken to mitigate its
effects, and that
implementation of such steps is a sound strategy for business and government
during the recovery portion of an
economic cycle. After all, if claims activity
increases during a recovery, then the timing and magnitude of the recovery may
be impacted
by the claims activity itself, as resources that could be
effectively utilized during the recovery may be diverted to resolve disputes
arising from, and pay for the liabilities arising from, increased claims
The steps that mitigate increased claims activity during recovery from an
economic downturn should include some or all of the following,
depending on the
economic experience of the employer during the downturn itself. First, care
should be taken in rebuilding workforce
capabilities. Workers who have been laid
off may have to be brought back at a higher wage than workers who are new to the
but the increased liability for wages is significantly offset by the
decreased incidence of injuries typical of inexperienced workers
relative lack of need for retraining resources to be committed to creating a
workforce that is sufficiently well-trained
to be safe. Care should be taken
when placing equipment that has been out of service back into production, to
ensure that it is in
good condition and fully functional despite the period of
non-use. The process of inspection and refurbishment of older equipment
considerable losses, due both to breakdowns and to injuries inflicted on the
workers that attempt to utilize it. When purchasing
new equipment, and when
bringing new workers into the workforce, the demands of safety education with
respect to unfamiliar processes
cannot be allowed to take a lower priority in
favor of quick response to production demands without jeopardizing the economic
attendant the increased production. This requires managers to take a
larger and longer term view of their workforce management than
consideration of
just the production orders on hand would dictate. Finally, the psychosocial
factors attendant the resumption of
production are worthy of consideration.
Increased demands for production should be acknowledged, and employee reactions
in the workplace environment should be considered, if an increase in
claims activity upon the economic recovery is to be avoided.
In short, employers
would be well to see the reversal of an economic downturn as a time where their
investment in the welfare of
their workforce will position them for full
utilization of the economic recovery, rather than an opportunity for a quick
of profitability without regard to the impact on the
VI CONCLUSIONS
Economic trends clearly have observed impact on workers’ compensation
claims activity. During the inception and deepening of
a downturn in economic
cycles decreased claims activity overall, with increased claims duration in the
claims made has been noted.
This phenomenon appears to be the product of a
number of factors. Economic conditions have disparate impacts upon differing
industries,
which are more or less predictable. Impacts on various industries
affect the industry-specific and overall business confidence levels.
business confidence levels impact employment levels as employers position their
workforces to reduce costs during periods
of anticipated low profitability. The
impact of reductions in workforce is double-edged. On the one hand the layoff or
termination
of workers as a business contracts or closes has been seen to result
in an increase in claims specific to that business. On the other
hand, there
appears to be a well-documented phenomenon of workers who have retained their
jobs during a downturn suppressing the
filing of new claims. For those workers
that have already filed claims or cannot avoid the filing of a new claim due to
of the injury, claim duration appears to be increased, as workers
hold onto their benefits for as long as they can, especially in
an environment
where even a willing employer may not have the ability to return a worker to
work at less than full duty. On balance,
the trend of claims during the onset of
the downturn is for decreased frequency (except where facility closings or
layoffs cause
local disruptions) and longer durations of claims.
The model is not particularly helpful in predicting employer and employee
behaviours, due to the probable presence of multiple independent
intervening
variables affecting the impact of the economic cycle on a particular region,
industry or business. Employer confidence
appears to be particularly difficult
to predict and the presence of undetermined local variables affecting overall
systemic performance
has also been noted.
The model is, however, useful in predicting behaviour when economic
conditions change for the better. As unemployment attendant an
economic cycle
decreases, claims activity increases. The prudent employer will utilize this
intelligence to avoid unnecessary claims
by affirmatively managing the impacts
of changes in infrastructure in the business and the personnel related aspects
of their operations.
In particular, consideration of safety concerns during the
repositioning of the workforce is a strategy likely to position the employer
take the fullest advantage of the opportunities brought by better times.
This paper is published with
the kind permission of Curtin University of Technology. It has previously been
published in Pauline
Sadler (ed),
Contemporary issues in law and policy
(Curtin Business School, 2010) 93-122.
Robert Guthrie, Adjunct
Professor of Workers Compensation and Workplace Laws, Curtin University of
Technology.
Robert Aurbach,
President, Uncommon Approach Inc, New Mexico, USA, May 2005 to Present,
Consulting Services.
Andrew Fronsko, PhD,
formerly General Manager Motor Accidents Compensation, Northern Territory
Insurance Office.
See definition of recession at
Investorwords.com,
http://www.investorwords.com/4086/recession.html
The National Bureau of Economic Research,
The NBERs Recession Dating Procedure
http://www.nber.org/cycles/recessions.html
When the business activity starts to rise again it is called an expansionary
See generally, National Australia Bank,
Global & Australian Forecasts
(26 November 2010)
http://www.nabgroup.com/vgnmedia/downld/ForecastsNov2010.pdf
Ronald Utt,
The Sub-Prime Mortgage
Collapse; A primer on the Causes and Possible Solutions
(22 April 2008)
The Heritage Foundation
http://www.heritage.org/research/economy/bg2127.cfm
Institute of Chartered Accountants,
The Collapse of the US sub prime mortgage market Understanding the impacts
(May 2008) 8
http://www.charteredaccountants.com.au/files/documents/Credit_Crunch_Report.pdf
Board of Governors of Federal Reserve
System (Press Release, 22 January 2008)
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20080122b.htm
Institute of Chartered Accountants,
above n 7, 8.
National Audit Office,
Treasury; The Nationalisation of Northern Rock Bank
(20 March 2008)
http://www.nao.org.uk/publications/0809/northern_rock.aspx#
‘JP Morgan Completes Bear
Stearns Acquisition’ (Press Release, 31 May 2008)
http://www.bearstearns.com/includes/pdfs/PressRelease_BSC_31May08.pdf
Leonie Wood, ‘Opes
(Melbourne), 5 April 2008
http://www.theage.com.au/business/opes-unravels-20080404-23s6.html
A sample of media releases appears as
Board of Governors of Federal Reserve System (Press Release, 20 March 2008)
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20080320a.htm
and Board of Governors of Federal Reserve System (Press Release, 30 April 2008)
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20080430b.htm
Armin J Kammel, ‘The Dilemma of
Blind Spots in Capital Markets – How to Make Efficient Use of Regulatory
(2009) 10(5)
German Law Journal
605, 611; Mary L
Shapiro, Chairman US Securities Exchange Commission,
Testimony Concerning SEC
Oversight; Current State and Agenda
(14 July 2009)
http://www.sec.gov/news/testimony/2009/ts071409mls.htm
Daniel Hamilton and Joseph Quinlan,
Annual Survey of Jobs, Trade and Investment between United States and
(2009) Center for Transatlantic Relations 4-10
http://www.colorado.edu/CEUCE/20090116-Hamilton%20Book.pdf
‘ABC Learning extend share trade
suspension’,
28 February 2008
http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2008/02/28/2175788.htm
Carol D Leonnig, ‘How the HUD
Policy fed the Crisis’,
Washington Post
, 10 June 2008
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/06/09/AR2008060902626.html
Peter Eavis, ‘Fannie Mae Could Face More Losses’,
4 December 2007
http://money.cnn.com/2007/12/03/magazines/fortune/fannie_eavis.fortune/index.htm
Editorial, ‘Lehman Brothers
Holdings Inc’,
The New York Times
(New York), 26 October 2009
http://topics.nytimes.com/top/news/business/companies/lehman_brothers_holdings_inc/index.html
See Australian Securities &
Investment Commission,
Short Selling
http://www.fido.asic.gov.au/fido/fido.nsf/byheadline/Short+selling+-+what+is+it+anyway%3F?openDocument
for a discussion of the process of short selling and naked and covered short
Australian Securities & Investment
Commission, ‘ASIC extends bans on covered short selling of financial
securities’
(Press Release, 21 January 2009)
http://www.asic.gov.au/asic/asic.nsf/byheadline/09-05+ASIC+extends+ban+on+covered+short+selling+of+financial+securities?openDocument
Government of Ireland, Department of
Finance, ‘Government increases deposit guarantee limit to E100,000 per
(Press Release, 20 September 2008)
http://www.finance.gov.ie/viewdoc.asp?DocID=5466
California, Department of Finance,
Chronology of Significant Events
http://www.dof.ca.gov/HTML/FS_DATA/LatestEconData/Chronology/chronology.htm
Reserve Bank of Australia (Media
Release, 7 October 2008)
http://www.rba.gov.au/MediaReleases/2008/mr_08_20.html
Thomas Huertas, ‘The Supervision
of Financial Services; What Next?’(Speech delivered at 12th Annual BBA
Banking Supervision
Conference, London, 28 October 2008)
http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pages/Library/Communication/Speeches/2008/1028_th.shtml
Lesley Wroughton and François
Murphy, ‘IMF warns of financial meltdown’,
elEconomista.es
11 October 2008
http://www.eleconomista.es/empresas-finanzas/noticias/798789/10/08/IMF-warns-of-financial-meltdown.html
Huertas, above n 24; A Michael
Regulatory Reform in Response to the Global Financial Turmoil;
Finding the Middle Road between Over-reaction and Complacency
Certified General Accountants Association of Canada
http://www.cga-canada.org/en-ca/ResearchReports/ca_rep_2009-08_regulator_reform_gloabl_fin_turmoil.pdf
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and
Treasurer Wayne Swan, ‘Macro Economic Conditions’ (Joint Media
Release,14 October 2008).
Herman Rosenfeld, ‘The North
American Auto Industry in Crisis’,
Monthly Review,
(New York, USA)
http://www.monthlyreview.org/090608rosenfeld.php
Reserve Bank of Australia (Media
Release, 7 October 2008, 4 November 2008)
http://www.rba.gov.au/MediaReleases/2008/mr_08_25.html
International Monetary Fund,
Economic Outlook October 2008:
Financial Stress Downturns and
(October 2008)
http://imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/pdf/text.pdf
Reserve Bank of Australia (Media
Release, 2 December 2008)
http://www.rba.gov.au/MediaReleases/2008/mr_08_27.html
Prime Ministers Kevin Rudd, ‘$42
Billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan’ (Media Release, 3 February
Reserve Bank of Australia (Media
Release, 3 February 2009)
http://www.rba.gov.au/MediaReleases/2009/mr_09_01.html
Reserve Bank of Australia (Media
Release, 5 May 2009)
http://www.rba.gov.au/MediaReleases/2009/mr_09_08.html
International Monetary Fund,
Economic Financial Surveys: Regional Economic Outlook Europe Securing
(October 2009)
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/reo/2009/EUR/eng/ereo1009.pdf
2008 WAUSAU Multiline Productivity
referred to in ‘Wausau Survey: Employers stay level headed
despite recession worries’ (11 July 2008)
Insurance Journal
http://www.insurancejournal.com/news/national/2008/07/11/91826.htm
See generally on the low prevalence of
worker fraud the report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on
and Workplace Relations, Parliament of Australia, Canberra,
on the Job: Report into aspects of Australian workers compensation schemes
There is some support for this
assertion, see Roberto Ceniceros, ‘Comp concerns rise with unemployment
rates’ (2009)
Business Insurance
http://www.businessinsurance.com/article/20090208/ISSUE01/100027108
See the discussion below.
Australia seems to be largely
unaffected by the Asian crisis in the mid-1990s.
Ian McFarlane, ‘The real reasons
why it was the 1990s recession we had to have’,
(Melbourne)
2 December 2006
http://www.theage.com.au/news/business/the-real-reasons-why-it-was-the-1990s-recession-we-had-to-have/2006/12/01/1164777791623.html
National Australia Bank,
NAB’S Monthly Business Survey & Economic Outlook
http://www.nab.com.au/wps/wcm/connect/818b39804feb2a24ac13af8460a45bb2/MBSSep09PR.pdf?MOD=AJPERES & CACHEID=818b39804feb2a24ac13af8460a45bb2
It is well known that in Western
Australia in some instances whole communities were dislocated as a consequence
of mine closures.
Whether or not those mine closures have resulted in any
variation in workers’ compensation claims for that industry has yet
determined. See, eg, Nick Bryant, ‘Australia hit hard by mining
31 March 2009
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/business/7973008.stm
National Australia Bank (September
2009), above n 42, 1, 5, 6.
National Australia Bank,
NAB’S Monthly Business Survey & Economic Outlook (
http://www.nab.com.au/wps/wcm/connect/b2b945004dbf32fab313bf3d0aa93aa1/MBSFeb09.pdf?MOD=AJPERES & CACHEID=b2b945004dbf32fab313bf3d0aa93aa1
National Australia Bank (September
2009), above n 42, 11.
Niklas Krause, Lisa K Dasinger and
Frank Neuhauser, ‘Modified Work and Return to Work: A Review of the
Literature’ (1998)
Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation
National Australia Bank (September
2009), above n 42, 5.
Robert P Hartwig, ‘Riding the
Economic Cycle: How Growth and Recession Affect Workers’
Compensation’ (1997) 29
Compensation Benefits Review
Ibid 15, 19.
Cited in Ceniceros, ‘Comp
concerns rise with unemployment rates’, above n 38.
Hugh Conway and Jane Svenson,
‘Occupational injury and illness rates, 1992-96: why they fell’
(1998) 121(11)
Monthly Labor Review
Ceniceros, ‘Comp concerns rise
with unemployment rates’, above n 38.
John A Gardner, Carol A Telles and
Gretchen A Moss,
The 1991 Reforms in Massachuetts: An Assessment of
(Workers Compensation Research Institute, 1996) 128-9.
Robert Ceniceros, ‘Layoffs spark
drive for comp price cuts’ (2009) 43
Business Insurance
http://www.businessinsurance.com/article/20090419/ISSUE01/100027505
Rhys Davies and Peter Elias, ‘An
Analysis of Temporal and National Variations in Reported Workplace Injury
(Research Report, Warwick Institute for Employment Research
University of Warwick, prepared for Health and Safety Executive, 2000)
http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/pdf/ier.pdf
Rhys Davies and Peter Jones,
‘Trends and context to rates of workplace injury’ (Research Report,
Warwick Institute for
Employment Research University of Warwick, prepared for
Health and Safety Executive, 2005) 101
http://www.hse.gov.uk/research/rrpdf/rr386.pdf
Vani K Borooah and John Mangan,
‘Why has the Workplace Become Safer?’ (1998) 31
The Australian
Financial Review
Vani K Borooah and John Mangan and
John Hodges, ‘Determinants of Workplace Injuries; An econometric analysis
based on injuries
compensation data for Queensland’ (1998) 28 (2)
Economic Analysis and Policy
Vani K Borooah and John Mangan,
‘Workplace Injuries in New South Wales; An Econometric Analysis’
(Draft Results of a
Study Undertaken for the New South Wales WorkCover
Authority, 2004) (unpublished paper) referred to in WorkCover New South Wales,
Impact of the Economic Cycle on WorkCover’s Operations
http://www.workcover.nsw.gov.au/Documents/Publications/GeneralWorkCoverInformation/Research/impact_of_the_economic_cycle_on_workcovers_operations_5909.pdf
Ann-Sylvia Brooker, John W Frank and
Valerie Tarasuk, ‘Back Pain and Claim Rates and the Business Cycle’
(1997) 45 (3)
Sociology Science Medicine
Jan Boone and Jan van Ours, ‘Are
recessions good for workplace safety?’ (2006) 25
Journal of Health
Institute for Work & Health,
‘Workers’ compensation and the Business cycle’ (Issue
Briefing, March 2009)
http://www.pphsa.on.ca/pdfs/Briefing_business_cycles_2009.pdf
John A Gardner, Richard Victor, Carol
A Telles and Gretchen A Moss,
Cost Drivers in New Jersey
Compensation Research Institute, 1994) xx, 55.
This is significant, in light of the
research indicating that the probability of a worker ever returning to work
diminishes in relation
to the amount of time they stay away from the workplace.
See generally, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development,
Directorate
of Employment, Labour and Social Affairs,
Sickness Disability and
Work Keeping on Track in the Economic Downturn
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/42/15/42699911.pdf
WorkCover New South Wales, above n
65.The latter conclusion being consistent with National Council on Compensation
Insurance, ‘An
Analysis of Factors Affecting Changes in Manufacturing
Incidence Rates’ (Research Brief, August 2006)
http://www.ncci.com/documents/research-brief-sept06.pdf
This is also supported by research by
Frank A Schmid, ‘Workplace Injuries and Job Flows National Council on
Compensation Insurance’
(Working Paper, 28 March 2009)
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1377704
Ibid 17. On the issue of moral hazard
and workers compensation see Richard Butler, David L Durbin and Nurhan
Helvacian, ‘Increasing
claims for Soft Tissue injuries in Workers
Compensation; Cost Shifting and Moral Hazard’ (1996) 13
Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty
Jon Coppelman, ‘Down the rabbit
hole: the economic crisis and workers comp’,
Workers’ Comp
(23 October 2008)
http://www.workerscompinsider.com/archives/000955.html
Jon Coppelman, ‘When the Bond is Broken: Workers Comp and Lay Offs’,
Workers’ Comp Insider
(13 April 2009)
http://www.workerscompinsider.com/archives/001035.html
Julie Ferguson ‘Workers Compensation and recession’
Workers’ Comp Insider,
14 May 2008
http://www.workerscompinsider.com/archives/000871.htm
Ceniceros, ‘Layoffs spark drive
for comp price cuts’, above n 60.
John A Gardner, Richard Victor, Carol
A Telles and Gretchen A Moss,
Cost Drivers in Six States
Compensation Research Institute, 1992).
Science Blog,
NASI: Recession
Affects Workers Compensation Trends Benefits Grew Faster Than Wages for the
First Time Since 1992
(15 July 2003)
http://www.scienceblog.com/community/older/archives/K2/pub2365.html
and Comcare,
Comcare Budget Statements – Overview and Resources
http://www.deewr.gov.au/Department/Publications/Documents/Comcare_SafetyRehabilitationCompensationCommission_SeafarersSafetyRehabilitationCompensationAuthority.pdf
Taylor Melissa Bell and Irakli
Workers Comp Trends Alert Critical information for State decision
(2004) The Council of State Governments
http://www.csg.org/knowledgecenter/docs/TA0402WorkComp.pdf
Finity Consulting Pty Limited,
Global Financial Crisis and Australian General Insurers - The Calm before the
(February 2009)
http:// www.finity.com.au/file.php?f=GFC_ArticleFeb09.pdf
Michael Owen, ‘Business tires of
global crisis excuse’,
The Australian
(Sydney), 14 May 2009.
Brendan Bailey, ‘Report of the
Royal Commission into HIH Insurance’ (Research Note Index 32-2002-03,
Parliament of Australia,
Parliamentary Library, 13 May 2003)
http://www.aph.gov.au/library/Pubs/RN/2002-03/03rn32.htm
Owen, above n 83;
Safe Work Australia,
Comparison of Workers Compensation arrangement in
Australia and New Zealand
http://www.safeworkaustralia.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/2F9B1EA6-7E2A-407C-AA52-99D0F6B2D0C5/0/Comparison_of_Workers_Compensation_Arrangements_in_Aust_and_NZ_2008.pdf
Safe Work Australia, ibid 7.
Paul Taylor et al,
Changing Workforce: Recession Turns a Graying Office Grayer
Research Center
http://pewsocialtrends.org/assets/pdf/americas-changing-workforce.pdf
Independent contracting is the
practice of some business entities to contract out portions of their business
operations to self-employed
individuals operating only under supervision to the
extent of approval of their work product. The practice is sometimes abused, with
employers taking on ‘independent contractors’ who function under
specific supervision, in the manner of employees, for
the purpose of avoiding
costs associated with employment, such as workers’ compensation premiums.
WorkCover WA,
Annual Report
http://www.workcover.wa.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/EB2042BE-B52E-4051-A0FC-F0A0332B1A9A/0/Annual_Report_0809_Web.pdf
Work Cover WA,
Workers Compensation
Premiums in Western Australia
(July 2009)
http://www.workcover.wa.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/7BE30D79-C34A-4C86-AE32-057D9572DA0B/0/Workers_Comp_Premiums_WA_1009_pdf.pdf
Safe Work Australia, above n 86, 33,
For example as noted by Comcare, above
Willis Commentary,
Workplace Risk
Workers Compensation Outlook
http://www.willis.com.au/Australia/documents/Workers_Comp_Outlook_-_May_2009.pdf
Conversations between the first
named author and Peter Burtenshaw, insurance broker West Coast Group, July
Taylor, above n 88.
This is reflected in the Western
Australian data, for example see WorkCover,
WA Statistical Report 2003/04 to
http://www.workcover.wa.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/64C9FD51-57CF-4112-9FC0-6B5F3B14B74E/0/Workers_Compensation_Statistical_Report_0304_0607.pdf
and also nationally, as noted in the Australian Safety and Compensation Council,
Compendium of Workers’ Compensation Statistics 2006-07
(March 2009)
http://www.safeworkaustralia.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/F0814819-6379-4443-8AF7-D6FB1D7022BC/0/Compendium200607.pdf
Australian Safety and Compensation
Compendium of Workers’ Compensation Statistics 2006-07:
Summary of Findings
(March 2009)
http://www.safeworkaustralia.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/C053F2E2-5653-4ABD-986A-F4C79D20F613/0/Summaryoffindings200607.pdf
Economy – Tasmania
–Frequently Asked Questions
http://tourtasmania.com/tasfaq/economy/industry.html
ABC Radio, Tim Jeanes,
‘Tasmania suffers decline in Woodchip Demand’,
16 May 2006
http://www.abc.net.au/worldtoday/content/2006/s1639717.htm
Iris Australia,
State of Success Zinc and Lead Demand
http://www.iris.tas.gov.au/archive/demand3/zinc_and_lead
Reserve Bank of Australia (Media
Release, 5 May 2009)
http://www.rba.gov.au/MediaReleases/2009/mr_09_08.html
and BBC News,
Australia able to avoid reces-sion
(3 June 2009)
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/8080446.stm
unemployment declines to 5.7 %
(9 October 2009)
http://www.randstad.com/the-world-of-work/australian-unemployment-declines-to-57.html?c=5385
Bloomberg.Com,
September Business Confidence Index Slips
(13 October 2009)
http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601081 & sid=aznrnDMllHnQ
Brooker et al, above n 66.
WorkCover, above n 100, 42-5, and
also nationally as noted in Australian Safety and Compensation Council, above n
100, 14-15.
See generally in relation to these
points Michael Connolly,
Workplace Safety and the Global Financial Crisis
– The ‘safety crunch’
(2009) National Safety Council of
http://www.nsca.org.au/Home/Home_Pages/Workplace_Safety_and_the_Global_Financial_Crisis_%e2%80%93.aspx
Tom Krause et al, BST Perspectives,
Leading Safety in the Downturn
http://www.bstsolutions.com/perspectives/article.php?item=8
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (283 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter