URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AULegHist/2007/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:36:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Smith, Simon --- "Constance May Bienvenu: Animal Welfare Activist to Vexatious Litigant" [2007] AULegHist 14; (2007) 11(1) Legal History 31
Constance May Bienvenu: Animal Welfare Activist To Vexatious Litigant
I Introduction
II Animal Protection in Melbourne in the Early 20th Century
III Bienvenu and the RSPCA: Early Encounters
IV RSPCA Reform Pressure Mounts: The ‘Revolution’ Cometh!
V A Second Challenge: The Legal System Intervenes
VI The 1965 : A New Battleground and New Legal Proceedings
VIII The RSPCA Cleanses the Membership
IX Enter Mr X
X Enough’s Enough! Two Declarations, ‘Ned Kelly’ and History is Made
IN THE FEDERAL COURT OF BANKRUPTCY
XI The Cause Continues: Activist to the End
XII Conclusion
Constance May Bienvenu: Animal Welfare Activist To
Vexatious Litigant
SIMON SMITH
Constance May Bienvenu (1912-1995) was a passionate animal welfare activist.
She was also the fifth person declared as a vexatious
litigant by the Victorian
Supreme Court (1969) and the first woman declared by the High Court (1971). In
the 1960s Bienvenu led a
reform group that challenged for control of a
conservative RSPCA (Victoria). Though unsuccessful, there were significant
consequences
from the legal challenges. This article explores the passion and
extraordinary determination of Bienvenu and her supporters. It traces
responses of a conservative RSPCA and its legal advisers struggling to maintain
the status quo and notes the unintentional consequences
of involving the legal
system in community disputes. Finally, by tracing Bienvenu’s determination
to secure substantive reform,
this article demonstrates the challenge self
represented activism presents to a legal system more comfortable with arcane
and legal form.
I Introduction
Constance May Bienvenu (1912-1995) was a passionate animal welfare activist.
In the 1960s she led a reform group that challenged for
control of a
conservative Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals of Victoria
(RSPCA). Though unsuccessful, there
were significant consequences from the
unsuccessful legal challenges. In 1968 the Victorian Parliament was forced to
pass retrospective
validating legislation to remove legal uncertainty about the
structure and operations of the RSPCA back to 1895. This included some
democratic reforms. Secondly, having been excluded from active involvement and
membership in the RSPCA, Bienvenu and her supporters
set about recasting the
Victorian animal welfare landscape by establishing a new ‘hands on’
organization, the
Australian Animal Protection Society.
Bienvenu’s litigious battles in the Victorian Supreme and High Courts
resulted in both courts declaring her a vexatious
litigant. She was only the
seventh Australian (and fourth woman) in forty years to be barred from issuing
future legal proceedings
without first obtaining the leave of the court. She was
also the first woman declared in the High Court and the second person to
the ‘double’ declaration. A decade after her declaration she
prompted further legislative reform, this time to
the vexatious sanction itself,
when she challenged its ‘draconic’ life sentence nature.
This article explores the passion and extraordinary determination of Bienvenu
and her supporters. It traces the responses of a conservative
RSPCA and its
legal advisers struggling to maintain the status quo and the unintentional
consequences of involving the legal system
in community disputes. It also
reveals for the first time the active role of an anonymous adviser ‘Mr
X’ in encouraging
Bienvenu’s legal struggle with the RSPCA after
1967. Disillusioned with her legal advisers before that date, Bienvenu was a
receptive participant in the legal strategies proposed by ‘Mr X’.
This article also notes the forces of the traditional
establishment arraigned
against her and the challenge that activism, reform movements and
self-representation present to a legal
system more comfortable with arcane
procedures and legal form than the substance of a reform struggle.
II Animal Protection in Melbourne in the Early
In seeking to understand the determination, even obsession, of Bienvenu with
her cause it is important to have an understanding of
the forces that
established and sustained the early animal protection movement. Historically,
the Australian movement finds its roots
in the cause espoused by the English
social reformers of the 19
Century. There, in 1822, Richard Martin
MP assisted by anti slavery advocate William Wilberforce MP had steered through
the English
Parliament the first legislation to protect farm
Two years later, in 1824,
they with the Rev Arthur Broome, were instrumental in the formation of a charity
to promote and enforce
the law. This was the Society for the Protection of
Cruelty to Animals (SPCA).
fifty years later the movement reached the Australian colonies when in 1871, in
Melbourne, the Victorian Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals
(VSPCA) was established.
The view of Jennifer MacCulloch is that in the 19
century, the
cause of animal protection operated as an umbrella term in which a number of
social processes such as education and
health reform, religion, law,
philanthropy and the role of women were accommodated. The language used
reflected those motivations
with emphasis on compassion, love and kindness.
Supporters were mainly conservative, middle class urban men and women with an
in social reform. They were not, however, extreme in their views and
the use of the term cruelty was selective. Meat was eaten, furs
were worn and
animals generally viewed as being for the benefit of humans. The theme was
amelioration of systemic animal cruelty
rather than total abolition. The latter
would be a focus of the Animal Rights movement that emerged toward the end of
By the twentieth century the dynamics of the animal protection movement had
altered. This reflected the changing place of animals
in the workplace. As
society industrialised, the role of the working animal changed and thus its
exposure to cruelty was reduced.
The car and the bus took over from the horse as
transport and the tractor replaced the horse drawn plough. This saw a shift in
towards pets and domestic animals and a greater emphasis on animal
welfare. As the cause lost its appeal for men the consequent feminisation
movement began with women playing leading, even dominant roles in running and
funding the movement.
In 1950s post World War II Melbourne, in common with other cities, animal
protection had become something supported by government
but effectively under
policed. There was support through legislation but it was more value as a symbol
of good faith than a reflection
of an active response to a pressing political
Responsibility for delivery
of services and promotion of the cause was instead shared between three main
Melbourne based charities:
the Lost Dogs Home
(estab.1910),
the Animal Welfare
League (AWL: established1927) that ran the Lort Smith Animal Hospital
(established 1936)
and by the then
renamed Royal Society for the Protection of Cruelty to Animals
While they shared the
workload, the determined nature of the personalities involved such as Mrs Louisa
Lort Smith and Dame Mabel
meant they found it
difficult to cooperate. Sources of disagreement, even dispute, were
responsibility for an after hours service,
methods of animal transport and
slaughter and styles of lobbying on anti cruelty
The RSPCA saw itself as the senior animal protection agency and the one most
recognised by government. It was the one with vice regal
patronage. There was a
conservative, even self-congratulatory confidence in its performance. In theory,
it had the wider remit with
a focus beyond domestic animals and a role to
initiate prosecutions for cruelty. In reality, it was a modest operation. There
a 2-person ambulance service and a three-person inspectorate that
investigated instances of alleged cruelty and put down maltreated,
neglected and
ill animals. There was also a small fulltime secretariat that handled both
administrative matters and a modest schools
educational
As an organization it
eschewed overt campaigning for reform preferring quiet lobbying. Not for it the
‘fanatical’ public
meetings convened by the Anti- Cruelty committee
of the AWL.
RSPCA governance was through an honorary committee. Determinedly male with a
cap on women members set at six,
it was drawn from religious, professional, police and retired military
It met monthly to
review finances and set policy but left administration and implementation to the
fulltime Secretary, the formidable
Miss Victoria Ethelberta Carter
(1900–1991).
For its part,
the variable membership of a few hundred to a thousand was more in the nature of
silent financial support. Kept at
a distance from any ‘hands on’
engagement, they received for their subscriptions, regular newsletters and an
to the Annual General Meeting.
This was the animal welfare landscape that Constance Bienvenu encountered
when invited by a friend to attend her first RSPCA Annual
Meeting in 1959. It
shocked her:
I went along with interest but was very much surprised that none of the officers
of the Society placed any concrete plans before
the members (NOTE: The Annual
General Meeting is the ONLY general meeting held in a year). I was conscious of
the animals in the
circuses, in rodeos, in stock transports, in scientific
research, in traps crying out silently for human voices to speak out for
Some people tried to speak but they were silenced. However, after the
‘officers’ of the Society had made congratulatory
remarks to each
other, tea and scones were served. I could only think that this was wasted time
and that instead of politely enjoying
the refreshments, the time would have been
more profitably spent on seeking ways to combat existing cruelties, as the
members would
not be together again for another twelve
At the meeting Bienvenu had tried to speak on topics of banning live bird
trap shooting and improved cooperation between ‘sister’
but had received a non-committal response. For her, the experience was a
catalyst for reform activism. For Victoria Carter,
it was a dark omen.
Henceforth, Carter’s approach would be to repel all
III Bienvenu and the RSPCA: Early
As an urban child born in 1912, Constance May Bienvenu nee’ Wilmott,
encountered the usual array of domestic animals of the
time; cats, dogs, rabbits
etc. One of three children, she grew up in South Melbourne where her father
managed some horse stables
for a shipping company. She would later say that her
interest in animal welfare was first kindled ‘when, as a girl of seven
startled a wagon owner with her vehement protests over his treatment of a
Her passion grew
To the immediate family her early adulthood was unremarkable and showed no
indication of her later activism. She was employed in sales
and secretarial
positions with the Myer Emporium and then marriage in 1937 to self-taught
engineer Albert (Ben) Henry Bienvenu. In
1943, the couple started a small
general engineering works in South Melbourne. It was named
Wellcome Products,
a play on their French based surname. Having no children, the
Bienvenu’s devoted themselves to the business. One of the major
made and distributed to local councils throughout Australia, in those pre
microchip times, was registration tags for animals,
Constance Bienvenu’s
other interest was animal welfare.
During the 1950s, she had assumed formal positions in the animal welfare
world when she became Honorary Secretary to the
Committee for World Animal
Week (Victorian Division)
Combined Animal Welfare Organisations
of Victoria
activity of World Animal Week was promotion of ‘education in kindness to
animals’ through a publicity week
in the October of every year. This
involved distribution of self printed leaflets and posters to schools featuring
Australian fauna
and iconic images such as ‘Simpson and his
For over twenty
years Bienvenu ran this from the South Melbourne business and appears to have
been its main force and provider of
For its part, the
Combined Animal Welfare Organisations of Victoria
(CAWO) was a loose umbrella group of eleven animal welfare associations formed
in this period to campaign on anti-cruelty
A key advocate, friend
and supporter of Bienvenu, was Reverend L L Elliott, the chairman of the Anti
Cruelty Committee of the AWL.
Predictably, the conservative RSPCA had declined to associate with the
Not long after the 1959 AGM, Bienvenu had her first conflict with Carter, by
now the public face of the
Significantly, it was
over posters, educational initiatives that both women organised. For a number of
years Carter had organised
the RSPCA poster competition for school
In December 1959 she
learnt that Bienvenu had retained children’s posters sent to her in error.
As a result the posters missed
being considered for the annual prize and had
caused the RSPCA, and Carter in particular,
embarrassment.
Thereafter, the momentum of Bienvenu’s correspondence and general
engagement with the RSPCA grew
Although it would be
four years before she launched her first legal proceedings she showed increasing
frustration with the RSPCA
and they with her. At no stage did they seek to bring
her ‘into the tent’. Instead, her focus and that of her supporters,
increasingly turned to reform of the RSPCA. An early 1960 skirmish was
Bienvenu’s request to Carter, just prior to the AGM,
for information on
voting procedures. She was promptly rebuffed. Writing on CAWO letterhead,
Bienvenu complained immediately to the
A polite request was made by the writer today by telephone to the RSPCA in which
nomination forms for your committee were asked for
if available, and if not
available, the date which nominations close. Miss Carter who answered the
telephone, said that nominations
were closed. On asking the date on which they
closed, Miss Carter on the grounds that I was not a member, refused to tell me.
seems rather odd that such a matter is kept
The President sent two letters in reply. The first outlined membership and
electoral procedures but made it clear that the RSPCA controlled
who could come
to the AGM and who could speak.
The second was undoubtedly ghosted by Carter and locked the Committee squarely
behind her. It advised that the Committee
expressed its genuine regret at the clash of personalities between you and Miss
Carter – particularly as you are both unselfishly
devoted to a common
cause – it strongly affirmed its complete confidence in our
Secretary’s fidelity to the Society’s
objects, her work as our
Secretary, and her zeal to promote the interests of
IV RSPCA Reform Pressure Mounts: The
‘Revolution’ Cometh!
Voices of dissent next erupted following the 1962 AGM when the President
closed the meeting without allowing questions. ‘There
is no question time
on the agenda’ and ‘When you become a member of this Society you are
bound by its rules’ was
his blunt response to two members who had wanted
to discuss the ill treatment of poddy calves in Gippsland. They felt
Carter’s unsympathetic follow-up action was to seek advice from the
Society’s solicitor, Roy Schilling, on how the committee
could expel
troublesome members. He advised that there was no specific power in the By-Laws
and it would be necessary to follow the
common law rules relating to natural
By 1963, a letter and leaflet campaign to reform the RSPCA had gained
momentum and spilt over into the public
Bienvenu, by this time a
paid up member of the RSPCA,
personalised the campaign when she was quoted in the
‘Carter should be censured severely for condoning use of animals in
experimental laboratories’ and that the
RSPCA was ‘wealthy but
won’t use its
Public Notices
appeared in the press that announced the formation of a six person ‘RSPCA
Reform Committee’. Led by Bienvenu
it called upon RSPCA members to support
a ‘MORE ACTIVE POLICY’ and to vote for them at the forthcoming
Bienvenu’s passion
shone through when she was quoted saying:
An animal revolution is in progress throughout the world. It will be the same
last century only this time
it will be the animals, which will
Beneath the rhetoric she outlined proposals for a 24 hour veterinary service;
more money for direct animal welfare; small clinics
placed strategically
throughout Victoria (attended by voluntary veterinarians) and greater public
education. The RSPCA committee
immediately countered with a notice saying that
the group were ‘self appointed and has no recognition by nor status under
distributed a three page circular letter to members mounting a vigorous defence
of its position. It made clear its view,
although somewhat defensively, whose
support was superior:
The Society is proud to enjoy the confidence of the Government of Victoria,
Victoria Police, the Graziers Association, the Fisheries
and Wildlife
Department, the Departments of Health and Agriculture, the Victorian Dairy
Farmers Association, Meat and Allied Trades
Federation and many of the Shires
and Councils in
The 1963 AGM was a public relations disaster for the RSPCA.
Critics heckle
RSPCA Chief,
RSPCA chief
The Animals are in revolt
were just some of the headlines over the next few days. The scenes at the
meeting had, however, confirmed Carter’s resolve
to ‘rid ourselves
of such people as members’ and she set about ensuring that proposed new
By-Laws included exclusion
powers as existed in the English RSPCA
For its part the RSPCA
committee still failed to understand the depth of feeling against them and
focussed instead on ‘fully
examining (the) possibility of action being
taken re the recent attack made upon the Society by certain members’ and
that ‘it was important to ascertain who constituted the group
“Combined Animal Welfare
Organisations”’.
They made no moves to review their policy direction.
The meeting was also a failure for Bienvenu and the Reform Group. Although a
fairly close contest,
their candidates was elected. Bienvenu believed the election to be unfair, even
unethical, as ballot papers had been marked
to indicate retiring committee
members, presumably to their
To support her view
she had requested a copy of the Society’s list of contributing members as
marked off by the Returning Officer
on Election Day. It was
The RSPCA had won that
V A Second Challenge: The Legal System
Undeterred by this setback Bienvenu had then thrown herself into campaigning
before a further reform attempt at the 1964 AGM. Through
the press she called
for better conditions and supervision of long haul cattle
reproved the RSPCA for
approving ‘Buckjumping’ rodeos at the Royal
and criticised as
‘disgusting’ the fact that Victoria was ten years behind a New South
Wales ban on live hare coursing.
She also continued to tackle the RSPCA head on. She wrote complaining about the
failure of the Society to respond promptly to a call
to attend an injured
their failure to invite her
as an RSPCA member to the annual Children’s Poster Exhibition, ‘no
doubt an oversight by
persistent in seeking copies of the Society’s unpublished Balance Sheets
for 1960/61 to 1962/1963.
The continuation of the reform campaign became public news again in June 1964
when Bienvenu wrote to the
foreshadowing that the Reform Committee
would again nominate and that ‘it would require that the ballot be
conducted in a fair
and unbiased way, and that the reform committee be given
their rights under the of the
Lady Gwenda
a doyen of the
establishment immediately rebuked her: ‘surely Mrs Bienvenu might better
assist the aim of the society with
with uncalled-for
criticism’.
silenced so easily Bienvenu responded referring to the pre-marked ballots at the
1963 election and noting the fact that
for some years there had not been a full
committee, asking ‘Why there is such urgency being displayed by some
members to divert
the normal process of change in committee membership by fair
Ominously for
the RSPCA, it was confirmation that Bienvenu had become a student of the RSPCA
This time around the Reform Committee ran a fuller campaign and distributed a
thirteen-page information booklet. It claimed credit
for improved financial
reporting by the RSPCA; analysed past annual reports and provided profiles of
its ten candidates, Bienvenu
and the Reverend L L Green included. There was also
detailed plans on how they would proceed if elected including the holding of
more general meetings for ‘open discussion and formulation of
policy’; more prosecutions for cruelty and the promise
that funds would be
‘released immediately for an all out war on
To ensure the widest circulation of the manifesto amongst the membership,
Bienvenu requested a list of RSPCA
subscribers.
She was advised
that she could view it at the
effectively giving the
incumbent committee full and sole prior access to the membership in the
forthcoming contest. By this time
Bienvenu’s study of the By-Laws had
revealed that Carter was wrong in advertising seven vacancies rather than twelve
improperly curtailing the hours the poll was to be open. From the 1963
elections she also held reservations about the integrity of
the ballot papers.
These facts suggested an unfair, even undemocratic, election and she sought
legal advice from Gillott, Moir and
Ahern, Solicitors. After checking with her
husband that Bienvenu was a person of means and could pay their bill, on the
25th August
1964, just seven days before the AGM, the Solicitors wrote to Carter
Unless the Society is prepared to cancel the present proposed poll and conduct
one in accordance with the requirements of the Hospital
and Charities Act and
the Society’s By-Laws, our instructions are to apply to the Supreme Court
for an injunction to retrain
[sic] the proposed poll next
Defiantly, Carter wrote back that same day ‘The Society denies the
validity of your client’s contention and will resist
the proceedings
threatened.’ She advised that Roy Schilling and Co had been authorised to
accept service.
The decision to
defend appears to have been made without reference to the
Three days later, Sholl J granted Bienvenu, as an RSPCA member, an
interlocutory injunction stopping the election of the General Committee
the RSPCA complied with the procedures under the
Hospital and Charities
1958. He was dissatisfied with certain of the By-Laws and said it
‘was a matter of importance that the Committee should be
Against this
troubled background the RSPCA proceeded with the scheduled AGM on the 31 August
1964. Once more it was a public relations
disaster with two and a half hours of
heated arguments, interjections and continual heckling. Only limited business
was transacted,
mainly release of the Annual Report and the election of
office-bearers. Newspaper reports the next day referred to
Snaps, Snarls,
Provide Theme for RSPCA
Uproar as Speakers Clash
On 12 October, 1964, having satisfied the necessary electoral rules, the AGM
reconvened to finalise the election of the General Committee.
Again, it was a
disappointment for Bienvenu and the Reform Committee. They were comprehensively
defeated by 600 votes to 289, for
all 12 committee
However, issues
relating to the work of the RSPCA were not discussed, the President ruling that
the Society was still before the
court and they ‘would have to be brought
up again at the next annual meeting or at a general
Round two to the
RSPCA Committee.
VI The 1965 : A New Battleground and New Legal
Proceedings
In 1965, the battleground became the By-Laws. For different reasons Bienvenu
and the Committee had an interest in them. Even before
Sholl J’s comments
had created legal uncertainty the committee had commenced a rewrite of the 1943
By-Laws, amongst other things,
to include a power to expel troublesome
For Bienvenu the focus
was on securing rules that ensured a fair electoral process. For her that was
the road to wider RSPCA reform.
To bring that about she gathered signatures from
twenty subscribers and petitioned Carter on 30 March 1964 for a Special General
Meeting. Its purpose was to adopt By-Laws that mandated election processes as
set out by the
Hospitals and Charities Act
. On 1 April, the irony of
the date no doubt not lost on her, Carter totally rejected the request, stating
that Bienvenu had ‘misinterpreted’
the By-Laws upon which she
relied. She did however indicate that a complete re-draft had been prepared by
Roy Schilling and would
shortly come before a Special General Meeting for
confirmation.
At the same time
Carter again sought urgent legal advice, this time from Schilling’s
partner Alan Missen,
expel Bienvenu. In providing his advice his comments indicated a certain
partisanship: ‘We feel that this expulsion
should have been contemplated
long before this.’
Committee thought differently, deciding that it was ‘inexpedient to take
action at this time’.
The disclosure that there was a new set of By-Laws in the pipeline alarmed
Bienvenu. She saw that voting on the By-Laws would take
place before the next
AGM and would most likely pre-empt her efforts at democratic reform and entrench
unfair electoral processes.
In particular, her examination of the proposed
By-Laws showed that names but not addresses of subscribers would only be
through the new public register. To Bienvenu this:
placed unfair and unwarranted power into the hands of the existing Committee to
post out any policy they wish to state, or any belittling
propaganda about those
who criticised the administration. This is a totalitarian
Also, the proposed By-Laws gave the committee power to make ‘any
regulation they liked, good or bad, regarding the conduct of
elections’.
To Bienvenu, the committee was ‘BULLDOZING’ through the 43 altered
By Laws. They had to be
With the Special General Meeting set for 25 May 1965, Bienvenu again
consulted Gillott, Moir and Ahern. Despite a warning letter,
the Society
declined to postpone the meeting and on the 24 May 1965,
interlocutory proceedings (No 1720 of 1965) came before the Supreme Court.
Relying on the 1943 By-Laws, Bienvenu’s counsel
Mr Otto Strauss challenged
the confirmation and electoral process and sought an injunction. However,
Winneke CJ,
unlike Sholl J in
the 1964 proceedings, saw no irregularities in the democratic process being
followed and declined to grant the
injunction. Accordingly, the meeting
proceeded and the new By-Laws confirmed, despite ‘continuous
interruptions’ by Bienvenu
and Reverend
It would later become significant that the court dealt with two matters that
morning. Apparently, without objection, Chief Justice
Winneke had earlier
dismissed the dormant 1964 proceedings (No 3256 of 1964) for want of
prosecution. Although present at the back
of the court Bienvenu would later
claim she had not been consulted on that step and indeed at that stage did not
know that there
had been two legal proceedings on foot. In her view as a
layperson, the 1965 hearing was simply a further part of the 1964 proceedings.
This event would loom large in her later claims of professional negligence and
conspiracy amongst lawyers.
A few days later, with the second proceedings now adjourned and waiting a
trial date, Bienvenu made a conciliatory gesture to the
Society. Through her
lawyers she offered first, to withdraw ‘on the basis that each party pay
its own costs in both actions’.
Missen, for the Society, rejected this
immediately.
As an alternative,
it was suggested that the matter be allowed to proceed with the Society agreeing
not to seek any further order
for costs. Gillotts suggested that this reflected
the Society’s expressed view that ‘it now feels essential that it
have the courts ruling on the validity of the
This too was
rejected upon advice of the Society’s counsel, Voumard QC and his junior
Ivor Greenwood. Voumard QC advised that
the Society should assume the By-Laws
are valid and ‘should not proceed to explore the position at
The assumption
apparently was that so pressured, Bienvenu would concede and the problem would
The Society having chosen to reject possible solutions, President Beattie
also sought to ensure there was solidarity amongst the committee.
meeting on the 15 June 1965 they spent considerable time discussing why
committee member Mr N Allen had recently declined
to formally second the new
By-Laws confirmation motion. Here, it was known that Allen had an association
with Bienvenu through her
World Animal Week poster
After pressing Allen
on whether he had any ongoing concerns, the President closed the discussion but
not before pointedly noting
‘that it was very important for all members of
the committee to be in agreement on this
Her peace offer having been rebuffed Bienvenu set about researching with new
urgency the origins and validity of the By-Laws. Through
the rest of 1965 and
into 1966 she spent enormous amounts of time researching in the La Trobe
making enquiries of the
Attorney General,
the Minister
for Health,
and even the
This caused exchanges
of correspondence between government departments about the ‘breakaway
group’ and saw tension develop
between the Society and the Hospital and
Charities Commission (HCC), the ostensible supervising
By then it was
becoming clear that when the Society first incorporated as a charity in 1895 (on
the advice of then committeeman and
honorary Counsel Hon. Alfred Deakin), the
provisions of the
Hospital and Charities Act
1890, required that By-Laws
be confirmed and then published in the Government Gazette. Bienvenu could find
no gazettal and nor could
But what did that
By May, 1966 with another AGM looming, Bienvenu had become concerned that the
case had not been heard and went to see her Solicitor
at Gillotts, Mr A E
O’Connor. She was surprised to learn that he was in Canada on leave and Mr
A F (Tony) Smith was now acting
for her. For the first time she learnt there had
been two legal actions issued but Smith was unclear why the 1964 action had been
dismissed. Though ‘far from happy’ Bienvenu ‘believed that
what she was doing was right’ and now armed with
what she clearly saw as a
silver bullet, namely the non-gazettal of the original By-Laws, she insisted on
amendments to the Statement
of Claim to incorporate the
Responding, the Society made two major points in their formal Defence. They
raised an estoppel argument. How could Bienvenu now say
there were no valid
rules when she had relied on them in the 1964 litigation? Secondly, if there
were no valid rules then she could
not be a member and thus had no
in the action.
adopting such a defensive position the Society was closing off any discussion on
reform of its electoral processes. At the same
time their determinedness to see
off Bienvenu and her supporters made it clear that they and presumably, their
legal advisers, did
not give full consideration to the wider legal implications
for the Society of their line of defence actually being successful.
With pleadings closed the matter moved slowly towards a hearing but not
before yet another fiery AGM. For two and half hours the meeting
series of motions put forward by Bienvenu and supporters. They canvassed the
suffering of Brumbies, a call for intensive
educational campaign on the speying
of female dogs, refusal of membership to ‘horse slaughterers’ and a
ban on the excessive
flogging of racehorses. At times the meeting bubbled over
and Bienvenu was accused of making ‘stupid suggestions’ to
replied evenly ‘I would have hoped that the gentlemen in this meeting
would have been able to control themselves
to the extent of not making such
remarks about ladies
However, it was
progress of sorts. Only four years earlier the AGM had been closed down without
allowing questions at all.
Shortly thereafter on 16 September 1966, the case came on for hearing. It was
a false start. It had been listed before Oliver Gillard
J who ‘laughingly
declined to hear the matter because he stated that he had been connected with
the RSPCA some years
In fact he had
been a member of the committee and joint architect of the 1943
Bienvenu bore the cost
of this adjournment, adding to her growing disenchantment with lawyers. The case
would not be heard that year.
VII A LEGAL BOMBSHELL: RSPCA IN A ‘TANGLE’ AND
LEGISLATIVE REFORM
Bienvenu’s long awaited ‘day in court’ came on 2 February
1967 but not before an unsettled start. At the last moment
her chosen counsel
Ashkanasy QC had dropped out and was replaced by the unknown (to her) Richard
For 3 days Searby and
Otto Strauss argued the case before Starke J taking evidence from Bienvenu and
her supporters such as Muriel
Danilov, Alan Green and her sister Nance Simonds.
More supporters sat in the public gallery. For the Society, Aiken QC and Haddon
relied on Carter and
former President and co-author of the 1943 By-Laws, Phillip
On 9 March 1967 Starke J dropped his bombshell. He accepted that the Society
had been without valid By-Laws since 1895. Bienvenu had
been right! However, as
a result there were no office bearers or contributors, including her. Therefore,
she had no locus standi
to bring the action. Further, she was estopped from
succeeding as having relied on the by-Laws in the 1964 proceedings, she could
not now seek advantage by saying they did not exist. He said: ‘I cannot
conceive of a clearer case of blowing hot and
Having accepted
the narrow legal points he went on to say: ‘There are various other
matters argued before me but in view of
the conclusions I have reached it is
unnecessary to determine
dismissed Bienvenu’s attempts through the courts, to reform the
Society’s electoral processes. As if to rub salt
into the wounds, and what
would subsequently be a major point of grievance, he awarded costs against
The next day the decision was front-page news.
Invalid since 1895. Judge
decides RSPCA
has no legal
Court Ruling
has RSPCA in a Tangle
Does the RSPCA
It was a cartoonist’s delight with both
making the most of the
opportunity.
parties explained their positions through the press.
RSPCA Goes on with
RSPCA is Still
“Operating” –
Tangles with RSPCA cost
Bienvenu. Sensing an opportunity, the Reform Group moved to fill the void
created by the ruling. With Bienvenu and Rev L L Green
at the fore they
petitioned the Hospital and Charities Commission to reconstitute the 1895
‘Victorian Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals’ by
accepting them as the valid body. To garner support they distributed a letter
addressed ‘Dear
fellow member of the legally non-existent RSPCA
(Victoria)’ outlining that the eventual aim of the reform was to
a portion of the amount of money at present held (over $400,000)
for immediate aid to
The President
of the RSPCA (NSW) was quoted in support: ‘Your “Bombshell” as
outlined in the press relative to
the Victorian RSPCA, will bring some headaches
to many people and it is hoped bring about some much needed reforms –
congratulations
on your courage and
sincerity.’
To head this off and ensure the Society was seen as the legitimate body,
Carter successfully sought support from established
Responding directly
to government the Graziers Association of Victoria counselled that ‘it
would be an ill-service to animals
and to the livestock industry if control of
the RSPCA should pass into more emotional and less responsible
Murray Byrne
MLC was concerned that a ‘bogus body can, in circulars, attempt to
misrepresent an organisation which, despite
some legal friction, has carried out
the work of a respected and honourable
and the Lost Dogs
suffer if the status of the RSPCA should
Missen also
lobbied heavily for the Society noting that ‘Its elected committee
(whether technically elected, irregularly or
otherwise) is composed of well
known citizens of the highest repute, who are actuated by no other than
philanthropic motives’.
He urged rejection of the
In this heated environment the Petition went nowhere as the Commission
elected to await the opinion of the Crown
There was however,
little doubt where the sympathies of some in government lay with Chief Secretary
Rylah opining ‘With regard
to the Interim Reform Committee this would seem
to have little standing as far as I know and there seems little doubt that it is
inspired by interests which have been carrying out a private war against the
Government as well as the RSPCA for some
For the Society, the solution lay with the government. This followed the
advice of Aikin QC that they could not appeal as they had
won! He noted that the
court had not ruled on the merits of the Bienvenu dispute and recommended an
approach to the government for
a legislative
Consequently, in
May 1967, Missen forwarded a ten-page submission to the government outlining the
views of the Society.
months later, Bienvenu made her own lengthy submission direct to Premier Bolte
and other Ministers. Showing the wordy style
that would characterise her later
legal documentation, it ran for eight pages with numerous under-linings for
emphasis. In five appendices
she outlined the main complaints against the RSPCA
and the evidence supporting them. They were:
Failure to extend field of activities despite huge increase of both human
and animal population.
Failure to conduct fair and democratic elections.
Lack of educational literature in the humane treatment & proper care of
Failure to implement resolutions carried at Annual General Meetings and
unfulfilled promises of action
Failure to prosecute in cases where an action would have every chance of
other side, as part of her on going lobbying, Carter gave wide circulation to
the specially produced 96
Annual Report (1966-67). Her covering
letter to subscribers explained the ‘technical breach’ of 1895, the
expectation
of remedial legislation and rather provocatively referred to:
the war of attrition which has been so sedulously carried on by a handful of
people styling themselves “Reform Committee”
over the past six
years. The distraction and waste of time and money involved has been widely
Her covering letter to Parliamentarians was more circumspect. It referred
simply to the ‘interesting contents’ of the
frontispiece and the
wish that the report was ‘helpful’ when considering the forthcoming
legislative measures designed
to ‘regularise’ the 1895 technical
‘omission’.
Bienvenu took immediate objection to the Annual Report, particularly the
inclusion of a letter that referred to the Reform Committee
‘robbing the
RSPCA’. To her that was libellous and she sought its withdrawal and
apology. Through Gillotts she indicated
she was considering ‘further
proceedings’.
did not apologise and Bienvenu did not sue. Nor, however, did it signal an end
to hostilities. It was a phoney peace.
In November 1967, Attorney General Reid agreed to a legislative fix. He
suggested a separate Act of Parliament that would retrospectively
validate the
RSPCA to 1895. It need not come under the supervision of the Hospital and
Charities Commission. The Act would include
a set of By Laws, most likely the
1965 ones, but should not include the contentious provisions of inspection of
membership lists
and postal voting. The Parliamentary Draftsman would be
available to confer with the RSPCA and ‘to any groups
interested’.
Society took immediate objection to the exclusion of postal voting provisions
that would disenfranchise many of the membership
and place the Society at risk
to ‘any unscrupulous or irresponsible group to sign up sufficient members
and pack a meeting
to obtain a small
less concerned. Noting that Bienvenu and supporters had taken successful legal
action and that there was a genuine difference
of opinion over elections it was
‘most undesirable for Parliament to resolve internal disputes in societies
such as the RSPCA’.
He suggested further discussions be with the
Parliamentary draftsman.
By March 1968 discussions between the parties had advanced, although sticking
points remained. One was the By-Law amendment procedure.
The Society was
concerned about takeover. Unless agreement was reached on their preference for a
tight procedure, the Society proposed
to send a deputation to the Chief
Secretary and Premier.
was already showing his skill as political brinks man. Eventually, in April
1968, Reid introduced the validating
He acknowledged the
incorporation of a number of Bienvenu’s representations including the
right for members to inspect the
full members
Parliamentarians also recognised the reforming role played by Bienvenu and
others to make the RSPCA ‘a more active and
organisation’.
persistent, she was ‘not a vexatious
prophetic words.
On 11 May 1968 the Bill passed the Legislative
The RSPCA was lawful
VIII The RSPCA Cleanses the Membership
New By-Law six had been a ‘sleeper’ during the parliamentary
debate. It gave the committee power to reject, refuse to
renew or cancel any
membership upon being satisfied:
6(a)(i) that the person concerned has made or caused to be made or published
false, unfair, extravagant, fraudulent, derogatory or
harmful statements
concerning the Society or its activities or its General Committee, Office
Bearers or Staff in the performance
of their duties.
By virtue of paragraph 6(c) an aggrieved member could ‘request’
the Committee to appoint an Arbitrator from the Law Institute
or Victorian Bar
but no legal representation was to be allowed. Costs could be awarded.
Importantly, it gave the power to control
appeals to the
The Committee wasted no time invoking the By-Law. Another AGM was approaching
and the concern was to avert takeover by any reform
group. At lunchtime on 28
June 1968 they ‘unanimously’ rejected the membership applications of
Bienvenu and her husband.
They relied on the presentation of a report from
Missen. Bienvenu and her husband were not invited to attend nor ever told the
basis of the
Schilling’s 1962 advice on the rules of natural justice in such matters
was overlooked.
Over the next few weeks, the Committee rejected a further eighteen
applications including Bet Hardy, Muriel Danilov, Nance Simonds,
Allan Green and
Joan Richmond.
The approach
of the Society quickly spilled into the public
and brought Carter a
rebuke from Reid:
Some severe public criticism may be made to the effect that the Society has been
somewhat oppressive in rejecting the applications
of Mrs Bienvenu and other
members in her position. I bring this matter to your notice at this stage since
I understand that the annual
meeting of the Society takes place on Friday next
and you may wish to take the opportunity of reconsidering the decision of your
Following the 1968 AGM, which ‘took place in a spirit of
harmony’, Carter responded defending the decisions, noting firmly
‘Society is confident that it can amply justify the action
Reid replied
almost angrily, saying that he did not feel able to answer the suggestions that
Bienvenu and her supporters had been
‘shabbily’ treated. He advised
Carter that unless the applications were reconsidered ‘I will be
submitting legislation
to Parliament to establish their rights to membership of
the Society’.
Society responded saying it was ‘shocked’ and would view such a step
as ‘the grossest form of interference
with the internal management of this
December, Carter defiantly advised that the Committee had
‘unanimously’ decided not to reconsider the applications
them to arbitration.
took no further action. The Society had stared him down. It was also the end of
the Reform Group’s attempts to change
the RSPCA. Bienvenu’s campaign
would now move to a different arena.
IX Enter Mr X
During the struggle over membership, the Society had moved further on the
offensive and had started to pursue Bienvenu for payment
of the $3308.11 court
costs. Rather surprisingly, Gillotts appear not to have advised Bienvenu to
appeal the costs order. Instead,
they accepted the traditional view that
‘costs follow the event’ and only tried to minimise the amount by
reviewing the
Taxing Masters order. Understandably, Bienvenu did not appreciate
the distinction between these two review paths and was shocked
when Gowans J, at
the urging of RSPCA barrister Haddon Storey, dismissed her appeal. He ruled:
Whether or not it was within power, or a proper exercise of discretion, to order
the plaintiff to pay costs for which the defendant
was not liable was not raised
before the learned trial judge, and was not a matter the Taxing Master could
consider or which can
be debated on a review of his taxation. It is now a matter
In Bienvenu’s eyes this was another technical decision, not fairness,
and understandably, compounded her growing lack of confidence
in her lawyers.
Her disappointment is clear from entries in a surviving diary from that
It seems so strange to me that whilst I have only fought for the general good of
the Society and its members, justice in the matter
fails to reach me every
Today my heart is heavy. Have all my efforts over the past nine years gone for
nought? Why is it that, if one is truthful, honourable
& works for the good
of other creatures or other human beings, with no thought of gain for oneself,
the odds seems stacked against
Then, as publicity raged around this latest case, including a call for a
public inquiry into the
an offer of help from
an unexpected source. On 29 July 1968 Bienvenu took a telephone call from a man
who would be the inspiration
for her legal activities for the next two years. In
Anonymous man with legal knowledge and who loves dogs has spent some hours
talking to me on the telephone endeavouring to try and
find some point of legal
weakness in RSPCA case to help me. He has given me some very sound advice, but
the long telephone conversation
tires me (2 hours this morning and 2½ hours
afternoon).
For the next year at least, when the diary entries finish, Bienvenu received
83 calls and spent hundreds of hours taking advice and
dictated instruction from
this anonymous man whom she variously described as ‘Mr X’,
‘Councillor’ [sic] and
‘Adviser’. He encouraged her to
study law by buying books on contract, tort and the Supreme Court
He also advised of her
right to inspect Supreme Court files and to obtain the Gillott’s file.
After reading court files at
the Prothonatory’s office she noted ‘I
have read through them and gather the impression that I have not been
represented
by my Solicitors as well as I
The examination
of the Gillotts file confirmed the impression: ‘I am afraid any belief or
confidence I had in Solicitors is
This, together
with her recent discovery that RSPCA President Beattie had been struck off the
Solicitor Rolls in New Zealand in 1932
for professional negligence, further
lowered her opinion of lawyers and the standing of people opposed to her at the
Stirred on by Mr X her view hardened that Gillott’s had gone beyond
tardiness in the conduct of the litigation. They had been
negligent. Not only
had they failed to protect her interests but they had been too close, even
conspired with the other lawyers.
Certainly her discovery of a letter before
action to Schillings from her solicitor A E O’Connor confirmed that view.
Sent immediately
prior to the 1965 proceedings it said ‘We are giving you
this prior notice in case it is of some assistance to you in any action
wish to take regarding this matter’. Bienvenu’s interpretation was
that this was the green light for Schillings
to have the 1964 matter struck out
without her knowledge thus causing her to lose before Starke
On Mr X’s advice she dismissed her
and on 27 September
1968 issued her own Supreme Court writ (3572 of 1968) against Winneke, Smith and
Gillotts claiming $32,000 damages
under causes of action described as
‘actionable wrongs and breaches of contract’. Over the next fourteen
months she issued
a further seven Writs together with supporting affidavits and
other documentation. Winneke, Smith and Gillotts are regularly named
but as the conspiracy argument took hold the list of defendants widened, peaking
at 32 in one Writ in November 1969. They
included broadcasters, judges and
senior lawyers such as Keith Aikin, Norman Banks, W A Beattie, Victoria Carter,
A E O’Connor,
Phillip Ettleson, Alan Missen, Basil Murray, the RSPCA, Roy
Schilling, Richard Searby, Haddon Storey, Otto Strauss, and Sir Henry
Although she continued to argue that the court should review the decision of
Starke J, the causes of action also broadened
and escalated in their stridency.
They included ‘intimidation, conspiracy and infamous conduct’,
‘obtaining judgement
by fraud’, ‘infamous professional conduct
and defamation’ and ‘malicious publication of false and defamatory
statements’. All the proceedings, save the first where a default judgement
was set aside and then dismissed, was either struck
out as hopeless, groundless,
vexatious, an abuse of the process of the court or just lapsed. Costs were
always awarded against
Running in tandem with this litigation was the bankruptcy proceedings started
by the Society.
Although the
formal bankruptcy order was made in August 1969 the RSPCA never recovered any
costs. Instead, the proceedings provided
Bienvenu with opportunities and federal
forums, mainly the High Court, still located in Melbourne, to challenge previous
and restate her case. It unleashed a torrent of letters to officials
and judges, applications, cross applications, and appeals most
with lengthy
supporting affidavits sworn by Bienvenu. A consistent theme was that the order
for costs was not effective because Starke
J found that there were no members or
properly appointed officers of the RSPCA capable of collecting the costs. Thus
she argued a
Bankruptcy could not be founded upon it and nor did the validating
RSPCA Act make good that
Named defendants were mainly connected to the RSPCA, most of the cases being
appeals from the Bankruptcy proceedings. Increasingly,
they include the suite of
defendants named in the Supreme Court, High Court Registrars and politicians
such as Attorney General Tom
Hughes, as the cases made their way on appeal. Here
again the documentation was dictated mostly by Mr X, and typed by Bienvenu,
into the early hours of the
She then filed
personally at the court registries where she met varying assistance from the
counter staff. For example, ‘One
of the clerks, one who takes the money
and stamps the documents is a perfect pig of a
Bienvenu appeared for herself. In her diary she recalled a particular
appearance in March 1969 when Gibbs J heard her challenges to
Bankruptcy Notice and the Creditors Petition:
B Day (Bankruptcy Court)
Today was one to be remembered. Although I felt I would be unable to carry out
my part up till the time I was seated at the Bar table
in the Bankruptcy Court
(I had been rather overawed by all the wigs and gowns of the barristers in the
proceeding cases). Suddenly,
I felt different somehow that inner peace reached
me. And I was able to go on. Eileen Allen, Muriel Danilov, Betty Hardy, Nance
Sylvia Simonds and Ben were in court to support me. I was very happy when
each one said I had carried out my task very well. The
decision was reserved. Mr
Justice Gibbs was very nice to me and I feel like he is fair judge. Mr Storey
Barrister (my opposition)
was in wig and gown. But I had a pretty lipstick pink
suit and my hair done nicely & I felt assured in my
appearance.
By August 1971 she had issued 14 applications in the High Court. All were
unsuccessful with the court refusing to review the decision
Throughout, although she
appeared to have never discovered his
she retained
confidence in Mr X. ‘He is an interesting
most brilliant man. Amazing memory and extremely well
It is Bienvenu
who had the self-doubt. ‘Very depressed today. Should I go on with legal
battle. Am I a (fool) for accepting
advice from someone whose name and address I
do not know? Can I possibly win when all seems stacked against
In the end it is
her friends who provide the support. She noted in her diary: ‘What should
I do? I am not a stupid or vexatious
person, I only seek justice. Bet Hardy is
absolutely wonderful. She is doing everything in the world to help.’
While the legal activity dominated her waking hours Bienvenu sought to lead
as normal a life as possible. Her campaigning and family
life simply merged with
her affidavit typing and filing of documents. One day she issued a Supreme Court
Writ and the next day she
went to see Dame Janet Baker sing, ‘It was
really wonderful’.
another day she had a Taxing Masters appointment and then a meeting with Senator
Mulvihill over presentation of a Petition opposing
the export of Kangaroo
She also continued to
write protest letters to the
baked and creamed
twenty-four sponges in a day for a
and found time to
celebrate her birthday. ‘Ben and I had dinner at the RACV and went to see
“Bedazzled”. Very poor
show. But nice day
generally.’
However, her opponents had had enough of the legal battles. They moved to
close her down.
X Enough’s Enough! Two Declarations,
‘Ned Kelly’ and History is Made
In December 1969, the Victorian Government moved to invoke Section 33 of the
Supreme Court Act 1958
Inserted into the
Act in 1928
the section
empowered the court to declare a person vexatious once satisfied that they had
‘habitually and persistently and
without reasonable ground instituted
vexatious legal proceedings’. Once declared as a vexatious litigant that
person must have
the prior permission of the Court if they want to issue new
proceedings. The Section gave the Attorney General the sole standing
to initiate
the application and it was with some irony that the task fell to Reid, who had
provided support to Bienvenu in the parliamentary
debates over the RSPCA
legislation.
However, for Bienvenu, this was another suspect legal manoeuvre. Her research
for the case discovered that the original 1927
Supreme Court (Vexatious
had been withdrawn by the Attorney General of the time
and had never been presented again. How then could it be law? In her responding
Affidavit she made her view clear. The section had ‘been illegally and
fraudulently inserted in and printed as part of the
Supreme Court Acts from time
to time by various printers while the said printers were employed by the
Government of the State of
Victoria’. Then, for her, in uncharacteristic
prose and suggestive of a change of adviser, ‘That the said section 33
a fraudulent political device and gimmick of the obnoxious Establishment for the
unlawful suppression of persons who refuse to
be cravenly subservient to the
Establishment.’
Bienvenu had a point. There was something unusual, but not illegal, about the
passage of the section. In 1928, in the hurry to enact
the provision, the Bill
had not been reintroduced. The Parliament had simply adopted in full the 1896
English equivalent as part
of the 1928 Consolidation. This was an arcane point
of legislative drafting that would both bewilder and fuel the conspiracy
of more than one vexatious
On 12 December 1969, in her absence, Gillard J declared her vexatious. She
was the fifth person declared in Victoria since 1930. Unfortunately,
Government, loose drafting of the order required a further court hearing in
February 1970 to insert the word ‘such’
in the appropriate spot.
This gave Bienvenu the opportunity to object to Gillard J’s involvement on
the basis of bias. She
had recalled that his prior RSPCA involvement had seen
him stand down from hearing the ‘1965’ litigation. He was not
sensitive to perceptions this time and did not agree. It added further fuel to
the conspiracy fire.
appeal to the High Court was dismissed on 25 February
By this time most of Bienvenu’s litigation had progressed to the
federal jurisdiction of either the Bankruptcy or High Court.
Around February
1970, she started receiving advice from a second ‘Adviser’. He had
approached her in the legal book section
of the Public Library of Victoria and
offered to ‘help me draw up legal documents’. An
‘expert’ in constitutional
law he had purchased the law library of
the former High Court, Chief Justice, Sir John Latham. Identified only as
‘Mr G Collins
research by
the author makes it clear that this was Goldsmith Collins, former Fitzroy
champion footballer of the 1920’s whose
own legal battles had seen him
declared as the first vexatious litigant in the High Court in
and the third by the
Victorian Supreme Court in
Indeed, legal legend
confirms that Sir John Latham, an enthusiastic Fitzroy supporter, did in fact
sell Collins his law library ‘at
a very modest
An indicator of Collins involvement was the Bienvenu writ issued by Frank
Jones, then Deputy Registrar of the Principal Registry,
on the direction of
Barwick CJ, naming Jones and the Principal Registrar Neil Gamble as defendants.
The cause of action was that
Gamble and Jones had conspired to deny Bienvenu her
constitutional rights by refusing to supply her free of charge with a copy of
Constitution
. Although dismissed by the Full Court it was modelled on the
only successful court action Collins achieved when he has successfully
Northcote City Council. In the early 1950s they had failed in their statutory
duty to supply him with a copy of the Council
For the next few months Collins appears to have actively inserted himself
into Bienvenu’s litigation. Certainly, there is an
abrupt shift in the
language used in the documents filed that is entirely consistent with Collins
style of closely typed documents
liberally strewn with emphasis and epithets
bordering on invective. The sudden change to ‘scurrilous and intemperate
was even noticed by the
For example the
heading of a Notice filed in the Bankruptcy proceedings was worded:
IN THE FEDERAL COURT OF BANKRUPTCY
BANKRUPTCY DISTRICT OF THE
STATE OF VICTORIA
IN THE MATTER OF THE MANIFEST CRIMINALITY
FRAUDULENT MALPRACTICE INFLICTED ON ME,
CONSTANCE MAY BIENVENU, PARTICULARY
RE THE TREACHEROUSLY FRAUDULENT BOGUS
“BANKRUPTCY NOTICE” AND ALL OTHER
NECESSARILY CORRUPT ENSUING MALICIOUS
ATROCITY ACTS THERON THERAFTER
BOGUS NONENTITY “ROYAL SOCIETY FOR THE
PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS’ AND
THE MANIFESTLY FICTITIOUS NONENTITY
“OFFICE BEARERS” FRAUDULENTLY PURPORTING
MALICIOUSLY SCURRIOUSLY CRIMINALLY LIBEL
AND TO DEFAME ME AND TREACHEROUSLY INJURE
ME IN THE SAID “BANKRUPTCY NOTICE” DATED
DECEMBER 1968
N O T I C E
TAKE VERY PARTICULAR NOTICE
that I am now fully satisfied after
Suddenly ‘Mr George’ is gone and not to be found. Attempts to
adjourn cases he was involved in so presumably she had access
guidance, fail.
that Bienvenu never made the connection that Collins was a declared vexatious
It seems unlikely
that he was also ‘Mr X’.
By October 1970 a frustrated RSPCA was urging Missen to petition the
Commonwealth Parliament to have Bienvenu declared vexatious in
the High Court.
Responding to Carter, Missen explained that a petition would neither be
appropriate or wise as such requests are
essentially political. He advised that
his friend Ivor Greenwood (and RSPCA junior counsel in the 1964 litigation), now
was pressing the Attorney General for action. He urged that Committee
members lobby ‘influential members’ to pressure
Showing the extent
of his own conservative network he lobbied his local member and future
parliamentary colleague, Andrew Peacock
In February 1971, Crown Solicitor Hutchison finally made application to have
Bienvenu declared vexatious under Order 63 Rule 6 of
the High Court Rules. To
demonstrate that she had been ‘unreasonably instituting vexatious
proceedings’ he referred to
her having taken fourteen unsuccessful actions
in the High Court in the past two years. The matter was not heard until October
by which time in another neat shift of positions, Greenwood had become
Attorney General. Although Bienvenu made a preliminary application
struck out for ‘unwarranted delay’ and also challenged the validity
of Order 63, she made no reference to
perceived conflict or bias of the Chief
Law Officer having regard to his prior involvement in the RSPCA case or his
friendship with
Missen. Barwick CJ dismissed the application. He said the:
‘rule is made in pursuance of the rule making power of the court
ample to sustain it and not in conflict with any constitutional or statutory
provision. In my opinion the rule is
The case finally came before Walsh J a few days later. Material filed in
Bienvenu’s defence reviewed the history of the RSPCA
litigation and drew
on Australian history to explain her position. The ‘Commonwealth of
Australia seeks to gag me by placing
legal restrictions and legal obstacles in
my way and barring me from free access to the Courts by branding me a vexatious
and thus making me an outlaw like Ned
On 19 October
1971 Bienvenu made history of sorts when she became the first woman declared
vexatious by the High Court.
Ironically, she joined Goldsmith Collins as only the second Australian (then) to
have been declared vexatious by two superior courts
XI The Cause Continues: Activist to the
Even as the litigation cycle drew to a close the minds of Bienvenu and
supporters had turned to another way of advancing the animal
welfare cause. If
the RSPCA could not accommodate them then they would establish their own
Society. Bienvenu had taken tentative
steps in May 1969 when she had registered
the words ‘Animal Protection’ as a business name and, at the
suggestion of
her ‘Adviser’, publicly advertised ‘Free advice
and assistance on animal welfare and cruelty
complaints’.
1970, Carter was alerted to this development by a ‘deep throat’
asking to remain anonymous. The informant advised
that a group calling
themselves ‘Animal Protection Society’ was setting up a company and
although her name would not
appear as one of the original subscribers, Bienvenu
was the convenor. The writer suggested ‘one of the reasons for the
of this name is a long plan term plan to subvert public support for the
Missen immediately objected to the Official Receiver, suggesting Bienvenu as
a bankrupt, should not be ‘using funds for this
It was of no
effect. In October 1971 Bet Hardy convened the first meeting of the
Australian Animal Protection Society
(AAPS) at the Malvern library and
became its pioneering President. Active supporters (and fellow excluded RSPCA
members) were Muriel
Danilov, Joan Richmond, Bienvenu and her sister Nance
Simonds. For many years after Bienvenu and her sister would be the nucleus
the Malvern Auxiliary that ran a fundraising shop that also served as early
committee rooms.
next 30 years the growth of the AAPS represented a significant recasting of the
animal welfare landscape in Victoria. It
developed a network of Auxiliaries
through out Melbourne, provided accessible shelter for unwanted animals and cost
effective Veterinary
services. It participated in animal welfare policymaking
and a provided a ‘welcome mat’ for volunteers wanting to be
involved in the care of
The RSPCA’s
loss was animal welfare’s gain.
Nor was it only in Victoria that Bienvenu’s influence was felt. In 1964
in South Australia, a kindred spirit, Joy Richardson
had established the very
Animal Welfare League
and directly attributed its success to
the inspiration and support provided by Bienvenu. Writing an open letter of
support in 1970,
Richardson explained that in 1959 she had written for help
after being rebuffed by the local RSPCA. ‘I can never forget her
spontaneous response – Not by vicious word or thought, of which I have her
incapable, but she carted to me, free of any charge,
her wonderful Animal
Kindness and Educational
The wheel was turning also for Carter and the RSPCA. After a decade of
dealing with the challenge of the Reform Group there was belated
recognition
within the RSPCA that change was needed. Key to this was the arrival on the
Committee in 1969 of future President Hugh
Wirth and the retirement of Carter.
The ‘unhappy but necessary departure’ occurred at the end of
Thereafter, the RSPCA
set a proactive course. The Committee regenerated with younger progressive
members more in tune with the times,
restructured governance into active
committees, rebuilt funding, membership and public relations and perhaps most
significantly,
initiated the Kindred Societies Liaison Committee ‘to bring
together the proliferation of satellite animal welfare groups launched
Victoria during the RSPCA’s Carter
Years later, long
time RSPCA President Hugh Wirth would say that Bienvenu had been ‘more
right than wrong’ and had been
a catalyst for
After 1971, Bienvenu’s life was quieter. She returned to work at
Wellcome Products, her activism limited to caring for animals
left at her front
writing letters of
protest to the papers
voluntary work with the AAPS. In 1977 she was discharged from bankruptcy without
having paid the RSPCA anything, her husband
having successfully established
equity in her real estate.
However, in 1982 she returned to court for one last tilt, seeking to have the
1969 vexatious order of Gillard J set aside or revoked.
She argued that he had
erred in not assigning Counsel to her as required by Section 33 (2). Crockett J
gave the argument short shrift.
She should have asked at the time and in any
event, it was an appeal point and out of time! An unintended consequence was
did create new law with Crockett finding that the court had an inherent
power to bring such orders to an end, if appropriate. In
his view Parliament
would not have intended it to be so ‘draconic’ as to be an effective
life sentence. Nonetheless,
he declined to make a revocation order although
indicating that if the application was in the proper form it would be
considered.
She took it no
further. In what could be called the ‘Bienvenu amendment’ Parliament
gave statutory recognition to the
revocation option in
Survived by her supportive husband Ben and sister Nance, Bienvenu died at
Melbourne in 1995 aged 83 and was cremated. A short obituary
in the AAPS
newsletter said ‘This lady was a great friend to the Society and indeed to
all animal welfare. Her fight for justice
and fair play years ago in animal
welfare is well known to many and she will be greatly
Ben died in
2000 and through his estate established the Albert and Constance Bienvenu
Foundation for charitable purposes. It was
a condition of his Will that no
donations be made to the
XII Conclusion
In the forty years since Constance Bienvenu first did battle with the RSPCA
it now common ground that she was ahead of her time. Her
vision for an active
and interventionist animal welfare system is now recognised. Not least of all,
her fight gave rise to a more
democratic, accountable and active RSPCA. It is
also clear that she was not alone in the struggle, either in Victoria or
interstate,
although it was her determination that drove the campaign for over a
decade when others, less determined, would have
In Victoria Carter
MBE, she came up against a woman who was equally determined that her
conservative vision for animal welfare was
the correct one. It is clear that
they did not like each other. Indeed, had Carter and the RSPCA Committee been
less defensive perhaps
Bienvenu’s recourse to litigation might have been
avoided and some reform achieved.
However, it was the inability of the legal system to provide solutions to
litigation veer off in
its own direction sweeping others up in its unintended consequences. In
retrospect, Bienvenu and the RSPCA
were not well served by their lawyers.
Bienvenu’s were too loose in their conduct of the case while the lawyers
for the RSPCA
became personally involved to the point of clouding their
professional judgment. However, it was the 1967 judgment of Starke J, focussing
as it did on narrow legal points and not the underlying dispute that acted as
the catalyst for her break from her lawyers. It was
exacerbated by his harsh
exercise of discretion to award full costs against Bienvenu. Had he not done
that a major focus of continuing
grievance would have been eliminated.
Not surprisingly the combination of passion for her cause together with her
disappointment with the legal profession made her easy
prey for a ‘Good
Samaritan’ in the form of the mysterious ‘Mr X’. The
extraordinary thing is that were two
such ‘Advisers’ at play at
various times and that at no time did the court or others involved, appear to
recognise that
there was an invisible hand guiding the litigation. This reflects
the difficulty the adversarial legal system has, unlike the European
inquisitorial system, of actively enquiring into disputes, relying as it does on
procedures, form and professional advocacy to get
to the core of a dispute.
One of the great ironies is of course that Bienvenu kept returning to the
court looking for that elusive ‘justice’ after
being rebuffed time
and again. This almost blind faith is of course what distinguishes the vexatious
from the ordinary litigant.
The positive aspect of this is best summed up in the
words of George Bernard Shaw:
The reasonable man adapts himself to the world: the unreasonable one persists in
trying to adapt the world to himself. Therefore
all progress depends on the
unreasonable man (Source:
Man and Superman
(1903) ‘Maxims:
B Juris LLM (Monash).
Cruel Treatment of Animals
3 Geo IV c 71
It obtained the Royal warrant
in 1840. See further Antony Brown,
Who Cares for Animals
(1974) 12-21,
and Barbara Pertzel,
For All Creatures: A History of the RSPCA Victoria
Pertzel, above n 2, 5.
See generally Jennifer
MacCulloch. ‘Creatures of Culture: The Protection and Preservation
Movement in Sydney 1880-1930’
(unpublished Doctor of Philosophy
thesis, Library, University of Sydney, 1993).
In her comprehensive study of
the Sydney based New South Wales RSPCA McCulloch provides an extensive gender
analysis of the reasons
for and impact of the feminisation of the movement. See
further McCulloch, above n 4, Chapter 2. See also Lyle Munro, ‘Caring
Movement’ (2001) 9
Society and Animals
McCulloch, above n 4, 3.
http://www.dogshome.com/aboutus (25 January 2007).
See generally Felicity Jack,
The Kindness of Strangers: A History of the Lort Smith Animal Hospital
Since 1871 there have been
three major name changes for the Victorian Society. The second change to
Victorian Society for the Protection
of Animals (VSPA) occurred circa 1913. In
1955, the grant of a Royal warrant saw a further change to the Royal Society for
the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA). See further Pertzel, above n 2, 35
Lort Smith was an
influential figure with both the AWL and RSPCA although she fell out with the
latter. See further Heather Ronald,
‘Lort Smith, Louisa Eleanor
(1875-1956)’ (2000) 15
Australian Dictionary of Biography
Jack, above n 8, 13-14 and Pertzel, above n 2, 99. Brookes was a formidable
charity worker and President of the AWL. See Jack,
above n 8, 12; J Poynter,
‘Brookes, Dame Mabel Balcombe (1890-1975)’ (1993) 13
Dictionary of Biography
Pertzel, above n 2,
Chapters 15-17.
Pertzel, above n 2, Chapter
Pertzel, above n 2,
By-Law 4 of the 1943
edition reads inter alia: ‘All members of the general committee shall be
contributing members and not
more than six of them may be women’ RSPCA
(Vic) Burwood.
For example in 1963-64 the
14 members of the General Committee included, the Dean of Melbourne, two
Generals, one Policeman, two
Veterinarians, one Architect, one Doctor and one
Lawyer. There were two women members. See Annual Report RSPCA (1963-64) 1.
She was appointed to the
salaried staff in 1944. Awarded an MBE in 1966 she retired in 1975. See Pertzel,
above n 2, 136-137.
Bienvenu to Richardson,
January 1971, Miscellanious 2 Bienvenu, RSPCA (Vic), Burwood East. Unless
otherwise stated this file and
other RSPCA (Vic) files referred to are located
at the Society’s Burwood East premises.
Benvenu to Kennedy, 15
August, 1960, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
David Dark, ‘Look
out! The animals are in revolt’,
31 August 1963.
His description of the
Bienvenu family background drawn from interviews with Graeme Bienvenu dated 2
and 12 March, 2006 and Nance
Simonds dated 4 May and 28 July 2006. See also NAA:
B160, 327/1969 Parts 1 and 2, Affidavit of Albert Henry Bienvenu, sworn 29
Bienvenu to Kennedy, 15
August 1960, Miscellanious Documents – Bienvenu Literature and Bienvenu to
Secretary, 18 October 1962,
By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
Bienvenu to Richardson,
January 1971, Miscellanious 2 Bienvenu. Examples of the posters are located in
NAA: A10074, 1970/6. See
also interview with Jim Hagekyriakou dated 1 March
See Dark, above n 19.
Jack, above n 8, 212.
Pertzel, above n 2,
Pertzel, above n 2,
Despite her enthusiastic
support for it since 1945 the Poster competition was not a major success having
regard to the effort expended.
See Pertzel, above n 2, 112.
Committee Minutes of the
Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 1, 21 December 1959, 320.
Unless otherwise stated
further reference to the Society’s Minutes and
their location will be in short form See also Pertzel, above n 2, 121.
In February 1960 she
complained to the RSPCA over the treatment of animals at Ashton’s circus.
See CMRSPCA 1, 15 February
1960, 324. In 1962 she complained about RSPCA
endorsement of chariot races at the Royal Agricultural Show being ‘not in
with efforts to promote kindness to animals’. See Bienvenu to
Secretary, By-Laws (Continued) File 2, 8 October 1962.
Bienvenu to Kennedy, 15
August 1960, Miscellanious Documents – Bienvenu Literature.
Kennedy to Bienvenu, 23
August 1960, Miscellanious Documents – Bienvenu Literature.
See Carter to Kennedy, 24
September 1960 enclosing draft letter and Kennedy to Bienvenu, 14 October 1960,
Miscellanious Documents
– Bienvenu Literature. See also Pertzel, above n
‘RSPCA meeting
gagging charge’,
31 August 1962, 13.
Roy Schilling and Co to
Carter, 19 November 1962, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
See for example Letter to
the Editor of L Cranfield, ‘Treatment of Animals,’
July 1963, 2.
She joined with her
husband. See further Annual Report RSPCA (1962-63) 23. See also Pertzel, above n
2, 121 and ‘Woman’s
Bid to Join RSPCA Rejected’,
2 July 1968, 3.
CMRSPCA 1, 17 June 1963,
423, RSPCA (Vic), Burwood and Pertzel, above n 2, 121-122.
1963. See also ‘Group Challenge to Reorganise RSPCA’,
August 1963, 8.
Dark, above n 19.
By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
, 27 August
, 27 August
Dark, above n 19.
Carter to Schilling, 2
September 1963, By-Laws (Continued) File 2. In responding to Carter’s
letter about the Australian developments
the Chief Secretary of the RSPCA (UK)
expressed sympathy and advised ‘practically all that you mention in your
letter had its
exact parallel in similar unhappy proceedings at our own
Extraordinary and Annual General Meetings in 1961’. See Hall to Carter,
November 1963, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
CMRSPCA 1, 17 September
The reform group received
216 votes and the RSPCA candidates 350. See Bienvenu to Richardson, January
1971, Miscellanious 2 Bienvenu.
Dark, above n 19.
CMRSPCA 1, 17 September
1963, 431. See also Ettelson to Carter, 5 September 1963, By-Laws (Continued)
Answer to Animal Cruelty’,
, 21 February 1964, 52.
‘Buckjumping at Royal
, 5 August 1964, 2. See also ‘The Cruelty behind
, 7 August 1964, 2.
‘Victoria’s Lag
on Coursing “Disgusting”’,
, 19 August 1964,
Bienvenu to Ettelson, 15
March 1964, By-Laws (Continued) File 2. See also CMRSPCA 1, 13 April 1964, 450.
Bienvenu to RSPCA
Committee, 12 May 1964, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
Bienvenu to President,
June 1964, By-Laws (Continued) File 2. responding to the criticism
in 1964 they were published in the Annual Report in line ‘with
trend in publishing accounts’. See Annual Report RSPCA, (1963-1964) 29.
‘RSPCA ballot’,
, 18 June 1964, 4.
nee’ Grimwade, she
was the wife of Sir Chester Manifold, grazier and racing administrator. See
Andrew Lemon, ‘Manifold,
Sir Thomas Chester (1897-1979)’ (2000) 15
Australian Dictionary of Biography
‘RSPCA Ballot’,
, 25 June 1964, 4.
‘To members of the
RSPCA : The Case for the Reform Committee’, Miscellanious Documents
– Bienvenu Literature.
Bienvenu to Secretary
RSPCA, 27 July 1964, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
CMRSPCA 2, 10 August 1964,
Bienvenu to Richardson,
January 1971, Miscellanious 2 Bienvenu. See also By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
Carter to Gillot Moir and
Ahern, 25 August 1964, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
An examination of the
committee minutes makes no reference to any discussion or ratification of the
‘RSPCA ballot
29 August 1962, 9. See also PROV, VPRS 6345/P0, Unit
310, submission from Roy Schilling and Co to Chief Secretary of Victoria dated
23 May 1967, paragraph 2.
1 September
1 September
‘All returned in
, 13 October 1964.
‘All quiet again
RSPCA: Committee returned’,
, 13 October 1964, 18.
In 1964, the
Society’s Solicitor Roy Schilling was authorised to prepare a new
constitution on the understanding that appropriate
fees would be charged. See
CMRSPCA 1, 13 April 1964, 17 September 1963, 450.
Carter to Bienvenu, 1 April
1965, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
From this point Missen
takes a key role in providing legal advice to the RSPCA. In 1974 he entered
federal parliament as a liberal
Senator for Victoria. See further Anton Hermann,
Alan Missen: Liberal Pilgrim: A Biography
Schilling and Co to
President, 7 April 1965, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
CMRSPCA 2, 22 April 1965,
Bienvenu to Richardson,
January 1971, Miscellanious 2 Bienvenu.
Michael Winneke, the son of
the Chief Justice, was by now a partner in the law firm acting for Bienvenu. In
due course, Bienvenu
would see this familial link as part of a wider conspiracy
by the legal profession.
The result (including
postal votes) was 612 in favour 64 against. See Annual Report RSPCA, (1964-1965)
3 and Pertzel, above n 2,
This description of events
drawn from Bienvenu to Richardson, January 1971, Miscellanious 2 Bienvenu, and
PROV, VPRS 6345/P0, Unit
310, submission from Roy Schilling and Co to Chief
Secretary of Victoria dated 23 May 1967, paragraphs 2 and 3.
See Gillott, Moir and Ahern
to Roy Schilling and Co, 28 May 1965, By-Laws (Continued) File 2 and CMRSPCA 2,
15 June 1965, 488.
Gillott, Moir and Ahern to
Roy Schilling and Co, 28 May 1965, By-Laws (Continued) File 2
CMRSPCA 2, 28 June 1965,
Bienvenu to RSPCA, 12 May
1964, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
CMRSPCA 2, 15 June 1965,
Bienvenu to Richardson,
January 1971, Miscellanious 2 Bienvenu.
PROV, VPRS 6345/P0, Unit
310, 26 May 1966.
Ibid 3 June 1966.
Ibid 7 September 1966.
As early as 1947 there had
been doubt that the Society came under the supervising remit of the then
Charities Commission. An opinion
provided by the then Crown Solicitor, Frank
Menzies, concluded that they did. See PROV, VPRS 6345/P0, Unit 310, Menzies to
Department of Health, 18 July 1947,
PROV, VPRS 6345/P0, Unit
310, Carter to Secretary, Hospital and Charities Commission, 20 July 1966.
Bienvenu to Richardson,
January 1971, Miscellanious 2 Bienvenu.
PROV, VPRS 6345/P0, Unit
310, submission from Roy Schilling and Co to Chief Secretary of Victoria dated
23 May 1967, paragraphs
Transcript of
Annual General Meeting held 31 August 1966, By-Laws (Continued)
Bienvenu to Richardson,
January 1971, Miscellanious 2 Bienvenu.
Pertzel, above n 2, 204 and
CMVPSA 6, 21 August 1943.
Interview with Richard
Searby, Melbourne, 13 February 2007.
Storey would later serve as
Victorian Attorney-General in a liberal party government in the period
Bienvenu to Richardson,
January 1971, Miscellanious 2 Bienvenu.
Royal Society for Protection of Animals
[1967] VicRp 74
[1967] VR 656
Bienvenu v Royal
Society for Protection of Animals
[1967] 665.
Bienvenu v Royal
Society for Protection of Animals
[1967] 665.
10 February
Australian,
March 1967.
See for example
‘Jeff and the RSPCA Tangle’,
10 March 1967, 27 and
‘Weg’s Day’,
10 March 1967.
PROV, VPRS 6345/P0, Unit
310, Bienvenu to Secretary, Hospital and Charities Commission, 21 March 1967 and
Elliott to Dear Fellow
Member, April 1967. See also ‘RSPCA row see –
saws by mail’,
18 April 1967 and ‘Clash over RSPCA
Reform Move’,
24 June 1967.
PROV, VPRS 6345/P0, Unit
310, Carberry to Bienvenu, 13 March 1967.
For a summary of sources
of support see Annual Report RSPCA (1967) 2-3.
PROV, VPRS 6345/P0, Unit
310, Secretary to Rylah, 12 May 1967.
Ibid, Byrne to Rylah, 4
Ibid, Sallman to Rylah,
12 May 1967.
Ibid, Schilling and Co
to Commissioner of Health and Charities Commission 14 June 1967.
Ibid, McLellan to
Dickie, 19 June 1967. In May 1968, the Minister for Health formally decided
against recommending acceptance of
the Petition. See PROV, VPRS 6345/P0, Unit
310, Rogan to Lindell, 30 May 1968.
PROV, VPRS 6345/P0, Unit
310, Rylah to Byrne, 5 May 1967.
Aikin Opinion dated 14
March 1967 located as attachment at CMRSPCA 2, 10 April 1967, 543.
PROV, VPRS 6345/P0, Unit
310, submission from Roy Schilling and Co to Chief Secretary of Victoria dated
23 May 1967. See also ‘Making
RSPCA “Legal”’,
4 April 1968 and ‘Govt. Acts to make the RSPCA Legal’,
4 April 1968.
PROV, VPRS 6345/P0, Unit
310, Bienvenu to Bolte, 25 August 1967.
Carter to Dear
Sir/Madam, 31 August 1967, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
Carter to Dear Sir, 14
September 1967, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
Gillott, Moir
&Winneke to Carter, 3 October 1967, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
Reid to Roy Schilling
and Co, 3 November 1967, Attorney-General (G O Reid MLA) re By-Laws File.
Roy Schilling and Co to
Reid, 9 November 1967, Attorney-General (G O Reid MLA) re By-Laws File.
Reid to Roy Schilling
and Co, 16 November 1967, Attorney-General (GO Reid MLA) re By-Laws File.
Roy Schilling and Co to
Reid, 19 March 1968, located in MBRSPCA 2.
See ‘Making RSPCA
4 April 1968 and ‘Govt Acts to make RSPCA
4 April 1968.
Parliamentary Debates,
Legislative Assembly, 3 April 1968, 4039.
Ibid, 30 April 1968,
Ibid, 30 April 1968,
Ibid, 1 May 1968, 4598.
Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 1968
See Schedule to
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1968
CMRSPCA, 28 June 1968,
See undated list on
RSPCA letterhead in By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
‘Woman’s Bid
to Join RSPCA Rejected’,
, 2 July 1968, 3 and ‘Refusing
Entry to RSPCA’
, 5 July 1968, 5.
Reid to Carter, 28
August 1968, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
Carter to Reid, 9
September 1968, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
Reid to Carter, 24
October 1968, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
Carter to Reid, 12
November 1968, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
Carter to Reid, 10
December 1968, By-Laws (Continued) File 2.
NAA: A10074, 1969/10,
Exhibit B Mr Justice Gowan’s Judgement, 23 July 1968. See also
‘Battle over RSPCA Fees,
20 July 1968, 20 and ‘Pay Costs
says Judge. $6000 Goes To Prove Her Point’,
23 July 1968,
Entry for 23 July 1968
in Collins Mid-Year Diary 1968-69 in the possession (2006) of Mrs N Simonds,
Melbourne, Victoria. Unless
otherwise stated all further references to diary
entries will be for the Collins Mid-Year Diary in the possession (2006) of Mrs N
Simonds, Melbourne Victoria.
Entry for 25 July
‘Seeks Public
Inquiry into RSPCA’,
, 24 July 1968 and ‘Case “Took
Cash for Animals”’,
25 July 1968 and ‘RSPCA
Legal Wrangle Unnecessary’,
, 26 July 1968, 3.
Entry for 29 July
See for example entry
for 24 January 1969.
Entry for 30 July
Entry for 6 August
Entry for 15 July 1968
in Collins Mid-Year Diary 1968-69 in the possession (2006) of Mrs N Simonds,
Melbourne, Victoria.
Gillott Moir and Ahern
to Roy Schilling and Co, 19 May 1965, referred to in Bienvenu to Richardson,
January 1971, Miscellanious
2 Bienvenu.
Entry for 29 August
PROV, VPRS 12024/P3,
Unit 2 see Affidavit of John Joseph Andrew Sharkey sworn 4 December 1969.
Bienvenu had been warned
that these were in train when her husband took a warning telephone call from a
sympathiser who worked as
a secretary in the office of Roy Schilling and
Company. See interview with Jim Hagekyriakou 1 March 2007.
NAA: A10074, 1970/22,
Reasons for Judgement of Full Court,
Hutchison v Bienvenu,
For example
‘Adviser telephoned. Dictated another affidavit. I was typing same until
2am.’ See Entry for 19 March 1969.
Entry for 10 April
Entry for 19 March
NAA: A10074, 1970/22,
Reasons for Judgement of Full Court,
Hutchison v Bienvenu
, 19 October
Interviews with Nance
Simonds dated 4 May and 28 July 2006.
Entry for 18 December
Entry for 18 February
Entry for 21 May
Entry for 22 May
Entries for 27 and 28
September 1968.
Entry for 1 October
, 7 March 1969, 4.
Entry for 23 October
Entry for 9 May
PROV, VPRS 12024/P3,
Unit 2, File M7029 of the Supreme Court of Victoria.
The provision was the
response to the extraordinary flood of unsuccessful litigation in the
1920’s of Rupert Frederick Millane
(1887-1969). Declared in 1930 he was
Australia’s first vexatious litigant. For a history of the provision and
litigation see Grant Lester and Simon Smith, ‘Inventor,
Entrepeneur, Rascal, Crank or Querulent: Australia’s Vexatious
Sanction Seventy-five Years On’
Psychiatry, Psychology
and Law Journal,
1 and Simon Smith, ‘Vexatious Litigants and their
Judicial Control: the Victorian Experience’
[1989] MonashULawRw 4
PROV, VPRS 12024/P3,
Unit 2. See Affidavit of Constance May Bienvenu sworn 11 December 1969.
See further Lester and
Smith, above n 172, 9.
PROV, VPRS 12024/P3,
Unit 2. See Affidavit of Constance May Bienvenu sworn 16 February 1970.
Full Court Minute Book,
Volume 14, High Court of Australia, Canberra. See also NAA: A 10074,
NAA: A10074, 1970/8,
Affidavit of Constance May Bienvenu sworn 13 May 1970.
High Court File 80/0452.
High Court, Canberra.
Supreme Court of
Victoria, File M 2073, Melbourne Victoria.
Charles Francis,
‘Valete Goldie’ (Winter 1982) 20.
Interview with Phil Opas
dated 21 March 2005. See also Tony Blackshield, Tony Coper, and George Williams,
The Oxford Companion to the High Court of Australia
(2001) 698-699 and
NAA: A10075, 1970/3.
NAA: A10117, 1970/22,
Hutchison v Bienvenu
, See for example the comments of Walsh J in Reasons
for Judgment, 19 October 1971.
NAA: B160/0, 327/1969
Part 2, Notice dated 10 March 1970.
NAA: A10074, 1970/8,
Affidavit of Constance May Bienvenu Sworn 13 May 1970.
Interviews with Nance
Simonds dated 4 May and 28 July 2006.
Roy Schilling and Co to
Carter, 12 October 1970, Miscellanious 2 Bienvenu.
Missen to Peacock, 26
October 1970, Miscellanious 2 Bienvenu.
NAA: A10117, 1970/22,
Bienvenu v Hutchison
, Transcript of Full Court, 5 October 1971.
NAA: A10117, 1970/22,
Hutchison v Bienvenu
, Affidavit of Constance May Bienvenu sworn 7 October
NAA: A10117, 1970/22,
Hutchison v Bienvenu
, Reasons for Judgement, 19 October 1971. See also
‘No more actions, judge rules’,
19 October 1971.
Entries for 1 May and 25
May 1969. See also ‘Public Notice’,
24 May 1969, 51.
Penanaid to Carter, 8
April 1970, Bienvenu to Kennedy, 15 August, 1960, By Laws (Continued) File.
Schilling and Co to
Official Receiver in Bankruptcy, 22 April 1970, By-Laws (Continued) File.
Sue Thompson,
Twenty-five Years of Animal Protection: A History of the Australian Animal
Protection Society
(1997) 2-6 and also Interviews with Nance Simonds dated 4
May and 28 July 2006.
‘Presidents
AAPS Newsletter,
Keysborough, Spring 2006, 2-4.
Richardson to Victorian
Parliamentarians, October 1970, Miscellanious 2 Bienvenu. See also
http://www.animalwelfare.com.au/AboutUs/History/tabid/55/Default.aspx
2007). Interestingly, the official history of the South Australian RSPCA makes
only a passing reference to the Animal Welfare
League and no mention of Joy
Richardson. See further Wallace Budd,
Hear the Other Side: A History of the
Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals in South Australia
, RSPCA (1988).
Pertzel, above n 2, 137.
Ironically, after she was ousted as Secretary, Carter was the one that made life
difficult for Wirth. In
his words: ‘She would come to the Annual Meetings,
sit in the front row wearing her tam’ o’shanter and criticise
me.’ See Lawrence Money, ‘The vet with bark and bite’ (2007)
Pertzel, above n 2,
Chapter 24.
Interviews with Hugh
Wirth dated 19 January 2006.
Interviews with Nance
Simonds dated 4 May and 28 July 2006.
See for example
‘They’re not Sportsmen’,
7 December 1971 and
‘Roo Ignorance’,
7 May 1984.
NAA: B160/0, 327/1969
Bienvenu v Attorney
General for Victoria
[1982] VicRp 58
[1982] VR 563.
Parliamentary Debates,
Legislative Council, 5 December 1986, 1659. See
also Section 21 (5)
Supreme Court Act 1986
‘Presidents
AAPS Newsletter,
Keysborough, September 1995, 3.
Interview with Jim
Hagekyriakou 1 March 2007.
Interview with Hugh
Wirth dated 19 January 2006.
Oxford Dictionary of
(1992) 637:32.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (325 KB)
PDF format (0.996 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter