URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JCULawRw/2023/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:06:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Greggery, Justin --- "Justice for Robodebt" [2023] JCULawRw 3; (2023) 29 James Cook University Law Review 27
Justice for Robodebt
Justin Greggery
I Introduction
It is a real pleasure to speak to the James Cook University students about
the tangled mess of politics, self-interest and personal
hurt that was the
Robodebt scheme.
I experienced a sense of distant familiarity as I drove to the University
this afternoon. As you now know, I was student here in the
1990’s, and
after graduating, I found my legal feet in the daily application of the law. In
preference to the academic study
of it. Although, once I started to apply the
law to the lives of the people in the cases which came across my desk, I was
drawn to understand the theory which underpinned its application.
Like most law students, I completed the administrative law subject as part of
my degree, but it did not regularly feature in my practice.
One of the unexpected moments in the Royal Commission was that it piqued my
interest in administrative law because it was a university
student who, in 2019,
engaged Victoria Legal Aid to challenge the lawfulness of the Commonwealth
government’s Robodebt scheme
in an application for judicial review in the
Federal Court. That challenge had some twists and turns but it, together with a
application, succeeded in late 2019. The end of Robodebt illustrates how
the rule of law applied by the courts can be used by the
most vulnerable in our
society when the enormous efforts made by many others through various avenues
had been deflected, rebuffed
or completely ignored by those responsible for
addressing the flaws of the scheme.
The Royal Commission found that practically everything else failed to stop
the Robodebt scheme since it was first introduced through
the Federal Budget in
May 2015. Sadly, the end of the scheme did not come soon enough. Hundreds of
thousands of Centrelink recipients,
or former recipients, had money or
entitlements unlawfully taken from them, often with distressing and sometimes
devastating effects.
The Commission heard stories of those who felt shame and
embarrassment from the allegation they received Centrelink money they were
entitled to. The Commission also heard stories of those who had to choose
between food and repaying the alleged Centrelink debt.
And there were also
stories told by the relatives of those who took their lives when their spirit
was crushed by the political and
bureaucratic weight of false debts and its
daily impact. The evidence produced during the Commission provided answers that
were previously
withheld by government departments. The findings identified
those responsible for the commencement and continuation of the scheme.
I found my role in assisting the Commission to be both meaningful and
challenging. It was an inquiry into how Robodebt came into existence,
why it was continued despite red flag after red flag from within the government,
public media and online commentary. It required
a detailed and forensic
consideration of material which was not what I had expected. It required close
analysis of contemporaneous
documents which often revealed more gaps than I
anticipated in the conduct of business as usual within the public service. By
time of the inquiry, the events of 2015 were already seven years in the
past. Memories undoubtedly faded although there were some
claims of memory loss
which I regarded with great scepticism given the significance of the scheme at
the time and the clear personal
investment of those involved with it.
In about 45 minutes time some of you may know all you want to know of what
the Commission uncovered during the nine months it existed,
others may want to
read a chapter in the three volumes of the report on a topic that interests
them. It is not possible to even briefly
cover the material contained in the
report but either way, I hope this leaves you more informed.
II What is a Royal Commission?
Like most things studied by law students, a Royal Commission starts with an
Act of Parliament. In this case the
Royal Commissions Act 1902
which provides at
Without in any way prejudicing, limiting, or derogating from the power of the
King, or of the Governor-General, to make or authorise
any inquiry, or to issue
any commission to make any inquiry, it is hereby enacted and declared that the
Governor-General may, by
Letters Patent in the name of the King, issue such
commissions, directed to such person or persons, as he or she thinks fit,
or authorising him or her or them or any of them to make inquiry into
and report upon any matter specified in the Letters Patent,
and which relates to
or is connected with the peace, order, and good government of the Commonwealth,
or any public purpose or any
power of the
Commonwealth.
The breadth of the inquiry is regulated by the content of the letters
They were issued on 18
August 2022. The scheme was not always known as the Robodebt Scheme; the Letters
Patent set out the names
given to the various stages of it by the Department of
Human Services.
Broad powers are granted by the
Royal Commissions Act
witnesses to attend and give evidence on oath or affirmation and to compel
production of documents.
Royal Commissions Act
also contemplates that counsel may be appointed to
assist the Commission which is the role that I was appointed to, together with
four other barristers, Angus Scott KC, Renee Berry, Salwa Marsh and Douglas
Freeburn. We undertook the role of drafting or settling
notices to give evidence
and produce documents. Those notices were issued by the Commissioner, the
Honourable Catherine Holmes AC
SC, the former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court
of Queensland. Those who watched some of the livestream hearings will be
with the Commissioner’s unequalled ability to give ‘side
eye’ to witnesses who gave incredulous evidence. We also
examined witnesses and drafts of notices of potential adverse findings and
drafts of various sections of the report.
Many notices to produce documents and give evidence were issued. More than
100 witnesses over four public hearings (three of two weeks
duration and one of
three weeks duration) were called. More than 900,000 documents were produced and
were distilled to approximately
8,400 exhibits. The volume of work required by
the terms of reference required an extension of the initial time frame to 30
2023 and then again to 3 July 2023 to enable the Commissioner to refer
individuals to the National Anti-Corruption Commission which
came into existence
on 1 July 2023.
The result required by the Letters Patent was that a report including
recommendations be provided to the Governor-General. The report
comprises of
three volumes which respond to the subjects set out in the terms of reference in
the Letters and sets out 57 recommendations.
As you might appreciate, completing a task of this magnitude in less than
nine months requires a lot of dedicated people and resources.
fortunate to be involved in a Commission which fit that description. A Secretary
of the Commission was appointed, Ms Jane
Lye, who headed the necessary
recruitment of Commission staff (media liaison, social workers, legal staff,
administrative and technical
support – almost 40 staff in total over the
duration). Gilbert & Tobin were appointed solicitors assisting the
Commission.
The teams of solicitors that worked throughout the commission were
led by two very senior lawyers experienced in the functions and
work of Royal
Commissions, Andrew Floro and Kate Harrison. During the public hearings, the
work required to prepare documents for
tender by the solicitors and junior
counsel resulted in little, if any, sleep. Their contributions were enormous,
and I remain very
grateful for it.
Of course, responsibility for the report rested with the Commissioner and
that was not a responsibility which she delegated. The Commissioner
set the pace
early and sustained it. It is truly her report. Assisting Catherine Holmes was a
professional experience that I value
very highly.
Although I was surrounded by highly capable Commission staff, counsel and
lawyers, I admit I felt, quite strongly, in the week before
the first hearing
that I was not in a position to start calling witnesses. There were too many
unknowns, document production was
frustratingly complicated and late, and where
does one begin to unravel the mysteries of Robodebt? A decision had to be made
whether to start as scheduled. I consulted with the other barristers and
came to a decision that we needed to defer the start; we
were not ready. I
shared my view with the Commissioner, already anticipating the relief that came
from the possibility of another
week of preparation before we got underway. The
Commissioner listened, disagreed and simply said: ‘It’s an inquiry.
aren’t supposed to know everything. Ask questions and press for
And so, it began.
III Where Did Robodebt Start and What Was It?
The Robodebt story began in 2014. The Commonwealth government had structured
its administrative functions so that there were two departments
cabinet portfolio of the Minister for Social Services; the Department of Social
Services (DSS) and the Department of Human
Services (DHS). Broadly speaking, DSS
had policy and advice functions and DHS had service delivery functions including
through Centrelink;
an office many university students are familiar with. Each
department had a Minister and a Secretary. A Secretary is the most senior
within the Commonwealth public service. Each department had many in-house
lawyers and I will briefly touch on their legal advice
The fact that there were two departments within the one portfolio did not
mean that they had exclusive areas of responsibility. If
DHS developed an idea
for potential inclusion into the Federal budget, it would be developed into a
New Policy Proposal (NPP) which
would be presented to the Expenditure Review
Committee, a sub-committee of Cabinet, by the Minister for Social Services. As
concluded, that required a collaborative process between DHS and DSS
in order for both departments to have an understanding of the
proposal and to
advise their respective Ministers. The Robodebt Scheme was developed as a NPP
for the budget in early 2015.
Like every government program, Robodebt started with a simple idea that there
was a more efficient method to recover Centrelink overpayments.
The idea was
that overpayments could be calculated according to information provided by
employers to the Australian Taxation Office
The idea was thought to be better for two reasons: first it would make it easier
for DHS (through
Centrelink) to calculate overpayments using this approach and
secondly, it would calculate a much higher volume of debt which could
recovered. These features, if workable, would make DHS look efficient and
financially responsible.
The idea also aligned with the government’s objective of balancing the
budget and it appealed to its policy of being tough on
welfare cheats (hence the
stigma). Despite all the evidence given during the Commission, there was no
evidence that any government
Minister of DHS or DSS or any government employee
asked why, if this was such a good idea, it was not already in place.
The fundamental problem with the idea was that the method of overpayment
calculation and consequential debt recovery was unlawful.
It involved a method
to calculate overpayments which did not reflect the statutory test for
entitlement to those repayments. The
report set out the detail:
In summary, the Employment Income Matching measure entailed a process of
data-matching and debt raising to be applied to some 866,857
instances of
possible overpayment for the financial years 2010/11, 2011/12 and 2012/13
identified through a comparison of Australian
Taxation Office (ATO) and DHS
data. DHS would obtain information from the ATO as to what benefit a
recipient’s employers had
returned as the income earned by the recipient
in the relevant financial year (“PAYG data”), compare it through an
system with what had been declared to DHS by the recipient, and in the
event of discrepancy would require the recipient to go online
to explain it.
If the recipient did not respond or provide details which explained the
discrepancy, or agreed with the PAYG data, the amount declared
by the employer
would be averaged across a period of time, which was often whatever employment
period the employer had indicated.
The system applied some rules which attempted
to account for the varied circumstances of income support recipients; however,
basic premise was that the amount declared by the employer would be divided
up evenly and allocated into the number of fortnights
included in the period
being reviewed. (That process was variously referred to income
“averaging”, “smoothing”
or “apportioning”.)
Where, in any given fortnight, the averaged fortnightly amount exceeded the
income the recipient was entitled to receive before reduction
of benefit, it
would be taken that there had been an overpayment, a debt would be raised
accordingly, and steps would be taken to
recover it. Where the recipient was
still on benefit, deductions would be made from the income support currently
being paid. Where
the recipient was no longer on benefit, they would be required
to enter a repayment arrangement. Debt collectors would be involved
if they did
not respond, and they were liable to have any income tax refund they were
entitled to receive garnisheed. Robodebt began
with some pilots in 2015, was
rolled out with its online platform in September 2016 and continued in various
iterations for four
The idea bubbled to the surface of DHS in about mid-2014 and came to the
attention of the Secretary, Ms Kathryn
At that time Senator
Marise Payne was the Minister for DHS and Ms Malisa Golightly was a deputy
secretary of DHS who was to work
closely with Ms Campbell and Senator Payne on
the development of the scheme.
Relevant identities at DSS included Mr Finn Pratt, the Secretary who took a
‘hands off’ approach to the idea and left
one of his Deputy
Secretaries, Ms Serena Wilson, to handle its progress.
In December 2014, Scott Morrison was appointed as Minister for Social
Services which was, as I indicated, a cabinet portfolio. He
was welcomed to the
role by letter from Senator Payne who noted that an arrangement had been made
for him to be briefed about DHS
by Ms Campell over the Christmas break. That
meeting took place on 30 December
Little contemporaneous record
of their discussion remained by the time of the Commission. If Ms Campbell had
made notes of the meeting
she had since destroyed them. Mr Morrison had a senior
advisor present at the meeting and he retained his
They included the words
‘most excited’ and a short list of matters which included
‘integrity package’. Ms
Campbell gave evidence that ‘payment
integrity’ referred to payments which exceeded a person’s
entitlement.
The report concluded that it was Mr Morrison who was ‘most
excited’. Subsequent documents confirmed that Mr Morrison asked
Campbell for options to strengthen the integrity of welfare
On Monday, 5 January 2015, almost most immediately after the New Year’s
day holiday, Ms Campbell met with her deputy secretary,
Malisa Golightly to
discuss Mr Morrison’s request to increase debt
By 9 January 2015,
other senior persons within DHS were involved and DHS started to discuss the
idea with those at DSS. The early
drafts of DHS documents referred to the
meeting between Ms Campbell and Mr Morrison and his
There was a real sense of urgency which accompanied the development of the
idea into a New Policy Proposal (NPP). That reflected the
confined timeframes
created by the federal budget process. The DSS portfolio budget submission was
scheduled to be considered by
the Expenditure Review Committee on 18 March 2015,
which required NPP’s to be circulated for consultation in February 2015.
As one would expect, it was Ms Campbell’s responsibility to inform her
minister of the discussion with Mr Morrison. On Monday,
12 January 2015 Ms
Campbell met with Senator Payne. Senator Payne maintained a notebook which
confirmed Mr Morrison’s request
and in fact the DHS
brief which responded to Mr Morrison’s request was to be provided through
Senator Payne. Ms Golightly was
the Deputy Secretary responsible for the
preparation of the brief and the draft of Thursday, 15 January 2015 confirmed
that Ms Campbell
was ‘very keen’ get the brief to Senator Payne.
The draft brief was in the form of an Executive Minute. It recorded two
things. First how overpayments were currently
and secondly that DSS
had informed DHS that the proposal required legislative
I pause there, what legislative change you ask? I skipped over an important
piece of information. In 2014, when the idea was first
considered by DHS they
sought advice from DSS. That advice was sought from Ms Anne Pulford, a lawyer
within the public law branch
of DSS. It was prepared by another lawyer, Mr Simon
Jordan and approved by Ms
The effect of the
advice was that that the existing legislation required calculation of social
security overpayment by reference
to the test for entitlement; that is by the
assessment of actual fortnightly income. Ms Pulford gave evidence about the
this advice.
No evidence was adduced at the Commission that the DSS legal advice was sent
to DHS before Ms Campbell’s meeting with Mr Morrison
on 30 December 2014,
but that did not matter greatly because Ms Campbell and Ms Golightly knew of it
from the contents of the draft
memorandum of 15 January 2015 and it was
reiterated in a series of dot points set out in an email sent from DSS to DHS on
What did matter was how, despite that clear legal advice, a NPP which
contained what became the Robodebt scheme was approved by the
Expenditure Review
Committee on 25 March 2015 without reference to the need for legislative change.
Matters which pointed towards an answer included statements made by Mr
Morrison in a radio interview on 21 January 2015 where he spoke
of the need to
crack down on welfare cheats, references to those rorting the system, and the
concept of himself as a welfare
Again, as you might expect,
Ms Golightly and Ms Campbell took notice of the language. Ms Campbell recalled
it, more than seven years
later, and agreed that the language was significant to
her because it indicated the direction Mr Morrison wished to take in his
of the portfolio.
There was also the government agenda of balancing the budget. No criticism
could be made of that goal, but it should go without saying
that a government
cannot unlawfully take money from its citizens in aid of that agenda.
A third consideration was that the coalition government required crossbench
support to pass legislation through the Senate and many
bills were awaiting
passage from the previous budget.
The final version of the DHS Executive Minute to Mr Morrison was prepared on
12 February 2015.
There had been
some to and from between DSS and DHS prior to the final version about the
language which identified the need for legislative
change. The net effect was a
slight watering down of the language but a clear message, that legislative
change was required.
Mr Morrison signed the Executive Minute on Friday, 20 February 2015 and it
was sent to DHS on Monday, 23 November
Mr Morrison marked the
Executive Minute to note his agreement that DHS develop a package of NPP’s
which included what became
the Robodebt Scheme, that DHS continue to work with
DSS to progress ‘consideration of additional policy and legislative
in relation to payment integrity’ and noted the current
arrangements which included the manually intensive process of calculating
overpayments according to actual fortnightly
He gave evidence that the information contained in the Executive Minute was
his only source of knowledge about the calculation of
overpayments.
It was in that context, that DHS drafted a NPP by Thursday, 26 February 2015,
(within three days) which fundamentally reversed the
position that legislative
change was required to implement the proposal to state it did
This radical alteration to the position was expressly stated in the NPP and
there was a notable lack of a clear explanation by any
employee of either DSS or
DHS about how that came about. Over the next week the draft was circulated to
both ministers’ offices
and to DSS. Except for one occasion, the draft NPP
which contained the ‘about face’ on the question of the need for
legislative
change was unquestioned. The report concluded that the language used
to describe the proposal changed but its substance did not.
The absence of any questioning continued through the NPP consultation process
and ultimately was approved by the ERC on 25 March 2015.
Present at the ERC
meeting were the ministers and secretaries of both
departments.
The report makes findings about the knowledge of those who were involved in
the idea which became the proposal which became a budget
measure and ultimately
became known as the Robodebt scheme. I don’t have time to talk to you
have to read that for yourself.
IV The Events of Late 2016 and Early 2017
Returning to the chronology, the scheme increased in scale and automation in
late 2016. That led to widespread complaints about the
inaccurate calculation of
debts. Perhaps coincidentally, the complaints surfaced in the media not long
after 5 December 2016, when
the media advisor to the then Minister for Human
Services, Alan Tudge, liaised with DHS and the Australian to publish an article
which extolled the apparent virtues of the
That was followed by Mr
Tudge’s appearance on television giving his full-throated endorsement to
the scheme.
Mr Tudge took leave overseas during Christmas. Then Minister for DSS, Mr
Porter, acted in place of Mr Tudge and publicly defended
the scheme. The Report
records that by this point, the public chorus of criticism was deafening.
Minister Tudge returned from leave
after some inquiring WhatsApp messages from
the then Prime Minister, Malcolm Turnbull, and continued the public defence of
the scheme.
Such was the extent of public concern and adverse media stories about the
scheme that the Commonwealth Ombudsman initiated its own
The inquiry started in
early January 2017, and was the catalyst for the acting Secretary of DHS to
direct his legal department to
obtain legal advice about the issues raised in
the media (primarily the inaccurate calculation of debts, or more directly, the
calculation
and allegation of debts which did not exist or did not exist to the
extent alleged). Steps were taken to engage a solicitor at the
Government Solicitor (that is external to DHS) to provide an advice. That
direction prompted communications within DHS
which included an email sent by a
DHS lawyer. His advice clearly concluded that the use of income averaging to
calculate debts was
not permitted under the
legislation.
In fact, that
advice was provided to the senior lawyer within DHS, Ms Annette Musolino, on 23
January 2017, at her request.
Musolino gave evidence that she delegated the task of reviewing those advices to
another lawyer in DHS but no contemporaneous
record of that delegation was
produced. Her evidence on the point was rejected by the Commission. Ms Campbell
returned from leave
before an advice from the Australian Government Solicitor
was provided. The report concluded that Ms Campbell directed DHS officers
cease the process of responding to the request for
What DSS did do was to re-engage Ms Pulford, the lawyer who signed off the
2014 advice which confirmed debts could not be lawfully
calculated in the manner
proposed by DHS. She provided another advice which was both inconsistent with
the 2014 advice and wrong
The Commission concluded
that Ms Pulford’s advice in 2017 was influenced by pressure placed on her
by a more senior person
Returning to the DHS response to the topic of the inquiry initiated by the
Commonwealth Ombudsman, a meeting between representatives
Ombudsman’s office and persons from DHS was organised for Monday, 16
January 2017.
That promoted a
pre-meeting between DHS and DSS via telephone on Sunday, 15 January 2017 to
review their respective positions. Those
who attended the meeting gave evidence
of their recollections.
The scheme was not only under attack publicly. In the face of the public
criticism Ms Campbell sent an email to DHS employees which
asserted there had
been no change to the way that DHS assessed income for the purpose of
calculating overpayments.
assertion became the catch cry of DHS under Ms Campbell’s leadership. It
was consistent with the radical change to the
NPP presented to the ERC almost
two years earlier, but it was clearly untrue, and Ms Campbell knew it was
Ms Colleen Taylor, an employee of DHS who knew how the scheme worked, wrote
directly to Ms Campbell in response to Ms Campbell’s
DHS email and told Ms
Campbell her message to staff was misleading in making that assertion. Ms
Taylor’s email to the Secretary
was practically
Other persons reported in online media as whistle-blowers from within DHS
contradicted the public position of the Department and the
DHS and Mr Tudge went on the front foot. Again, they used the national print
media to extol the virtues of the scheme. On 26 January
2017, an article was
published in the Australian which sought to win the public
On that same day, Rhys Cuazzo committed suicide. His mother Jenny Miller gave
evidence about Rhys, how he worked in jobs in Melbourne
and did not receive a
consistent income. He had debts raised through an early iteration of the
Robodebt Scheme. Ms Miller’s
evidence was deeply moving. Ms Miller
described how when she attended his flat, she saw a picture on the fridge drawn
by him. A gun
was in his mouth and dollar signs were drawn as though to come out
of the back of his head.
response of Mr Tudge and DHS to suicides associated with the Robodebt scheme is
addressed in the Report. It is still difficult
for me to believe that a
government department and its Minister would respond with such a lack of empathy
to the assertion of surviving
family members that there was a link between the
debts calculated by the Robodebt scheme and suicide.
I also examined Ms Kathryn Madgwick, the mother of Jarrod Madwick, who also
took his life in 2019 in the context of debts raised by
Centrelink.
The ability of these
two mothers to give evidence about the loss of their sons and their experiences
with unsuccessful attempts to
get honest answers from DHS made a significant
impression on me.
V Senate Inquiries
On 8 February 2017, the Senate referred the Robodebt Scheme to the
Senate Community Affairs References Committee for inquiry and report.
the first of two senate reports into the Robodebt scheme. The second was in
2019. The DHS submission to the 2017 Senate
inquiry was published by the Senate
on its website together with the submissions received by committee. The DHS
submission said this:
In 2015–16 the Government announced the
Strengthening the Integrity
of Welfare Payments
measure. A key element of this measure was
Income Matching,
which provided resources to expand the department’s
compliance activity in this area
This expansion did not change the
data-matching methodology nor how the department assesses and calculates
differences in income and
On 8 March 2017 a number of DHS and DSS employees attended the Senate
inquiry. The audiovisual recording of the evidence given by
the DHS and DSS
employees was also published by the Parliament on publicly available websites.
Ms Golightly, sitting beside Ms Campbell,
gave oral evidence to the same effect
as the written submissions, in an answer about a recent meeting with the ATO.
That assertion
was, according to the evidence of Ms Campbell in the Royal
Commission, known to be untrue.
A question I have been asked is why didn’t the evidence obtained in the
Senate inquiry feature in the Royal Commission. The
answer to that question is
simple. Despite the broad powers granted by the
Royal Commissions Act
Parliamentary Privileges Act 1987
(Cth) provides that:
(3) In proceedings in any
it is not lawful for evidence to be tendered or received, questions asked or
statements, submissions or comments made, concerning
proceedings in Parliament,
by way of, or for the purpose of:
(a) questioning or relying on the truth, motive,
intention or good faith of anything forming part of those proceedings in
Parliament;
(b) otherwise questioning or establishing the credibility, motive, intention
or good faith of any person; or
(c) drawing, or inviting the drawing of, inferences or conclusions wholly or
partly from anything forming part of those proceedings
Parliament.
A Royal Commission is a court proceeding within this section, and the Senate
inquiry was a proceeding in parliament. It was not lawful
for the Commission to
adduce evidence of what was said or submitted to the Senate inquiry for the
prohibited purposes in
or (b) questioning the credit of any person or
drawing the prohibited inferences in
So, although the material adduced in the Senate inquiry was publicly
available, it could not be used by the Commission.
The prohibition on the use of material obtained by the Senate inquiry likely
did not limit to any large extent the ability of the
Commission to make its
findings. Had this evidence been available for use by the Commission, it would
have only been used to try
to establish that those present in the Senate hearing
were so committed to ensuring the scheme continued (despite knowing it alleged
debts which did not exist) that they were prepared to positively mislead the
committee by the written submission of DHS and silently
acquiesce while Ms
Golightly gave evidence which they knew was untrue. The material produced to the
Commission was sufficient evidence
to establish that very senior public servants
in DHS and DSS worked to inhibit the public knowing the true facts about the
and frustrate or misdirect the inquiry by the Ombudsman.
Once the Ombudsman released its draft report to the DHS and DSS as part of
its natural justice obligations, DSS were quick to seize
misrepresentations by DHS that the scheme had not changed the way income was
calculated and debts were assessed and that it
produced accurate results. The
published report was then relied upon by the DHS, DSS and the ministers to
maintain the ‘nothing
has changed’ line in the continued defence of
the scheme.
Many of those who suffered because of the scheme had hopes that their
experience would be vindicated by the report of the ostensibly
independent
inquiry of the Ombudsman. The Commission heard evidence that the
Ombudsman’s report crushed those expectations.
For this reason, the Commission was very interested to know about the
dealings between the departments and the Ombudsman’s office.
The chapters
which address this inquiry, its shortcomings and the role played by the office
generally are both fascinating and disheartening.
The report described how 2017 was a watershed moment that ought to have led
to the cessation of the scheme.
Instead, it was a watershed moment because DSS, DHS and their ministers
successfully defended the attacks on the scheme from all
angles. I found it
remarkable that such a coordinated and successful defence could be mounted on so
many fronts. To my mind, that
approach required a complete disinterest in the
welfare of those who relied on the welfare system for basic living standards.
Another point worth mentioning is that the Commission uncovered evidence of
the practice of obtaining legal advices in draft form
and not finalising them if
they appeared to be adverse to the Department’s purposes. I pause there to
note the staggering unspoken
assumption of this evidence; that is, the
department’s purposes are more important than complying with the law. That
antithesis of the obligations on public servants under the
Service Act 1999
VI Legal Challenges
The Australian Institute of Administrative Law held its national conference
in Canberra in mid-2017. The keynote speaker was barrister
Peter Hanks, an
eminent silk from Melbourne. His paper ‘administrative law and welfare
rights: a 40-year story from
Green v Daniels
to Robodebt recovery’
was adapted from an advice he provided to Victoria Legal Aid earlier in 2017
following Victoria Legal
Aid’s engagement with many people who had false
debts alleged against them.
A number of lawyers from DHS and DSS attended. They heard Mr Hanks explain
why, in his opinion, the way in which Robodebt calculated
debts was not
permitted by the legislation. By this point you will not be surprised to learn
that his points were dismissed by Ms
Musolino (the most senior lawyer in DHS) in
her advice to Ms Campbell.
There were many applications for review of alleged debts in the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal. Volume 3 of the report contains a
those cases.
Some made it as far
as the appeal division in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. None reached the
Federal Court.
Ms Masterton was the university student I spoke about in my introduction who
sought the assistance of Victoria Legal Aid, Mr Hanks
was briefed. Ms Masterton
was the second witness I called on the first day of the hearings. Ms
Masterson’s evidence included
the uncertainty she felt in being the
litigant in proceedings against the Commonwealth. It was not a small step for
her and took
In early 2019 Victoria Legal Aid filed an application for judicial review in
the Federal Court, on behalf of Ms
The Applicant sought
declarations which went to the fundamental question of the lawfulness of the
scheme. After the affidavits were
filed, DHS recalculated Ms Masterton’s
debt as it accepted it had double counted the same income in calculating the
left a relatively small, recalculated debt of approximately $700
which was then, administratively, reduced to
Arguments ensued in the
Federal Court about the utility of the declarations sought by Ms Masterton.
Within weeks of those arguments, a second applicant, Ms Amato, engaged
Victoria Legal Aid and a similar application was filed in the
The facts in Ms
Amato’s case did not permit any recalculation of her debt to zero and the
arguments about utility did not arise.
Ms Masterton’s proceedings waited
the outcome of Ms Amato’s proceedings.
The Commonwealth was forced to confront these legal challenges. DHS sought
the advice of the Solicitor
Legal professional
privilege was waived by the Commonwealth and the Solicitor General’s
advice was the first exhibit I tendered
on the first day of public hearings. The
advice confirmed the unlawfulness of the
Shortly before the
hearing of Ms Amato’s matter, the Commonwealth conceded. Its concession
and the reasons for the concession
marked the end of the Scheme. Almost 400,000
Australians had been affected.
Before concluding, I want to also mention that the Commission also heard
evidence from dedicated and passionate members of not-for-profit
organisations
such as the Australian Counsel of Social Services, and community legal services
which were overwhelmed with requests
for help from those who were victim to the
scheme. Their evidence is a timely reminder of the importance of adequately
funding these
community legal organisations, which are often the only available
service for people who are in the most vulnerable socio-economic
strata of our
society. There is a section in the report on advocacy groups.
There is so much more in the report than this brief skim across the surface.
There is a chapter on automation and data-matching which
includes automated
decision making. An area which will only increase in its relevance to lawyers
involved in the area of government
VII Recommendations/Where to From Here?
The report contains 57 recommendations. They are directed to key failings in
the systems and structures which were overcome by the
willingness of individuals
to circumvent the existing checks and balances. No doubt they are under active
consideration by the government.
Those of you who followed the inquiry and have read the Commissioner’s
letter to the Governor-General on the first page of the
report will also know
that there was an additional chapter of the report which was sealed. It was not
included in the published report.
It contained recommendations for the referral
of individuals for civil action or criminal prosecution. Before I am asked any
I cannot disclose anything about the sealed section or who is the
subject of it.
There were reports in the media about potential causes of action for those
affected by scheme which were not resolved in the class
To conclude, justice for those affected by the Robodebt scheme is ongoing. It
did not finish with the Commission’s report. I
quote from Commissioner
Holmes’ preface to the report:
At the outset of my inquiry, I had anticipated that the Commission would
uncover how such a patently unreliable methodology as income
averaging, without
other evidence, to determine entitlement to benefit could become part of an
Australian Government debt raising
and recovery scheme. What has been startling
in the Commission’s investigation of the Robodebt scheme has been the
other ways in which it failed the public interest.
It is remarkable how little interest there seems to have been in ensuring the
Scheme’s legality, how rushed its implementation
was, how little thought
was given to how it would affect welfare recipients and the lengths to which
public servants were prepared
to go to oblige ministers on a quest for savings.
Truly dismaying was the revelation of dishonesty and collusion to prevent the
lack of legal foundation coming to light. Equally disheartening
was the ineffectiveness of what one might consider institutional
balances – the Commonwealth Ombudsman’s Office, the Office of Legal
Services Coordination, the Office of the
Australian Information Commissioner and
the Administrative Appeals Tribunal – in presenting any hindrance to the
continuance.
Despite those disheartening and dismaying aspects of the evidence, I found it
worth the highly demanding workload to uncover those
things. The matters
uncovered by the Commission vindicated the belief of those who were affected by
the scheme. Their beliefs about
their unfair treatment were denied by
politicians and public servants. Their vindication mattered. The Commission gave
them a voice, a voice which was not shouted down by the departmental
mantras and manipulated media. I was privileged to have played
VIII Postscript
On 12 November 2023 the Attorney-General tabled the Government Response to
the Report of the Royal Commission into the Robodebt scheme
in the House of
Representatives.
The Government Response adopted the Report and accepted, or accepted in
principle, all but one of the 57 recommendations made by the
Commission. The
recommendation which was not adopted related to the repeal of
Freedom of Information Act 1982
The full terms of the
recommendation were:
The Commonwealth Cabinet Handbook should be amended so that the description
of a document as a Cabinet document is no longer itself
justification for
maintaining the confidentiality of the document. The amendment should make clear
that confidentiality should only
be maintained over any Cabinet documents or
parts of Cabinet documents where it is reasonably justified for an identifiable
interest reason.
It was my experience in assisting the Commission that DSS and DHS marked
documents ‘Cabinet in Confidence’ which did not
properly attract
such a marking. That marking was used as a basis to decline requests under the
FOI Act for access to government
documents which were, but for that marking,
accessible. Public access to the documents related to the Robodebt scheme was
during its lifespan in this way. What is difficult to understand about
the Government Response is that it refused to acknowledge
that there were 57
recommendations in the Report, asserting that there were only 56.
Save for this qualification, and it is a significant one, I am hopeful that
the reforms addressed in the Government Response together
with the public nature
of the hearings will improve the transparency of and accountability for the
conduct of the Australian Public
Justin Greggery KC was called to the Bar in 2000 and took silk
7. He has broad trial and appellate
practice and is highly sought after as an advocate in complex matters. In
September 2022 Justin
was appointed Senior Counsel Assisting in the Royal
Commission into the Robodebt Scheme. Justin is affiliated with 31 Sturt Chambers
and 8 Petrie Terrace Chambers. The original text of this paper was a speech
delivered by the author at James Cook University on 26
Royal Commissions Act
Royal Commissions Act
Royal Commission into the
Robodebt Scheme
(Report, July 2023) vol 1, x-xi (‘
Royal Commission
into the Robodebt Scheme
Royal Commissions Act
Royal Commission into the
Robodebt Scheme
(n 2) xxiv [1]-[3].
Ibid 49, [9] (n 113).
Ibid 49, [7] (n 105).
Ibid 50, [3] (n 117).
Ibid 50, [3] (n 120).
Ibid 57, [1] (n 1).
Ibid 57, [2] (n 3).
Ibid 60, [1] (n 18).
Ibid 60, [6] (n 24).
Ibid 61, [1] (n 26).
Ibid xxxiii, [2] (n 47).
Transcript of Proceedings,
The Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme, Wednesday 2 November 2022 at 9.30
AM (AEST) Day 5, 176.
Royal Commission into the
Robodebt Scheme
(n 2) 65 (n 57).
Interview with Scott
Morrison (Sky News Radio, 21 January 2015).
Royal Commission into the
Robodebt Scheme
(n 2) 78 (n 165).
Royal Commission into the
Robodebt Scheme
(n 2) 78, [5].
Ibid 26 (n 14).
Ibid 80, [3] (n 179).
Ibid 80 (n 180).
Ibid 86, [1].
Ibid 96, [1] (n 291).
Ibid 140, [4].
Ibid 160, [3] (n 45).
Ibid 214, [1]-[5].
Ibid 40, [3].
Ibid 187, [8] (n 301).
Ibid 215, [4]-[6].
Ibid 209 (n 22).
See above n 17.
Ibid 210-211.
Ibid 171, [6] (n 150).
Ibid 174, [3].
Transcript of Proceedings,
The Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme, Tuesday 7 March 2023 at 9:28 AM
(AEST) Day 43, 4583.
Simon Benson, ‘Debt
scare fires back on Labour’,
The Australian
(Australia, 26 January
Royal Commission into the
Robodebt Scheme
(n 2) 338, (n 144).
Ibid 339–340.
Australian Government
Department of Human Services, Submission No 66 to the Senate Community Affairs
Reference Committee,
Design, scope, cost-benefit analysis, contracts awarded
and implementation associated with the Better Management of the Social Welfare
System initiative
Parliamentary Privileges
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Centrelink’s Automated Debt Raising System
(Report No 1, April
Peter Hanks,
‘Administrative law and welfare rights: a 40-year story from
to ’robot debt recovery’ (Conference Paper, Australian
Institute of Administrative Law, 20 July 2017).
Royal Commission into the
Robodebt Scheme
(Report, July 2023) vol 3.
Royal Commission into the
Robodebt Scheme
(n 2) 288, [1] (n 8).
Ibid 288, [6] (n 13).
Ibid 298, [1] (n 49).
Royal Commission into the
Robodebt Scheme
(Report, July 2023) vol 2, 545 (n 183).
Royal Commission into the
Robodebt Scheme
Royal Commission into the
Robodebt Scheme
Australian Government,
Government Response Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme November 2023,
Government Response (2023).
Freedom of Information
Royal Commission into the
Robodebt Scheme
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (74.7 KB)
PDF format (376 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter