URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/36.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Knake, R N --- "Cultivating learners who will invent the future of law practice: some thoughts on educating entrepreneurial and innovative lawyers" [2013] LegEdDig 36; (2013) 21(3) Legal Education Digest 16
Cultivating learners who will invent the future of law practice: some
thoughts on educating entrepreneurial and innovative lawyers
Ohio North University Law Review
, Vol 38 pp 847 – 854
The convergence of technological advances, global competition, and financial
pressures facing the legal profession in the 21
century demands
that we equip our students to be entrepreneurial and innovative in their pursuit
of a rewarding and meaningful career
in the law. Legal education prides itself
in producing members of a learned profession. We face, however, a ‘time of
change’, as Eric Hoffer might say, where the ‘learned
usually find themselves beautifully equipped to live in a world
that no longer
exists’. His observation calls us to cultivate ‘learners’ who
invent the future of law practice
, to borrow from Alan Kay’s
observation that ‘to predict the future’ we must ‘invent
it’. In other words,
we need to educate entrepreneurial and innovative
The value in educating an entrepreneurial and innovative lawyer is, in some
ways, tied to the economic realities of a disrupted legal
market, a massive
tuition-based debt bubble, and disgruntled graduates unable to secure jobs.
Legal education cannot afford to ignore
this culmination of forces. Indeed, this
is precisely why – contrary to what recently ran on the front page of the
New York Times
– law schools actively pursued reform over the past
decade and continue to do so. The
New York Times
author’s critique,
that law schools do not teach lawyering, was not only misguided, but failed to
hone in on the actual problem.
Law schools now widely focus on lawyering skills
by incorporating clinical activities, mock simulations, and other efforts
to provide practical, hands-on experience as well as to encourage
collaboration with others.
The real issue is that law students also need to be
engaged in the
enterprise of inventing how law will be practised in the future.
Instilling entrepreneurialism and innovation holds additional significance
beyond simply responding to the current pressures faced
by the profession.
Admittedly, lawyers have always been entrepreneurial in some ways (particularly
those setting out to hang their
own shingles), so one might question why it is
necessary, at this particular point in time, for legal education to take up the
of cultivating an innovative atmosphere. Even if economic pressures
were not at play, in my mind it is essential that legal education
culture and curriculum of entrepreneurialism and innovation for at least three
reasons. First, an enormous need exists
for legal services, a demand that has
gone largely ignored by the legal profession. Second, law schools are filled
with creative,
bright individuals who, given the right atmosphere, will be
inventors of new models for legal services delivery in addition to practitioners
of law. Third, developing the qualities of an entrepreneur and innovator can
benefit any lawyer in her own career development, whether
or not she decides to
become an inventor or to open a new business.
Some law schools are beginning to acknowledge the need for this sort of
culture and curriculum in legal education. For example, Stanford
Law School is a
partner in a multidisciplinary laboratory called CodeX, which brings together
‘organizations from industry,
government, and academia’ in order
‘to explore ways in which information technology can be used to enhance
the quality
and efficiency of our legal system while decreasing its cost’.
Scholars at the University of Miami Law School founded LawWithoutWalls,
part-virtual, collaborative academic model ... that brings together students,
faculty, practitioners, business professionals,
and entrepreneurs from around
the country and the world to innovate legal education and practice’.
Harvard’s Berkman
Center Law Lab ‘is a multidisciplinary research
initiative and collaborative network of University, non-profit and industry
partners. Its mission is to investigate and harness the varied forces –
evolutionary, social, psychological, neurological and
economic – that
shape the role of law and social norms as they enable cooperation,
governance and entrepreneurial innovation’.
A new course offered at
Georgetown Law Center,
Technology, Innovation, and Law Practice: An
Experiential Seminar
‘exposes students to the varied uses of computer
technologies in the practice of law’, where teams of students partner
‘with a legal tech expert to develop a platform, application or system
that increases access to justice and/or improves the
effectiveness of legal
representation’. The class ‘culminates in a design competition, The
Georgetown Iron Tech Lawyer
Contest, which is judged by outside experts in the
At my home institution, Michigan State University College of Law, together
with my colleague Professor Daniel Martin Katz, we offer
Entrepreneurial
, a course designed to help students understand the economic
pressures, technological changes, and globalisation facing the legal
century, and to assist students in successfully
navigating their legal career given these challenges. The course explores the
of a virtual law practice as well as the use of technology and
cloud-computing in building a law practice; free and low-cost resources
tools are shared to assist the entrepreneur-minded student in leveraging
leading-edge technology to defray start-up costs associated
with launching a
practice and to control overhead. Ethics, licensing, and malpractice issues
related to virtual and multi-jurisdictional/global
law practice are discussed.
The course is meant to be particularly useful for students contemplating solo
practice, consulting, or
engaging in an entrepreneurial venture, as well as
those considering non-traditional uses for their law degree. Other topics
in the course include client development and networking, case studies of
innovative legal services delivery mechanisms and alternative
structures, and work/life balance including the study of emotional intelligence
and mindful lawyering practices. Students
hear from guest lecturers on topics
such as technology for lawyers, digital law practice, the retail of legal
services, and deregulation
of the legal profession. There is an optional
excursion to the American Bar Association Annual TechShow in Chicago. As part of
final grade, students create an electronic resume and present a six-minute
Ignite/PechaKucha-style presentation, which is recorded
and becomes part of the
electronic resume.
Professor Katz and I also recently launched ReInvent Law, a law laboratory
devoted to technology, innovation, and entrepreneurship
in legal services. Our
mission is to cultivate a creative community through partnerships with other
university departments, academic
institutions, industry, non-profit
organisations, government, and our students. The primary purpose of ReInvent Law
is to provide
a new element of education to our students through research and
experimentation on endeavours designed (1) to solve problems faced
by the legal
profession including access to justice concerns; and (2) to create new vehicles
for the delivery of legal services.
Through ReInvent Law, collaborators from the
fields of law, technology, engineering, design, retailing, computer science, and
will come together in this shared space to engage in conversation and to
actively construct innovative solutions. In creating ReInvent
Law, we aim to
provide an environment where ideas can be generated, tested, and brought to
market – a sort of research and
development department for future law
practice. Most important, however, is that ReInvent Law will harness
collaborative energies
and expertise for inventing ground-breaking solutions to
problems faced in 21
century law practice while simultaneously
encouraging and equipping students to embrace innovative approaches in the
practice of law.
One example of ReInvent Law’s work is the creation of our 21
Century Law Practice Summer Program, ‘a first of its kind, intensive
study of technology, innovation, regulation, entrepreneurship
international legal marketplace.’ The program is held in London, England,
a location selected mindful of the recent
deregulation in the wake of the United
Legal Services Act
of 2007 and the corresponding
outgrowth of alternative legal services delivery models. Students are immersed
in the study of these
new models. As we explain on our website, the program has
three primary educational objectives: (1) Provide students a comprehensive
understanding of the market for legal services as it transitions to a global
legal supply chain in the wake of deregulation, economic
pressures, and
technological innovation; (2) Prepare students to become practise- ready
entrepreneurial lawyers who can leverage
information technology in order to
operate more efficiently and thereby attract (and retain) clients; and (3)
Inspire students to
think broadly about future delivery of legal representation
and access to justice by exposing them to the innovative legal service
models and platforms of the present (and not-too-distant future).
The program covers subjects essential to cultivating a learner who will
invent the future of law practice, topics that often are neglected
schools including technology, legal informatics, marketing, case studies of new
legal business structures, math/statistics,
virtual law practice, and digital
lawyering. We also encourage personal reflection on how each student might shape
law practice in
the future to reach those who currently cannot access a lawyer
and to do so in a way that allows for positive work/life balance.
Our partners
include industry innovators, government entities, regulators, non-profit
organisations, and international academics,
with the program culminating in a
capstone ‘un’conference of presentations, ReInvent Law London. By
creating this new
space for students to interact with these cross-institution
and cross-sector partners – all of us connecting to consider alternative
ways of delivering legal services – the program embodies the very kind of
innovative spirit we hope to infuse in participants.
Educating an entrepreneurial and innovative lawyer should be a priority for
every law school.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (381 KB)
PDF format (1.67 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter