URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlLegHist/2005/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:33:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lunney, Mark --- "Causation, Science and Sir Owen Dixon" [2005] AUJlLegHist 11; (2005) 9(2) Australian Journal of Legal History 205
Causation, Science and Sir Owen Dixon
I Introduction
II The Background to the Case
III The Conflicting Evidence at Trial
IV Judicial Approaches to the Conflicting Evidence
V Dixon, Science, and Causation
VI A Familiar Pattern?
VII A Leading Case?
VIII The Rest of the Story…
Causation, Science and Sir Owen Dixon
MARK LUNNEY
I Introduction
One of the leading cases
law of torts of the Commonwealth is the decision of the Privy Council in
Grant v Australian Knitting Mills Pty
Looking at modern tort
textbooks, the importance of the case lies in the fact that it was the first
higher court decision in the
Commonwealth to expand the ratio of
beyond the fact
situation of that case.
question for tort lawyers was whether the manufacturer of a pair of woollen
underpants owed a duty of care in the tort of
negligence to an ultimate consumer
(the wearer of the underpants) to ensure that care was taken in the manufacture
of the underpants
such that the user did not suffer injury by wearing them.
Donoghue v Stevenson
, the consumer in this case could inspect the
goods before wear (the ginger beer bottle was opaque). The Privy Council held
relevant point was whether the defect could be detected by an
inspection of the goods. In
case the defect – an
excess of sulphites on the underpants – could not be detected and,
accordingly, a duty of care was
owed by the manufacturer in the same manner that
The interest of this article is not the decision of the Privy Council. The
plaintiff won at first instance in the Supreme Court of
South Australia, but
lost by a 3-1 majority in the High Court of Australia. The Privy Council
reversed that decision. However, the
High Court of Australia did not deny the
existence of a duty of care (as might be thought from the way the Privy Council
is today portrayed). Rather, two of the three judges of the majority
(and McTiernan J simply concurred with Dixon) held, amongst
other things, that
the negligence of the defendant, if there was any, was not a cause of the injury
the plaintiff suffered, whilst
Starke J held there to be no breach of duty.
The argument before the High Court took place in the middle of 1933 and the
decision was handed down in August. It may be noted that
one of the two
defendants was a woollen textile manufacturer. The early years of the depression
hit the Australian wool industry
particularly
In terms of looking at broad
historical influences, a plausible but circumstantial case could be made for
linking the decision to
the wider economic considerations of the time. However,
this article will argue that this historical context played little role in
decision. Rather, at least as far as Sir Owen Dixon was concerned, the decision
was based on the strict application of legal
Although Dixon’s
strict legalism is well-known in the context of constitutional
interpretation
, it is much less
discussed in private law.
is an example of Dixon applying his
strict legalism in the private law context. This argument will be supported by
demonstrating Dixon’s
commitment to this approach in other cases as well
as his scepticism regarding the analysis given to questions of causation by the
courts in general. Arguably, Dixon’s views led him to recognise problems
with causation in negligence cases well in advance
of his contemporaries. In
particular, Dixon recognised that the growing emphasis on the use of scientific
evidence created difficulties
for the traditional approach courts had adopted in
determining questions of causation. Although Dixon’s solution to these
has not generally found favour with modern courts, the recognition that
the use of intuitive notions of cause and effect may be unsatisfactory
the heart of more recent court decisions that have explicitly relaxed causal
requirements to enable plaintiffs to recover.
However, the categorisation and
dissemination of
as a case on the duty of care has masked its
importance as a causation case. It is only by considering the case in context
both the legal and wider historical context – that Dixon’s
judgment can be accorded the importance it deserves.
II The Background to the Case
In June 1931 Dr Richard Longford Thorald Grant, 37, went into John Martin
& Co (‘John Martin’), a retail department
store in Rundle
Street, Adelaide, to purchase some woollen underwear. The shop attendant showed
him two brands, one made by a British
company, and the other, slightly cheaper
brand manufactured by Australian Knitting Mills Pty Ltd (‘Australian
Knitting Mills’).
Grant chose the brand made by Australian Knitting Mills,
known as ‘Golden Fleece’, and purchased two woollen singlets
long underpants (known as ‘Long Johns’). Several weeks later he wore
the clothing for the first time and within
nine hours noticed an irritation
where his socks were pulled over his underpants. He treated the irritation but
continued wearing
the underwear for a week, after which he wore the second pair
for a week. He then wore the first pair of underpants (which had by
washed) and the irritation increased. The following day he consulted a skin
specialist who advised him to cease wearing
the woollen underwear; however, the
condition later developed into general dermatitis. The description of the case
in the Commonwealth
Law Reports states that ‘the plaintiff’s medical
advisers feared for his
but, even though
this assessment was made by a medical practitioner friend of Grant, there is
little doubt that the dermatitis was
severe. From 21 July 1931 he was confined
to bed for 17 weeks, and it was said that the rash at one time or another
affected all
of his body other than the soles of his feet and the palms of his
In November 1931 he made a
trip to New Zealand to recuperate under the care of his
and stayed until the
following February. However, his recovery was only temporary and he suffered a
relapse in March 1932. He returned
to hospital in April and remained there until
Apart from his physical state, it is also clear that Grant’s mental
health was affected. One witness stated that he suffered
from lack of sleep
which was treated by hypnotics, the effect of which was ‘very much to
increase the irritation’.
More ominously, cross-examination of one of Grant’s witnesses suggested
that Grant had suffered a mental breakdown. This was
rebutted but it was
admitted that at one time Grant had showed what amounted to a
‘delirium’ from insomnia, and the witness
admitted that Grant was
under ‘great mental
agitation’.
supported by a letter written by John Martin to Australian Knitting Mills where
it was noted that, as Dr Grant had ceased
working, he was financially
embarrassed and that this worry was affecting not only his general recovery but
also raised the possibility
of a complete
At the time of the illness Grant was a specialist physician dealing with
and he was well-known
within the Adelaide medical fraternity. He was born in April 1894 in north
Adelaide, his father being a writer
on rural affairs for
The Australasian
newspaper. After winning a State bursary he enrolled in the Adelaide Medical
School in 1913, graduating in
In his final year he was
the joint recipient of the Everard
Scholarship.
At the end of the
First World War he travelled to London and he became a member of the Royal
College of Physicians in 1921, one of
the first two graduates of the Adelaide
Medical School to achieve this.
He returned to Australia in 1922 and began his career as a specialist physician.
He was associated with the Adelaide Children’s
Hospital where he was a
pathologist and bacteriologist between 1923-25, and then assistant physician
from 1926. Grant was thus well-known
in the medical
Grant’s position
within the Adelaide medical profession was strengthened by his marriage in
February 1927 to Helen Jane Nancy
Grant married into a distinguished family. His bride was the daughter of
James Brook Lewis, whose father had been a partner in an
early pastoral company
and served in the Legislative Council for South Australia. James Brook Lewis
served overseas with the Australian
Army Medical Corps during the First World
War and was later an eye surgeon in
Helen Lewis’s
uncle was Essington Lewis, General Manager, Chairman of Directors and
Deputy-Chairman respectively of BHP, and
her cousin Thomas Lancelot
(‘Tom’) Lewis became Premier of New South Wales for a year in the
mid 1970’s. This was,
without doubt, an establishment family, and the
wedding was an establishment wedding. It was held mid-week in St Peter’s
and there were over 300
The wedding was
extensively reported in the social pages with descriptions of the outfits worn
by the invited female guests.
was reported that conversation in social circles in Adelaide for that week was
‘chiefly concerned with the cathedral wedding
of Nancy Lewis and Dr
“Dick” Grant’.
It is quite clear that members of the medical profession were in attendance both
at the wedding and the
Although there are no reports in the contemporary Adelaide press referring to
Grant’s plight, it is clear is that members of
the medical profession, and
their circle, knew of his
The close web of
connections is revealed by Grant’s wedding photograph. His best man was
Ian Hayward, a member of the Hayward
family that founded John Martin. The same
Ian Hayward was involved in the case and later gave evidence for
This relationship may
explain the conciliatory attitude of John Martin towards Grant’s
Before considering the progress of the case in the Supreme Court of South
Australia, a number of preliminary points should be made.
As noted above, Grant
wore the undergarments for one week without washing them. To modern eyes this
might well look like contributory
negligence but there is no suggestion that
this was ever raised as a
This is probably
explained by an obiter remark of the trial judge, Murray CJ, that in changing
his underwear only once a week Grant
was following the ‘ordinary custom of
ordinary people’.
also evident that the plaintiff did not wash the undergarments before he wore
them. Again, there is nothing in the record of
the case to suggest that this was
ever formally raised as some kind of defence. This is explained by the answer to
a question put
by Grant’s counsel,
defendants’ witnesses:
Mr Cleland – I will put the question generally. Is it imprudent for a man
to wear new underclothing without first having them
washed? The witness said he
personally preferred to have them washed, as he did not like the smell of new
woollen wear. That was
the only reason why he had them washed. He would feel
quite safe in wearing them without further
However, the most vexing of the preliminary questions is why Grant continued
to wear the underclothing after he became aware of the
irritation. Grant’s
own oral evidence was that he did not connect the irritation with the woollen
underwear until 13 July 1931,
when he first visited the dermatologist Dr William
although his
interrogatory answer is more
It is difficult to
know why Grant failed to make the
connection.
A well-known test
for the diagnosis of contact dermatitis at the time involved placing a patch
with the suspected irritant on it
over part of the forearm, the patch remaining
undisturbed for twenty-four hours ‘unless discomfort from irritation
removal before this
specifically used to determine the effect of chemicals, characterised a positive
reaction as resulting in a sharply defined
square of redness corresponding in
size and shape to the central test area, with pimples and small blisters usually
present corresponding
to the appearance of the original
When Grant first wore
the undergarments irritation occurred within 12 hours and within a couple of
days patches of redness approximately
2½ x 1½ inches were visible on
both shins.
Perhaps he was not
aware of the test, as, despite his reaction to the undergarments mirroring
closely the symptoms for a positive
diagnosis under the patch test, he does not
seem to have thought that wearing the undergarments was linked to the
dermatitis. The
defendants were in fact granted leave at trial to include a plea
that, because the plaintiff wore the underwear for upwards of a
fortnight he
accepted the risk and was guilty of contributory negligence. However, this point
appears not to have been argued by
the defendants, and it should be noted that
none of the medical experts who gave evidence at the trial mentioned the failure
Grant to self-diagnose his condition. This was so despite clear evidence
that the processes associated with producing woollen garments
could produce an
irritant effect.
This allowed
Murray CJ to dismiss the argument on the basis that Grant did not know or
suspect the underwear was the cause of the
dermatitis until he visited the
dermatologist.
The Conflicting Evidence at
The first instance trial began before Murray CJ on November 8, 1932 in the
Supreme Court of South
The case was tried
without a jury, a feature of civil trials in South Australia at that
Although reports of the
case were initially carried with enthusiasm by Adelaide’s newspapers, the
later reports of the progress
of the case simply concern its length. By the time
final submissions had been made the case had continued over 20 hearing days,
one of the longest civil trials in South
The evidence filled
340 foolscap pages and contained 102 000
For the purposes of this article it is unnecessary to delve into all the
voluminous evidence. Whilst detailed evidence was led as
to the practice adopted
by Australian Knitting Mills
ensuring that woollen garments were free from excess
(what might be called
the ‘breach’ enquiry) and the procedures used by analytical chemists
to determine the sulphur content
underpants,
what is important in
this context is the medical evidence as to the cause of the dermatitis (the
‘causation’ enquiry).
The medical evidence divided into two broad questions. First, what was the
factual cause of the dermatitis? Secondly, could Dr Grant’s
considered to be hypersensitive? Although much of the medical evidence took this
form, some witnesses merged the two questions
so it is not always easy to
determine for what purpose the evidence was given.
With respect to the question of whether Grant’s dermatitis was caused
by excess sulphites, two questions needed to be addressed.
The first was whether
excess sulphites were capable of causing the kind of reaction experienced by
Grant. As one might expect there
was a conflict of evidence. One of the
plaintiff’s witnesses testified that underwear which contained sulphur,
arsenic or any
compound of either might be a danger to the
defendant’s experts dealt with this issue, and both disagreed with the
plaintiff’s witness, one
unequivocally.
significant was the disagreement over whether the dermatitis was caused by an
external factor – such as would be
created by an excess of sulphites
– or was a spontaneous outbreak caused by something personal in
Grant’s physiology.
the plaintiff’s expert witnesses testified that the cause of the
dermatitis was consistent with an external irritant
and to greater or lesser
extents ruled out other causes.
The evidence of the defendants’ witnesses was equally definitive. In the
course of the plaintiff’s evidence it became
apparent that Grant had
suffered from tuberculosis at a younger age. In fact, Grant suffered from
pleurisy and effusion in 1916 and
suffered from pulmonary tuberculosis for about
a year in or about 1924. Treatment for this tuberculosis ceased in 1927. There
evidence that a particular kind of dermatitis – dermatitis
herpetiformis – was linked to patients with a history of tuberculosis.
evidence in chief Dr Upton (for Grant) stated that the dermatitis of Dr Grant
was not attributable to his exposure to
tuberculosis.
However, he was
later recalled by Cleland (Grant’s counsel) where he was more circumspect.
He accepted that he had observed
a group of lesions which indicated the
possibility of dermatitis herpetiformis and that dermatitis was not easily
distinguishable
from dermatitis herpetiformis, but that the two were
distinguishable as the papules associated with each condition presented
differently.
In the end, he
rejected a diagnosis of herpetiformis in a ‘most emphatic
defendants’ witnesses was equally unequivocal: taking all the
circumstances into account any diagnosis other than
herpetiformis would not be
More generally, other
witnesses for the defendants argued that the source of the dermatitis must be
idiopathic. One such witness
examined Grant after the commencement of the
He noticed a considerable
swelling of the hands, and conducted a ‘test’ on Grant: pressure was
applied to the skin on
Grant’s back. The witness found that the pressure
created an immediate red blush which lasted for 40 seconds and which, in
witness’s opinion, indicated a sensitive
This was consistent with
his view that the cause of the dermatitis was not of external origin. One
witness took this argument to
its logical conclusion: the breaking out of the
dermatitis within twelve hours of wearing the undergarments was a mere
coincidence:
I think coincidence is a large thing. I think it is a fair assumption to say
that Dr Grant would have had this trouble within 12
hours if he had not put on
the new underpants.
The final conflict of evidence, directly related to the conflict over the
cause of the dermatitis, was whether Grant’s skin
could be considered
hyper-sensitive. As noted above, one witness for the defendant testified
unequivocally that Grant had a sensitive
and it seems that some of
the witnesses who thought the condition idiopathic attributed its cause to a
sensitive skin.
The response to
this evidence was not altogether convincing. Grant testified that he himself did
not think he had a sensitive skin
although he recognised that some of his
medical advisers must have thought he had a sensitive skin independently of the
Edwin M Wrigley, whilst testifying that the condition was consistent with an
external irritant, thought Dr Grant would have
to take special care of his skin
or he might at any time have a further attack of dermatitis, and that he had to
be careful in the
ordinary use of soap and
Most surprising of all
was the production of a witness who claimed to have also suffered a reaction
after wearing ‘Golden Fleece’
underwear in mid
This tactic cannot be
considered a success. For a start it was clear the irritation was minor compared
with Grant’s; the witness
admitted that he was able to cure himself by the
use of boracic and iodine.
cross-examination, the witness admitted both that he connected the irritation to
the wearing of the underpants and that he
continued wearing them in the winter
months of 1931 and 1932.
Proceedings took a somewhat comical turn; Grant’s counsel asked the
witness to expose his leg and doctors in the court made
what must have been a
perfunctory examination.
However, the examination did reveal some patches of irritation despite the
witness having stopped wearing the underwear six weeks
previously. One the
plaintiff’s experts stated that the patches were consistent with
dermatitis.
IV Judicial Approaches to the Conflicting
It is clear, then, that there was a significant dispute between the various
medical experts.
As might be
expected, the judgment of Murray CJ reviewed the competing evidence on all
aspects of the case.
this review is formal, simply stating what the various witnesses had said. On
balance Murray CJ was satisfied that it was
more probable than not that the
plaintiff’s illness was caused by the presence of bi-sulphite of soda in
the ankle end of the
underpants. His Honour made a finding that the
plaintiff’s skin was not abnormally sensitive, and that the evidence of
Upton and de Crespigny – who attended the plaintiff throughout the
illness – was that the illness was caused by an external
irritant. The
alternative theory that the disease was dermatitis herpetiformis had
‘nothing specific to support it.’
It has been argued above that
there was considerable debate over whether the plaintiff’s condition was
idiopathic so it is
difficult to see how it could be said that there was
‘nothing specific’ to support a diagnosis of dermatitis
herpetiformis.
Whatever the reason it was clear from the outset that the case
would go further as counsel for the defendant immediately requested
a one-month
stay of proceedings.
of Appeal was filed on April 3, 1933 and contained 44 grounds of appeal.
Although there is much duplication, four grounds
of appeal can be identified as
relating to the causation
The appeal in the High Court was heard between 13-16 June
The High Court file in the
Canberra registry contains no description of the oral argument. The report of
counsel for the appellant’s
argument in the Commonwealth Law Reports
suggests that it was said that there was no evidence to support the finding that
the plaintiff
‘caught the complaint from these
contemporary newspaper report indicates that counsel’s argument was
somewhat less dogmatic: ‘All the medical
evidence admitted that it might
have been contracted internally as well as
externally.’
In fact, it
appears very little argument was addressed to the causation issue, the main
thrust of the submissions going to questions
of duty and breach. This brevity is
reflected in the judgment of Starke J, who devoted slightly over 50 words (apart
from quotations)
to the factual cause of the dermatitis, and just over 200 words
to the question of whether Grant’s skin was hypersensitive.
As McTiernan J
concurred with Dixon J, this leaves the approaches of Evatt and Dixon JJ to the
causation issue. For Evatt J, the
approach of Murray CJ was unimpeachable. The
Chief Justice had found that, having regard to time, place and circumstances,
was a high degree of probability that the cause of the onset of the
disease was to be found in the portions of the garment that came
into contact
with the irritated parts of the
Evatt’s response to
the scientific nature of the medical evidence was as follows:
The element of sequence in time was of the very essence of a scientific approach
to the solution of the question at issue …
Where there is an admitted
addition of such other element by the wearing of a new kind of woollen underwear
and injury follows quickly
upon the use of that new kind, commonsense and
science both insist that inquiry may easily discover the source of the new
in some particular quality of the new element. This is not mere
conjecture, it is a basis of reasonable
The reference to mere conjecture is a direct reply to the judgment of Dixon
Dixon’s approach to the
medical evidence on causation was methodical. Dixon was simply not prepared to
make the ‘reasonable’
inference that an external irritant was a
cause of the dermatitis. He first discussed the evidence of three of the
defendant’s
witnesses in favour of a diagnosis of dermatitis
herpetiformis, and then noted the facts that were against the positive view.
none of the evidence was conclusive, the factors that were inconsistent
with this condition being the factual cause raised a probability
that such a
diagnosis should not be affirmatively
Two points stand out in
this initial analysis. First, Dixon engaged with the medical evidence in some
detail, weighing the competing
factors for and against the particular diagnosis.
Secondly, Dixon refers to probability. For Dixon, it was clear that the
had to prove his case (and hence causation) to the standard required
by law. A failure to prove causation to that standard –
the civil standard
of balance of probability – meant that the case must fail.
Dixon adopted this approach to all of the medical evidence in the case. The
result was that there were ‘serious difficulties’
in accepting that
the dermatitis was caused by a chemical irritant of sufficient strength in the
garment such as to render them unfit
for use. Again, Dixon engaged in detailed
analysis of the evidence – the quick appearance of the disease suggested
an irritant
present in strength or quantity; the subsequent slow progress did
not, as did the slow progress of the disease. The disease was not
removed when
the irritant was removed but appeared in a ‘remote member’. Thus the
course of the complaint was independent
of its cause, but this was not
inconsistent with the source being an external irritant. For Dixon all of this
went to probability.
However, in a paragraph that has escaped historians of the
law of tort, Dixon explained in more general terms the problems with proof
causation in this kind of case:
But a consideration of the medical evidence and an examination of a number of
textbooks cited in that evidence shows that the aetiology
of disorders of the
skin involves many uncertainties. It would appear that most of the older views
are undergoing change or modification.
It is difficult to discover any generally
accepted explanation of the manner in which such a condition as that of the
plaintiff is
derived from the existence of a chemical irritant applied at one or
two points such as the shins… The special liability of
a particular person
to respond to some particular irritant or other substance, although the subject
of much study, has not been explained
upon any theory commanding general
This passage reveals the difficulties Dixon experienced in answering
questions of causation where complicated and conflicting scientific
evidence was
adduced. The contrast between Dixon and Evatt is stark. Where all that was known
was a relationship between an act and
a result – here, putting on the
undergarments and the dermatitis – it might have been possible to infer
that the act
was the cause of the injury. For Evatt this was a matter of both
commonsense and science. Dixon’s analysis of the scientific
evidence shows
just how much he disagreed with this approach. In the absence of scientific
evidence it might have been ‘commonsense’
to infer causation from
the wearing of the underpants. However, Dixon would never have thought this
scientific. But where there was
evidence there was
simply no room for commonsense notions to apply. The plaintiff had to prove his
case. This required proof, in
accordance with the scientific evidence, that the
negligent act resulted in the damage of which the plaintiff complained. The
evidence could not simply be ignored because it ‘muddled’
the causation enquiry. If this was the result of the scientific
evidence the
result must be that the plaintiff lost the case. In light of this it is not
surprising, then, that Dixon dismissed Grant’s
case as depending on
‘ambiguous circumstances and speculative conjectures and at some points is
opposed to arguments of probability
V Dixon, Science, and Causation
Whether or not
was the source of Dixon’s concerns over
science and causation, the case certainly seems to have galvanised him into
recognising
the full implications of his approach. On 30 September 1933 Dixon
delivered an address to the Medico-Legal Society of Victoria in
Melbourne. The
address, entitled, ‘Science and Judicial Proceedings’, was concerned
with possible approaches the law
should take to recognise its limitations when
confronted with complicated scientific questions. One suggestion, which Dixon
was the use of scientific assessors in judicial proceedings. It is
clear, however, that this disapproval was conditional upon a new
approach being adopted in the treatment of scientific evidence. He said:
In the simpler conditions of social life prevailing when causation grew into
importance as a standard of legal right, perhaps the
difficulties of answering
the question it propounds were not great. Before the mechanical and scientific
age, the sources of inquiry
were either relatively simple, or else entirely
outside human knowledge. But science, particularly physical science, has
changed the practical application of the legal tests. On the one
hand, it has called for their application to all the varieties of
human activity
to which applied science has given rise. On the other hand, it has made
available an immense stock of knowledge for
the solution of the very problems
which arise from this application of the standards of the law. Upon the
difficulties which arise
from the mere complexity and variety of the subjects of
judicial investigation, it is needless to enlarge. They are sufficiently
obvious. But my immediate concern is to speak of the embarrassment caused by the
wealth of knowledge which science has put at the
disposal of those able to use
it. Questions of fact, raised by the standards of legal liability, which
formerly might have appeared
simple, are now shown to contain ingredients
calling for close and complicated examination. Where rough and ready answers of
practical man might have once sufficed, an exact and reasoned solution is
The relation of this speech to the difficult issues of causation in Grant is
obvious, a connection reinforced by Dixon’s later
reference in the
address, as an example of the problem, to the solubility of sulphur compounds in
water and (in the case of sulphur
dioxide), the formation of sulphurous and
sulphuric acid.
Dixon returned to the issue of science and the law ten months later in an
address given to a general meeting of the Victorian Branch
of the Australian
Chemical Institute. In this speech Dixon suggested ways in which the scientific
expert might be prepared, both
personally and by counsel, for the task of giving
scientific evidence in a court of law. But Dixon was acutely aware that the task
itself was in many ways unsatisfactory. Thus it might be permissible for the
expert to present unfamiliar ideas as ‘clear cut
and logical
conceptions’ before considering exceptions, reservations and ‘all
the consequences of the intrusion of competing
and countervailing
principles’.
may be that, if both sides agreed, it would not be necessary to refer to these
factors in other than very general terms
as they would not assist in the
judge’s ‘understanding of the matter nor contribute to the soundness
of his judgment’.
regrettable that so unscientific an impression was produced by this approach but
the object of the exercise was not the spread
of correct knowledge. It was to
obtain a sound answer to a specific
Dixon may have been satisfied with this compromise in 1934 (or at least told
his audience that he was) but it is no surprise that
other, less enthusiastic,
writings of Dixon on the subject can be found. The Philip Ayres biography of
Dixon describes a speech,
‘Causation and the Law’, given to the Law
Student’s Society of Melbourne University in March 1937. The lecture
not published. Ayres suggests that the reason for this is that the scepticism
which underpinned the lecture may have been too
controversial for a current
member of the High Court. Records of the lecture exist in an attendee’s
notes and Dixon’s
draft, and by and large the two are
consistent.
In many ways the
lecture is a
tour de force
, demonstrating expertise in philosophy,
science and law. Its immediate target is the unsatisfactory notion of
‘proximate cause’
(or remoteness of damage). For Dixon,
philosophy’s main concerns as regards causation were metaphysical and
epistemological,
through an examination of appearance and reality. But another,
sub-ordinate consideration was directly relevant: the examination
of the grounds
and validity of inductive reasoning. However, lawyers were completely
uninterested in such philosophical musings,
with the result that the ‘fog
which has fallen upon the principles of causation in the law of torts is the
result of an attempt
to dispense with logic and rely upon unsophisticated and
intuitive notions’.
if one was to adopt an intuitive concept of cause, it was necessary to consider
all existing conditions before one could attribute
a causal consequence to any
one. Many participating elements must exist for a consequence to occur, yet the
law decreed that one
could be singled out by a particular person and called a
proximate cause.
Philip Ayres
summarises the effect of the speech as follows:
Lawyers, Dixon told his impressionable young audience, are sublimely ignorant of
the epistemological abysses they skirt. Each and
every kind of causation –
and he listed ‘Immediate’, ‘Direct’,
‘Proximate’ – ‘are
illusory in point of logic’, he
insisted, ‘broken links’ or
Ayres notes that Dixon’s scepticism surfaced in a number of cases but,
understandably, there is no reference to
Australian Knitting Mills v
. It is the contention of this article that the case should be seen as
one of the earliest – perhaps the earliest – manifestation
Dixon’s scepticism as to the use of simple intuition to satisfy what was
required by legal principle. Although most of the
cases referred to in the 1937
speech relate to proximate cause, the comments are applicable to causation
generally. Given his judgment
, it is not far-fetched to suggest
that the case provided fertile ground for the development of Dixon’s
scepticism.
VI A Familiar Pattern?
Does Dixon exhibit the same approach to questions of causation later in his
judicial career? A broad survey of decisions of the High
Court on the law of
tort between 1933 and Dixon’s retirement in 1964 reveals that no
subsequent case raised the issue of causation
in the way that it was raised in
. The closest cases are
a well-known case
involving the duty of care owed to a rescuer, and
Fitzgerald v
The latter is the more
interesting as the issue was the sufficiency of an instruction to a jury as to
whether negligence was a cause
of the plaintiff’s complaint. Here, Dixon
appears to have recognised that simple intuition
the only workable
causal reasoning for a jury. It was a mistake to attempt to explain
‘causation’ as a general conception
to the jury: ‘If one is
once to enter on a philosophical examination of the meaning of “cause and
effect”, there
is no telling where one ought to
scepticism is again evident at the conclusion of the discussion: it was not
appropriate for a jury to enter into theoretical
analysis and exposition, and
‘[i]n truth the conception in question is not susceptible of reduction to
a satisfactory formula’.
As is evident from the discussion below, however, the jury did not have an
unrestrained discretion and an appellate court could review
the evidence upon
which the verdict was founded.
This point is demonstrated in another category of case where Dixon does
exhibit a distrust of intuition as a means of answering disputed
questions of
fact. These are cases that reached the High Court because there was a dispute
over whether evidence of breach of duty
could be inferred from the circumstances
of the accident. It is true that Dixon can be found supporting inferences of
in some cases of this
However, it is submitted
that, after considering these cases, a pattern does emerge. Dixon is not
prepared to draw inferences as
to fault in the absence of evidence excluding
other possible causes. Although a number of examples could be
two well-known cases
illustrate the point. Both involve appeals from questions of fact decided by a
jury. The first is
Mummery v Irvings Pty
In this case the
plaintiff, who had entered the defendant’s building on business, was hit
by a piece of wood which had flown
from a power-driven circular saw being
operated by an employee of the defendant. One issue for the High Court was
whether the plaintiff
could rely on the maxim
res ipsa loquitur
establish negligence against the foreman. On one view the case the maxim was
clearly applicable – if the saw had been operated
carefully a piece of
wood would not have flown out and hit the defendant. However, a majority of the
High Court (one member being
Dixon CJ) held the maxim inapplicable:
We are told nothing of the characteristics of circular saws and we are not told
that such an occurrence is usual or unusual or indeed
highly improbable.
Moreover we are told nothing concerning the size of the piece of wood in
question and it is difficult, if not
impossible, in these circumstances to
attribute the accident to some act of negligence on the part of the operator. If
the question
is posed ‘Was the accident such as in the ordinary course of
things does not happen if those who have the management use proper
the answer, on the evidence in the case, must be ‘We simply do not
know.’ One may conjecture but cannot
as a matter of inference attribute
negligence to the respondent’s
The second case is
One issue for the
High Court in this case was whether an inference of negligence in the driving of
the defendant’s truck could
be drawn from the surrounding circumstances
(ie, the condition of the road, the accident scene) because the defendant gave
no evidence.
Dixon, in dissent, refused to hold that the circumstances gave rise
to an inference. He argued:
It is possible of course to say that if you have an empty diesel truck coming
down a winding road on the outside at thirty-five miles
per hour and an
International truck going up the road on the inside at twenty-five miles per
hour, the former is more likely than
the latter to be over the centre line of
the road on its wrong side. But that is only to say that of two guesses one is
more probable
than another. It may be remarked that these are not the only two
guesses open as to the cause of the
No more can be made of this point than to note that in this closely-related
area of the law Dixon expressed similar types of concern
is also interesting that in these cases, as in
ultimate recourse was to the burden of proof. This is no surprise, as Dixon,
first and foremost the lawyer, could
only express these doubts through the
failure of the plaintiff to meet the standard required by law. However, the
rejection of the
claims in this way masks Dixon’s deep concerns over the
use of intuition to satisfy legal standards in a scientific age, and,
generally, the relationship between intuition, causation and science in the law
of negligence. As Ayres notes, Dixon was extremely
sceptical about discovering
and in the absence
of the necessary evidence, be it scientific or circumstantial, Dixon could see
no reason to prefer one version
of events than another. As he said in a speech
[I]t is not the fault of the courts of law that difficult and uncertain
inquiries must be undertaken. The nature of the inquiry,
more often than not, is
made inevitable because the law, guided by supposed considerations of justice,
has provided some test of
the rights and liabilities of the parties which throws
open a wide and uncertain field, a field a survey of which may not necessarily
produce any clear or certain
VII A Leading Case?
In light of the above, it is suggested that
Australian Knitting Mills v
is a leading case. It may well be a leading case for the reasons that
are conventionally cited. However, it is the thrust of this
article that its
significance also lies in the approach of Dixon J to questions of causation in
the law of tort. It is worth asking
just how radical Dixon’s approach in
really was. Conflicting medical evidence in civil trials was not
new but, as the resolution of the dispute was most likely a matter
for the jury
in determining the overall question of
there was little
attempt to theorise, as opposed to
complaining,
problems such conflicts created. Tort textbooks around the time say little on
factual causation.
discussion of the issue comes from cases involving applications for
injunctions to prevent the operation of smallpox sanatoriums, the most
detailed of which is the decision of Farwell J in
Attorney-General v
Corporation of
distinction was drawn between ‘purely scientific questions’ (on
which ‘it would be most dangerous to form
an independent
‘empirical opinions of experts’. As regards the latter, he said:
This is, of course, a legitimate and usual mode of proof; and the Court in the
case of a conflict of experts may either say that
the onus is on the plaintiff
and has not been discharged, or it may examine the facts and the reasoning given
by the experts as the
ground of their opinion; and, if and so far as that
reasoning can be tested by ordinary rules independent of special scientific
I feel bound to test it and not to state simply that the conflict is
such that the plaintiff’s have not discharged the burden
At one level, this approach can be seen as a precursor of Dixon’s view
but closer analysis suggests that the analysis conducted
was of a different
order. For a start the distinction drawn between types of expert evidence is not
one Dixon would necessarily have
drawn. The ‘testing’ of the
empirical evidence also draws on a supposed distinction between conclusions
based on ‘logic’
or ‘medical science’, the former
apparently being prescribed a lower probative
Nonetheless, the
judgment does represent an attempt, albeit erratic, to recognise and deal with
the problem of competing scientific
evidence in the context of judicial
decision-making.
, Dixon, too, was confronted with a vast amount of conflicting
and complicated medical evidence. Dixon was prepared to ‘test’
scientific evidence in a forensic
but he did so against
a background of his own recognition of the pivotal role of science in
twentieth-century society. Speaking in
1954, Dixon noted, in relation to
university education:
But nothing can be of greater importance … than the imperative demands of
science. The demands are made imperative by what
are now commonplace facts; the
great advances in scientific knowledge ... the enormous part played by applied
science in the life
of a modern community …[and] the importance of a wider
appreciation among people, if not an understanding, of scientific principles
procedures.
Viewed from this perspective, the use of simple intuition as a solution to
conflicting scientific evidence that created difficulties
in establishing a
legal right was objectionable. It was simply not possible to infer from the
close proximity in time and space between
the wearing of the undergarments and
the appearance of the dermatitis that the underpants were the cause. To have
allowed a commonsense
inference in this way was to do precisely what the
medical/scientific evidence said could not be done. As a result the plaintiff
had to lose as he had not established his case to the standard required by law.
Arguably this was a harsh result for the plaintiff.
However, the evidence
exposed considerable uncertainty in the aetiology of the dermatitis. But the
judgment recognised that there
were objections to proving cause and effect in a
way that had been accepted as the norm, at least where an appellate court had to
consider the matter.
Nearly forty years later the House of Lords was confronted with a pursuer who
suffered from dermatitis in
McGhee v National Coal
In that case, the
expert medical evidence could not determine the precise mechanism by which the
dermatitis was caused. Of course,
Australian Knitting Mills v Grant
not cited as, by now, Dixon’s judgment had passed into history and the
case was ‘leading’ because of the Privy
Council’s recognition
duty. Despite
the uncertainty in the medical evidence, the House of Lords found for the
pursuer. The legal basis for overcoming the
deficiencies of the medical evidence
was obscure and a later House of Lords was able to explain the finding of
causation as a ‘robust
and pragmatic inference’ from the
It was not until very
recently – 2002 – that the House of Lords recognised that the result
was a departure from the ordinary rules of causation and needed
to be both justified and
Dixon did not reach
this result seventy years previous – the ordinary rules of causation
applied – but he framed precisely
the legal problem that had to be faced.
It is a measure of Dixon’s abilities that he was able to conceptualise
this problem
years before other members of the judiciary. Indeed, if
Dixon’s judgment had received the attention it deserved it is hard
believe that arguments regarding aetiological uncertainty would have taken so
long to come to prominence.
VIII The Rest of the Story…
As has been foreshadowed, Grant appealed against the decision of the High
Court of Australia to the Privy Council. It appears the
decision to appeal was
taken almost immediately after the decision of the High Court was handed
although, as the High
Court did not grant leave, the special leave hearing before the Privy Council
was not heard until November
1933. Despite Grant’s status he attempted to
launch the appeal
in forma pauperis
. The Judicial Committee rules of the
time required the petitioner to state that he was not worth £25 in the
world excepting
his wearing apparel and his interest in the subject matter of
the appeal. Grant did this, also stating that he could not provide
However, the
respondents, by affidavit, produced evidence that Grant’s cash receipts
for the year ending June 30, 1933 were
£445, and from that date until
November 17, 1933 were
The affidavit
apparently set out the source of this information and it was said to satisfy
their Lordships, although no record of
it survives in the records of the Privy
The Privy Council heard argument in July 1935 and delivered judgment the
following October.
discussion of causation, mostly along the lines of Evatt’s judgment in the
High Court.
The appeal was
allowed, and the original judgment of £2 450 was
The decision of the
Privy Council received extensive academic and professional comment but none of
it was addressed to the causation
difficulties that had concerned
Despite the concerns that had been expressed about Grant’s
susceptibility it appears he never again suffered a major outbreak
dermatitis. He retained his association with Adelaide Children’s Hospital,
becoming a physician there in 1937, a position
which he held until 1956. During
the Second World War he was a consultant physician to the RAAF with the rank of
Wing Commander.
He remained a
man of some altruism, becoming a visiting medical officer to the Home for the
Incurables and a visiting physician to
Estcourt House, a convalescent home for
children with rheumatic heart
He died on 29 March
1979 at the healthy age of 84. Australian Knitting Mills also survived the case
and the company continues to
make ‘long johns’ to this day, albeit
by a different process that does not involve the use of bleach or
Perhaps the most surprising result of the Privy Council’s decision was
that the case was taken up by at least one edition of
the tabloid
After an initial report of the decision, the following week’s issue
contains a large article on the case. The general tenor
of the article can be
gleaned from its sub-heading: ‘Mr Justice Evatt’s Law is
In a manner
that was unparalleled, at least in the author’s experience of reviewing
the newspaper, the article contains a simple
but nonetheless distinctly legal
analysis of the case. Moreover, the article reads like a press release from
Evatt. It was said that
Evatt must have been gratified that ‘the ultimate
Court of Appeal for all the Dominions’ should have seen eye to eye
him on every point raised in the
The paper was moved to
‘Truth’ congratulates Mr Justice Evatt, who is probably the youngest
Judge in a Supreme Court of Appeal in the British
Empire, on the fact that the
law, as stated by him, has been approved of by the highest Court of Appeal as
being the law of the British
It is difficult to believe that Evatt was not associated with this piece of
publicity in some way, and it might even be that the article
was an attempt to
maintain Evatt’s public and political
Certainly Dixon
would not have thought this beyond
It is yet another
chapter in the untold story of the itchy underpants.
Associate Professor of Law,
University of New England. I received valuable assistance from the staff of the
National Library in
Canberra, the State Library of South Australia, and the
Privy Council Record Office, and the registries of the Supreme Court of South
Australia and the High Court of the Australia. I would also like to thank
Professor Wilf Prest, Professor Donald Simpson, Mr John
Bagot, Mr Richard Grant,
and Mr Rob Parker for their help. Versions of this article were presented to the
Australia and New Zealand
Law and History Society Conference in July 2004, and
to the London Legal History Seminar in January 2005. The author acknowledges
gratefully the comments of the participants in those events.
For the purposes of this
article I gratefully adopt AWB Simpsons’s description of ‘leading
cases’ as cases which
are said to provide the best illustration of a legal
principle or cases in which a principle was expounded (AWB Simpson,
Cases in the Common Law
(1995) 4). As Simpson recognises, the notion of a
leading case is something of a construct but this does not detract from the fact
that certain cases are regarded as being more significant than others. Viewed in
this way, I have set out below why I think
Australian Knitting Mills v
is a leading case.
[1935] UKPCHCA 1
(1935) 54 CLR 49
[1932] AC 562.
See, for example, Trindade and
The Law of Torts in Australia
ed, 1999) 614-15;
The Law of Torts
ed, 1998) 531-542; Rogers,
Winfield & Jolowicz on Tort
ed, 2002) 10.7.
It is interesting to note that
the pleadings make no reference at all to an action in negligence based on a
generalized duty of
care. Rather, the pleadings allege that Australian Knitting
Mills Ltd entered into a contract with the plaintiff, or that the item
inherently dangerous (Statement of Claim, 25 April 1932, Supreme Court of South
Australia, Civil Registry, No 200/1932). This
is not surprising as
[1932] AC 562 had not then been decided; at some point the
implications of this decision were taken on board and the negligence point
raised as it is dealt with by the trial judge in his judgment (
, 14 March 1933, 9-10).
See, for example, the Report
by the Commonwealth Wool Inquiry Committee (Commonwealth,
Report by the
Commonwealth Wool Inquiry Committee
, Parliamentary Papers, General, Session
1932-34, vol 4, 769.
I am conscious that the notion
of ‘strict legalism’ is contested. For the purposes of this article
it is assumed that
‘legalism’ bears the meaning ascribed to it by
Dixon himself: that there are certain permissible ways in which existing
rules may be expanded to meet new circumstances, but that a judge is constrained
by the nature of ‘legal reasoning’
from making decisions in
accordance with perceived notions of necessity or social convenience (see Dixon,
‘Concerning Judicial
Method’ in Wionarski (ed),
Jesting Pilate
And Other Papers and Addresses by the Right Honourable Sir Owen Dixon
158-59). The article does not claim that Dixon’s approach was always
uniform or that it should be adopted as the preferred
form of judicial
reasoning, matters on which there is considerable current debate (see, for
example, Frank Carrigan, ‘A Blast
from the Past: The Resurgence of Legal
[2003] MelbULawRw 6
; John Gava, ‘Another Blast from
the Past or Why the Left should Embrace Strict Legalism: A Reply to Frank
[2003] MelbULawRw 7
; Allan C Hutchinson,
‘“Heydon” Seek: Looking for Law in the Wrong Places’
[2003] MonashULawRw 5
; The Honourable Michael Kirby, ‘Judicial
Activism? A riposte to the counter-reformation’
Aust Bar Rev
The oft-cited is example is
Dixon’s speech upon taking the oath of Office as Chief Justice:
‘Such a function has led
us all I think to believe that close adherence to
legal reasoning is the only way to maintain the confidence of all parties in
conflicts. It may be that the Court is thought to be excessively
legalistic. I should be sorry to think that it is anything else.
There is no
other safe guide to judicial decisions in great conflicts than a strict and
complete legalism’ (Address upon taking
the oath of office in Sydney as
Chief Justice of the High Court of Australia, 21 April 1952, in Wionarski (ed),
above n 7, 249).
This is taken from the
evidence of Dr C C T de Crespigny, one of Grant’s witnesses and a personal
Adelaide Advertiser
, 16 November 1932, 5.
Adelaide Advertiser
16 December 1932, 20 (evidence of Dr Upton).
Adelaide Advertiser
9 December 1932, 11.
Evidence of Dr C T C de
Adelaide Advertiser
, 16 November 1932, 5.
Ibid. The witness was
anxious to point out that the delirium did not arise from a neurosis.
Letter John Martin & Co
to Australian Knitting Mills Ltd, 8 September 1931, Appendix A to Affidavit of
Dr R L Grant and Thomas
Erskine Cleland, 4 October 1932, Supreme Court of South
Australia, Civil Registry, No 200/1932.
Roll of the Royal
Australasian College of Physicians
[1994] vol 2 127. His condition may have
made it especially difficult to practice given its nature. This is hinted at the
of Murray CJ; the plaintiff was entitled to general damages for the
possible damage to his practice from the notion which might be
conceived that he
was affected by a contagious or infectious complaint. In fact, ‘there was
no ground for this notion, for
eczema was neither contagious nor infectious but
many people might not be convinced, and might think it safer not to consult him,
or to call him in’. (
Adelaide Advertiser
, 14 March 1933, 10).
Roll of the Royal
Australasian College of Physicians,
above n 15.
Adelaide University:
Jubilee of the Medical School 1885-1935
(1935) 60. The joint recipient was R
W Cilento, who later became Director-General of Health and Medical Services in
Queensland (1934-5)
and later Professor of Social and Tropical Medicine at the
University of Queensland.
Adelaide University:
Jubilee of the Medical School 1885-1935
, above n 17.
For example, Dr C T C de
Crespigny, who gave evidence on Grant’s behalf, described himself as
having known Grant for a long
time, and being on friendly terms with him and on
intimate professional relations (
Adelaide Advertiser
, 16 November 1932,
5). De Crespigny had been an honourary physician at Adelaide Hospital since 1918
Adelaide University: Jubilee of the Medical School 1885-1935
, above 17,
South Australian State
, Archival Database, Entry for James Brook Lewis.
The Register
February 1927, 12.
Adelaide Advertiser
24 February 1927, 11.
Adelaide News
February 1927, 6.
Ibid. In his speech Grant
is reported to have said, ‘In my profession we tell people very
little’, which ‘caused
appreciative chuckles from the numbers of his
fellow-physicians present’. Also, one of Helen Lewis’s bridesmaids
Alison Verco, undoubtedly a member of the Verco’s, a leading medical
family in Adelaide. However, I have found no reference
to Alison Verco in the
family history although she may have well have been referred to in the newspaper
by the name by which she
was commonly known. For a history of the family see
Masons, Millers and Medicine: James Crabb Verco and His Sons
In addition to his own
illness, Grant’s wife had to enter the workforce and his children were
placed in the care of his grandparents
until he recovered -
Roll of the Royal
Australasian College of Physicians
, above n 15.
In his evidence he stated
that Grant had been a friend for years although he did not admit to being his
best man (Privy Council
Printed Papers in Appeals 1935
Judgments Nos 61-63, 56).
See Letter John Martin
& Co to Australian Knitting Mills Ltd, 20 July 1931; Letter John Martin
& Co to Australian Knitting
Mills Ltd, 4 August 1931; Letter John Martin
& Co to Australian Knitting Mills Ltd, 8 September 1931, all in Appendix A
to Affidavit
of Dr RL Grant and Thomas Erskine Cleland, 4 October 1932, Supreme
Court of South Australia, Civil Registry, No. 200/1932.
There were 44 grounds of
appeal, none of which referred to any possible contributory negligence of the
plaintiff – see High
Court File 4/1933, High Court Registry, Canberra.
Privy Council Office, above
Grant was represented by
the firm of Cleland and Teesdale Smith, the senior partner of which was Edward
Cleland KC (South Australia
having a fused profession). By the time of the case
Edward Cleland was a leading barrister having appeared before both the High
of Australia and the Privy Council. It was said that he appeared in
practically every ‘heavy’ case. In March 1936 he
was appointed a
judge of the Supreme Court of South Australia. His junior in Grant’s case
was his son, Thomas Erskine Cleland,
who was also a partner in the firm. A
cousin of this branch of the Cleland family was a distinguished medical
researcher (whose son
later became a house-surgeon at the Adelaide
Children’s Hospital, an institution with which Grant had a long
association) so
it is possible that this explains why Cleland took the case. For
a general history of the family see E R Simpson,
The Clelands of Beaumont
Adelaide Advertiser
18 November 1932, 11.
Dr Upton testified that,
upon asking Grant whether he had any new woollen underwear, Grant replied,
‘By Jove! I began wearing
some underwear about a fortnight ago.’
Adelaide Advertiser
, 10 November 1932, 19.
Grant suggests that, on the
afternoon or evening of the day after he first wore the underwear, the symptom
was an erythemato-papular
rash (redness of skin and pimples) indicative of and
consistent with dermatitis. The next sentence, without explanation, simply says
he first sought medical advice on his skin condition on 13 July. The reason for
the delay is not explained (Plaintiff’s Answers
to Interrogatories,
Supreme Court, Civil Registry, No. 200/1932).
In cross examination Grant
admitted that when he went to Dr Upton he knew it was dermatitis: ‘When Dr
Upton told me I had
dermatitis was to tell me nothing I did not myself
know’ (Privy Council Office, above n 26, 25).
‘The Patch Test in
Medical Journal of Australia
text is taken from S Ayres and N P Anderson,
Annals of Internal Medicine
March 1932.
Ibid. The medical terms
‘papules’ and ‘vesicles’ were used in the text; I have
translated the terms into
the lay ‘pimples’ and
‘blisters’.
Adelaide Advertiser
14 March 1933, 9 (summary of decision of Murray CJ in favour of Grant).
See the evidence of Dr John
Edwin M Wigley, of Harley Street, London, who testified that he had known
instances of dermatitis having
been caused by wool (
Adelaide Advertiser
12 November 1932, 23) and Dr William C T Upton, a specialist in dermatology, who
stated that in his general practice he would not
recommend wool to patients
because of the risk that arsenic might be present (
Adelaide Advertiser
11 November 1932, 17). There was, however, conflicting evidence on this point
Adelaide Advertiser
, 10 December 1932, 17 (Evidence of Dr William
Privy Council Office, above
Sir George John Robert
Murray (1863-1942). The author of his entry in the
Australian Dictionary of
opined that Murray tended in appellate and other decisions
‘to eschew detailed reasoning in his judgments’ – Nairn
Serle (eds),
Australian Dictionary of Biography
(1986) vo1 10, 641 (entry
written by Alex Castles).
Sir Owen Dixon,
‘Science and Judicial Proceedings’ (speech given on 30 September
1933 to Medico-Legal Society of Victoria)
in Wionarski (ed), above n 7, 16;
Balkin and Davis,
Law of Torts
ed, 2004) 755.
December 1932, 5. The paper noted that the longest civil trial was the
well-known ‘corset’ case between Weingartner
and Wills in 1902 which
took 52 days!
1933, 6. A full record can be found in Privy Council Office, above n 26.
, 7 December 1932, 14; 8 December 1932, 5. The Associate to Chief
Justice Murray, Mr. John Bagot, advised the author that the Chief
requested Australian Knitting Mills to produce a witness who was actually
present in the place where the underwear was produced.
This witness appears to
have been Alfred Stanley Ashworth, who gave evidence on this point.
A sulphur compound,
bisulphite of soda, was used by Australian Knitting Mills in the production of
the underwear. If not removed
by washing, these sulphites could produce sulphur
dioxide after contact with the sweat of the human body. The combination of
dioxide with sweat and oxygen results in the formation of sulphurous and
sulphuric acid. The gas and the acids were all known irritants..
Adelaide Advertiser
17 November 1932, 10; 9 December 1932, 29; 14 December 1932, 23; 16 December
1932, 20; 17 December 1932, 17.
Adelaide Advertiser
12 November 1932, 23 (Evidence of Dr John Edwin M Wrigley).
‘He did not agree
with the view of a previous witness that any quantity of arsenous oxide or
sulphur dioxide which could be
revealed by the minutest test would be injurious
to the wearer of the garment containing it’,
Adelaide Advertiser
December 1932, 5 (Evidence of Dr Robert Charles Brodie). Dr William Ray
testified that in his opinion injections of gold improved
dermatitis, and if
this was so it was against the view that the dermatitis was produced by a heavy
Adelaide Advertiser
, 10 December 1932, 17).
The medical term used in
the evidence was ‘idiopathic’.
Adelaide Advertiser
10 November 1932, 19; 11 November 1932, 17 (Evidence of Dr William CT Upton); 12
November 1932, 23 (Evidence of Dr John Edwin M
Wrigley); 16 November 1932, 5 (Dr
CCT de Crespigny).
Adelaide Advertiser
10 November 1932, 19.
Adelaide Advertiser
15 December 1932, 19.
Privy Council Office, above
Adelaide Advertiser
19 November 1932, 13 (Evidence of Dr Roland R Wettenhall).
This witness (nor any other
expert called on behalf of the defendants) was not allowed to question Grant
Adelaide Advertiser
, 8 December 1932, 5 (Evidence of Dr Robert
Charles Brodie).
Adelaide Advertiser
10 December 1932, 17 (Evidence of Dr Esmond Shirley Joske).
Adelaide Advertiser
8 December 1932, 5 (Evidence of Dr Robert Charles Brodie).
Dr Esmond Shirley Joske,
the medical officer of Australian Knitting Mills, tesitifed that in 5 ½
years he had seen five cases
of dermatitis, none of which arose out of handling
wool. Australian Knitting Mills employed between 600-800 people about half of
whom worked in the wool department (
, 9 December 1932, 1).
Adelaide Advertiser
10 November 1932, 19 (Evidence of Dr Richard Thorold Grant).
Adelaide Advertiser
12 November 1932, 23 (Evidence of Dr John Edwin M Wrigley).
It is not clear how this
witness was discovered. In the Plaintiff’s Interrogatories the defendants
were asked whether a Mrs
Pearson had complained that ‘Golden Fleece’
underwear had caused her skin irritation. The defendants refused to comment
the ground that the Interrogatory was ‘irrelevant, vexatious,
embarrassing, oppressive, and is fishing’ (Plaintiff’s
Interrogatories; Defendant’s Answers to Interrogatories, Supreme Court of
South Australia, Civil Registry, No. 200/1932).
November 1932, 5.
Adelaide Advertiser
17 November 1932, 10
The article headings
reflect the levity of the witness’ appearance: ‘Evidence of Witness
Who Said He Cured Himself’
Adelaide Advertiser
, 17 November 1932,
10; ‘Man Shows His Legs in Court’,
, 16 November
Adelaide Advertiser
17 November 1932, 10;
, 16 November 1932, 5.
Although the experts for
the plaintiff were from Adelaide and the experts for the defendants from
Melbourne (where Australian Knitting
Mills Ltd was based) there is no evidence
to suggest that regional affinity played any part in the dispute. Nor, it is
can anything much be read
into the fact that
the Chief Justice and Grant were both members of the Adelaide Club.
Murray CJ’s judgment
may only be found in the records of the Privy Council (Privy Council Office,
above n 26, 275-298). There
is no copy in the records of the Registries of the
Supreme Court of South Australia or the High Court of Australia. The judgment
reported in the
Adelaide Advertiser
, 14 March 1933, 9-10.
Ground No 4 (no or no
sufficient evidence to support finding that the plaintiff was a person with
normally sensitive skin), No 6
(no or no sufficient evidence to support the
finding that the dermatitis of the plaintiff was caused by the use of the
or by the presence of bi-sulphite of soda in the ankle ends of at
least one pair of underpants), No 21 (trial judge wrong when, for
purposes of
drawing inference that Australian Knitting Mills was guilty of negligence, he
assumed as an established fact that the
dermatitis was caused by an irritant
– the chemicals in the underpants – a conclusion itself depending on
inference),
No 33 (no or no sufficient evidence to support the finding that in
consequence of the failure of Australian Knitting Mills Ltd to
take care the
plaintiff suffered the damage complained of). See High Court File No 4/1933,
High Court Registry, Canberra.
Counsel for the appellants
assured Starke J that the proceedings would not last as long as the 20 days of
the trial –
Melbourne Herald
, 14 June 1933, 10.
Australian Knitting
Mills Pty Ltd v Grant
[1933] HCA 35
(1933) 50 CLR 387
Adelaide Chronicle
22 June 1933, 47.
Australian Knitting
Mills Pty Ltd v Grant
[1933] HCA 35
(1933) 50 CLR 387
, 431 (Evatt J).
Australian Knitting
Mills Pty Ltd v Grant
[1933] HCA 35
(1933) 50 CLR 387
Australian Knitting
Mills Pty Ltd v Grant
[1933] HCA 35
(1933) 50 CLR 387
Australian Knitting
Mills Pty Ltd v Grant
[1933] HCA 35
(1933) 50 CLR 387
Australian Knitting
Mills Pty Ltd v Grant
[1933] HCA 35
(1933) 50 CLR 387
, 422-23. Sixteen textbooks were
supplied to the courts in connection with the case.
I have used medical
evidence as an example of scientific evidence in this context.
Dixon, above n 41, 14.
Dixon, above n 41, 29.
Dixon, above n 41, 14.
Dixon, above n 41, 30.
I am very grateful to
Philip Ayres who kindly sent copies of the documentation relating to this speech
to me. The originals are
contained in the private papers of Sir Owen Dixon which
are held by surviving family members. A relatively full account of the lecture
can also be found in Ayres, ‘Owen Dixon’s Causation Lecture: Radical
Scepticism’
Sir Owen Dixon,
‘Causation and the Law’ (speech given to the Law Student’s
Society of Melbourne University, March
1937). This quote is taken from
Dixon’s draft notes for the lecture, and appears in similar language in
the notes of the lecture
made by John Kinnear, a student.
Philip Ayres,
[1961] HCA 46
(1961) 106 CLR 112.
the case mentioned by Ayres as demonstrating Dixon’s scepticism.
[1954] HCA 74
(1954) 91 CLR 268.
(1954) 91 CLR 277.
(1954) 91 CLR 278.
Griffith District
Hospital v Hayes
[1962] HCA 18
(1962) 108 CLR 50.
See, for example,
[1952] HCA 19
(1952) 85 CLR 352
Franklin v Victorian Railways
Commissioners
[1959] HCA 48
(1959) 101 CLR 197
The Commonwealth v Ockenden
[1958] HCA 37
(causation in the context of workers’ compensation
legislation).
[1956] HCA 45
(1956) 96 CLR 99.
Mummery v Irvings Pty
[1956] HCA 45
(1956) 96 CLR 99
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298.
(1959) 101 CLR 304.
Ayres, above n 85.
Sir Owen Dixon,
‘Jesting Pilate’ (twentieth George Adlington Syme Oration delivered
in Melbourne on 20 August 1957 at
the invitation of the Royal Australasian
College of Surgeons, in Wionarski (ed), above n 7, 5.
See the comments of the
Lord Chancellor (Cranworth) in
Broadbent v The Imperial Gas Company
(1857) 7 De G M & G 436
, an injunction case decided by an arbitrator
involving much conflicting evidence. The Lord Chancellor agreed that the
conflict needed
settling by someone: but no new trial was granted as the
arbitrator's decision was equivalent to that of a jury. (This was affirmed
the House of Lords:
[1859] EngR 915
7 HLC 600).
I am grateful to Professor Michael Lobban for
drawing my attention to this case.
See the following
comments of the Lord Chief Justice at the end of a case in the 1820’s,
‘[T]hese two days, thus employed,
are not days of triumph, but days of
humiliation for science; for when I find that their science ends up in this
degree of uncertainty
and doubt, and when I observe that they are drawn up in
martial and hostile array to each other, how is it possible for me to form
… an opinion upon such contradictory evidence?’, Crawford,
‘The Emergence of English Forensic Medicine: Medical
Evidence in the
Common Law Courts, 1730-1830’ (PhD dissertation, Oxford University, 1987)
cited in Stephen Landsman, ‘One
Hundred Years of Rectitude: Medical
Witnesses at the Old Bailey, 1717-1817’ (1998) 16
Law and History
The discussion is of
proximate cause or remoteness, and cause in contributory negligence. See, for
Clerk & Lindsell on Torts
ed, 1921) 146-154,
498-510; Winfield,
Textbook on the Law of Tort
(1937) 71-88, 438-443.
Although said in the specific context of contributory negligence, Winfield (441)
reflects the general contemporary
view that the questions of causation could be
explained adequately by observing that, scientifically, the approach of the law
wrong but that law was not an exact science.
[1904] UKLawRpCh 37
[1904] 1 Ch 673.
[1904] UKLawRpCh 37
[1904] 1 Ch 673
from Bowen LJ in
Fleet v Metropolitan Asylum District
(1886) 2 Tim LR
Farwell J explains the
logical conclusion as being an example of Bacon’s
inductio per
enumerationem simplicem, ubi non reperitur instantia contradictoria
the sample on which the conclusion was based was too small to make the
generalisation. However, it is not clear what was
meant by a conclusion based on
‘medical science’, especially if it was to exclude
conclusions based on
forms of inductive reasoning.
Explained, perhaps, by
Dixon’s view that the law’s contribution to civilization was not the
result of applying scientific
method – see Sir Owen Dixon,
‘University Education in a Scientific Civilization’, in Wionarski
(ed), above n 7,
Dixon’s judgment
Fitzgerald v Penn
[1954] HCA 74
(1954) 91 CLR 268
suggests that he may have been
more willing to accept ‘commonsense’ causation in jury trials.
[1972] UKHL 7
[1973] 1 WLR 1.
[1932] AC 562.
Wilsher v Essex Area
Health Authority
[1987] UKHL 11
[1988] AC 1074.
Fairchild v Glenhaven
Funeral Services Ltd
[2002] UKHL 22
[2003] 1 AC 32
, 19 August 1933, 15.
Ibid. It was also noted
that Grant had book debts amounting to £180.
[1935] UKPCHCA 1
(1935) 54 CLR 49
[1935] UKPCHCA 1
(1935) 54 CLR 49
‘Mathematical, or strict logical, demonstration is generally impossible:
juries are in practice told that they must act
on such reasonable balance of
probabilities as would suffice to determine a reasonable man to take a decision
in the grave affairs
of life.’ As noted earlier, Dixon had little
confidence in juries to handle abstract questions of causation. However, there
was no jury in
, and in most of the cases cited above the question
of the appropriate inference was raised as a matter of law.
The costs of the action
are a matter of some dispute. It was reported that the total cost of the
proceedings were £20 000,
with the 9 days Privy Council hearing costing
(Country edn), 8 December 1935, 15). The High Court
file indicates that the taxed costs of the original hearing were £386 17s
7d and the High Court appeal £567 9s 8d – see High Court File No
See, for example, (1935)
Law Journal
266 (26 October 1935); (1935) 79
Solicitors Journal
952; (1935) 180
; (1936) 52
118; (1936) 81
Law Journal
February 1936); H R Blair, ‘Negligence itself a Wrong (1936) 10
Institute Journal
Roll of the Royal
Australasian College of Physicians
[1994] vol 2, 128.
Ibid, Adelaide
Children’s Hospital,
Annual Report for 1979
, 3. I am grateful to Dr
Brian Fotherington and Professor Donald Simpson for the latter reference.
I am grateful to Mr Rob
Parker of Australian Knitting Mills for this information.
edn), 15 December 1935, 13.
Evidence has emerged
that, by March 1938, Evatt was actively seeking assistance from John Wren to be
made a Privy Councillor (James
John Wren: A Life Reconsidered
(2004) 281-283). In fact, Evatt was not made a Privy Councillor until he became
Attorney-General in 1942. I am grateful to Dr Frank
Bongiorno for this
‘Dixon never much
admired Evatt, seeing him as an essentially political judge and as dishonest,
though he forced himself to
get along with him.’ Ayres, above n 88,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (228 KB)
PDF format (775 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter