URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AULegHist/2007/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:36:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Maher, Laurence W --- "King, Country and Kremlin: The RSL Anti-Communist Purge Cases, 1948-1949" [2007] AULegHist 9; (2007) 11(2) Legal History 169
King, Country and Kremlin: The RSL Anti-Communist Purge Cases, 1948-1949
I The Great Crusade
II Soldiers Defending The Cold War Home Front
III Loyalty, Dissent and Guilt By Association
IV Disaffected Soldiers March into Court
V Winning a Battle
VI A Historic Decision?
VII Losing the War: ‘The Possibilities are Infinite’
VIII A Historiographical Postscript: Unreported Case Law
King, Country and Kremlin: The RSL Anti-Communist
Purge Cases, 1948-1949
Throughout more than six decades, the struggle against Australian communism
was in part a co-operative venture between Commonwealth
and State officialdom,
and the private sector. In the annals of Australian private sector
anti-communism, the Returned Sailors, Soldiers
and Airmen’s Imperial
League of Australia (‘RSL’) adhered to a policy of implacable
opposition to the Communist
Party of Australia (‘CPA’), its
objectives, and its members, sympathisers and dupes (real or imagined). Although
time for attempted precise measurement has now passed, it is arguable that
in its intensity and duration, the RSL’s anti-communist
unrivalled by any other private organization operating openly. Prompted by what
it perceived as the deadly menace unleashed
by the then recent Bolshevik
revolution, the RSL’s anti-communist exertions were continuous after the
emergence of the CPA
in 1920. They were zealously practised in the period
1946-1949 when the Cold War was in a particularly threatening early phase and
the non-labour parties were in opposition in Canberra. In those early Cold War
days, the RSL first purged its own ranks.
I The Great Crusade
With a membership of approximately 375,000 in 1946, the
influential.
Led in large measure
by recently returned senior military officers, it had direct access to the
Commonwealth Government in relation
to the content and administration of the
Repatriation Act
(Cth) and otherwise regarding the welfare of
returned servicemen and women. It was no less vocal in its efforts to ensure
that Australian
defence and foreign policies followed the dictates of respect
for King and Empire
and patriotic
support for Australia.
The RSL also
had direct access to the controllers of the defence intelligence and national
security apparatus although it is axiomatic
that it exercised this facility
secretly and informally. The RSL
Constitution
required it to operate in a
non-partisan way, but this stricture did not inhibit its crusading
anti-communism. The threat to world
peace said to be posed by the Soviet Union
after 1945 and the ensuing portrayal of the CPA (not without cause) as a slavish
of a monolithic worldwide communist movement combined to provide a
justification for the claim that the struggle against the CPA
was a matter of
national self-preservation which transcended both mere party politics and legal
The assertion that the CPA
was not a genuine political party underpinned the anti-communist crusade
throughout the Cold War years.
It was, for example, expressly relied upon by the
Victorian Government in 1949 when it established a Royal Commission chaired by
Mr Justice Lowe of the Supreme Court of Victoria to inquire into the origins,
aims, objects and funds of the CPA in Victoria and
other related matters. It was
also fundamental to the unsuccessful attempt in 1950-1951 by the newly-elected
Menzies Government to
outlaw the CPA. And, it was central to the ostensibly
non-partisan ‘Call to Australia’ – a kind of metaphorical
to anti-communist arms couched in Aesopian language - proclaimed on Remembrance
Day 1951 and to which each State Chief Justice
subscribed his
The Victorian Chief Justice,
Sir Edmund Herring, a distinguished veteran of both world wars, and a pillar of
the RSL, grasped every
opportunity to warn his former comrades in arms and the
general public of the looming communist
Cold War anti-communist
rhetoric was replete with appeals to Australians to hold fast to their
traditional imperial and Christian
values which were being menaced by the
‘alien’ and atheistic creed of communism. Yet for nearly two
decades, the CPA
had been active in the everyday lives of tens and tens of
thousands of Australians, including the lives of RSL members who had seen
service in the Great War. The privations and hardships inflicted on Australians
during the Great Depression that had begun in 1929,
the CPA’s active
industrial and political campaigning throughout the 1930s, and the sympathy
displayed in Australia (after
the German invasion launched on 22 June 1941) for
the plight of the Soviet Union go a long way towards explaining the numerical,
political and industrial strength of the CPA at the end of the Second World War.
After the German invasion of the Soviet Union, the
CPA had become a wildly
enthusiastic supporter of Australia's war effort. The CPA had only a very small
number of adherents in the
armed forces, but given the strong following which
the RSL was able to exert in terms of attracting members in the returning
it was inevitable that its membership would include some CPA members and
sympathisers.
In the turbulent
transition from war to peace, the dominant conservative forces in the RSL were
threatened by the emergence of what
might be called a broader, albeit small,
left-wing tendency within the League’s progressive element, which wanted a
more vigorous
internal debate about how the RSL could best advance the interests
of its members, and those of the nation. However, the League’s
were not given to making fine distinctions between the communist and
non-communist left wing of Australian (or international)
politics and were
alarmed by the communists' supposed diabolical use of infiltration tactics to
subvert and capture control of targeted
organizations. The fact that the
CPA’s record in Commonwealth and State electoral politics was consistently
poor was inconsequential.
Those who promoted and aided communism were considered
as being engaged in a do-or-die struggle against everything for which hundreds
of thousands of Australians had fought and died in two world wars. For the loyal
defenders of King and country, it was enough for
a progressive dissident to be a
suspected communist sympathiser to warrant the League taking prompt
self-protective intervention.
The RSL’s first task was, therefore, to rid
its own ranks of communists and suspected communists. Beyond that essentially
housekeeping
concern, the RSL soon resolved that it would wage a determined
national campaign to deal with the threat to Australia’s national
which the CPA posed as the emerging Cold War gripped
Perhaps not
surprisingly, the legality of the private sector anti-communist crusade seems
scarcely to have been challenged. This article
– a Cold War study in
miniature – examines several unreported related cases heard in the Supreme
Court of New South Wales
in 1948-1949 in which dissident RSL members in that
State unsuccessfully contested the RSL’s determined efforts to purge its
ranks of alleged CPA members and
sympathisers.
II Soldiers Defending The Cold War Home
In the immediate post-war period, the RSL was quick to deal with what it
perceived to be the increasing ‘communist menace’.
In late 1946, the
League’s honorary solicitor in Victoria, F P
– a partner in the
influential Melbourne law firm, Moule, Hamilton and Derham - was asked by the
RSL General Secretary, J C
Neagle, to advise ‘whether a returned
serviceman who is a Communist can be or remain a member of the League’.
advised Neagle that an avowed communist would be guilty of conduct
subversive of the objects of the RSL and could for that reason
be expelled from
the League.
of the objects
of the RSL included the following:
(d) To inculcate loyalty to Australia and the Empire, and secure patriotic
service in the interests of both.
of the League’s
Constitution provided in part as follows:
Any person attested or accepted for Active Service shall be eligible for
membership as a full member of this League.
(n) If any member shall be guilty of conduct unbecoming a gentleman or
subversive to the objects of the League, or wilfully infringes
the Rules or
By-laws of the League, or be convicted of an indictable offence, he shall be
liable to expulsion upon a resolution to
that effect, duly carried by the
Council of the State Branch
(o) Any person desiring to become a member who is eligible in accordance with
Constitution
shall be proposed by one member, seconded by another member and
his nomination submitted to a meeting of the Sub-branch which he
join. If a majority of two-thirds of the members present and voting, approve of
the nomination, upon payment of his subscription,
such person shall become a
member of such Sub-branch. In the event of the applicant being refused by any
Sub-branch he shall have
the right of appeal to the next highest authority
within the League in the State Branch concerned. (p) Any State Branch shall
the right to veto the membership of any particular person within the
shall the right
of appeal to the Federal Executive of the League.
In his opinion, Derham recited his understanding that the constitution and
objects of the CPA included the following:
The Communist Party of Australia, which, in its capacity of leader and organiser
of the Revolutionary Movement of the Proletariat,
fights for the capture of the
majority of the working class and of large sections of poor and middle class
farmers for Communist
principles and aims, for the Colonial peoples in their
struggles against Imperialism, for the establishment of the Dictatorship of
Proletariat, for the formation of an Australian Socialist Soviet Republic, for
the total abolition of classes, and for the realisation
of Socialism which is
the initial stage of the Communist social order.
advice was that ‘unless an avowed Communist is not debarred from becoming
a member in pursuance of
and (p), he can only cease to be a member if
he is expelled under
’ and that ‘an avowed Communist would
be guilty of conduct subversive to the objects of the League and could be dealt
The noted historian of the Cold War, L J Louis, has described in detail how
in Victoria the RSL State Executive carried out a pre-emptive
anti-communist
strike at the League's 1946 State Conference by securing a ruling that
communists were barred from membership under
Constitution
followed by expulsions of more than 80 members in the next two years. The RSL
Victorian State Secretary had no doubt that
the expulsion policy was justified:
‘it has been a long standing rule dating back many years that no man can
be a Communist
and a member of the
There seems to have been little effective opposition to the Victorian
expulsions although at that early stage the RSL Federal Executive
disinclined to endorse the Victorian blanket
The situation in New South Wales proved to be markedly different in that the
overall determination of the RSL’s national apparatus
to step up its
opposition to communism ultimately met with stiff internal resistance.
Throughout 1947 and early 1948, as the international
and domestic Cold War
crisis worsened, the controversy about communists and suspected communists
inside the RSL correspondingly intensified.
On 13 May 1948, the RSL Federal Executive passed the following
resolution:
That the following clause be added to the Federal
Constitution
, Rules and
By-Laws:- No Communist shall be permitted to become, or remain, a member of the
The Federal Executive also ruled that the
resolution was part of the
Constitution
and was immediately operative. It then
ruled as follows:
That all Communists
and fellow travellers
, whether members of the
Communist party or not, come under the ban, and it is the duty of every State
Branch, and Sub-Branch to rigidly
implement the Resolution. The State Branches
have the power under the
Constitution
to withdraw a Sub-branch charter, if the
Sub-branch does not enforce the
Constitution
. State Branches and Sub-branches
should act immediately. (italics
Federal President, Eric Millhouse, KC of the South Australian Bar, issued a
press statement summarising what he regarded as
the effect of the Executive's
resolution.
The New South Wales
Branch of the RSL promptly endorsed the decisions of the Federal Executive and
appointed a Sub-Committee to make
recommendations for the implementation of the
Two days later, the
sub-Committee duly reported to the State Council which decided to adopt the
Sub-Committee's recommendation that:
If a complaint is made in writing to the State Council that a member is a
reputed communist or communist sympathiser the onus for
establishing a prima
facie case shall lie with the informant. Where such a prima facie case is
established the State Council shall
proceed to take action under Rule 5(n) of
the Federal
Constitution
. In the case of any charge being made to a Sub-Branch
action shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of Rule 24(p) of the
Constitution
, Rules and
State Council also accepted the Sub-Committee's recommendation, ‘That
nomination for membership forms should now include
the question, ‘Are you
Communist’?’.
In a letter dated 17 June 1948 read to a meeting of the RSL State
Executive held on 23 June 1948, a State Councillor of the NSW Branch,
Martin, relying on the recently amended
Constitution
, laid a charge against
Arthur Reginald Bergeest, a fellow member of the NSW State Council, alleging
that Bergeest was a communist
or a communist
sympathiser.
Bergeest, who had
very close ties with the CPA,
had been active in the three years since the end of the war in pushing the RSL
‘to adopt a radical stance on issues affecting
ex-servicemen’.
was also present at the State Executive meeting on 23 June 1948 and pressed the
Executive to require Martin to supply full
written particulars of the charge to
the State Secretary prior to the meeting of the Executive at which the charge
was to be considered.
The day after the meeting, at which it was also resolved
to hear and determine the charge on 7 July 1948, Bergeest was sent a copy
Martin's formal charge. Bergeest immediately sought legal advice and on 26 June
1948 his solicitor, Harold Rich,
wrote to the Secretary of the New South Wales Branch challenging the validity of
the amendment to the
Constitution
and asserting that no amendment could be
validly passed which had the effect of implementing some partisan political
requirement.
Rich concluded his letter with the following appeal:
Mr Bergeest deeply regrets the necessity for taking this action at a time when
the whole energy and resources of the League should
be applied in the interests
of effective rehabilitation of ex-servicemen, but he feels it his duty, on
behalf of tens of thousands
of ex-servicemen generally, to defend their rights
as members of the League and as citizens, against the principle of having their
politics dictated to them by a section of the leadership of the ...
June 1948, Bergeest’s request for particulars was
On 6 July 1948 (the day
before the hearing of Martin’s charge against Bergeest), following a
conference he had had with the
State Branch’s solicitors, K McL Bolton,
the NSW State President of the RSL, wrote to Millhouse suggesting that a Special
Executive meeting be held with ‘the best legal brains in all
States’ so as to ‘tighten up our
Constitution
, and leave no loophole
whatsoever’. For Bolton, the potential advantage of such a meeting was
If this was done before the 28th of this month, it would be a bombshell in the
Court, to produce our amended
Constitution
. I can assure you that Marx House is
flat-out, and a fighting fund has been formed. One Sub-branch, namely
Paddington-Woollahra,
has already subscribed £100 to Bergeest’s fund.
This case will not only be a test case as regards the RSL, but it could
great national importance to Australia, for as you know, on Bergeest’s
writ we could subpoena some of the Communist gang
III Loyalty, Dissent and Guilt By
Association
In order to appreciate the significance of the cases determined in the
Supreme Court of New South Wales in 1948-1949, it is necessary
to draw attention
briefly to several broad features of the rapidly evolving Cold War
context.• Beyond Australia’s shores,
the Cold War was worsening. In
August 1948, the Soviet Union had imposed a blockade on the western sector of
Berlin. Soviet hegemony
in Eastern Europe (behind what, in 1946, Winston
Churchill had ominously called an ‘Iron Curtain’) had spread to
Bulgaria and Hungary in 1947 and Czechoslovakia in 1948. In March 1947,
with concern increasing in Washington that Greece and Turkey
were immediately
threatened, the United States had embarked on the so-called ‘Truman
Doctrine’, its policy of ‘containment’
of Soviet expansionism.
Three months later, the US Secretary of State, George C Marshall, launched the
plan (which was to bear his
name) for the economic recovery of Western Europe
– a plan in which the Soviet Union (a recent wartime ally of the USA, the
UK and Australia) would play no role. In March 1948, the British Government had
introduced new measures for the ‘vetting’
of civil servants in order
to exclude communist security risks. Throughout 1947 and 1948, a Congressional
anti-communist witch hunt
had gathered pace in the United States;
There had been prolonged CPA-led or CPA-inspired strikes in 1947 and 1948.
Tom Sheridan has advanced a strong case that this industrial
disputation was
predominantly a function of the economic dislocation caused by Australia’s
transition from a wartime economy
and the programme of postwar economic
reconstruction, but the industrial disputation was portrayed by anti-communists
very differently.
For them, the pattern of recurrent strikes was unequivocal
evidence of a seditious communist conspiracy aimed at the violent imposition
a Soviet-style proletarian dictatorship on the Australian
In April 1948, the Liberal Party led by Robert Gordon Menzies KC announced
that it had changed its policy and stated that it now agreed
with the Country
Party (the forerunner of today’s National Party) and that it would, if
elected, legislate to outlaw the CPA;
By mid-1948, the political and industrial activities of the CPA were
exciting strong animosity in conservative circles and similar
hostility in some
sections of the right wing of the labour movement. The general issue of the role
of the CPA as a disruptive force
was a burning issue for the
In mid-1948, the Opposition in the Commonwealth Parliament denounced the
Commonwealth (ALP) Government led by Joseph Benedict Chifley
in connection with
newspaper reports that the US Government had stopped the flow of highly
classified information about atomic weaponry
to the Australian Government
because of concerns in Washington that the Australian Government could not be
relied upon to safeguard
such sensitive information. The embargo, which applied
to all classified military information, was partly prompted by the reports
the US naval attaché who vouchsafed to the Director of Naval Intelligence
that there were communists in the Australian
Throughout 1948 there were constant parliamentary and public debates
concerning Australia’s national security and the threat
said to be posed
to it by the CPA due to its willingness to side with the Soviet Union in the
worsening Cold War.
The Sydney Morning Herald
exemplified the attitude of
mainstream newspaper comment. The deterioration in the international situation,
especially the expanding
menace of Asian communism, ‘should be heeded in
Australia’. The Australian communists though small in number were powerful
and constituted a dangerous and well-entrenched fifth column: ‘Why then
should the activities of potential traitors be accorded
the protection of laws
they are pledged to
overthrow?’
The judiciary itself was playing a prominent role in the emerging
anti-communist crusade.
given by the Victorian Chief Justice, Lt-General, Sir Edmund Herring, was
followed elsewhere. In September 1948, Mr Justice
William B Simpson of the
Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory, and also a veteran of both
world wars, opened the annual
congress of the ACT branch of the RSL. A motion
was presented urging the revocation of the RSL Federal Executive’s
banning communists from League membership. The judge told his fellow
congress delegates that communists ‘white-anted’
every organization
within which they operated. Moreover, he predicted that if communists were
permitted to enter the RSL:
We will find ourselves controlled by a small coterie who will not let us talk or
think. The very nature of the communist makes him
ineligible for membership. We
stand for everything they do not. They stand for another ruler and
It was a sign of the times that battled-hardened adults could persuade
themselves in such a way;
• The Chifley Commonwealth was subjected to increasing pressure to take
effective steps to curb the CPA. In September 1948,
it relented in part when it
successfully prosecuted Gilbert Burns a member of the Queensland State Executive
of the CPA for sedition
following pro-Soviet remarks made by Burns in a public
debate about communism in
pressed the Chifley Government to exert itself vigorously to counter the threat
of communist subversion. For example,
in late 1948, the RSL Federal Executive
resolved to lobby the government to withhold the issue of passports to
communists. Prime
Minister Chifley told RSL General Secretary, J C Neagle, that
the Minister for Immigration’s discretionary power under the
1938 (Cth) was not, as a rule, exercised to withhold the grant of a
passport in normal times unless in very exceptional circumstances,
such as where
a person was seeking to evade criminal prosecution or where the Minister knew
that the grant of a passport would definitely
be opposed to the applicant's well
It is not the practice to refuse to grant passport facilities solely on account
of the political beliefs of a person and it is considered
that it would be
undesirable to adopt a rule which could be used to deny the grant of such
facilities on the ground that an applicant
had communistic tendencies and which
could conceivably serve as a precedent for similar action in the case of persons
holding other
authors of the more recent of the two histories of the RSL have remarked how as
domestic and international tensions increased
in 1948-1949, it served the
interests of that section of the RSL apparatus which supported the Liberal Party
to press the anti-communist
purge as a means of embarrassing Prime Minister
Chifley and his government as the 1949 election approached. Chifley had resisted
calls for banning the CPA saying that communism was just another political party
and that the ALP intended to fight it in the
IV Disaffected Soldiers March into
Arthur Reginald Bergeest had issued proceedings in the Supreme Court of New
South Wales on 2 July 1948 seeking an injunction restraining
the RSL New South
Wales Branch,
, from proceeding to hear or otherwise act upon
the charge laid against him by Martin that he was a communist or communist
sympathiser
and from proceeding to expel any RSL member on the ground that such
a member was a communist or a communist sympathiser. On 7 July
1948, the RSL
sought and obtained an adjournment of the hearing of Bergeest’s claim so
as to have time to prepare its defence,
having given an undertaking to the court
that the charge against Bergeest would not be proceeded with pending the outcome
On 19 July 1948, R
R Sholl, KC
of the Victorian Bar
provided the RSL with a detailed opinion on the New South Wales case, the State
and Federal RSL Rules, and a
method of dealing with communists
Sholl had considered
the affidavits filed on behalf of Bergeest in the Supreme Court of New South
Wales and expressed the opinion
that Bergeest might well succeed in establishing
the invalidity of the amendment.
This was because there was nothing in either the State or Federal
Constitution
or the New South Wales Act ‘to make an alteration in the Federal Rules
immediately operative in respect of the Branch
Constitution
out at length the steps which the Branch would need to take to overcome the
problems which he had identified. On the question
provided that one of the objects of the Branch was to maintain an association
non-partisan in relation to party politics,
Sholl was sure that an amendment was
I think the Branch (and ... the League) has got to face up to the position that
the maintenance of its objects and policy may bring
it into conflict with some
bodies such as the Communist Party which claim to be political. The amendment of
this Rule and of the
membership rule can be effected in one of two ways. Either
it can be done by limiting the amendment to an express reference to the
Communist Party (which is the method at present adopted by the Federal
Executive), or it can be done by an attempt to describe in
general terms bodies
or persons professing or advocating doctrines inconsistent with the objects or
policy of the League. The relative
advantages and disadvantages of these two
methods are obvious enough. The former method will no doubt be more easily
accepted, but
the latter method will be wider and more
Sholl’s firm view, based in part on his experience in
industrial cases involving removal of communists from union positions
dismissal of employees for alleged communist affiliations, was that the Rules of
the RSL and its Branches should not be restricted
to the provision that
‘communists’ were to be ineligible for membership because such
provisions involved difficulties
of objective proof.
The first basis is to limit the exclusion to persons who are members of the
actual Communist Party or who profess doctrines deemed
by the League to be
similar to the doctrines of that Party. The second basis is to exclude persons
belonging to a party declared
by the League to profess doctrines inconsistent
Sholl, who was an accomplished lawyer with a keen eye for providing practical
legal advice, also detected serious defects in the purported
amendment of the
Federal Rules and suggested a series of amendments to cure those defects. He
concluded his comprehensive opinion
by urging the League to take steps to
ensure, if necessary, that the Constitutions and Rules of all other State
Branches provided
for the immediate operation of any Federal amendment
applicable to a given State Branch.Three weeks later, an opinion was provided
the Hobart lawyer, H S Baker,
the RSL Tasmanian Branch. Baker had read Sholl’s opinion and expressed
some technical disagreement with it, but he entirely
agreed with Sholl’s
view that the term ‘communism’ could be used in many different
senses and was thus vague and
uncertain. It was therefore important to have a
more objective test. The Federal Executive had passed the resolution
mature consideration’ and when the matter came before the
next RSL Congress ‘the need for further elucidation [was] likely
apparent’. His advice to the Tasmanian branch was that no action be taken
until the position had been cleared up by the
The Bergeest suit came
on for hearing before Mr Justice Bernard Sugerman in the Equity Court on 30 July
1948 and occupied several
days ending on 13 September 1948 when the judge
reserved his decision.
combination of talent on the bench and at the bar table ensured that the
controversy would be well tried and determined. Mr Justice
Sugerman, was
forty-four years old and had had a stellar academic and professional
The RSL was ill-disposed
towards Sugerman because it considered that in 1946, prior to his appointment to
the bench, he had engaged
in pro-communist
activities.
Both leading counsel
were outstanding members of the New South Wales Bar and were destined to join
Sugerman on the State’s
Supreme Court bench in the 1950s and on the Court
of Appeal after it was established in 1966. Martin Hardie, KC, who was forty-one
led for Bergeest, and
Gordon Wallace, KC, who was
forty-eight,
led for the RSL.The
defendant had filed an affidavit by William Charles
who was well on the
way to becoming one of Australia’s most resolute anti-communist agitators.
The affidavit was intended to
establish what were considered by its enemies to
be the CPA’s more important communist doctrines including unswerving
to the Soviet Union, its disloyalty to the British Commonwealth, and a
commitment to the forcible overthrow of the Australian system
of government. The
trial judge gave a ruling rejecting the tender of the Wentworth affidavit on the
basis that it was irrelevant
and that the hearing was not one in which expert
evidence had a role to play.
annual congress of the RSL New South Wales branch was conducted during the
hearing of Bergeest’s suit. Bergeest and his
supporters went on the
attack. Perhaps it was no more than a stunt, but the Eastern Metropolitan
District Council of the RSL, the
de facto ginger group to which Bergeest
belonged, unsuccessfully sought to have the Congress consider a resolution
banning known
communists, SP bookmakers, black-marketeers, estate agents, Labor
Party members, Liberal Party members, Country Party members, and
members of the
Japan-Australia Society in 1941.
At the Congress, Bolton ruled out of order sixteen items dealing with communism
because he had been advised that communism was
Bergeest’s protest that the item was
, the congress
endorsed the Federal Executive’s decision that communists should not be
members, but Bolton did not permit any
discussion of the endorsement motion.
Bergeest’s defeat was complete when it was announced that his candidature
as a continuing
Eastern Metropolitan delegate had been
unsuccessful.
The RSL Federal
Executive followed these decisions with a reaffirmation of an earlier decision
urging the Commonwealth and State
governments to outlaw the CPA and to exclude
communists from all public service
V Winning a Battle
On 14 October 1948, Sugerman J delivered his judgment upholding
Bergeest’s claim and granting an
injunction.
In summary, the
trial judge held that: • On the evidence, he did not consider that
Hardie’s submission that Bergeest
had a sufficient property interest to
enliven the court’s jurisdiction to grant injunctive relief was open to
serious contest.
However, since neither side had really pressed an argument with
respect to the issue, it was unnecessary to deal with the issue of
whether the
threatened expulsion involved an
ultra vires
use of the League’s
• Contrary to
Hardie’s argument, the Federal Executive resolution of 13 May 1948 was not
an attempt to bring about, by
its own operation and without the necessity for
any enquiry or further resolution, the mass expulsion of all present RSL members
who were, in fact,
‘communists’.
The resolution, then, is a direction to [the Branches and Sub-branches] - they
are not to permit communists to become or remain members
of the League. It does
make a new Rule by way of addition to the Federal Rules ... This new Rule is a
declaration of League policy
on a question of qualification [for membership]
plus a direction to ... the Branches and Sub-branches, to give effect to that
This, if I understand him correctly, is in substance Mr Wallace’s
submission, and I agree with
• The altered rule concerning membership qualification still left open
the question whether the power to give effect to the
new rule had to be sought
in some other existing rule or if the new rule itself granted to the Branches a
sufficient power of expulsion.
It was held that there was no implied grant of
the power of expulsion to give effect to the membership qualification direction
in the Federal Executive
resolution.
However, the
resolution did contain an implied direction to each Branch to take the necessary
power to expel, by appropriate amendment
of its rules, if it did not already
have the power. The New South Wales Branch had not thought fit to take further
power by altering
its rules. The State Branch was not competent to effect such
an amendment and, therefore, its resolution endorsing the Federal Executive
resolution had not, because it could not, confer the expulsion power. Whatever
was the effect of the Federal Executive resolution
so far as providing a basis
for the expulsion of ‘communists’, the resolution was not, on any
view, authority for the
expulsion of the class of persons referred to by the RSL
as ‘communist
sympathisers’;
• The power to expel communists was not conferred by RSL Federal Rule
5(n). In coming to this conclusion Sugerman J rejected
Hardie’s argument
that the word ‘communist’ was too vague and uncertain to be given
legal effect. Here there is
no substitute for having the judge speak
What is a ‘communist’? Mr Hardie has been good enough to furnish me
with extracts from a number of dictionaries of repute.
These are about equally
divided in defining ‘communist’ as, on the one hand, one who merely
believes in or adheres to
the doctrines and on the other hand, one who advocates
or practises those doctrines. I have no doubt that, like other words derived
from particular political or economic theories, the word is as applicable to the
mere believer or adherent as to the active practiser
or advocate. And it is
clear that some of the beliefs, doctrines, or practices which might lead to the
description of whoever believes
in or advocates or pursues them as a
‘communist’ have nothing whatever to do with the objects of the
League or the subversion
of those objects.
It has been strongly urged, more so perhaps in the argument on admissibility
than in the final argument, that a ‘communist’
really means a member
of the Communist Party and that discussion about the meaning of the word is, as
it was put, metaphysical. That,
no doubt, is a very common use of the word. If
that is all that the Federal Executive and the State Council meant, they might
easily have said so. But they did not, and I should be merely guessing if I
took the view that it is in that limited sense that the
word was used. And I
should almost certainly be guessing wrongly. What Mr Millhouse and other members
of the Federal Executive intended
to convey by the word ‘communist’
may, in strictness, be inadmissible on the question of construction. But it was
without objection. And it is plain from Mr Millhouse’s evidence
in relation to his press statement that he and at least one
other member
understood by ‘communist’, ‘All communists and
fellow-travellers, whether members of the Communist
Party or not’. That
evidence ... is a warning against hazarding a guess that the word in anything
less than its wide and general
meaning ...The problem in applying Rule 5(n) to
the word ‘communist’ was that the rule referred to those who were
and these were terms peculiarly inappropriate
the holding of a belief
and, if possible, even less appropriate to
sympathising with a belief
. Properly construed in accordance with
the basic dictates of the criminal law, Rule 5(n) could not inflict a penalty
upon what Professor
Kenny called ‘mere internal feeling’ which
‘had produced no result in external conduct’. Thus, a merely mental
condition – ‘Shakespeare’s “wicked meaning in a lawful
practically never made a crime.
Sugerman J noted that, in the United States, Charles Evans
had made the same point
in the following terms:
It is of the essence of the institutions of liberty that it must be recognized
that guilt is personal and cannot be attributed to
the holding of opinion in the
absence of overt
Sugerman J went on to make the following observation:
Furthermore the conduct of which guilt is required is ‘conduct unbecoming
a gentleman or subversive of the objects of the League’.
I have refrained,
because it is unnecessary for present purposes, from attempting the difficult
task of stating the various sorts
of conduct which might justify the attribution
of the term ‘communist’ or ‘communist sympathiser’. It
sufficient, and it is clear, that not all of them would amount to subversion
of the League’s objects. All this does not mean
that, if the draughtsmen
of this constitution had desired to make the holding or profession or practising
of certain doctrines a
ground for expulsion, they might not have done so by
appropriate provisions. But this is not what they have done. Indeed to some
extent they have done the opposite, for they have inserted safeguards against
membership of the League being conditional upon political
beliefs ...
If the true facts are that the plaintiff has been guilty of conduct unbecoming a
gentleman or subversive of the objects of the League,
there is no reason
whatever why that conduct should not be alleged and proved before the State
Council and the plaintiff expelled
from the defendant. The case would then fall
within Rule 5(n). However, to allege and prove that a man is a communist or
sympathiser is not, by itself, to allege or prove that he is guilty of
such conduct. And that is all that is alleged against the
plaintiff and it is on
that ground alone that power is claimed to expel him. To be a
‘communist’ or ‘communist
sympathiser’, on the one hand,
or to be a person guilty of conduct subversive of the objects of the League, on
the other, are
treated as mere equivalents. The simple point is that they are
not mere equivalents. One may. for instance, be a communist or communist
sympathiser and be guilty of no ‘conduct’ at all; what identifies
one as a communist or communist sympathiser is in this
case the mere holding of,
or sympathy with, certain views on economic or political questions. One may
indeed advocate, or even engage
in, certain practices which may be described as
‘communism’, such as the ownership in common of all property which
been practised by various societies of men from ancient times right down to
the present day, without in any way acting in a manner
subversive of any of the
objects of the League as I read them.
The defendant may be in a position to [prove], as it set out to prove before
this Court by evidence which was rejected as irrelevant
to the issues here, that
there are some persons properly designated as ‘communists’ whose
conduct could properly be described
as subversive of the objects of the League.
But by such proof, it would not establish that any other individual who is in
within the designation of ‘communist’ or ‘communist
sympathiser’ is guilty of such conduct. To establish
that it must show
that he, the individual, is thus guilty; it cannot impute to him the guilt of
[one] other merely because it is
possible to bring him within one of the
applications of the same general term, indicative of political or economic views
[or] practices,
as, in one of its applications, applies also to those
The defendant would not improve its position by showing that the individual is a
member of the same organization as those whose conduct
is subversive of the
League’s objects, that is without showing that the individual’s
conduct is also thus subversive.
Nor would it help that that organization be
shown to include amongst its aims and methods some which may be shown as to lead
encourage such conduct on the part of some of its members. I think it is
true to say ‘that under our traditions beliefs are
personal and not a
matter of mere association, and that men in adhering to a political party or
other organization notoriously do
not subscribe unqualifiedly to all of its
platforms or asserted principles’ (
Schneiderman v United States
per Murphy J for the Court).
rule providing for the expulsion of any member who is guilty of certain conduct
cannot be invoked against the whole of a class
as a class unless it can be shown
that membership of that class necessarily establishes guilt of that conduct in
every member. Nor
can it be invoked as against an individual, merely
member of a class, except on the same terms as to what must be shown in respect
of the class. Such a class would, I think, be a rare
phenomenon.I have dealt
somewhat fully with what I believe to be a very plain and simple point. But it
remains a plain and simple
point. It comes to no more than this: The defendant
is charged by the Federal Executive with the duty of expelling
‘communists’,
and, as it believes, ‘communist
sympathisers’ as well. Not merely such communists and such communist
sympathisers as
are guilty of conduct subversive of the objects of the League,
but all communists and all communist sympathisers. It looks around
for a power
under which to perform this duty and seizes on Federal Rule 5(n). It fails to
take into account that Rule 5(n) applies
to members guilty of conduct subversive
etc, whether communists or communist sympathisers or not, and not to communists
or communist
sympathisers, whether or not they are persons guilty of conduct
subversive etc. It fails to appreciate that, for the valid exercise
of the power
given by Federal Rule 5(n), it is necessary to allege and prove that the
individual member is guilty of conduct subversive
of the League’s objects
– that it is not sufficient merely to show that he entertains certain
opinions or sympathies,
to attach to him a certain label, or to fix him with
guilt by imputation from the guilt of others or by association with an
organization
having certain aims or methods.
• The procedure adopted by the defendant for dealing with the charge
of being a communist or a communist sympathiser was ambiguous,
unsatisfactory, and unfair.
• Bergeest’s suit
for an injunction was not
premature. Commenting on the decision, RSL State President Bolton was reported
as saying: ‘We don’t
want the swine and we are going to kick them
out legally’. The State President of the League of Ex-servicemen said that
decision would not stop his organization’s determination to bar
communists from membership.
week after the decision, the RSL National Congress endorsed the decision of the
Federal Executive in May 1948 to amend the national
constitution and directed
each State Branch to amend its constitution by insertion a prohibition on
communists. That was followed
by a federal executive resolution adding Rule
That each State Branch shall expel any person who is proved to the satisfaction
of the State Executive and/or State Council or State
Board to be a
Millhouse told the National Congress that the RSL was determined to stamp out
communism wherever it appeared in the League and that
the set back in the
Supreme Court of New South Wales could be overcome by an amendment to the
Constitution
to keep the communists out and that the same could be done in each
of the branches. The visceral quality of the prevailing anti-communist
was also given voice by the RSL South Australian State President and renowned
veteran of both world wars, A S Blackburn,
who told his fellow delegates that
the communists were ‘rats and should be treated as
Wallace advised the RSL to appeal. He considered that the suit should have
been dismissed on the sole ground that it was
As part of its public response to the RSL’s call for its prohibition,
the Communist Party of Australia sought to exploit its
(post-June 1941)
commitment to the overall war effort and the loyal service of those party
members who had signed on to fight in
the King’s uniform. In a pamphlet
distributed in 1948-1949 entitled
They Fought Facism: Now They’re
, the CPA argued that the RSL was relentlessly
attacking the labour movement instead of concentrating on the pressing needs of
ex-service members, and that it was hoping that fellow Australians would
‘forget that hundreds of Australian Communists paid
with their lives in
the fight for victory in World War
VI A Historic Decision?
It is suggested that Mr Justice Sugerman’s decision is noteworthy at
least for the following reasons.First, using the RSL rules
as a backdrop, it was
a concise and thorough articulation of the case that abstractions like
‘loyalty’, ‘disloyalty’
and ‘subversion’
could be easily and dangerously manipulated to ride roughshod over the rights of
individuals at a time
when fear of communism was being very actively promoted.
As such, the decision was a salutary call for calm, common sense, and elementary
fairness in a het-up political and social environment in which the accusation
that a person was a communist or a suspected communist
was very damaging since
it was taken to be the equivalent of a charge of necessarily being engaged in
conduct that posed an imminent
threat to the safety of the nation. Secondly, in
the absence of any constitutional protection of individual liberty of
conscience,
expression and association, and thus in the context of a case which
was not likely to rise beyond being a vehicle for abstruse arguments
interpretation of private contracts, constitutions, rules and by-laws, the
judge’s use of US materials, albeit only in
passing, was highly unusual.
Sugerman’s life as barrister and judge combined the daily concerns of real
life cases and a scholarly
interest in the law. Sugerman must have known about
the intensifying anti-communist crusade in the United States and the spirited
resistance that was being offered by a small group of lawyers before committees
in the United States Congress and in that nation's
courts. His use of John Lord
O'Brian's article ‘Loyalty Tests and Guilt by Association’ which had
been published only
a short time before in the
Harvard Law Review
demonstrates a sharp awareness of the fundamental nature of the issues which RSL
dissidents like Bergeest were pursuing. Thirdly,
the emphasis which Mr Justice
Sugerman placed on the need to make a clear distinction between, on the one
hand, merely
adhering to and advocating
, and, on the other
hand, actually
engaging in
which posed a real threat to
the survival of a free and open Australian society – a distinction which
was central in the practical
application of the First Amendment to the United
Constitution
– was proof enough that Sugerman's concern with the
philosophical bases of arguments about freedom of individual expression
firmly anchored in practical reality and elementary fairness.Finally, the
substantive outcome of the case made it abundantly
plain that at a time when
anti-communist hysteria was on the rise and was being fomented at a national
level and in a framework of
judicial decision-making which allowed judges to
make choices, Mr Justice Sugerman was disinclined to take some easy path of
interpretation and was true to his oath to do justice fearlessly. It
can probably be safely inferred that, if pressed about the matter,
would have said that he was doing no more than discharging his oath of office
conscientiously. True though that was, Sugerman’s
judgment can fairly be
labelled courageous given the prevailing atmosphere of hysteria and the
inclination of judges like Chief Justice
Herring and Mr Justice Simpson to
engage in overt partisan politicking.
VII Losing the War: ‘The Possibilities are
The RSL’s appeal against Mr Justice Sugerman’s decision came on
for hearing in the Full Court before Chief Justice
and Justices
On 2 March 1949, the
Full Court delivered its judgment unanimously allowing the appeal and dismissing
Bergeest’s suit.
features of the Full Court’s decision can be summarised as follows:
It was within the jurisdiction of the Council of the New South Wales Branch
to consider whether Bergeest had in its opinion been guilty
‘subversive to the objects of the League’, and if it found that he
had, to expel him upon a resolution to
that effect;
When, in May 1948, the RSL Federal Executive added to the Federal
Constitution
a provision that no communist would be permitted to become or
remain a member of the League, the New South Wales Branch Council defined
clearly the procedure to be adopted if a complaint was made to it that a member
was a reputed communist or communist sympathiser.
If a prima facie case was
established, the Council itself would proceed to take action under Rule 5(n) of
the Federal
Constitution
There was no evidence that the State Executive intended to do, or would have
done, at the meeting scheduled for 7 July 1948, more
than act in accordance with
the State Council resolution of 17 May, that is, consider whether the
complainant, Martin had, in its
opinion, discharged the onus of establishing a
prima facie case that Bergeest was a communist or communist sympathiser, and
its opinion on the subject to the State Council.
There was no evidence that the State Council, if it had received a report
that a prima facie case had been established, would have
treated the report as
determining anything except that the charge had sufficient substance in it to
warrant the Council in proceeding
to exercise the jurisdiction conferred on it
There was no evidence that if the State Council had decided to entertain a
proceeding against Bergeest under
it would not have given him ample
notice and ample opportunity to defend himself.
The Full Court took a narrow view of the issues presented, concluded that
Sugerman J had misconceived the issues, and perhaps gratuitously,
appeared to
administer a rebuke to him. In what was a complete vindication of
Wallace’s advice to his client, the Full Court
concluded that on the
evidence there was no evidence that the RSL was threatening to expel Bergeest
improperly and therefore his
suit was premature.
There is no evidence that the State Executive assumed jurisdiction to decide
whether the plaintiff should be expelled upon any ground,
and no evidence that
the State Council would have considered any communist activities that might be
proved against him before the
Council except for the purpose of exercising its
undoubted jurisdiction under
Regulation 5(n).
There is certainly no evidence
that the State Council ever contemplated doing – much less threatened or
intended to do –
what it has been restrained by injunction from doing,
that is, expelling the plaintiff on the ground that mere proof that he is a
communist or has communist sympathies would without more justify his expulsion
under Rule 5(n) of the Federal
Constitution
rules. The learned judge of first
instance evidently took the view that the defendant Branch treated ‘being
a communist or
a communist sympathiser’ as equivalent to ‘being
guilty of conduct subversive of the objects of the League’, and
failed to appreciate the fact that a person might have communist opinions or
sympathies and yet not be guilty of subversive
conduct. This led His Honour to
examine and discuss various meanings attributed to the word
‘communism’ in different
dictionaries, and to point out that a
person may be a communist in some of the senses there given although he merely
entertains certain
opinions without having any intention of attempting to carry
them into effect by any means legal or illegal. With all respect, this
did not arise for His Honour’s determination. If it had, it may with
deference be suggested that more light might
have been gained as to what the
League and its Branches had in mind when reference was made to
‘communists’, by considering
the National Security (Subversive
Associations) Regulations made in the year 1940, of which the third under the
rubric ‘Subversive
Associations,’ provided that ‘Any body
corporate or unincorporate, the existence of which the Governor-General, by
published in the Gazette declares to be in his opinion prejudicial to the
defence of the Commonwealth or the effective prosecution
of the law, is hereby
declared to be unlawful,’ and the fourth provided that any body in respect
of which such a declaration
was made should by force of the declaration be
After the passage of nearly sixty years, that excerpt might be thought to be
somewhat cryptic or, if not, then innocuous. However,
when regard is had to the
Cold War context in which it was crafted, it is scarcely a strained reading to
suggest that the Full Court
was saying that the communist leopard did not change
its spots and that, therefore, whatever might have been the situation between
the German invasion of the Soviet Union in mid-1941 and the end of the Second
World War in mid-1945, the CPA was to be regarded as
an organisation that could
justifiably be outlawed (as it had been between 1940 and early 1942). According
to the Full Court, there
was no reason to suppose that anything adverse to
Bergeest was imminent. Lapsing into hyperbole, the Full Court asserted that
possibilities are infinite’.
The Federal Executive may report that in its opinion the charge is devoid of
foundation and that no prima facie case has been made
which could justify
proceedings by the Council under Rule 5(n). Or it may, for example, report that
he had become a member of a body
whose actual purpose was to advocate disruptive
communist principles and methods, but that he had been led to do so because he
ignorant of its real nature and misled by its name and the philanthropy of
its ostensible objects, and that as soon as he became
aware of its real nature
he withdrew from it. Or it may report that a prima facie case has been made out
that not only is he a member
of a communist group which advocates the
destruction of the economic structure of Australia by fomenting industrial
unrest, and the
exploitation of resultant discontent by overthrowing the present
system of government in Australia by illegal violence, but that
he also takes an
active part in promoting and actuating the objects of the group. There is an
infinite variety of possibilities,
and the form of its report will no doubt
depend upon the material placed before it. There is nothing to suggest that the
State Council
will not act reasonably and properly in the light of any report
which it receives from the State Executive whatever that report may
be, or will
not make its decisions for
It followed that neither the injunction which was granted, nor any other form
of injunction, was warranted by the material placed
before the Court. Given the
background of the RSL’s iron determination to weed out communists from its
ranks, the Full Court’s
approach had an accentuated air of artificiality
then wide-ranging. Viewed differently – say, by a non-lawyer
– in the context of the mounting clamour for decisive government
against the ‘red menace’, it was a near certainty that the official
RSL apparatus would crush any internal opposition.
But, of course, that is not
the way courts operate. They are disinclined to take judicial notice of
‘notorious’ facts.
They act only on admissible evidence. Proving
that an event is imminent may be inherently difficult. Thus, in that highly
sense, the Full Court was, arguably, correct in holding that
Bergeest’s action premature. By March 1949, the Cold War
progressed to a heightened state of tension. The Soviet blockade of Berlin was
continuing. The Chinese communist forces led by
Mao Tse-tung were massing in the
final moves of the civil war against the Nationalist government of Chiang
Kai-chek. On the domestic
front, there was mounting pressure on the Chifley
Government to ban the CPA. It resisted all such pressures, but it did
successfully
prosecute the General Secretary of the CPA, L L Sharkey, for
sedition for pro-Soviet remarks.
A member of the CPA state executive in Western Australia, Kevin Healy, was
unsuccessfully prosecuted for sedition when he endorsed
his party’s
national leader. In February 1949, Prime Minister Chifley had succumbed to
unrelenting pressure applied by the
US and British Governments and had set up
the Australian Security Intelligence Organization (ASIO) pursuant to a secret
administrative
directive.In late April 1949, the Western Australia Branch of the
RSL issued a statement recording the League’s determination
tolerate communism within the Australian community, but counselling against
unlawful disruption of CPA meetings and assemblies
and ‘taking the law
into our own hands’.
July 1949, Chief Justice Herring addressed the annual conference of the
Victorian Branch of the RSL and said that the national
coal strike which had
commenced on 16 June was a wicked business. It could, he told the delegates, be
of satisfaction only to those
whose aim was to cause disruption. Nevertheless,
the coal strike was playing a real part in unmasking the communist to the man in
the street who was now beginning to realise the worldwide implications of
As soldiers we dealt with a foreign foe in the war. We will have to do the same
thing again by dealing with the foreign theory in
peace. We are either for or
against. We have to be prepared to do a bit of acting as well as
The Bergeest case had been concerned with threatened expulsion. By clarifying
the nature of the expulsion power, the Full Court decision
had effectively
cleared the way for expulsions in New South Wales, but the dispute within the
RSL was not yet over. The litigation
continued with several expelled members
claiming that the expulsion power had been exercised
improperly.
The charge against
Bergeest was heard and he was expelled. He brought a second successful suit on
the basis that the rules of natural
justice had not been
Two other expulsions
were also successfully challenged on natural justice
On 31 July 1949, a
resolution was passed by the New South Wales State Council expelling Arthur
Thomas Gietzelt (who was himself a
member of the Council) in reliance on rule
5(n). Gietzelt applied for an injunction to prevent the RSL from treating him as
been expelled. On 16 September 1949, Mr Justice Roper, the Chief Judge in
Equity, made an order continuing until the trial of the
suit an interlocutory
injunction which he had granted on 9
However, in doing do,
Mr Justice Roper held that federal rule 5(n) gave the RSL abundant power to
expel on the ground that a member
was a communist and he indicated that being a
communist could also be deemed to be conduct subversive of the RSL’s
and even a wilful infringement of its rules and by-laws. The judge
continued the injunction because he considered that there was
an arguable case
that the RSL had failed to accord Gietzelt natural justice in the hearing of the
Also on 31 July 1949, a
resolution was passed by the NSW State Council expelling another State
Councillor, Charles Davidson, on the
basis that he was guilty of being a
communist and such conduct was subversive to the objects, rules and by-laws of
the RSL. He unsuccessfully
challenged the expulsion on natural justice
Commencing on 4 August
1949, the RSL State Branches began an all-out national propaganda drive against
communism. The main purpose
of the RSL’s ‘Anti-Communist
Month’ was to educate the Australian public as to the dangers of a
disloyal organization.
element of this propaganda campaign was a scripted radio feature on the topic:
‘Shall We Abandon Australia?’ involving
two persons discussing the
perils of communism. Some commercial radio stations supported by the Federation
of Australian Commercial
Broadcasting Stations declined to broadcast the
feature. The RSL approached the Australian Broadcasting Control Board seeking to
obtain a ruling that the League’s ‘Shall We Abandon
Australia?’ radio feature did not contravene s 89(3) of the
Broadcasting Act
1942 (Cth) which prohibited the broadcasting of
‘any dramatization of any political matter which is then current or was
at any time during the last preceding five years’. In a decision
which outraged the RSL and caused it to complain bitterly
to the government of R
G Menzies which had come to power following the election conducted on 10
December 1949, the Board refused
to make the requested
conferred with Sholl KC in Melbourne in October 1949 and discussed the
desirability of amending the League’s
Federal and State Constitutions to
ensure that they provided adequately for procedural fairness in expulsion cases
and gave advice
(in which Sholl concurred) as to how litigation could be avoided
in the future. Wallace also suggested that it was advisable in future
‘to have an experienced barrister present for the purpose of giving legal
advice to the Chairman and Councillors should
Bergeest was again
expelled in early January 1950 with eleven other members including his
solicitor, Harold Rich. Arthur Gietzelt,
who like Bergeest and Rich had direct
personal links with CPA members, was expelled later that
Throughout 1949 and 1950,
the newly-established ASIO was keeping a close eye on the anti-communist
struggle within the RSL and on
1 July 1950 an ASIO officer, relying on ‘a
reliable source’, forwarded to his superior a seven-page report on
in the RSL setting out in detail communist infiltration of the League
which was said to have commenced when Bergeest became a member
The Bergeest and
related cases were inherently limited. The chief focus was on the interpretation
of the RSL rules. The controllers
of the RSL were in a position to alter the
rules to remove any ambiguity and to prescribe procedure. In the end, in the
entrenched legal protection of the right of expression and
association, the RSL was inevitably going to purge its ranks of dissenters
legally. So the willingness of Mr Justice Sugerman to approach the resolution of
the interpretation issues thrown up by the disputed
expulsions merits
approbation. We will probably never know the full extent of the private
anti-communist activities of the RSL and
its allies in the Cold War years and
the tangible effect these activities had on dissenters real and imagined. The
RSL sustained
its overt campaign against Australian communism until after the
CPA was a spent force in Australian politics.
Arthur Gietzelt, who was subjected to ASIO surveillance throughout the 1950s
and 1960s, was first elected to the Senate as an ALP
candidate in
In what may be seen as a
supreme irony, he was Minister for Veterans’ Affairs in the first and
second Hawke Governments (1983-1987).
And he was re-admitted to membership of
VIII A Historiographical Postscript: Unreported
Law reporting plays a central role in recording the evolution of the legal
system. In the past, unreported decisions have been easily
lost. In an age of
electronic information storage and dissemination, there is a greatly enlarged
and more systematic archiving of
case law. Five decades previously, the failure
to report a case might have led to the irretrievable loss of historic data.
the decision at first instance nor the Full Court decision in the
Bergeest case was reported. This was not all that surprising because
the central
issue of the case was such a relatively narrow one. The Full Court found error
in Mr Justice Sugerman’s decision
in a way that did not involve any issue
of principle. It was not, it seems, considered to be a reportable case. In any
the Full Court decision was to be reported, it would have been
necessary to report the trial judge's decision since, without the
decision, the Full Court decision would reveal little about how Mr Justice
Sugerman’s decision was formulated.The secondary
accounts of the Bergeest
and related cases, chiefly in newspapers, have survived. But we have the RSL to
thank for the survival of
the texts of the decisions of Mr Justice Sugerman and
the Full Court, and the later decisions. These long forgotten unreported cases
are useful reminders of the intensity of the domestic Cold War and of the mixed
record of the judicial branch in protecting the rights
of individuals whose only
activity was to express highly unpopular political ideas and who were thus
exposed to invidious discrimination.
LLB (Melb), LLM (ANU)
of the Victorian Bar. To a large extent, this article relies on items to be
found in the RSL Collection (MS
6609) in the National Library of Australia. The
author acknowledges with gratitude the permission given to him by the RSL
access to be had to that collection. Thanks are also due to Les Louis
who kindly provided a copy of an early draft of his seminal
(see n 15 below), to Harold Rich for making time in 1992 to give the
author the benefit of his first-hand recollections of anti-communist
in Australia in the early Cold War years, and to this Journal’s two
anonymous referees for their very useful comments
and suggestions.
At the time when the events
described in this article occurred, the name of the organization was the
Returned Sailors, Soldiers
and Airmen's Imperial League of Australia. Its name
was shortened to Returned Services League of Australia in 1965 and, with the
dwindling number of returned service personnel, to the Returned and Services
League of Australia in 1990. The abbreviations ‘RSL’
League’ are used throughout this article. For histories of the RSL, see G
L Kristianson,
The Politics of Patriotism: The Pressure Group Activities of
the Returned Servicemen's League
(1966) and P Sekuless and J Rees,
Lest We Forget: The History of the Returned Services League 1916-1986
(1986). The cases narrated in this article are not considered by Kristianson;
see also S Gregson, ‘Foot Soldiers for Capitalism:
The Influence of RSL
Racism on Interwar Industrial Relations in Kalgoorlie and Broken Hill’
(PhD Thesis, University of NSW,
http://www.rsl.org.au
http://members.optusnet.com.au/~griff52/Gregson/a%20
Title% 20&%20contents.pdf
Kristianson, above n 1, 86. One
of its achievements was the enactment of the state
Servicemen’s Preference Acts
and the Commonwealth
Re-establishment
and Employment Act
The Illawarra District County Council v
(1959) 101 CLR 467;
Butler v Victoria
(1961) 106 CLR 268. Its
political influence also extended to securing enduring legislative protection
against the unauthorized use
or possession of its membership badges:
Servicemen’s Badges Act
1995 (Qld);
Returned Services Badges
Returned Servicemen’s Badges Act
1956 (Vic);
Returned Servicemen’s Badges Act
C Lloyd and J Rees,
The Last Shilling: A History of Repatriation in Australia
(1994). On 11
November 1945, the League conducted a Festival of Empire and Remembrance at the
Melbourne Town Hall which was broadcast
by ABC radio. One segment of this
elaborately staged patriotic ceremonial event was a presentation,
The Flags of the Nations
. It commenced with the
Anzac with Union Jack and Britannia flags and was followed by the flags of
England, Scotland, Northern Ireland,
Wales and the Isle of Man. Only then was
the Australian flag presented: RSL,
Festival Programme
, Rare Book
Collection, Matheson Library, Monash University. The recent debate about an
Australian republic stirred the League’s
remnant imperial pride:
(official journal of Melbourne RSL sub-branch), December 1991
On the private or
clandestine anti-communist crusade, see M Cathcart,
Defending the National
Tuckshop: Australia’s Secret Army Intrigue of 1931
(1988); A Moore,
The Secret Army and the Premier: Paramilitary Organizations in New South
Wales 1930-1932
(1989); A Moore,
The Right Road: A History of Right-Wing
Politics in Australia
(1995); see also R Evans,
The Red Flag Riots: A
Study of Intolerance
(1988). On the early history of the CPA, see S
Reds: The Communist Party of Australia: From Origins to
For a sample of the
literature on the origins and early years of the Cold War, see F J Harbutt,
The Iron Curtain: Churchill, America, and the Origins of the Cold War
(1986); J L Gaddis,
The Long Peace: Inquiries into the History of the Cold
(1987); H Thomas,
Armed Truce: The Beginnings of the Cold War
M Dockrill,
The Cold War 1945-1963
M P Leffler,
Preponderance of Power: National Security, the Truman
Administration and the Cold War
(1992); V Mastny,
The Cold War and Soviet
Insecurity: The Stalin Years
(1996); L J Louis,
Menzies’ Cold War:
A Reinterpretation
(2001); J L Gaddis,
The Cold War: A New History
For a detailed
treatment, see the author’s
Tales of the Overt and the
Covert: Judges and Politics in Early Cold War Australia
All-Out for the People’s War: Communist Soldiers in the
Australian Army in the Second World War’ (October 1995) 10
See eg RSL (WA
Branch), Statement on Communism, 27
April 1949, RSL Collection.
Bergeest v The
Returned Sailors, Soldiers and Airmen's Imperial League of Australia (NSW
(unreported, Sugerman J, 14 October 1948) (‘Bergeest
Judgment’);
Gietzelt v The Returned Sailors, Soldiers and Airmen's
Imperial League of Australia
(unreported, Roper CJ in Equity, 16 September
Davidson v The Returned Sailors, Soldiers and Airmen's Imperial League
of Australia
(unreported, Roper CJ in Equity, 23 September 1949 and 18
November 1949). Copies of the judgments are to be found in NLA MS 6609.
was at least one related case involving an organization similar to the RSL:
Griffiths v League of Ex-Servicemen and Women
(unreported, Sugerman J, 14
October 1948), copy in the author
s possession;
Morning Herald
, 15 October 1948. For a running commentary on how the CPA
viewed the RSL’s mounting anti-communist exertions in 1948 and of
mobilization within particular RSL branches in New South Wales, see
, 19 May 1948, 9, 19, 23, 26 June 1948, 7, 21 July 1948, 11, 21,
25, 28 August 1948, 18 December 1948.
Francis Plumley
Derham (1885)-(1957); 13
Aust Dict of Biog
618; (1957) 31
235. Derham had served in both wars. In the Great War, he had been awarded
the DSO in 1916 for service as an artillery commander on
the Western Front, had
been awarded the
Croix de Guerre
, and was several times mentioned in
despatches: see also
http://www.ww2roll.gov.au/script/veteran.asp?ServiceID=A&VeteranID=515755.
Letter, Derham to
Neagle, 10 September 1946, RSL Collection. Derham’s letter contains a
typographical error. It mistakenly refers
to rule 5(i) instead of rule 5(n).
The New South
Wales State Branch Rules contained a power to
a member guilty of
bad citizenship or of conduct subversive to the objects of the Branch.
‘The RSL and the Cold War 1946-50’ (May
The Sydney Morning Herald
, 10 September 1948; see
, 27 and 29 July 1946 and 29 August 1946. An internal RSL appeal
against the Victorian ban was withdrawn:
, 14 September 1946.
One of the League’s most prominent members in Queensland was Frederick
Woolnough Paterson (1897-1977).
Paterson, a member of the Queensland Bar, who
had been elected to the Queensland Parliament in 1944 (and re-elected in 1947)
endorsed CPA candidate. In May 1948, Paterson was expelled from the RSL
for ‘bad citizenship’ and for ‘having actively
participated in
demonstrations which tended to embarrass the (Queensland) government’:
, 15 and 29 May 1948; 2 June 1948; R Fitzgerald,
People’s Champion: Fred Paterson
Australia’s Only Communist Party MP
(1997) 204. According to the
CPA, in early 1948 the Victorian RSL Council also decided to impose a membership
ban on communists,
but backed off in the face of a threat of legal action:
, 22 May 1948, 14 August 1948.
Louis, above n 15,
Circular Letter,
RSL (NSW Branch), 24 May 1948, RSL Collection.
Kristianson, above
n 1, 88-89. At the hearing before Sugerman J dealt with below, there was a
dispute concerning the precise terms
of the Federal Executive resolution. Some
of the evidence suggested that the important prefatory words
That the following clause be added to the Federal
Constitution
Rules and By-Laws
may not have been part of the resolution
passed by the Federal Executive. Had such evidence been accepted, it would have
the defendant
s case entirely. The trial judge had no
hesitation finding that the prefatory words were a part of the resolution:
Bergeest Judgment,
above n 10, 6-7.
Circular Letter,
above n 17. The New South Wales Branch was incorporated pursuant to the
Returned Sailors and Soldiers Imperial League of Australia (NSW Branch)
Incorporation Act
1935-1941 (NSW).
Circular Letter,
above n 17.
Born in 1898,
Bergeest had served in the army in the Great War. He had been subjected to
security service surveillance since about
1944: NAA A6126, Item 619.
National Archives
of Australia (NAA), [ASIO Personal files: alpha-numeric series], Arthur Thomas
Gietzelt, Vol 1 (1950-1962), A6119,
Louis, above n 15,
In the late 1940s
and early 1950s, Harold Rich played a prominent role as solicitor for the CPA
cause: see eg
Sharkey v R
[1949] HCA 46
(1949) 79 CLR 121
Australian Communist
Party v The Commonwealth
[1951] HCA 5
(1951) 83 CLR 1
; Information supplied by Harold
Letter, Rich to
State Secretary, 26 June 1948, RSL Collection. Through Rich, Bergeest urged the
State Branch to take disciplinary
action against Martin
breach of the Rules of both the Federal and State Constitutions of the [RSL]
requiring neutrality in matters political
, RSL Collection.
Bergeest Judgment,
above n 10, 12.
Letter, Bolton to
Millhouse, 6 July 1948. Ibid. Bergeest was a member of the Paddington-Woollahra
Sub-Branch. Marx House was the CPA’s
headquarters in Sydney. The
Commonwealth Government executed search warrants there on 8 July 1949 in what
was one of the most dramatic
public anti-communist exertions of the Chifley
Government: NAA A432, Item 1949/816; SP 1714/1, Item N54743; C1070, Item
T Sheridan,
Division of Labour: Industrial Relations in the Chifley Years
See, for example,
the feature articles by the anonymous ‘Special Correspondent’
‘How Communist Party Plans Revolution’,
The Sydney Morning
, 17 July 1948, and ‘How Communism is Infiltrating Cultural
Organisations,
The Sydney Morning Herald
, 24 August 1948.
Morning Herald
, 5 July 1948.
See the piece
cited in n 6.
The Canberra
, 15 September 1948;
, 15 September 1948.
[1949] HCA 45
(1949) 79 CLR 101.
The CPA General Secretary was also charged with
and convicted of sedition:
Sharkey v R
[1949] HCA 46
(1949) 79 CLR 121
text below at n 80.
Letter, Neagle to
Chifley, 18 November 1948 Letter, Chifley to Neagle, 8 December 1948, RSL
Collection; NAA, [Prime Minister’s
Dept, correspondence files], A461/1,
Item A349/4/1. The RSL kept up the pressure after the change of government in
1949, but the
Menzies Government rebuffed the League in its attempts to prevent
Australian communists from attending peace conferences in communist
Letter, Holt to Neagle, 20 January 1952, RSL Collection.
Sekuless and Rees,
above n 1, 114-116.
Bergeest Judgment,
above n 10, 13; The adjournment was granted by Maxwell J (see below n 77)
Sydney Morning Herald
, 8 July 1948;
The Canberra Times
, 8 July 1948;
, 10 July 1948.
Reginald Richard
Sholl (1902)-(1988). Judge of the Supreme Court of Victoria (1950)-(1965). Sholl
had served in the Army in 1940-1944.
In 1949, he appeared as senior counsel
assisting the Victorian Royal Commission into the aims, objects and funds of the
CPA in Victoria.
His appointment to the bench was attacked by the CPA and this
led to contempt of court proceedings:
[1950] VicLawRp 17
[1950] VLR 226
[1949] VicLawRp 56
[1950] VLR 78
; V Rastrick, ‘The Victorian Royal Commission
on Communism, 1949-1950: A Study of Anti-Communism in Australia’ MA
1973, ANU; [1950] VLR vii; see also
http://www.ww2roll.gov.au/script/veteran.asp?ServiceID=A&VeteranID=513083
Opinion, ‘Re
RSSAILA and Communists’, 19 July 1948, RSL Collection.
A search of the
archives of the Supreme Court of New South Wales some years ago at the
author’s behest, failed to locate the
court file in either the Bergeest or
Davidson cases.
Opinion, above n
39. State Rule 23(b) expressly limited the power of alteration of the
Constitution
to the State Congress upon eight weeks’ written notice. Sholl
went on in his written opinion to indicate that, if his assessment
strength of Bergeest’s case was correct, the only ground upon which the
RSL might still successfully defend the action
was that, applying the decision
of the High Court in
Cameron v Hogan
[1934] HCA 24
(1934) 51 CLR 358
, Bergeest had no
proprietary right or interest enforceable by an injunction.
Opinion, above n
Henry Seymour
Baker (1890)-(1968). Baker had been awarded the DSO for bravery in France in
September 1918: 13
Aust Dict of Biog
Letter, Baker to
State Secretary (Tas), 11 August 1948, RSL Collection.
Morning Herald
, 14 September 1948. For the CPA’s account of the case,
, 3, 10, 24 July 1948, 4 August 1948, 15 September 1948.
Bernard Sugerman
(1904)-(1976); Foundation Editor,
Australian Law Journal
, 1927-1946;
Commonwealth Law Reports
, 1942-1946; Editor in Chief,
Australian Digest
, 1934-1939; Judge of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales (1947)-(1970); President, Court of Appeal (NSW) (1970)-(1972); (1946) 20
16; (1970) 44
144; (1972) 46
481. Sugerman had
been appointed a Judge of the Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration
in 1946 and had resigned the following
year to accept the New South Wales
appointment: 16
Aust Dict of Biog
342. In a tribute by his editorial
successor at the
Australian Law Journal
, J G Starke, it was said of
Sugerman that it was ‘not an exaggeration to claim that [as a judge] he
was rarely in error, or
to maintain that he will probably be regarded as one of
the greatest of Australian judges. He was a Cardozo-type of judge, inclined
be self-effacing, yet none the less bearing the mark of the great lawyer in all
that he did or wrote while on the bench’:
Blackshield, M Coper and G Williams,
The Oxford Companion to the High Court
of Australia
(2001) 26, 598, 615-616, 661. There is nothing in the Sugerman
Papers (MLMSS 3304) in the Mitchell Library dealing with the 1948-1949
Information supplied by the Mitchell Library.
NAA A6119, Item
381. In 1946, Sugerman had attended a meeting referred to in W C
Wentworth’s affidavit (text at n 51 below)
and had delivered a paper at
The Canberra Times
, 4 August 1948.
Martin Francis
Hardie (1907-1974);
; (1955) 29
370; R Else-Mitchell, ‘Tribute to the Late Mr Justice
Martin Hardie, Judge of Appeal, New South Wales’
In his tribute, Mr Justice Else-Mitchell remarked that ‘in 1950 [Hardie]
was seriously considered by the State Government for
appointment as Chief
Justice but his youth was an obstacle as he was then only forty-three years of
his detailed knowledge of every
branch of the law and of each jurisdiction was equal, if not superior, to those
of many Judges who
had specialized exclusively in one jurisdiction during their
judicial careers’:
Gordon Wallace
(1900-1987); Judge of the Supreme Court of New South Wales (1960)-(1966);
President, Court of Appeal (NSW) (1966)-(1970);
Wallace was a graduate of the
Royal Military College Duntroon, enlisted in 1942, attained the rank of
Lieutenant Colonel, and saw
war service in New Guinea; (1960) 33
; A Blackshield, M Coper and G Williams, above n 47, 26.
Wallace had been advising the New South Wales RSL on the expulsion issue
it arose in 1946: Louis, above n 15, 89; see also
http://www.ww2roll.gov.au/script/veteran.asp?ServiceID=A&VeteranID=219858
It appears that Wallace had advised the RSL in 1947 that neither the federal or
state rules authorized expulsion of a class of members
merely because such a
class belonged to the Communist Party. His opinion had been read out by Bolton
at the 1947 RSL congress:
, 15 May 1948.
(1907)-(2003); see
the obituary,
The Sydney Morning Herald
, 17 June 2003.
Gordon Wallace KC,
Opinion, 20 October 1948, RSL Collection. I have been unable to locate a copy of
this ruling. See
The Sydney Morning Herald
, 31 July 1948, 4 August 1948;
The Canberra Times
, 4 August 1948. Wallace had, it seems, informed the
trial judge that his client was proposing to appeal against the ruling:
, 4 and 7 August 1948.
Morning Herald
, 5 August 1948.
Morning Herald
, 19 August 1948.
Morning Herald
, 21 August 1948.
Morning Herald
, 27 August 1948.
Judgment, above n 10.
The judge referred
Maunsell v Midland Great Western (Ireland) Railway Co
[1863] EngR 752
(1863) 1 H&M
Stevens v Keogh
[1946] HCA 16
(1946) 72 CLR 1
[1948] NSWStRp 30
(1948) 65 WN (NSW) 190.
Bergeest Judgment,
above n 10, 18.
Bergeest Judgment, above n
Ibid, 20-21 relying on
Dawkins v Antrobus
[1881] UKLawRpCh 28
(1879) 17 Ch D 615
Kelly v National Society of
Operative Printers and Assistants
(1915) 31 TLR 632
Webster v The Bread
Carters Union of NSW
[1930] NSWStRp 44
(1930) 30 SR (NSW) 267.
Bergeest Judgment, above n
Why then to-night
Let us assay our plot; which, if it speed,
Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed,
And lawful meaning in a lawful act,
Where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact:
But let’s about it’
All’s Well that Ends Well
III, sc vii.
In the copy of the judgment
located in the RSL Collection, Mr Justice Sugerman refers to the ‘1th
) of Kenny. It seems likely that this was a typographical
slip and that it was meant to refer to C S Kenny,
Outlines of Criminal
(15th ed, revised by G G Phillips, 1936) 40.
Charles Evans Hughes
(1862)-(1948): Governor of New York (1906)-(1910), Associate Justice of the US
Supreme Court (1910)-(1916),
unsuccessful Republican presidential candidate
(1916); Secretary of State in the Harding and Coolidge Administrations
(1921)-(1925);
Member, Permanent Court of Arbitration, The Hague (1926)-(1930);
Chief Justice of the United States (1930)-(1941).
Cited in J L O’Brian,
‘Loyalty Tests and Guilt by Association’
, 594. Hughes had uttered these words in 1920 as a participant in a historic
debate in the Great Hall of the Association of the Bar
of the City of New York
when he had opposed a resolution which would have approved the action of the New
York State Assembly in suspending,
without a hearing and pending a trial, five
of its members who had been elected on a socialist ticket and had taken their
office: O’Brian, above 593.
[1943] USSC 144
at 136 (1943);
see W Schneiderman,
Dissent on Trial: The Story of a Political Life
Bergeest Judgment, above n
Because he fears.
The Sydney Morning
, 16 October 1948.
Louis, above n 15, 91.
The Sydney Morning
, 23 October 1948. Arthur Seaforth Blackburn (1892)-(1960) had won the
Victoria Cross for most conspicuous bravery at Pozieres in
1916, had served in
the Second World War, and had been taken prisoner by the Japanese on Java.
Between 1947 and 1955, he served as
a Conciliation Commissioner of the
Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration; 7
Aust Dict of Biog
307: see also
http://www.ww2roll.gov.au/script/
veteran.asp?ServiceID=A&VeteranID=700192
Opinion, 20 October 1948,
RSL Collection.
Rare Book Collection,
Matheson Library, Monash University.
Frederick Richard Jordan
(1881)-(1949); Chief Justice of New South Wales (1934)-(1949);
Aust Dict of
522; (1934) 7
355; (1949) 66 WN (NSW) iii; Blackshield,
Coper and Williams, above n 47, 25, 163, 283, 306, 713.
Kenneth Whistler Street
(1890)-(1972); Judge of the Supreme Court of New South Wales (1931)-(1950);
Chief Justice (1950)-(1959);
Aust Dict of Biog
332; (1950) 23
500; (1959) 33
Allan Victor Maxwell
(1887)-(1975); Judge of the Supreme Court of New South Wales (1934)-(1955);
Aust Dict of Biog
335; (1955) 72 WN (NSW)
Bergeest v The Returned
Sailors, Soldiers and Airmen's Imperial League of Australia (NSW Branch)
(unreported, 2 March 1949); NAA A6126, Item 619.
Ibid, 12-13.
Ibid, 14-15. The wartime
ban on the CPA was not removed until 18 December 1942.
Sharkey v R
[1949] HCA 46
79 CLR 121.
Statement on Communism,
above n 9. On a number of occasions in early 1949, CPA public meetings were
violently broken up by anti-communist
protesters.
Speech to the Victorian
RSL, Herring Papers, Box 37;
, 28 July 1948. Herring was true
to his words. In July 1950, immediately following the North Korean invasion of
South Korea, he took
leave from his judicial duties to become Director General
of Recruiting. He returned to his judicial duties in August 1951: [1950]
vii. The bald assertion that the exigencies of the Cold War necessarily meant
that Australians had to be either ‘for or
against’ communism was
deeply embedded in the dissenting judgment of that other staunch
behind-the-scenes anti-communist judicial
agitator, Latham CJ in
Communist Party v The Commonwealth
[1951] HCA 5
(1951) 83 CLR 1.
Louis, above n 15,
I have not located a copy
of this decision.
Louis, above, n 15.
Daily Telegraph
, 11 January 1950. At the time, the Supreme Court was more
inclined to review the conduct of private/voluntary organizations on
administrative
law grounds than superior courts in later decades.
Gietzelt v The Returned
Sailors, Soldiers and Airmen's Imperial League of Australia (NSW Branch)
(unreported, 16 September 1948), RSL Collection. In mid-1949, William Yeo
(1896-1972) was elected New South Wales President of the
League and became a
member of the national executive. He declared that he was committed to the
policy of keeping communists out of
the League, but in ‘a sane and
reasonable manner’. It is a measure of the intensity of feeling at the
time that Yeo who
was to prove as zealous an official anti-communist as the RSL
was to contain, was seen by supporters of the 1948-1949 purge as being
with Bergeest
: Report, Communism in the RSL, 1950, NAA A6119, Item
Aust Dict of Biog
Ibid. Wallace, Opinion, 3
November 1949, RSL Collection.
On 23 September 1949, Roper
CJ in Equity dissolved an injunction he had earlier granted to the plaintiff:
Davidson v The Returned Sailors, Soldiers and Airmen's Imperial League of
(unreported) RSL Collection. Later that year, the same judge
refused a fresh application for an interlocutory injunction:
Davidson v The
Returned Sailors, Soldiers and Airmen's Imperial League of Australia
(unreported, 18 November 1949) RSL Collection.
Letter, RSL General
Secretary to Prime Minister R G Menzies, 20 December 1949, RSL Collection.
Letter, Fanning to Bailey,
15 August 1949; Letter, Bailey to Fanning, 2 September 1949, NAA, A432/1, Item
1949/279; Letter, Neagle
to Menzies, 20 December 1949: Letter, Menzies to
Neagle, 9 June 1950, RSL Collection.
Wallace, Opinion, above n
Louis, above n 15;
Courier Mail
(Brisbane), 11 January 1950;
(Adelaide), 11
January 1950. Bergeest was made bankrupt on the petition of the RSL:
Sydney Morning Herald
, 9 February 1951;
, 8 February
From the terms of the
report, it seems likely that the informant (and author of the report) was
Vincent J Brady of the law firm,
Vincent J Brady, Donald & Co, which
represented the RSL in the Supreme Court litigation: NAA A6119, Item 381, ff
, 16 October 1948.
NAA A6119, Items 381, 1721
Sekuless and Jones, above n
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (335 KB)
PDF format (987 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter