URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JCULawRw/2024/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:07:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jarro, Nathan --- "An Aboriginal Perspective (From the Bench)" [2024] JCULawRw 2; (2024) 30 James Cook University Law Review 1
An Aboriginal Perspective (from the Bench)
The Mayo Lecture for 2024
27 September 2024
Judge Nathan Jarro
I Acknowledgements
Budabai duru
ngya Bidjara/Ghungalou mardi
Nyila dana.
ngiya nhandhigu Wulgurukaba Bindal
ngudya ngiya gumba Wulgurukaba Bindal Country
maringa nhandhigu.
Translation:
I am a Bidjara/Ghungalou man.
Bidjara is on my Mother’s side. Ghungalou on my Father’s
Today I stand on the country of Wulgurukaba and Bindal and I pay my
respects to (them and their Elders for their continuing connection
to the lands,
waterways and culture).
Stephen Urquhart, thank you very much for that kind introduction. Who would
have thought that we meet again after so many years. For
those of you
don’t know, Stephen and I attended primary school together in the Brisbane
suburb of Ashgrove. We lost contact
with each other when we moved to high
I thank all of you (including those who have joined remotely) for your
attendance this evening (even though it is a Friday night and
I’m sure you
have far more enjoyable things to do, especially tomorrow’s AFL grand
final between the Lions and the Swans
or tonight’s 7:50 NRL kick off for
the Storm and Roosters preliminary final. I suspect had the Sharks not beaten
the Cowboys
last week, there would be less of you here tonight.
I am humbled by your attendance and having been bestowed the honour by James
Cook University of delivering an annual lecture in tribute
of Mrs Marylyn Mayo.
I have big shoes to fill, and I can tell you now that my imposter syndrome is
well and truly kicking in, because these annual lectures,
given their prominence
in the JCU calendar, have been delivered by significant legal luminaries,
including: Dr Bryan Keon-Cohen KC,
a plethora of superior court justices,
academics, former attorneys-general and other silks.
The organisers have extended a broad invitation to present on a topic of my
choice, with the aim to inspire the next generation of
law students.
Before doing so, it is important that we take a moment to reflect on the
common thread which brings us here tonight and that is to
recognise the person
in whose honour this lecture is named.
Mrs Marylyn Mayo sadly passed away in 2002. Unfortunately, I did not have the
privilege of meeting this wonderful lady, so I did a
short internet search. Mrs
Mayo has several lectures and scholarships named in her honour, one of which is
Established in 1991 by the JCU Law Students Society, the Mayo lecture pays
homage to Mrs Mayo, JCU's foundational law staff member,
and serves as a
testament to her pioneering efforts in establishing the full law degree at
In 1960, the then Marylyn Mason graduated in Law and Arts from the University
of Auckland. She was one of a small group of female
law graduates. After being
admitted as a solicitor and barrister in the Supreme Court of New Zealand, she
worked in private practice
until 1969 before moving to Townsville. It was not
long after she began lecturing in law at the then Townsville University College
(which later became James Cook University), that she met her husband Dr John
Mayo, who was then a lecturer in economics. They married
As a woman in a predominately male academic field, she was an inspirational
mentor for many, especially women in North Queensland.
In 1989, she realised her
dream of establishing a full law degree at James Cook University and acted as
Dean until 1990, after which
she continued lecturing. She held the post of
deputy Dean until 1993. In addition to lecturing, she published articles and
at conferences. She retired from academic life in 1996.
Mrs Mayo was the Chair of the Townsville Hospital Ethics Committee and also
served on various university committees, including the
University Council
itself, Academic Board and Promotions Committee.
Whilst a simple internet search can divulge a person’s achievements, I
wanted to know more about this intriguing lady because,
as I said, I never had
the privilege, unfortunately, of meeting her. I wanted to know who Mrs Mayo was
to the people who knew her.
Therefore, if I may, can I just share with you some
insights given by those people who knew her well:
(a) For instance, Justice Crowley met Mrs Mayo, when his Honour was then a
first-year law student of this university. His Honour said
that Mrs Mayo showed
the students the methodology for case analysis using the acronym
‘FIRAC’ – Facts, Issues,
Rules, Application and Conclusion
– which his Honour said he still uses today. His Honour remembered fondly
enthusiasm and the energetic instruction, saying that she was a
formidable woman and a great teacher. Always clear and comprehensive
tutelage. Always immaculately dressed and presented. And always projecting an
energy and passion for the law that inspired
her students.
(b) Mr Michael Drew of counsel (affectionately known as Swampy Drew), once
leader of the Townsville Bar, who was a student of Mrs
Mayo and tutored at JCU
for a period of time, has said that Mrs Mayo could be described as vivacious,
attractive in personality and
presentation, ‘sharp as a tack’ and an
artiste of the one word riposte to any brash male student (in the 1960s and
who vainly attempted to put her down in tutorials and lectures!! She was
admired and loved by her students!
(c) She had an amazing poise, great confidence and a true understanding of
the fundamental principles of the law, bringing alive to
callow North Queensland
youths the concept of the Rule of Law, the separate roles of common law rules
and legislation, the legal
philosophies of Montesque, Jeremy Bentham and JS Mill
and the world-changing thought of Wilberforce. Mr Drew said that Mrs Mayo truly
shone in explaining the development of the law of torts through its stages in
developing the law of negligence, starting with the
late 19th century English
cases which culminated in the 1932 House of Lords decision in
(d) He said some have characterised Marylyn Mayo as being someone in the
early vanguard of womens’ rights. She was so inclined,
but only to the
extent that she led by example. She felt that men and women should advance on
their own merits and neither be held
back, nor advanced on the sole basis of
gender. She supported equality and never felt any discrimination toward herself.
As I said, this remarkable woman is the common thread which brings us here
tonight and I am delighted to present this year’s
annual lecture.
II Introduction
Before presenting my paper, can I share with you a little bit about my
background into the law.
My family’s history is not that uncommon to many Aboriginal families in
that my grandparents on both sides were removed from
their traditional lands and
relocated on someone else’s traditional lands.
My mother’s land is Bidjara which is the Carnarvon Gorge area in
Central Queensland and Dad’s country essentially adjoins
his people are Gangulu, which is in the Dawson Valley in Central Queensland
(near Blackwater). My totems are the
owl and the emu.
My father grew up in Woorabinda which is an Aboriginal community located a
couple of hours south-west of Rockhampton. My mother is
originally from Ayr but
grew up in Inala (a suburb in Brisbane with a high Indigenous population) after
my grandfather died shortly
after his war service.
Dad’s dad, my grandfather, was removed from his birth lands of
Springsure and relocated to Woorabinda. He, like my grandparents
mother’s side, lived in a time when their lives were controlled by the
State government, where the government used its
legal power to remove them from
their families and country.
My grandmother on my mother’s side was born in the Gorge at Carnarvon
on a riverbank. She lived with her family in a humpy until
the age of 3, when
she and her four siblings (at the time) were transported on the back of a cattle
truck some 8 hours away to Cherbourg
which is near Murgon. Her schooling was in
a tin shed on the Cherbourg mission. Her classes were segregated into light and
skinned children because the lighter skinned kids were thought to be more
able than the darker skinned ones.
The Superintendent ran the reserves, settlements and missions. The people
lived on the missions, settlements and reserves as if they
were in prison. Many
were in a constant state of starvation. They were given only small quantities of
rations and given their movement
across the land was restricted, many people
could not hunt or bring in the food on which their families traditionally lived.
The authorities did not educate my Nan after grade 4 but, according to her,
she had a very happy childhood up until the age of 14,
when a trooper knocked on
the door at my great-grandparent’s place and said for her to get ready for
the train in the morning
because she’s going to work in Charleville. Of
course, you can imagine the horror packing up and getting my grandmother ready,
and she didn’t know what was happening. So, by the age of 14, she was
directed to leave Cherbourg, still as a non-citizen of
her country, and required
to go out and work as a domestic. She worked in places such as Charleville in
the 30s where she was required
to work from dawn until night cleaning, cooking
and caring for children. Her wages were controlled by the Chief Protector. She
a pittance of what she earned. She never spoke of, and she wouldn’t
speak about, the injustices that she received or the treatment
that was meted
out to her on those cattle stations.
Because she was under the control of the Chief Protector, neither she, nor my
great-grandparents Grannie Holt and Grandfather Holt
were given warning about
where she would work. She had to get permission to return back to Cherbourg to
see them. She even had to
get permission to attend funerals or Christmases. Her
permission to return was often declined (which at times caused her significant
distress in missing family events).
My mum’s dad, whom I never met, was an only child. By contrast to my
Nan, he had an idyllic childhood in Ayr, where his family
somehow escaped the
harsh Queensland government treatment of First Nations peoples.
He was Birri Gubba Juri, from North Queensland.
His father (my great-grandfather) was in the army in WW1 and my grandfather
fought in WWII. They, like other Indigenous serviceman
and women, fought for a
country that discriminated against them.
He was a POW of the Japanese in Singapore and spent much of the war on the
notorious Burma-Thailand Railway. He died from war-related
illnesses shortly
after his return from war and did not live to see the right to vote, which
happened some 15 years after his return.
I know this information directly through my Nan on my mother’s side and
my granddad on my father’s side. I was old enough
(I’m talking when
I was in my early 20s) to hear of their lived experiences. It was certainly a
different, harsher and more
punitive time, than the blissful life I have been
lucky to receive.
My parents met in their late teens and married when they were 19. In fact,
they celebrated their 50
wedding anniversary earlier this month. My
father wanted to remain in Woorabinda; however, Mum didn’t want that. So,
they settled
in Brisbane together.
My parents produced three boys. We are Brisbane-born and bred. My parents
gave us a private school education (without any government
handouts) through a
Catholic school in Brisbane. Whilst I am certainly what is known as an urbanised
Murri, I can assure you that
my brothers and I have strong family and cultural
links to Rockhampton, Woorabinda, Cherbourg and Carnarvon. We know who we are
where we come from.
I have had a very good life (thanks to my parents); and that has stemmed from
their decision to settle in Brisbane; not in Woorabinda.
My life would have been
so different if they had decided to remain in Woorabinda.
Now the fortunes that I have been blessed with have not passed to some of my
cousins. Let me tell you about one. She is my age. She
is already a grandmother.
She is my dad’s niece and has lived in Woorabinda and Rockhampton. She
lost her father to alcoholism
when she was 14. She completed year 8 at Wadja
Wadja State High School, which is the high school in Woorabinda. Her mother died
few years later. She has four children to four separate fathers, one of those
children committed suicide; all were in the care of
the Department of Child
Safety from very young ages until they turned 18.
Our father’s brothers (with the exception of my father) and one of our
aunties have all died of alcohol-related illnesses (all
in their 40s).
My cousin has a small criminal history comprised of public nuisance offences
and has spent time in prison. A number of my male cousins
however have committed
far more serious crimes than her, many of whom have done long stints in prison.
She and I are the same mob. We have had different opportunities which have
led to clearly different lives. It just goes to show how
a loving home with
supportive parents who love, cloth, nurture and feed you, and give you an
education can lead to different outcomes.
As I said, my cousin has been to prison. She is not the only one. Many of my
mob have been and, indeed, some are currently in prison.
They are the ones who, even to this day, are discriminated against on a daily
basis. People look down at them; people avoid them;
society frowns at them.
Where many of my Indigenous brothers and sisters are today, is a product of
their upbringing, and nobody in this audience needs to
be told that historically
relations between Indigenous Australians and various manifestations of the Law
– whether it be Police,
Governments, Courts, or indeed the legal
profession altogether, have been far from ideal. Regrettably and all too
frequently, Aboriginal
peoples and Torres Strait Islanders have not fared very
well at all in these various interactions. It is something we all need to
improve upon.
As I said, I have had a very good life (thanks to my parents); and that has
stemmed from their decision to settle in Brisbane; not
in Woorabinda. My life
would have been so much different if they decided to remain in Woorabinda.
After completing high school, I went to QUT to study law. I graduated. My
results were not stellar, but I was lucky enough to be an
associate to the late
Justice Moynihan AO. Among Justice Moynihan’s many achievements, the judge
was involved in the Mabo findings
of fact. My associateship with the judge was a
fantastic experience because I saw a brilliant man in action, and met many
friends, including one of my mentors, the late John Griffin KC. Like my
judge, Griffo was a generous man.
I completed my articles at Gilshenan and Luton and practiced as a solicitor
for 2 years in health litigation – acting for doctors
and hospitals before
going to the Bar at the age of 26. I squatted in Griffo’s chambers for
close to 12 months. That gave me
a good grounding to embark upon my career at
the Bar. I had a civil practice at the Bar. I enjoyed being at the Bar –
the challenge of working for yourself and being in an environment where
you had to rely on your skills and talent, otherwise you
would not get work or
make a living.
I spent 14 years at the Bar which I enjoyed until I expressed an interest to
become a District Court judge.
For those of you who don’t know, the District Court deals with serious
criminal offences such as rape, armed robbery and fraud.
The court deals with
civil disputes involving amounts between $150,000 and $750,000 and also hears
appeals from the Magistrates Court.
III To-night’s Lecture
Tonight’s lecture is called ‘An Aboriginal perspective from the
Bench’. It goes without saying that I feel extremely
privileged to be a
judge, and an Indigenous one at that. Since joining the bench, I have been
fortunate to have witnessed three Indigenous
superior court appointments,
starting with Justice Crowley in May 2022, followed closely by Justice Michael
Lundberg in WA in November
2022 and Justice Louise Taylor in the ACT in July
We are part of a growing cohort who share at least two common traits –
we are Indigenous, and we occupy positions of influence.
There are now, on my
count, 18 Indigenous people who sit in various judicial posts across this
When each of us took an oath or affirmation to judicial office, we promised
to do our jobs without fear, favour or affection. As judges,
we are required to
be independent and impartial.
So, I am not going to be controversial tonight (because that is best left to
the lawyers, advocates, politicians and the media who
perhaps do not have the
same constraints as judges). I hope not to offend or give the impression of bias
or preference towards one
group of Australians. I just simply want to share with
you some of my observations over the last few years, as a circuit judge to
places like Townsville, Mount Isa, and, to a lesser extent, Cairns, where the
Indigenous population is more obvious than that of
South-East Queensland.
One memory that stayed with me longer than usual was when I circuited to Mt
Isa last year. I expected to see many Indigenous defendants
appear in court,
given the observably higher population rate of Indigenous people. Given the
population numbers, I also assumed there
would be some Indigenous faces in the
jury pool for empanelment purposes. I was surprised.
Four trials were conducted during the two-week circuit. The trials involved
defendants who were charged with alcohol-related offending
(whether that was
choking, rapes or serious assaults). The four trials involved four separate
complainants, all of whom were Indigenous
females and three out of the four
defendants tried were Indigenous.
Out of a jury pool of around 60, I observed no more than two people who I
thought to be Indigenous. In the random jury selection process,
no Indigenous
person was empanelled.
I am not saying that to be critical or to have a black arm-band view about
things, but I just wanted to give you some factual context
like to talk about this evening.
So, for the first time in my judicial career, in those sittings in Mt Isa,
there was an Indigenous complainant, an Indigenous defendant
(save for the one
non-Indigenous person tried), an Indigenous judge and a non-Indigenous jury,
together with the lawyers.
Relevantly that meant in those criminal trials, non-Indigenous juries
determined the guilt of the Indigenous defendants.
I invite you to pause for a moment and think about the Indigenous defendant,
sitting in the dock, being tried before an all-white
jury. Is that really
reflective of the notion of being tried by your peers? Do you think these
Indigenous defendants are receiving
a fair trial? We all know justice is
presumed to be blind, and, we are all equal before the law, but using this
scenario even on
this one occasion (if you already haven’t considered it
before), and put yourself in the shoes of any one of those Aboriginal
and ask yourself whether you would be comfortable in having 12 people, who are
non-Indigenous, determine your guilt or
innocence. Of course, being a defendant
on trial would be uncomfortable for any person, but the uncomfortableness, in
having 12 complete
strangers determine your fate, is unnecessarily heightened
because of your Aboriginality.
As trial judges and lawyers, it is easy for us to forget about cases and move
onto the next, but there are some cases that stay longer
in your memory, and you
can’t unsee certain things. That was one that I was unable to unsee.
Of course, an Indigenous person being tried before an all-white jury is not a
novel concept. Indeed, challenges have been made about
this in the past. For
instance, in
R v Buzzacott
[2004] ACTSC 89
(2004) 154 ACTR 37
, an Aboriginal applicant,
who was charged with stealing a bronze coat of arms outside Parliament House for
the Aboriginal Tent Embassy
in Canberra, asserted, amongst other things, that he
could only have a fair trial if the jury panel were to comprise Aboriginal
The application was dismissed by Connolly J who observed that the right
to trial by a jury of one’s peers does not mean that
an accused person may
demand that the jury panel be comprised solely of persons of a particular
racial, ethnic, social or gender
group. His Honour stated that it would be
entirely inappropriate, and indeed unlawful, to make directions so as to ensure
a particular
racial or ethnic composition of the jury panel.
I am sure HH was right and, as I said earlier, I do not plan to be
controversial or offend. So let’s flip the facts in
my Mt Isa trials.
Our country’s first Indigenous silk, Queensland born, Sydney based, Dr
Tony McAvoy SC, was in Alice Springs in late 2022 when
a white police officer
was on trial for the murder of Kumanjayi Walker. In his foreword to a report
which I intend on speaking about
shortly, Dr McAvoy observed as follows:
Senior Constable Zachary Rolfe had been charged with the murder of a
19-year-old Aboriginal man in his home in the very remote Northern
community of Yuendumu. ...
That trial was conducted before a jury that did not include a single
Aboriginal person. That fact attracted some media attention when
the jury was
sworn in and a lot more attention when a not guilty verdict was returned. For my
own part, there can be no justification
that permits a First Nations person in
the Northern Territory to be tried before an all-white jury. First Nations
people make up
approximately one third of the Northern Territory population.
The analysis that occurred during and after the verdict in Rolfe turned to
Juries Act 1962
(NT) and the
Juries Regulation 1983
provides that jurors may only be drawn from the relevant jury district, and
limited jury districts to the suburbs of Darwin
and the Alice Springs, both
areas in which Aboriginal people are grossly outnumbered by non-Aboriginal
There are many knots in the Australian justice system which must be
untangled, and ensuring representation of Aboriginal people on
the juries, and
benches, as the arbiters of fact, is a large knot.
Like the trial in Rolfe, let’s move closer to where we are meeting
tonight, and that involved the Queensland trial of Senior
Sergeant Hurley who
was charged with manslaughter and assault following the death of 36-year-old
Indigenous man, Mulrunji Doomadgee
in a police cell on 19 November 2004 at Palm
Island. A coroner and an independent inquiry found that Hurley caused the death
45 minutes after his arrest, Mulrunji died with a cleaved liver, broken
ribs, a ruptured portal vein and a haemorrhaging pancreas.
The Palm Island
community said they had little faith in the system when an all-white jury was
empanelled. Their prediction was true
when Hurley was, of course, acquitted.
The issue of Indigenous jury representation has been discussed by law reform
bodies in the past. For example, in a 1986 Australian
Law Reform Commission
Report called ‘Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws’, it was
The Commission has received no evidence to justify the conclusion that jury
trials involving Aborigines are, in any way regular or
recurring way, biased or
otherwise unsatisfactory.
In the same report the Commission commented that to deny an Aboriginal person
the right to trial by jury would be discriminatory.
Where there was a risk of
prejudice, an application could be made for a judge-alone trial or for a change
in venue for the trial
(which may itself affect the make-up of the jury).
Such was the case in
Wotton v DPP (Qld)
[2006] QDC 202
Aboriginal man Mr Wotton had been charged with riotous damage and arson on
Palm Island. He applied to have the trial venue
changed from Townsville to
Brisbane. One principal ground was that a survey conducted in Townsville showed
that a large proportion
of those surveyed had personally experienced anti-social
behaviour involving Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander persons, almost
persons remembered the incident well, over a third remembered the identity of Mr
Wotton and over a fifth regarded him as one
of the persons criminally
responsible for the damage and arson caused on the Island. The survey revealed
some people would not put
aside their prejudices against Mr Wotton, even if
directed to do so by a judge. Approximately half indicated they were unsure or
did not believe that they would be able to follow such a direction.
It was held by Skoien ACJ that the highly adverse publicity in Townsville had
created a risk of prejudice to Mr Wotton, notwithstanding
that a trial
judge would give proper directions to the jury such that the trial be held in
The issue of Indigenous jury representation has gathered publicity in more
recent times.
Last month, former Supreme Court judge, the Hon Roslyn Atkinson AO, when
delivering a lecture to the Seldon Society on ‘Juries
– Their Place
in Democracy’, observed that ‘if juries are meant to be members of
the community who are peers of
the defendant, then it is critical that First
Nations people are also fairly represented on juries.’ She said,
‘the legitimacy
of our criminal justice system may be said to depend on
She drew on her experiences presiding over criminal trials of Indigenous
defendants at which none of their cultural peers was present
on the jury.
Unfortunately, Ms Atkinson’s observations, however, have been the subject
of some critical commentary by certain
sections of the community and media, but
I consider she is well positioned to make comment as a retired judge with
demonstrated credentials,
and perhaps those who have criticised have
misinterpreted or misunderstood what she really said.
As I said I do not intend to be controversial. I am merely observing that in
my travels, particularly whilst doing circuit work, it
got me thinking about
Indigenous defendants being tried by all-white juries and why it
case that there are not a lot of (if any) Indigenous jurors engaged in the jury
The principal source of what I am about to share with you is derived from the
Australasian Institute of Judicial Administration (’AIJA’)
‘The Australian Jury in Black & White – Barriers to
Indigenous Jury Representation’
. The report was published in June
2023. It is my intention to discuss the report and to avoid proffering a
personal view.
Drawn from multiple sources (including existing literature, law reform
reports, statistics, case law and legislation), the report
is comprehensive, and
examines the role and experiences of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people within Australia’s
jury system.
Relevantly for Queensland purposes, it considered, among other things, the
2011 Queensland Law Reform Commission report
‘A Review of Jury
where the Law Reform Commission interviewed serving jurors
in Brisbane and found that no juror self-identified as Indigenous. Those
findings were supported by ‘anecdotal feedback’ from the Queensland
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Service
(ATSILS) that there is
‘[n]ext to no Indigenous Australian representation on juries involving
Indigenous defendants
Across Australia, all states and territories have their own individual jury
legislation. In Queensland, juries are governed by the
Jury Act 1995
(Qld), previously the
Jury Act 1929.
Women became eligible for jury service 100 years ago. Queensland was the most
progressive state in the country in permitting the inclusion
of women, but the
inclusion of women was initially met with significant resistance and was
strongly opposed. For instance, male MPs
questioned whether those women who were
willing to serve were only ‘sticky-beaks’ and whether women jurors
referred to as ‘juresses’. It is safe to say though that
our jury system did not come crashing down simply by permitting
participate in the jury process. Whilst women became eligible for jury service
100 years ago, it was not until the 1960s
when Indigenous people were given the
same right.
The lack of Indigenous Australians representation on juries is closely linked
to Australia’s colonial roots. As acknowledged
by Dr McAvoy SC,
‘First Nations disenfranchisement from the jury system is not new, nor
is it disconnected from Australia’s colonial DNA
’. The AIJA
report observes:
There are undoubtedly pervasive social, economic, cultural and attitudinal
reasons why Indigenous Australians are under-represented
in civic and political
institutions. Typically, these reasons are borne out of the impact of
colonisation and marginalisation.
Our colonial history has deeply impacted our Indigenous communities, forging
long-standing policies of discrimination and exclusion
which has, not
surprisingly, informed Indigenous communities’ interactions with the legal
system. Early laws explicitly barred
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples from the colonial identity. It needs to be borne in mind that Indigenous
Australians
were specifically denied the right to vote in 1902 when the
Commonwealth granted the right to vote to people ages 21 and over. It
be for another 60 years until the right to vote was extended to Indigenous
Australians in 1962, and mandatory enrolment
was only introduced in 1983. That
means that only 41 years ago did Indigenous Australians, once voting was made
compulsory, become
able to serve as jurors.
It is in the context of the disadvantages faced by Indigenous Australians
within our colonial narrative that I would like to identify
the principal
reasons why Indigenous Australians are excluded from juries, despite past legal
reforms which have slowly opened the
doors to limited Indigenous
participation.
There are many reasons why a significant number of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples will not end up serving on a jury
– there could be
socio-economic factors, geographic and logistical challenges, legal and
procedural obstacles, or indeed cultural
or institutional barriers.
The AIJA Report has observed that their research ‘
suggests that the
system has (at worst) actively operated against the inclusion of Indigenous
Australians on juries and (at best)
failed to adapt to facilitate their
. It identified what it described as ‘pressure
points’ that appear to
disadvantage Indigenous people, namely:
(a) non-inclusion on electoral and jury rolls;
(b) exclusion from jury rolls due to disqualification;
(c) peremptory challenges; and
(d) excusal and other forms of self-elimination.
I will speak briefly about each of these matters before highlighting
potential models to improve participation amongst the Indigenous
population.
IV Non-inclusion on the Electoral Roll and Jury Roll
To be included on the jury roll, potential jurors need to be on the electoral
roll. It therefore follows that if you are not on the
electoral roll, you will
not be a potential juror. As such, non-enrolment on the electoral roll is a
factor affecting Indigenous
Australian participation in the eligible jury pool.
The Australian Electoral Commission has published Indigenous enrolment rates
from June 2017. I am pleased to say the figures from
Queensland are not bad. As
at that date (being 30 June 2017), the estimated enrolment rate for Indigenous
Queenslanders was sitting
around 70%. By 30 June 2023, that figure has
encouragingly increased to 95.3%. The data also reveals in broad terms that of
million Queenslanders enrolled to vote, 150,000 are Murris (ie,
Indigenous people from Queensland). So therefore 4% of the total
There is a tad over 7,000 Murris (ie Indigenous people from Queensland) who
are unenrolled; the numbers are small, but they are so
As I said, Queensland is in a better position than the other states and
territories but remember the figures I have just mentioned
are the people who
are enrolled to vote. Being enrolled to vote does not necessarily equate to
inclusion on the jury roll. Nonetheless
it is trite to observe the importance of
ensuring that potential jurors are correctly enrolled on electoral rolls as that
will contribute
towards improving eligibility status, irrespective of cultural
background.
Jury Districts
All states and territories are divided into what is referred to as jury
It is the imposition of what is known as jury districts which impact
predominantly on Indigenous Australians, including in Queensland,
because jury
districts form the basis of jury rolls. Remember what Dr McAvoy observed earlier
when referencing the Rolfe trial:
The analysis that occurred during and after the verdict in Rolfe turned to
Juries Act 1962
(NT) and the
Juries Regulation 1983
provides that jurors may only be drawn from the relevant jury district, and
limited jury districts to the suburbs of Darwin
and the Alice Springs, both
areas in which Aboriginal people are grossly outnumbered by non-Aboriginal
Let me give you a case illustration regarding jury districts. In an
unreported 1973 decision of
, a South Australian
Supreme Court judge ruled that the sheriff had made no attempt to exclude
Aboriginal persons who were qualified
to serve as jurors when calling the jury.
That was a case where the defendant, who was a member of the Pitjantjatjara
community in
South Australia, made a challenge that the jury had no Aboriginal
members at all. The defendant called several Aboriginal persons
who asserted
that they never had been called for jury service, nor did they know of any
Aboriginal person who had been called for
jury service. Yet contrary evidence
was given by the sheriff that Aboriginal persons had in fact been summonsed,
which the judge
preferred to accept and dismissed the application.
In Queensland,
Jury Regulation 2017
provides for jury
districts. Generally, jury districts fall within a 15-25 km radius of
courthouses, where the court is constituted
to sit. Here in Townsville, for
example, the jury district falls within a 25km radius of the courthouse.
The point is that if you are not within, say, a 20km radius ‘at which
the District Court is constituted and held’, your
name (assuming you have
passed the first hurdle and you are on the electoral roll) will not be included
onto the jury roll. Therefore,
as you can see, citizens who live beyond the jury
district boundaries are not summonsed for jury service, and consequently are
from the jury roll.
You therefore might accept the proposition that for First Nation Australians,
many of whom do not live in the CBD or live in remote
regions outside of jury
district boundaries, are excluded from jury service, causing
under-representations on juries within their
relevant district.
Binge v Bennett
(1989) 42 A Crim R 93
, Justice Smart commented:
The lack of Aboriginals on both jury panels and juries is to be greatly
regretted. The present system of making up jury panels does
not of itself
discriminate against Aboriginals. However, it is a system which, because of
their education, lifestyle and attitudes,
does not readily encompass them.
That was a case which concerned an application by Mr Binge and 15 other
Indigenous people from Toomelah/Boggabilla to quash an extradition
order imposed
by a magistrate in the Local Court at Moree to return them to Goondiwindi to
face a charge of riot said to have caused
extensive damage, which followed from
serious ill-treatment of an Aboriginal boy in Goondiwindi the previous day. The
application
came before a single judge in the Supreme Court in Sydney in late
November 1987. The primary judge gave his decision, ordering that
the applicants
be returned to Queensland for trial. The decision was appealed. The NSW Court of
Appeal upheld the appeal and ordered
a rehearing before a different judge.
In the rehearing, the applicants claimed that it would be ‘unjust or
oppressive’ for them to be returned to Queensland,
on the ground, among
other things, that the events giving rise to the charges had sparked extensive
adverse press coverage in local,
State and national newspapers. That publicity
included strong adverse statements attributed to the Premier of Queensland and
government ministers and much of it related to Aboriginal people. The
statements attacked Aboriginals from New South Wales and views
were expressed
that the offenders should be made an example of and gaoled. Further, a local
teacher detailed the racial prejudice
within the community and said that white
children would sometimes speak of their preferred weekend sport as ‘nigger
or a local Uniting Church Minister often heard young Goondiwindi
men call out to Aboriginal girls who were shopping words to the
‘There are the black shits’. The young girls moved on quickly and
did not reply.
Justice Smart considered that the adverse publicity had been ‘so
extensive and so virulent as to make a fair trial in Goondiwindi
impossible’ and that, in all of the circumstances, it would be
‘unjust and oppressive’ to return the
Indigenous applicants to
Queensland.
That matter took close
to two years to conclude.
Another reason related to jury districts that affects numbers of Indigenous
Australians on juries is that of non-response to jury
summons. A non-response to
a jury summons can occur for many reasons, including a change of address,
non-delivery of the summons
and from receipt but no response to the summons.
While the report notes that it ‘
do[es] not have figures on the rates
of, or reasons for, non-responses to the jury
, it concluded
that that non-response to summons is ‘
an issue that has been identified
as one that may specifically impact Indigenous Australians’
recommended appropriate investigations be launched to consider this issue in
more detail.
V Removal from Jury Rolls – Disqualification and
Exclusions/Exemptions
Turning now to removal from jury rolls.
In Queensland under the
, jury composition is achieved by
selecting jurors at random from those members of the community who are eligible
to serve on juries.
Like other states and territories, and also federally, part of our system in
Queensland involves the exclusion of various groups from
the jury pool. The
legislation provides for the removal of certain summonsed people from the
selection jury process. For example,
Governors, judicial officers, lawyers,
people employed by the ODPP, Police Service etc).
Exclusion Also Applies to Citizens with a Criminal History.
Whilst it is accepted that the exclusion of people with criminal histories
reflects the view that juries should be impartial, it is
this exclusionary
category that affects Indigenous Australians most disproportionately.
In Australia, typically disqualification from the jury rolls applies to a
with a certain criminal history, either serving their sentence,
or within a certain number of years of obtaining a criminal
disqualification based on criminal history applies in all Australian
across the states and
territories. All jurisdictions, except Queensland, scale according to the
seriousness of the criminal offence
as measured by its sanction. For example,
New South Wales provides for increments of 3 years, 7 years, 10 years and life
disqualification.
Hunter J; Crittenden S, 2023, The Australian jury in
black and white: Barriers to Indigenous Representation on
juries, Australasian
Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, Sydney,
http://dx.doi.org/10.26190/unsworks/28690
Whilst all jurisdictions provide for life bans, Queensland stands out in that
any person who has been convicted of an indictable offence
or who has been
sentenced to imprisonment is
permanently
disqualified from jury service.
There is no provision for such a person to become eligible again after a certain
period has elapsed
after being convicted or completing the term of imprisonment;
nor is a minimum sentence length required to trigger ineligibility.
The practical effect of this is that relatively minor breaches of the law can
trigger the provision and thus result in a lifetime
ban from jury participation.
For example, ‘
public order offences such as assaulting, resisting, or
wilfully obstructing ‘a police officer while acting in the execution
the officer’s duty, or any person acting in aid of a police officer while
indictable offences under the
Criminal Code
(Qld) and consequently all
result in a life disqualification from the jury roll.
As a result of the higher rates of incarceration, First Nations Australians
are statistically more likely than non-Indigenous Australians
to be disqualified
from jury participation for a major period of their adult life, or their entire
adult life. In Queensland, it
is for the entire adult life. A quick search of
Indigenous Queensland prisoners for the financial year ended 30 June 2023,
10,226 persons.
The 2011 QLRC Report criticised the current exclusionary jury provisions in
Queensland. As noted in the AIJA Report, the QLRC has
recommended ‘
recognition of the principles of offender rehabilitation and non-discrimination,
and the desirability of maintaining representative
juries, that the
disqualification be limited to convictions made on indictment, excluding those
determined summarily
other words, minor offences should not be part of the exclusionary practice and
Criminal Law (Rehabilitation of Offenders) Act 1986
(Qld) apply
to criminal convictions, otherwise disqualifying a potential juror. These
recommendations have not been adopted to date.
By way of case illustration in relation to criminal records, in
[2010] NTSC 69
, two Indigenous defendants were charged with
murder. Evidence was adduced that of the 350 people selected for jury service,
the total were disqualified due to their criminal records. So, you can
imagine how many Indigenous ones (if any) were left standing.
VI Elimination from the Jury: Challenges, Excusal and
Self-Eliminations
Another key reason why Indigenous Australians do not end up serving on a jury
is due to challenges, excusals and self-eliminations.
Part of the empanelment process involves the use of peremptory challenges
both by defence and the Crown. The right to peremptory challenges
personal to the accused. Depending on the jurisdiction, the number of peremptory
challenges per defendant varies. Peremptory
challenges are different from a
prosecution’s right to ‘stand by’.
Hunter J; Crittenden S, 2023, The Australian jury in
black and white: Barriers to Indigenous Representation on
juries, Australasian
Institute of Judicial Administration Inc, Sydney,
http://dx.doi.org/10.26190/unsworks/28690
In Australia, Victoria, Western Australia, New South Wales and South
Australia have the lowest number of peremptory challenges (limiting
availability to 3 per defendant), with other jurisdictions having 6 or 8
peremptory challenges per defendant, or more, subject
to the number of
defendants. In Queensland, prosecution and defence are each entitled to 8.
The AIJA Report discusses several cases that highlight the misuse of
peremptory challenges against Indigenous Australians in the 21
In the 2004 case of
R v Badenoch
a defendant unsuccessfully
‘objected to the composition of the panel [from] which [the jury] was to
be chosen as he, an Aboriginal
Australian, had not observed anyone that he
identified as an Indigenous person in it’ despite the trial being
conducted in
a location where it is ‘well known that many persons of
Indigenous origin resided.’
It was in Mildura, Victoria. In dismissing the challenge to the array of a white
jury, the court held that lack of Indigenous representation
did not inhibit a
fair trial for the applicant, and that selection based on ‘some ethnic or
other discriminatory criteria’
would have ‘terrible
consequences’ for fair
The decision was upheld
on appeal by the Victorian Court of
A similar challenge was raised in the 2010 Northern Territory case of
Woods & William
, the court held that ‘an accused person is not
entitled to be tried by a jury that is racially balanced or comprised of the
same proportion of people of a particular race, as occurs in the broader
community from which the jury is
‘to impose some overriding requirement to the effect that a jury, once
randomly selected in this way, has to be racially
balanced or proportionate
would be the antithesis of an impartially selected
The case of
Binge v Bennett,
referred to earlier,
is useful as
it discussed the practice of prosecutors using their right to ‘stand
by’ to ensure Aboriginal people were
excluded from the jury.
In that case, a barrister called Colin Bennett of some 40 years standing,
swore on affidavit in the 1988 interstate extradition proceeding
criminal trials that Crown Prosecutors regularly ‘stand by’ any
Aboriginal person empanelled for jury
service. This practice is so familiar to
me that for years I have never exercised my right of objection against a
prospective Aboriginal
person as I can rely on the Crown practice of standing by
any Aboriginal.’ He said: ‘during all the years of [his] practice
Queensland, I have seen only a small number of Aboriginal people empanelled for
jury service and that with the one exception ...
I have never seen an Aboriginal
person selected to actually sit on a jury for a trial’. This was a
Queensland barrister who
conducted several hundred criminal trials in his time
(and he only saw one Aboriginal juror).
The Report noted that in 1988 the then DPP, Des Sturgess, wrote into the
Director’s Guidelines for prosecutors that: ‘The
power to stand a
prospective juror by is to be used only for the purpose of attempting to secure
a fair trial. When deciding whether
or not to stand a prospective juror by,
racial or ethnic background is to be disregarded unless it is reasonably likely
the prospective juror to be prejudiced unfairly in favour of or against
the defendant.’ The point was made in the report that
these guidelines
were only published to prosecutors.
Binge v Bennett
being heard some 35 years ago, a submission by
ATSILS to the 2011 QLRC suggests that in recent times the prosecution’s
of standing by Indigenous jurors has continued in Brisbane.
Specifically, ATSILS provided the following anecdotal feedback from its
offices, that there was:
[n]ext to no Indigenous Australian representation on juries involving
Indigenous defendants. Our Townsville office indicated that
since November 2008
— they have only had Indigenous Australian representation on juries three
times (twice involving the same
juror). Mount Isa — despite a relatively
high local Indigenous Australian population — still very rare to have an
juror (at least for our clients). In Brisbane the few that are on the
panel are invariably stood down by the
Nevertheless, the QLRC supported the retention of peremptory challenges.
The New South Wales case of
is a standout
case in that it provides authority that the courts have the power to discharge
the entire jury to ensure that a fair
trial is achieved. The case involved the
Crown Prosecutor exercising his peremptory right of challenge to exclude three
Australians from the panel. In discharging the all-white jury, Judge
Martin found that the lack of Aboriginal people on the jury
suggest that justice is not being done
’. In discharging the
jury, the trial judge avoided criticising the actions of the Crown Prosecutor,
stating that
‘the Crown Prosecutor, like the counsel for the accused,
has an absolute right of challenge with a certain number of jurors
and does not
have to give any reason ... The fact remains that the Crown Prosecutor is a
person well known to you as an honourable
citizen, an honourable Crown
Prosecutor and I am not in the slightest criticising his action nor impugning it
in any way whatsoever
The case of
is notable as it has set a high bar for the type of
overt racism against Indigenous defendants that is needed in order for the
to uphold a successful challenge. When compared to case law involving the
use of challenges by Indigenous defendants,
would appear to be on
its own in that it differs from the accepted position of the courts that
fairness in jury selection comes hand
in hand with compliance with the
legislated jury selection process, that is, in situations where an all-white
jury has been empanelled
in compliance with the legislated jury process and
therefore the jury has been randomly selected, Australian courts are reluctant
to discharge the jury panel as courts view the latter approach as a fair and
just process.
VII Other Factors
There are also additional factors, the report has highlighted, that
disproportionately affect Indigenous jury numbers, specifically
that Indigenous
people are, to a greater degree than the general population, impacted by
structural disadvantage.
are a range of social impediments that First Nation Australians face that
conflict with their capacity to participate on juries
(for example,
disproportionate chronic health problems, greater caring responsibilities, sorry
business and cultural constraints).
Regarding chronic health conditions, the National Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Health Survey conducted by the Australian
Bureau of Statistics
in 2018-2019 revealed that 46% of Indigenous people ‘had at least one
chronic health condition’.
This means that more than 4 in 10’ Indigenous Australians will suffer from
poor health conditions.
significant health condition which disproportionately affects Indigenous people
is hearing loss.
The report contends that there is a likely nexus between the major health
gaps between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians and
disproportionate jury
participation.
The report also highlights that unpaid caring responsibilities
disproportionately affect Indigenous Australians compared to non-Indigenous
Australians. Indigenous Australians are twice as likely to provide unpaid care
compared to non-Indigenous
Australians.
disproportionate caring responsibilities have been linked ‘
greater prevalence of disability and chronic health conditions in these
communities
associated with poorer health outcomes is the fact that Indigenous Australians
are more likely to experience ‘sorry business’
and need to be
excused from jury service.
Thirdly, the AIJA report quoted the then Victorian Attorney-General, Mr
Robert Hulls, at his Opening Address in 2011 on Aboriginal
Justice to support
its contention that circumstances may operate to impact Indigenous
representation to serve as jurors due to cultural
constraints, community ties
and/or cultural safety as follows:
On one occasion I was acting for an Aboriginal client in a civil matter about
a car accident. We had an eye-witness to the accident
... Our witness was an
Aboriginal man from the Camooweal area. I spoke to him briefly before he went
into court to give evidence
explaining that he just had to tell the court what
he saw when the accident happened. When he was called to give evidence he walked
up to the witness box, saw all white faces looking at him
, turned to the
magistrate and said ‘I plead guilty, Sir’.
The reality is that there is still a perception amongst Indigenous people
that the current jury system is not a culturally safe place
for them and
according to the report, ‘
broad anecdotal evidence
a sense of fear, alienation and distrust of the criminal justice system amongst
Indigenous Australians.
to me that to address the sense of fear, alienation and distrust, then community
engagement is vital and effort needs to
be given to target recruitment drives
within communities, with the leaders and organisations of those communities
having a pivotal
role in advocating for greater representation and supporting
potential jurors. After all, Indigenous leaders and organisations can
bridge the gap between Indigenous communities and the legal system.
VII What Have Overseas Jurisdictions Done or Proposed?
Australia’s Indigenous peoples’ participation is not unique given
the experiences and concerns expressed in Canada, New
Zealand and Argentina. The
report observed that:
The sense of alienation reported in the press from Kumanjayi’s family
is similarly described in New Zealand. For example, the
2001 NZLC observed that
‘many Maori feel strongly that juries are not representative of Maori
society, [which] ... contributes
to a general feeling of alienation from the
criminal justice system.
In Canada, in 2013, the Canadian Ontario government commissioned the
Iacobucci Report,
First Nations Representation on Ontario Juries
Iacobucci was a former Canadian Supreme Court judge. The report included 17
recommendations ‘
relating to the creation of the jury roll, increasing
opportunities for Indigenous input into government decision-making and
services for Indigenous people involved in the justice
One of these
recommendations included the abolishment of peremptory challenges.
Five years later in the 2018 Canadian case of
was heard. The case
involved a white defendant being acquitted of the homicide of
an Indigenous man by an all-white jury. The case also involved defence
challenging all five jurors of Indigenous appearance during the empanelment
process which resulted in public outcry from the use
of the peremptory
challenges calling for reform.
Very soon after this case was handed down, the Debwewin Jury Review
Implementation Committee, made up of ‘
Indigenous leaders and government
and judicial representatives
,’ was charged with advising the Ontario
government on the earlier 2013 Iacobucci report. The Committee published the
Barriers to Accessing Justice: Legal Representation of Indigenous
People within Ontario
’ (‘Debwewin’s Report’) in
April 2018 which
‘reviewed and responded to barriers described in
reports, academic articles, and in presentations and community engagement,
Elders’ Forums.’
The Debwewin’s Report suggested a list of initiatives aimed at
increasing Indigenous people’s jury representation which
are outlined in
the AIJA report. In the interest of time, I will not read out all of the
recommendations, but some of them include:
• Various recommendations regarding the use of peremptory challenges.
These recommendations have been overtaken by Canada’s
abolition of
peremptory challenges.
• Reviewing criminal history exclusions to reduce ineligibility
timelines and to develop an automatic pardon program for First
Nations people to
have convictions removed 5 years after the completion of a sentence, possibly
limited to non-indictable offences,
and possibly recognising the authority of an
Indigenous community to offer its members amnesty, the equivalent of a
• Establishing First Nations liaison officers, ideally from local
communities, who are tasked with consulting First Nations
reserves on juries and
on justice issues to reduce hesitancy to respond to juror summonses and improve
Indigenous representation
on juries by better informing Indigenous people of
justice system processes.
• Creating a focus on including and educating Indigenous youth.
• Supporting the training of more Indigenous lawyers.
The Debwewin’s report also went further and suggested reforms aimed at
addressing the broader underlying issue shared by countries
such as Canada and
Australia, that being ‘
Indigenous people’s alienation from the
justice system
The AIJA detailed three overseas jury models for what it described as
‘affirmative action’, that is whether it is:
(a) A proportionate model requiring that the jury reflect the respective
proportion of both majority and minority groups in the general
population.
A social science model effectively of three minorities (which is said to
reduce the impact of racially homogenous juries).
de medietate linguae
concerned with the inclusion of aliens
(the concepts of aliens was based on the Medieval system permitting the
inclusion of Jews,
or others to be part of the jury, in other words mixed
juries) (ie, half/ half). It has more recently been adopted in Argentina,
Zealand, Barbados, North Borneo as a mechanism to ensure Indigenous jury
representation.
All these models advocate for minority participation on juries and the report
supports a consideration of these models.
I should say it is merely a consideration of these models; it is not a hard
proposal or recommendation to adopt all or any of them.
Perhaps that is why
recent media commentary (and associated comments) have been critical of the
report. There is no harm in making
further inquiries, research and
investigations about this important issue. The impetus for the recommendation
is, on my understanding,
due to the limited data on the actual, ‘on
ground’ results of Indigenous participation derived from these models.
is no harm in exploring these issues.
The report merely encourages further discussion around ways to improve
Indigenous engagement, because it does emphasise the need for
reform in the jury
system to enhance Indigenous representation.
The concluding remarks contained within the report argue that the
disenfranchisement and the inertia that it permits, despite previous
recommendations by Australian law reform bodies directed at improving First
Nations’ Australians representation on jury lists,
panels and juries, is
not acceptable. In relation to inclusiveness and responsiveness, the report
concluded that the jury system
fails to make a genuine attempt to provide for
all Indigenous Australians. In relation to shifting the inertia and embarking on
through a process that is Indigenous led and collaborative, it has
suggested that an appropriately resourced and national focus was
desirable because it is an issue of national importance.
That explains why a roundtable discussion was recently convened by the AIJA
in June 2024 to consider opportunities to address the
issues identified in the
report. The roundtable included Indigenous and non-Indigenous stakeholders from
the judiciary, court administration,
policy, practice, advocacy and academia.
It was well-attended and provided a forum for meaningful exchange on the
complex and interwoven issues underpinning barriers to Indigenous
representation
on juries across different Australian states and territories. Two broad topic
areas were identified at the roundtable
as requiring further consultation and
research, namely:
(a) Legal Issues, including differences in approach, rationale and criteria
by various Australian states and territories to jury disqualification,
peremptory challenges and the availability of judge-alone trials;
(b) Social-cultural issues, such as cultural safety issues regarding the
criminal justice system, and jury summons (e.g. language/service
difficulties,
juror travel, and/or not being on the electoral roll).
The AIJA is currently pursuing a number of activities, including:
• Extracting and gathering data on matters such as peremptory
challenges and disqualifications.
• Setting up a community consultation pilot study which will consult
with Indigenous communities about their priorities to direct
further work in
• Expressions of interest from law, humanities and social sciences
academics to conduct further research on legal issues identified
roundtable.
As I indicated at the outset, I thought the report was extensive, extremely
thorough, well researched and comprehensive. I commend
those who are drawn to
this topic of significance.
VIII Conclusion
I conclude by saying my main goal in delivering tonight’s lecture was
to highlight the findings of the AIJA report. Remaining
impartial as I have
tried to be throughout tonight’s lecture and putting aside any feelings of
fear, favour or affection, what
is clear is there is more work (whether with
investigations, conversations and research) to address what has been described
chronic under-representation of Indigenous jurors.
Thank you all very much for your attendance this evening, especially in
honour of Mrs Marylyn Mayo.
Report, Page 11.
See Aboriginal Bench Book for
Western Australian Courts, 2
ed, Stephanie Fryer-Smith 2008.
Report, page 20.
Report, 21.
Report, 28.
Report, 27.
https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/crime-and-justice/prisoners-australia/2023#aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-prisoners
Report, 30.
R v Badenoch
[2004] VSCA
Ibid at [66] and [68].
(2010) 207 A Crim R 1.
https://www.qlrc.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/372544/r68.pdf
(Unreported, District Court of New South Wales, Martin J, 19 October 1981).
Report, page 45.
ABS, National Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Health Survey 2018-19, n 280, Report page 46.
Report, page 45.
Report, page 47.
Report, page 47.
Report, page 48.
Report, page 51.
[2018] SKQB 27.
Report, page 51.
Report, page 52.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (558 KB)
PDF format (824 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter