URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LawTechHum/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:12:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Schultz, Karen --- "Utopia and Intellectual Humility: More, Bacon and Swift Appraising Law and Technology" [2025] LawTechHum 2; (2025) 7(1) Law, Technology and Humans 7
Utopia and Intellectual Humility: More, Bacon and Swift Appraising Law and
Karen Schultz
Griffith University, Australia
; law and technology; Thomas
More; Francis Bacon; Jonathan Swift; intellectual humility.
1. Introduction
Law and frontier technologies have been variously
anticipated or perceived in Western literature’s classic
from the time of the
earliest iconic ‘Ur-paradigm’
Utopias’ diverse
narratives and commentaries can both applaud or admonish. For instance, utopias
can applaud the beneficent
prospects of law’s interplay with technology to
imagine technological progress and better futures; alternatively, they can
admonish technology’s pitfalls to problematise assumptions of
technology’s necessarily progressive ‘good’.
frontier technologies have been promoted in non-fiction and news media for their
unalloyed ‘good’ and technological
‘progress’. Yet,
given the risk profiles of frontier technologies, it has been suggested that a
counter of intellectual
humility should usefully accompany their operation.
Intellectual humility is not a new awareness – its value in connecting
with law and technology is illustrated in select utopias in the early Western
literary tradition. Equally, its connection to past
literature has relevance to
present frontier issues.
This article proceeds with three big-picture strokes. First, to consider law
and technology’s interplay and the focus on frontier
technologies, it
cherry-picks select utopias, including two Western Ur-paradigm utopias by More
and Bacon. Specifically, it considers
a trilogy of iconic British fictions in
the ‘imagined travellers’ mode, situated within the wider literature
utopia (and/or dystopia): Thomas More’s
Francis Bacon’s
New Atlantis
(1626) and Jonathan Swift’s
Gulliver’s Travels
(1726). Aspects of each text’s treatment
of law and technology are canvassed, including their intertextual connections:
apparently draws on More’s template; and Swift positively references
More but satirises Bacon’s disciples.
Second, this article recollects recent calls for ‘intellectual
humility’ to accompany the trajectory of frontier technologies.
Intellectual humility lacks consensus as a concept but reflects approaches to
measuring a sceptical mind that recognise fallibility
over-confidence. Yet what is this intellectual humility?
Third, the select utopias’ messages concerning law and
technology’s interplay with intellectual humility are briefly considered.
Each iconic text can be understood as a complex thought experiment
problematising the limits of human judgment, understanding and
counsel. More,
Bacon and Swift variously correlate the potential of human capacities with
technological futures. While the select
utopias’ treatment of frontier
technologies is complicated by each text’s wordplay or puzzles, various
messages emerge
concerning approaches to appraise law and technology. For
instance, there are messages of optimism or reassurance that good judgment
exist; alternatively, there are messages of pessimism, caution or admonition
that poor judgment can perpetuate, and humans may
degenerate. This article
cannot do justice to each author’s prolific and complex oeuvre, but its
purpose is to deepen the discourse.
2. Select Utopias in Imagined Travellers Mode
To introduce this article’s trilogy of select utopias within the
imagined travellers mode, an initial word is appropriate on
the wider literature
of ‘law and utopia’. Following this, broad and specific reasons for
cherry-picking the three utopias
will be briefly canvassed, together with
initial prefatory points that underline both the capacious use of
‘utopia’ and
the expanding ‘law and technology’
literature.
The wider literature on law and utopia (and/or
continues its growth in
the twenty-first century with new applications and framings. Coined by More in
1516, the concept and terminology
of utopia have been variously
– for instance, to
comprehensive, all-encompassing visions in fictional and non-fictional texts
from Plato to Marx
less-comprehensive, targeted perspectives, including ‘specific (feminist,
libertarian, ecological ...)’
Equally, utopian
literature has been variously framed and periodised – for instance, from
early classical utopias to critical
utopias (and/or
dystopias).
The concept of utopia,
together with its relevance to and interface with law, has experienced cycles of
favour versus disfavour.
However, in recent decades, and despite the utopian
imagination’s ‘hostility to legal forms and processes’ and
liberal legality’s critique of the utopian
‘blueprint’,
vocabulary of utopia and utopianism has been resuscitated, reimagined and
revitalised.
This imaginative
utopianism has a ‘close synergy with law and legal reform’ and a
‘role ... in law and
positive functions’ for the ‘rule of law as utopia and as
ideology’ are, not least, ‘to criticise
the current order and to
imagine an alternative
Moving to the
select utopias considered in this article, the focus is on what are frequently
described as early classical utopias
(and/or dystopias).
Broadly, this article’s select utopias have been cherry-picked for
their formal literary characteristics (relevantly, composition
historical position, literary mode or derivation, and intertextual connections
or engagement) combined with their substantive
scientific-technological focus
(whether technological enthusiasm or technological
criticism).
The Ur-paradigm
utopias of More and Bacon
exhibit senses of optimism that contrast with Swift’s distinct degrees of
pessimism concerning the ‘human prospect ...
married to science and
technology, the twin horsemen of the modern-day
apocalypse’.
Yet all three
texts contribute to answering two key methodological questions: first, can
reflecting on ‘ancient stories’
enrich or ‘deepen our
understanding of the techno-utopian impulses driv[ing]’ contemporary
and second, can
‘ancient stories’, despite representing neither ‘grand
futuristic dreams’ nor
‘techno-nightmares’,
be characterised as drawing on shifting moral perspectives or
‘technological
For narratives
assist in navigating ‘why’ questions – that is, questions that
seek answers ‘in terms of technical
or legal “solutions”, or
in terms of deficits of civic, moral, and religious
education’.
Specifically, three formal criteria are relevant to this article’s
trilogy of select utopias. First, in terms of composition
date, three early
iconic British utopias have been selected within a 200-year span from the
Renaissance to the Restoration –
More’s earliest text coins the
neologism ‘utopia’. Second, in terms of literary mode, this trilogy
instances the
‘imagined travellers’ mode, where utopian societies
are located on isolated islands visited by a traveller-narrator who
travelogue of customs and experiences. The select utopias variously critique
contemporary social conditions or institutions,
although More’s and
Bacon’s use of ironic or satiric critique is less intense than
Swift’s withering denunciations
and savage parodies. Third, in terms of
intertextual connections, the later authors were well aware of the earlier
contributions, so Bacon draws on More’s utopian blueprint
and Swift expressly applauds
but Swift attacks and
parodies the experiments and technologies of Bacon’s disciples in the
Royal Society.
As a prefatory point concerning the terminology used in this article when
describing the select utopias with their ambiguities, ‘utopia’
employed capaciously to include ‘dystopia’. This use is not unusual
– More himself, with his ‘mixture
of the ideal and the
‘utopia’ with ‘nowhere’, and not with a
‘somewhere’ that is necessarily good. A utopia’s
depends on the narrator’s expressed or implied perspectives and the
reader’s interpretations and judgment. Each
of the select utopias has
enigmatic, nebulous elements. For instance,
’ third voyage particularly displays dystopian/anti-utopian
elements, but this is a realisation that only partially unfolds
for, and largely
eludes, its narrator. Moreover, this capacious use of ‘utopia’ not
only recognises that dystopian elements
in an ostensible utopia may be revealed
where the text deploys various narrative standpoints or irony, but this use
intersects with
the concept of a ‘critical utopia’. Coined by Moylan
to capture the ‘transgressive, totalizing, transformative’
late twentieth-century utopian impulses and
utopianism,
critical utopias do
not represent ideal or perfect political blueprints but express societal
aspirations, envisage alternative futures
and engender utopian
To varying degrees, the
select utopias can be understood as bearing a ‘related critical utopian
Finally, as a prefatory point concerning this article’s substantive
criteria, the select utopias exhibit diverse treatments
of law and technology,
and offer messages relevant to recent discourse in intellectual humility. From
the Renaissance, the imagined
travellers mode launched the ‘ship of modern
to incite not
only the ‘machinery and navigational techniques’ of the
‘“new” science’, but ‘the
humanistic concept of
utopias imaginatively and diversely express intellectual and ethical limits in
dealing with ‘new science’.
Moreover, utopianism and utopias,
including the select utopias here, can connect with a contemporary call of
‘technology law
scholarship’.
This clarion
call for law to ‘re-imagine the relations between humanity and
technology’
utopian analogy – that is, the exploration of ‘two alternative
technological futures, cornucopian and dystopian’
and their ‘complex
and multi-layered’ relationship, where cornucopia not only ‘resists
but ... suppresses dystopia’.
Charting this relationship and its
ethics recognises that ‘technical legality’ can enhance human
as ‘responsibility for becoming is technically
possible for technological
Being-in-the-world’.
Hence, as utopia continues its reimagining, so too does ‘law and
technology’.
Turning to consider each text’s focus on law and technology, this
article begins with More’s
2.1 First, Thomas More’s
More’s neologism, ‘Utopia’, describes his two-book imagined
commonwealth, celebrated for its provocations and striking
contemporaneity.
’s mythical New World island of 54 cities as a point of
departure, More problematises European and English society – Utopia
private property, debilitating unemployment, excessive work, or lawyers. The
text telegraphs the benefits of practical communal
technology practices and the
disadvantages of obscure laws.
The narrative begins in Antwerp where, in 1515, Thomas More was actually
serving as an ambassador for Henry VIII in negotiations with
commission investigating the English wool trade. More was introduced to Peter
Giles, Erasmus’s pupil, and commenced
2, a travelogue apparently inspired by the widely circulated accounts of the new
world travels of Amerigo Vespucci,
Christopher Columbus and Angelo
This real-world
setting transitions to the fictional – ‘character
is introduced by
character Giles to
fictional Portuguese sailor-narrator,
Raphael Hythloday, whose back-story includes travels with Vespucci. The three
repair to More’s
Antwerp garden where Hythloday recounts Book 1’s
“Dialogue on Counsel”, and Book 2’s “Discourse on
Hythloday engages in table-talk (concerning discourse and satire on justice,
punishment, governance, social conditions
and standing armies) with a
Socratic-style coterie that includes character Morton – that is, Cardinal
Morton, the famous Tudor
ecclesiastical lawyer and statesman who had actually
been More’s mentor and
Then, in Book 2,
Hythloday outlines Utopia’s institutions and infrastructure, including
aspects of law and technology.
Yet ‘Utopia is intentionally
enigmatic’.
text’s wordplay clouds its messages – for instance, the
narrator’s name means both ‘healing of God’
and ‘peddler of
nonsense’ (Hythloday).
Moreover, the notion of ‘utopia’ is interpretable – not all
utopias are necessarily good eutopias and may include
dystopic tones. For
’s six-verse/stanza poem, ‘On Utopia’,
distinguishes ‘utopia’ from More’s second
(meaning ‘Happy
‘topos’) – the island, Utopia, applauds itself as being so
good, and with the ‘best laws’, that
its name ought to be
the text’s word-play, or
glossopoeia,
interpretable layers of oxymorons. Utopia (meaning ‘nowhere’) is a
constructed island with a river ‘Anydrus’
(‘no water’),
city ‘Amaurote’ (‘shadow-city’), ruler
‘Ademus’ (‘no people’)
and neighbouring people
‘Achorians’ (‘no
In addition,
’s longer title has a satiric edge – it describes
itself as a ‘truly golden handbook, no less beneficial than
entertaining’,
Utopia clearly devalues gold, associating it ‘with disgrace’ or a
lesser status, as Utopians use gold for
chamber pots, shackles and
‘trinkets’.
Equally, substantive uncertainties and standpoint obscurities appear in
’s ‘most vexing question’ – that is, the
attitude to the ‘common ownership of
Character More
is mainly non-committal concerning Utopia’s
but denies that
Utopia’s communistic practices are a ‘social
identifies the ‘principal foundation of their whole social structure,
namely their common life and subsistence with
no exchange of money’ as
‘entirely undermines all nobility, magnificence, splendor, and
majesty’ that are ‘(in the popular view)
the true adornments and
ornaments of a
commonwealth’.
instances the text’s multi-vocal
and the lack of clear
equation between the real and fictional Mores. One cannot simply attribute to
author More the apparent beliefs
of character More; the fictional More
apparently rejects the communal approach as ‘absurd’ but the real
More apparently
perceived that a communal approach and humility could bridle
In terms of law,
’s conceit is that law is notable by its
absence. Hythloday’s ‘afternoon discourse’ is recorded as
the ‘Laws and Institutions of the Little-known Island of
despite laws
barely existing. For, while the Utopians have criminal offences and
they have ‘very
few laws’ and no lawyers
because laws ‘so numerous ... or so obscure’ are unjust and lawyers,
as ‘clever practitioners and sly interpreters
of the law’, offend
practicality, clarity and truth.
In addition, the lawyers’ ‘absence is meaningful’ and notable
– it instances the historically repeated ‘regularly
negative turn in the public’s opinion and confidence in the legal
profession’.
Lawyers are
not only a symptom of ‘dark humanity’ but ‘active agents to
violence, greed, and
corruption’.
underlines the ‘unhealthy effect of legal wrangling on
Utopia eschews
‘incredibly intricate laws’ or interpretations –
‘everyone is knowledgeable of the law’
and the judge ‘protects
simple souls from the false accusations of crafty litigants’.
Yet, in this highly ordered, but
imperfect, society that includes
law exists as a social
control mechanism and guarantee of order, sub silentio, in moral, religious and
political networks.
Finally, in terms of technology, the text abounds in ‘discussion of
technology and applied
and instances
how the Utopians are ‘marvellously effective in inventing
techniques’ – ‘in intellectual pursuits
indefatigable’.
instance, they pursue specific pragmatic technologies in animal husbandry (to
‘tend a great number of eggs’ for ‘hatching
... in constant
hydrology (to
ensure ‘water cannot be diverted or contaminated ... and is channelled in
tile conduits’),
(‘to investigate the secrets of nature using the resources of
(‘to remedy the defects of the
and papermaking’ (to ‘invent[] techniques’ for
‘contribution to a comfortable
and astronomy
(‘to understand very accurately the movements and
positions’).
society and technology are not static or unchanging: Utopians converted to
Christianity,
devoured the newly
presented ancients’ books
and embraced print technology. Printing is an interesting inclusion – its
European invention signified ‘seismic shifts
in thinking and
sensibility’, assisted ‘more cosmopolitan and mobile ways of
imagining and conducting intellectual
and was momentous
historically for critical thinking and dissent. Hence, while the textual
references to technology are undeveloped
and technology is practical, as opposed
to ‘fantastic’, the takeaway is that Utopia is not an
epistemologically nor technologically
closed society.
commonwealth is the template for Bacon’s point of departure in
2.2 Next, Francis Bacon’s
New Atlantis
In the century following
New Atlantis
emerged as a technology-heavy, but inchoate ‘early contribution to the
tradition of utopian
pivotal point where ‘science and technology emerged as a way of
transforming society’.
Written in 1624
but published
posthumously,
is Bacon’s ‘most prophetic
It offers a
fragmentary plan of the ideal commonwealth and mythical island of
and its fantastic
pursuit of empirical science and prosperity via its scientific foundation,
Salomon’s House.
The narrative details how European sailors, lost when exploring uncharted
seas, are permitted to enter Bensalem. Selected sailors
are drip-fed knowledge
of its technological wealth. Ultimately, the sailor-narrator receives the honour
of an in-depth outline of
Salomon’s House, with its ‘new
science’ and technological directions – the Father of
Salomon’s House
exhaustively recites the foundation’s
‘end’ and purpose, its ‘preparations and instruments’,
its ‘employments
and functions’ and its ‘ordinances and
Like Utopia,
Bensalem had converted to Christianity – Salomon’s House is
otherwise named the ‘College of the Six
Days’ Works’. Unlike
Utopia however, religious and scientific principles are separated, not
‘interfused’;
appears to be the ‘Feigned
Commonwealth’
New Atlantis
’s Jewish merchant,
Bacon offers new science
as the apparent means to the practical end of increasing human control of nature
and pursuing peace and
prosperity. But the science is fabulous, and its pursuit
is relentless.
New Atlantis
’s so-called prophetic vision of human
knowledge’s scientific-technological future comprises not only
House’s manifold inventions and discoveries, but its
institutional plan and organisation, similar to the modern research
university’s
focus on pure and applied science. For instance, its zodiacal
and Trinitarian structure of imaginatively named workers in scientific
has strict numbers of Merchants of Light, Depredators, Mystery-Men, Pioneers or
Miners, Compilers, Dowry-Men or Benefactors,
Lamps, Inoculators and Interpreters
However, this awesome
array of scientists and technicians, and the ‘glittering
scientist’s dress, gestures to ‘endless, ever-increasing torrents of
usable inventions and
for a populace
constructed as a ‘‘consumer’ ...[:] a belly capable of ...
infinite distention’.
insatiability prompts an applied science that is ‘increasing without fixed
limits the material goods and sensual luxuries
available’.
Unlike Utopia,
Bensalem upholds its private property, individual splendour and dizzying array
of scientific and frontier technologies.
There is contention concerning
New Atlantis
’s messages. While
Weinberger considers that
New Atlantis
‘depicts the world to be
produced by [Bacon’s] famous project for modern science and
technology’,
denies that this is Bacon’s
Commentators recognise
Bacon's focus on applied, not theoretical,
he eschewed pure
metaphysics and abstract thinking that neglected practical outcomes. Yet doubts
exist as to whether Bacon endorsed
the extremes of the Salomon’s House
agenda. Frietzsche and Adams argue that Bensalem’s ‘applied science
manipulated’ to supply insatiable material
in this society clearly
nested within a Christian ethical context. Moreover, Liebeskind characterises
Salomon’s House’s
illusion-creating ‘machines’ as a
‘troublesome
development’,
potentially
responsible for a ‘successful religious fraud’ on the
‘sheep-natured’
‘displays of human power’ comporting as angelic
She considers that
Bacon ‘blurs the distinction between divine and human power’ and may
be orchestrating an ‘unlimited
suspicion’.
In terms of law,
New Atlantis
has been variously interpreted and
understood. It may signal that ‘modern science could easily sink modern
society beneath
the seas, leaving only a cautionary
whereby political
society requires not only the rule of scientists, but a ‘strong commitment
to liberal principles and philosophical
questioning’.
Bensalem’s lawgiver created laws of secrecy, an espionage system and a
scientific foundation, God’s law ostensibly
bases Bensalem’s
political order. Hence, unlike the ‘drive to expand’ of
Plato’s Atlantis, Bensalem embodies
the ‘cardinal Christian virtues
of faith, charity, peace, and
Bensalem’s economy discounts the gold standard but, unlike Utopia,
‘maintain[s] a trade ... for God’s
first creature ...
describes this as ‘no ordinary human economy ... but an angelic economy
subsisting on the light of
knowledge’.
Finally, in terms of technology, Bensalem’s fabulous armoury of
inventions, as outlined by the Father of Salomon’s House,
‘new artificial metals’, ‘high towers ... half a mile in
height’, ‘engines for multiplying
and enforcing of winds’,
‘Water of Paradise’, ‘perspective-houses’ and
‘houses of deceits ...
illusions[] and their
fallacies’.
Particularly striking are the military ‘engine-houses’: the
invention of ‘swifter motions’ of ‘muskets
engine’ to ratchet up their strength and violence, ‘exceeding your
greatest cannons and basilisks’; and
the innovations of ‘instruments
of war ... new mixtures and compositions of gun-powder, wild-fires burning in
water, and unquenchable’.
‘breathtaking’
list continues with flying vehicles imitating bird-flight, submersibles,
‘divers curious clocks’ with their ‘motions
of return, and ...
perpetual motions’, and imitations of ‘living creatures, by
Like Utopia,
Bensalem is not static or unchanging – the Bensalemites were interested in
scientific evolution and change, and
received Christianity and
Unlike Utopia,
however, the scale is ratcheted up with the vertiginous versions of inventions
– it is a ‘sumptuous vision
of science’s
ostensibly of
improvement. This template is integral to what Swift derided in the third voyage
Gulliver’s Travels
2.3 Finally, Jonathan Swift’s
Gulliver’s Travels
A century after
New Atlantis
, Swift’s misanthropic four-voyage
Gulliver’s Travels
, targeted contemporary science and
technology in its third voyage. Here, the fictional sailor-narrator, Lemuel
Gulliver, hijacked
by pirates and forsaken as a castaway, leapfrogs to four
extraordinary islands peopled by pseudo-scientists and magicians
metaphors physical’ and exhibiting the ‘abuses of
Modern learning’.
third voyage is ‘devoted, particularly, to satire on the sources of
intellectual pride’ and develops critiques of
human ‘intellectual
inadequacies’.
islands of this third voyage offer multiple lenses on abusive law and inflated
science and technology.
First, Laputa, the circular ‘flying or floating
adamantine base, instances fanatical, fantastical mathematicians, musicians and
theoreticians with twisted bodies and crooked
eyes – one eye pointing
inward, one upward.
Swift’s representation, this distortion represents their error-ridden
calculations, ignorance of the world and solipsistic
focus on contemplation and
abstraction.
Laputans’ heads are metaphorically in the clouds – they despise
practical geometry as ‘Vulgar and
and neglect
‘Laws, Government, History, Religion, or Manners of
Countries’.
Their focus
on pure mathematics and music
extends even to degustation – for instance, they present their first
course of mutton as an ‘Equilateral Triangle’,
‘Rhomboid’ and pudding as a ‘Cycloid’, and their second
course of ducks as ‘Fiddles’,
sausages and puddings as ‘Flutes
and Hautboys’, and veal as a
geometrical and astronomical calculations trigger their catastrophising –
they are ‘perpetually alarmed with
the Apprehensions of ... impending
Dangers’ of ‘Celestial Bodies’ and ‘Destruction of this
Second, the larger island, Balnibarbi, is governed by Laputa – it is
literally located beneath and overshadowed by
Balnibarbi exhibits a
wasteland of ruined crops, squalid living conditions and dilapidated,
‘ill-contrived’
Its Grand Academy
of Projectors, located in its metropolis Lagado, follows Laputan science and
technology. Housed in decrepit buildings,
the Academy is the record of a
failure. Its impractical and destructive experiments, technology and projects
are juxtaposed with
the practical and beneficial outputs of Swift’s foil
to the absurdity – Lord Munodi, Laputa’s former
Predictably, in
typical Swiftian moves, the ill-conceived Laputan mores brand the sensible
Munodi with ‘low contemptible
Understanding’,
notwithstanding his voice of reason, his ‘Magnificent, Regular and
Polite’ comportment and his estates exemplifying the
‘best Rules of
Ancient Architecture’.
By contrast, Gulliver self-identifies as a ‘great Admirer of
Projects’ and as an actual Projector in his ‘younger
Projectors’ technology is demonstrated to be useless and, similarly,
Gulliver’s understanding is distorted or
deficient. Visiting the Academy,
he reports on absurd experiments, including an eight-year ‘Project for
extracting Sunbeams
Cucumbers’,
experiment for creating dyed silk from spiders’ webs tinctured by
consumption of ‘beautifully coloured’
and a project
anticipating computers by a Professor in ‘language
constructs an extremely labour-intensive ‘Engine’. The latter
project produces only meagre outputs by means of its
Handle[s]’ and enslaved pupil-readers and ‘Scribes’, instead
of its anticipated compositions of ‘Books
in Philosophy, Poetry,
Politicks, Law, Mathematics and Theology, without the least assistance from
Genius or Study’.
roll-call of absurd, impractical, ineffective experiments concludes with
Gulliver characterising an excrement project for forecasting
conspiracies as bearing ‘great
Benedict summarises Swift’s target here as the ‘absurdity of
Third, the little island of sorcerers and
Glubbdubdrib, with
its ghost-summoning Governor and his magic technology, facilitates
Gulliver’s comparison of the ancients
and moderns. As a ‘natural
extension of a satire on the intellectual pretensions of eighteenth century
scientists’
requests that the Governor summon the spirits not only of ancient heroes and
classic authors, but of corrupt modern commentators
of classical texts and
non-virtuous ancestors of modern aristocrats. A ‘sextumvirate’ of
the most virtuous historical
political figures appears, including More as the
only ‘Modern’ – ‘Junius, Socrates, Epaminodas, Cato the
younger, Sir Thomas More and
highlights Swift’s respect for More as the ‘ideal English
politician’ – ‘Swift is closest to More’s
perspective in his pragmatism and social
criticism’.
the great philosopher Aristotle is summoned and reconsiders his now-exploded
theories, as highlights Swift’s critique
of the new sciences. For
Aristotle predicts that the new sciences would be ‘equally exploded’
on the basis that ‘new
systems of Nature were but new Fashions’,
referencing doctrines of ‘Attraction’ (meaning Newtonian-inspired
together with Gassendi’s and Descartes’s
Here, Swift
upholds what he considers to be Aristotle’s acute perception and rejects
the restricted vision of flawed scientists
whose ‘excessive pride’
impedes their recognition and admission of errors, and whose hubris blinds their
‘historical
Fourth and finally, Luggnagg’s island, with its miserable race of
immortals – the Struldbruggs – is a final illustration
of the limits
of the human intellect and progress. To demonstrate the delusion that intellect
can control nature, Swift focusses
on the so-called immortals’ decay and
their increasingly quarrelsome, discontented and senile existence. Equally,
self-delusion and intellectual vanity are evidenced in his
encounter with the Struldbruggs. He careers from ‘inexpressible
delight’ at immortality’s
where he envisions
the potential discoveries that immortality could experience (‘the
Longitude, the perpetual Motions, the
Medicine’),
disillusion at immortality’s ominous reality. For the ‘follies and
infirmities’ of this long-lived race
are only magnified by the
‘dreadful prospect of never
Struldbruggs ultimately lose their sense and capacity and are accounted legally
dead. Here, technology is impotent.
Yet Swift’s construction and conception of Gulliver’s third
voyage has been variably understood. Commentators have critiqued
‘episodic and
miscellaneous’,
‘overly topical, ill-organised, and intemperate’ literary
credentials.
Alternatively,
commentators have recognised its cohesion as each episode’s thematic
connection ‘represents an error-filled
aspect of Modern
contributes to the ‘over-all fictional
structure’.
article adopts the latter position as the most apposite reading of the third
voyage’s satire of intellectual pride inflating
law and technology.
In terms of law, the third voyage overall is technology focused but each
island presents as an absolutist legal system. For instance,
characterised by its tunnel vision: the Laputan King is ostensibly disinterested
in the ‘Laws, Government, History,
Religion, or Manners of the
Countries’ that Gulliver has visited; and the Laputans display
‘Faith in Judicial
Astrology’.
by literal top-down force is illustrated by the threat of the flying
island’s typical dual response to Balnibarbian
rebellions – the
island hovers and blots out sunlight and rainfall, then descends and literally
crushes the city beneath with
its adamantine
Yet the proactive
actions of Balnibarbi’s second city, Lindalino, countermand this in
staging a rebellion and thwarting Laputa’s
tyrannous force. The message is
that absolutist rule and technology’s violence cannot guarantee successful
good governance and legal decency are required.
Finally, in terms of technology, Swift was clearly not an ‘uninformed
contemporary accuracy of his third voyage’s scientific examples’ has
been recognised and extensively
researched:
Balnibarbi’s Grand Academy of Projectors has been identified with,
variously, London’s Royal Society, Dublin’s
Philosophical Society,
Paris’s Royal Observatory, and the Netherlands’ University of
Leiden; and the Projectors’
fantastic experiments recall, but distort,
actual Royal Society
experiments.
Swift identified
experimental science’s modernism with the Royal Society and rejected its
intellectual pride and ‘intellectual
autonomy divorced from any dependence
on religion or humanistic
tradition’.
despaired that frontier technologies would trump the Ancients’ wisdom and
values, and scientists would ‘overrate
their inventions, downplay
nature’s complexity, and devalue the intelligence and autonomy of
individuals’.
Hence, this concern with, and promotion of, a general sense of intellectual
humility features in each select utopia, whether in its
foreground or
background. Next, this article considers the relation to intellectual humility
of law and technology, particularly
given the developments of frontier
technologies.
3. Frontier Technologies and Intellectual Humility
Frontier technologies are described by the World Intellectual Property
Organisation (WIPO) as emerging or operating ‘at the
intersection of
radical scientific breakthrough and real-world
implementation’.
refer to diverse technologies that, at particular historic moments, are in the
vanguard of scientific research and effectively
advance developments in human
interactions and communications. Today, for instance, they include artificial
intelligence, big data,
nanotechnology, bioprinting and quantum computing. Yet,
as frontier technologies continue to evolve, so do the theorisations of their
anticipated or appropriate methods of operation. Given concerns with the
uncontrolled direction, trajectory or explosion of frontier
technologies,
suggestions have emerged for ‘intellectual humility’ to accompany
their operation.
Recent news media and literature have proposed an ‘emerging
relationship between artificial intelligence, technology, and intellectual
humility’, whereby artificial intelligence (AI) tools are not a
replacement for human intelligence or reasoning, but a complement
characterised
by ‘engagement, discernment, and oversight’, and by being
‘inclusive and considerate of the full
tapestry of human
experience’.
has been characterised both as a field of scientific research and a highly
successful ‘collection of technologies’
human intelligence’.
Yet, coincidentally, a regulatory reflexive turn for ‘grappling with the
risks and opportunities’ of
has been recognised
– transformative and emerging technologies may ‘contribute to human
flourishing’, but they
may equally trigger ‘serious ethical
questions’ concerning freedom, dignity and human
generative AI emerges and the dizzying potential application of AI
‘demands careful moral reflection and political
deliberation’,
‘holistic and humanistic
counselled that presumably includes considerations of intellectual humility.
Admittedly, intellectual humility lacks consensus as a concept. It has
diverse ethical and epistemic antecedents, but its appearance
in recent news
media and literature focuses on its general definition, not its specific
theorisations.
Recent general
definitions include an approach that measures one’s sceptical mind,
recognises one’s fallibility and rejects
one’s over-confidence. At
its core, ‘intellectual humility’ has been described as owning
one’s limitations,
or as being alive to the possibility that one’s
judgment may be wrong.
otherwise been characterised as key to the
open-mindedness
the exploratory drive for appropriate knowledge for community flourishing, and
that grounds the scientific quest for information,
not misinformation. Hence, to
distil this, intellectual humility can be identified as one of scientific
progress’s key
ingredients.
So, what are the applications of this intellectual humility for law and
technology? Speaking generally, potential applications may
include a recognition
that one’s legal or technological judgment, reasoning or understanding
could be fallible. There is a
critical future question concerning who should
exhibit this intellectual humility – humans or computers. Envisaging
potentially
neuromorphic frontier technologies suggests a new frontier of
intellectual humility. But turning to consider the select utopias,
question concerns how this general sense of intellectual humility is implicated
in their appraisals of law and technology.
4. Interplay of Law, Technology and Intellectual Humility
Each of the select utopias – commencing with More’s literary
sensation, moving to Bacon’s technocratic utopian dream
and concluding
with Swift’s dystopian confabulations – engages differently with law
and technology, and with intellectual
humility. In their different approaches to
the significance of intellectual humility, the texts illustrate the
‘modern predicament’
of vacillating between ‘innermost hopes
and ... outward accomplishments’ or, put differently, that
‘[s]cientific
prophet has since alternated with
Swift’s premises in
Gulliver’s Travels
’ third voyage
resonate with More’s virtues and ethics in
‘counter-attack’ the experimental science of Bacon’s
The different
approaches within, or readings of, the texts reveal diverse ethical limits to
science and technology, including More’s
religious humanism (whether
Christian or Erasmian), Bacon’s use of angelic iconography and
Swift’s adoption of the Ancients’
learning and virtues. Hence, the
select utopias offer – or can be the vehicles for – diverse
perspectives on emergent,
transformative frontier technologies and intellectual
Effectively, the select utopias are complex thought experiments: they
problematise technology’s relation to humanity and nature;
they support
pathways of ‘good’ judgment and values; and they reinforce
intellectual humility by recognising how scepticism
and doubt contribute to
judgment’s critical capacities. Relevantly, they recognise the importance
of law that aligns with justice
– More underlined the culling of obscure
or superfluous laws, the reduction of overt legal institutions and the
with lawyers. Yet the select utopias were written in times of
societal innovation and historical inflection or change-points, and
construct untrammelled visions of necessarily good ‘eutopia’.
Instead, they pique questions – for instance,
will an ‘inexorable
slide from Eldorado to Helldorado’
Or does an abundance
of technology improve society? While each text ultimately represents a quest for
flourishing and prosperity,
its interpretation is complicated by wordplay, irony
or satire. Equally, each text’s interpretation can be affected by diverse
agendas, motivations and historical contexts. So, what are the select
utopias’ messages for law and technology’s interplay?
combines an appreciation of effective law with
practical technology, where intellectual humility includes eradicating pride.
technologies are not More’s focus, but ethical limits are, as
signalled by the interfusion of religious humanism (whether Christian
Erasmian) with science. Commentators observe that
typifies central
themes in More’s oeuvre – in particular, equality and
‘abhorrence of
technologies are integrated within Utopia’s institutions of communal
living and common property – this commonality
bridles pride. For the
fictional narrator Hythloday, common property is the ‘single most
important institution for regulating
pride, forestalling social evil, and
fostering the common
For the author
More, pride and pageantry generate the world’s sin and foster
inequality;
humility derives
particularly from religious humanism, and supports equality. To avoid tyranny,
political power is held in common,
discussed in public assemblies, and designed
for the public welfare;
More, pride is the ‘monster, the prince and parent of all plagues’
and so is ignored, as are sartorial ‘splendour’
and ‘imagined
’s obscurities, mixed messages and wordplay not only offered
More a degree of protection from the real perils of publication
text’s trenchant and dangerous critique of English
institutions)
but signalled
to the contemporary reader the importance of prudence in judgment – that
is, one should not be over-confident
in appraising the world. Moreover,
More’s Utopians can be ‘untrustworthy’, as recognised by the
law against, and
punishment for, impure
– the Utopians
are ‘not significantly better by nature; they are better because their
social institutions are
New Atlantis
is loosely modelled on More’s
– it is a technocratic ‘instructive fable’
concerning the boundary between human and divine
Yet, unlike
New Atlantis
notably retains the institution of private
property. A usual reading is that
New Atlantis
‘irradiate[d]’ by an ‘unguarded optimism’ for
contemporary frontier
technologies,
nevertheless presenting obscurities and mixed messages. Characterised as a
materialist
par excellence
, Bacon separates his temple of science from
He showcases the
Bensalemites’ generosity, enlightenment, dignity, splendour, piety and
public spirit, representing the ideal
or desired qualities in a Baconian
statesman. Coincidentally, the usual reading suggests that Bacon offers a
‘belief in the
over-all beneficence of scientifically produced
‘unbounded faith in human rationality, human goodness and in the
beneficence of scientific
essentially, a power for progress. Yet alternate readings exist that express
caution or uneasiness with Bensalem’s
secret laws, with Salomon’s
House’s maximal
‘Bacon’s failure’ to analyse how to safeguard society from the
‘anti-social use of
and with the
iconography of angels and light, where Salomon’s House is the
kingdom’s ultimate
‘lanthorn’.
instance, for Weinberger, the inhabitants of the sole identified Bensalemite
city, Renfusa (meaning ‘sheep-natured’),
appear to be
‘orderliness lobotomised’ – they are ‘denatured’
with ‘super-flat
articulates concerns too with the ‘lawless use of technological
power’ and the ‘limits of the conquest
of nature’ –
Bensalem’s laws of secrecy and the absence of safeguards of freedom offer
a ‘decidedly mixed
for Liebeskind, the sailors’ identification of Bensalem with a ‘land
of angels’, and the iconography
of ‘angelic’ qualities and
cherubim, have darker implications. Liebeskind articulates concerns that
quest for knowledge and power, together with science and
technology, is ‘totally without internal
direction’.
‘terrible revealing image’ of ‘awesome and terrifying’
technological power, Bensalem is not a model
intellectual humility and prudence in judgment is a pathway to recognising the
distinction between human and divine power.
Finally, Swift’s third voyage of
Gulliver’s Travels
a savage parody of law and technology – it excoriates ‘human
and lambasts the
‘new science’. Shortsightedness and excessive pride characterise the
new science and go hand in hand
in Swift’s depiction of the
‘scientist as poor practical reasoner’ – if flawed scientists
are ‘invested
with cultural authority or political power’, the
message is that epistemic failures can have devastating social
repercussions.
Swift’s sense of humility is strongly coloured by his Christian belief
– his concern is with derailing human
‘well-grounded, sceptical and pessimistic churchman, with his
philosophical roots well in the seventeenth century’,
Swift is no advocate
for what he perceives to be eighteenth-century ‘pseudo-rational
He presents
the science that he deprecates as bearing no sufficient practicality, nor
morality or ethics. He scathingly attacks abstract
science and frontier
technologies for grounding the follies of London’s Royal Society natural
philosophers who were identified
as following Bacon’s scientific method
and experimental science precepts. To underline, Swift is not rejecting
scientific knowledge
expressing a backward-looking longing for the Ancients’ wisdom and virtues
(including intellectual humility and
prudence in judgment) to underpin
5. Conclusion
In light of the select utopias’ discourse, where to from here? Frontier
technologies may present the extremes of unalloyed good
or apocalyptic
consequences, yet the ‘powers of frontier technologies do not offer
unreserved comfort, never mind visions of
utopias of More, Bacon and Swift suggest that intellectual humility can assist
the operation of law and technology. Notably,
More, Bacon and Swift were not
ivory-tower writers – each was a well-informed, multi-disciplinary
individual with a public
presence that was variously political, legal or
religious. Their select utopias offer examples of thought-provoking correctives
the notion that law and technology is necessarily good and risk-free, and
reminders that technological visions can be deficient.
For frontier technologies
may be propelled by agendas that lack balance or judgment – they may
intend to promote unalloyed
good but may ignore risks and dangers.
Recent calls for intellectual humility to accompany the growth of law and
technology have antecedents in the select utopias considered
in this article
– each text considers what comprises human judgment. More and Swift
clearly abhor excessive pride and uphold
social virtues and prudence in
judgment. Bacon’s temple of science lacks overt articulation of the
‘guiding principles
of the technological project’ but is grounded in
a landscape of Christian
and, again, prudence
in judgment. Ostensibly, what
New Atlantis
may present as utopia is
repackaged and distorted in
Gulliver’s Travels
third voyage as
– for Swift,
the excessive ‘spirit of experimentation’ is ‘contrary to a
sense of decency and humanity’
and so undermines the ‘true sense of
community’. Yet the problems sketched in
Gulliver’s Travels
may not be anomalies but may be ‘typical of ... modern
In addition,
Bacon’s temple of science with its dizzying frontier technologies may
present warnings of the potential danger
of a project lacking limits and not
heeding intellectual humility.
For all the variable interpretations of the select utopias canvassed here,
perhaps More’s
best summarises an approach that encapsulates
the interplay of law and technologies with intellectual
’s conclusion, character More admits, via an aside to the
reader, that he retains objections to Utopian life but, to accommodate,
his hand to Hythloday in a ‘gesture of friendship and a prospective
This instances
an openness to understanding and an accommodation of frontier perspectives.
Moreover, not only does it instance an
iteration of intellectual humility by one
who may not be a visionary, it is a gesture to future hope.
Acknowledgements
My sincere thanks to the Narratives, Frontier Technologies, and the Law
Conference organisers, to the
Law, Technology and Humans
team, and to the
peer reviewers for their valuable comments.
Bibliography
Adams, Robert P. “The Social
Responsibilities of Science in Utopia, New Atlantis and After.”
of the History of Ideas
10, no 3 (1949): 374–398.
Bacon, Francis.
New Atlantis and The Great Instauration
. Edited by
Jerry Weinberger. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 2017.
Benedict, Barbara M. “A Voyage to Laputa, Balnibarbi, Luggnagg,
The Cambridge Companion to Gulliver's Travels
by Daniel Cook and Nicholas Seager, 150–163. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2023.
Brink, J.R. “From the Utopians to the Yahoos: Thomas More and Jonathan
The Journal of the Rutgers University Libraries
(1980): 59–66.
Carpenter, Rob. “9 Ways to Create an ‘Intellectually
Humble’ Classroom.”
, April 9, 2024,
https://daily.jstor.org/9-ways-to-create-an-intellectually-humble-classroom
Caudle, Mildred Witt. “Sir Thomas More’s Utopia: Origins and
Social Science
45, no 3 (1970): 163–169.
Cooper, Davina.
Everyday Utopias: The Conceptual Life of Promising
. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2014.
Davis, J.C. “More, Morton, and the Politics of Accommodation.”
Journal of British Studies
9, no 2 (1970): 27–40.
Davis, J.C. “Thomas More’s
: Sources, Legacy and
Interpretation. In
The Cambridge Companion to Utopian Literature
by Gregory Claeys, 28–50. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Dickson, Michael. “Intellectual Humility is a Key Ingredient for
Scientific Progress.”
The Conversation
, December 7, 2023,
https://theconversation.com/intellectual-humility-is-a-key-ingredient-for-scientific-progress-211410
Douglas, Laurence, Austin Sarat and Martha Merrill Umphrey. “Law and
the Utopian Imagination: An Introduction.” In
Law and the Utopian
Imagination
, edited by Austin Sarat, Laurence Douglas and Martha Merrill
Umphrey, 1–22. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2014.
Eagleton, Terry. “Utopias, Past and Present: Why Thomas More Remains
Astonishingly Radical.”
The Guardian
, October 16, 2015,
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/16/utopias-past-present-thomas-more-terry-eagleton
Falk, Michael. “Artificial Stupidity.”
Interdisciplinary
Science Reviews
46, nos 1–2 (2021): 36–52.
Frietzsche, Arthur. “The Impact of Applied Science Upon the Utopian
Brigham Young University Studies
3, nos 3–4 (1961):
Goodwin, William. “Volatile Spirits: Scientists and Society in
Gulliver’s Third Voyage.” In
Jonathan Swift and Philosophy
edited by Janelle Potzsch, 67–83. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2017.
Hale, Kimberly Hurd.
Francis Bacon's New Atlantis in the Foundation of
Modern Political Thought
. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2013.
Harp, Jerry. “Afterword.” In
by Thomas More,
translated by Clarence H Miller, 141–160. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 2014.
Higgins, Ian. “Why Jonathan Swift Wanted to ‘Vex the World’
with Gulliver’s Travels.”
The Guardian
, May 9, 2018,
https://theconversation.com/why-jonathan-swift-wanted-to-vex-the-world-with-gullivers-travels-94972
Houghton, Ruth and Aoife O’Donoghue. “Utopia as
‘No-Place’: Utopias, Colonialism and International Law.”
Law Text Culture
27 (2023): 204–227.
JSTOR Editors. “What if AI Operated with Intellectual Humility?”
, January 24, 2024,
https://daily.jstor.org/what-if-ai-operated-with-intellectual-humility/
Kadar, Zoltan and Janos I Toth. “The Critique of Technology in 20th
Century Philosophy and Dystopias.”
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.01.008
Kearney, Dutton B. “Swift’s Critique of Philosophical
Materialism.” In
Jonathan Swift and Philosophy
, edited by Janelle
Potzsch, 103–129. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2017.
Knowles, Ronald.
Gulliver's Travels: The Politics of Satire
. New York:
Twayne, 1996.
Lancaster, Ashlie. “Instantiating Critical Utopia.”
11, no 1 (2000): 109–119.
Liebeskind, Louise. “If Scientists Were Angels.”
74 (2023): 72–89.
Lucas, Peter. “Bacon’s
New Atlantis
and the Fictional
Origins of Organised Science.”
Open Cultural Studies
Martiny, Erik. “Helldorado.”
The Cambridge Quarterly
no 4 (2011): 384–388.
McKnight, Stephen A. “Reconsideration: Francis Bacon’s God: The
Religious Foundations of the ‘New Atlantis’.”
10 (2005): 73–100.
Miller, Clarence H. “Introduction.” In
, by Thomas
More, translated by Clarence H Miller, vii–xxiii. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 2014.
Mills, M Anthony. “A President’s Council on Artificial
Intelligence.”
New Atlantis
75 (2024): 100–107.
More, Thomas.
. Translated by Clarence H Miller. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press, 2014.
Moylan, Tom.
Demand the Impossible: Science Fiction and the Utopian
Imagination
. Edited by Raffaela Baccolini. Bern: Peter Lang, 2014.
Moylan, Tom. “Introduction to the Classics Edition.” In
the Impossible: Science Fiction and the Utopian Imagination
, edited by
Raffaela Baccolini, ix–xxviii. Bern: Peter Lang, 2014.
Moylan, Tom. “Transgressive, Totalizing, Transformative: Utopia’s
Utopian Surplus.”
Utopian Studies
29, no 3 (2018):
Nicholson, Marjorie and Nora M Mohler. “The Scientific Background of
Swift’s ‘Voyage to Laputa’.”
Annals of Science
(1937): 299–334.
Nicholson, Marjorie and Nora M Mohler. “Swift’s ‘Flying
Island’ in the ‘Voyage to Laputa’.”
2, no 4 (1937): 405-430.
Niezen, Ronald.
#Human Rights: The Technologies and Politics of Justice
Claims in Practice
. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2020.
Noletto, Israel AC, and Sebastião Alves Teixeira Lopes.
“Glossopoesis in Thomas More’s Utopia: Beyond a Representation
Foreignness.”
230 (2019): 357–368.
O’Har, George. “Technology and its Discontents.”
Technology and Culture
45, no 2 (2004): 479–485.
Paul, Joanne. “‘Nothing is Private Anywhere’: Utopia in the
Context of More’s Thought.” In
The Oxford Handbook of Thomas
More's Utopia
, edited by Cathy Shrank and Phil Withington, 89–104.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2023.
Paul, Joanne. "Beyond Utopia: Thomas More as a Political Thinker.”
History of European Ideas
50, no 3 (2024): 353–369.
Robertson, Lloyd W.
Political Philosophy in Gulliver’s Travels:
Shocked by The Just Society
. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2022.
Rubin, Charles T. “The Ancients’ Tech Anxiety.”
60 (2019): 80–86.
Salzman, Paul. “Narrative Contexts for Bacon’s New
Atlantis.” In
Francis Bacon's New Atlantis: New Interdisciplinary
, edited by Jeff Wallace, John Whale and Bronwen Price, 28–47.
Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2003.
Samaan, Angele B. “Death and the Death-Penalty in More’s Utopia
and Some Utopian Novels.”
23, no 90 (1986): 5–15.
Sargent, Lyman Tower. “Five Hundred Years of Thomas More's Utopia and
Utopianism.”
Utopian Studies
27, no 2 (2016): 184–192.
Sargent, Lyman Tower. “A Note on the Other Side of Human Nature in the
Utopian Novel.”
Political Theory
3, no 1 (1975): 88–97.
Sargisson, Lucy.
Fool’s Gold? Utopianism in the Twenty-First
. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012.
Schultz, Karen. “Griffith the Utopian.” In
The Many Hats of
Sir Samuel Griffith
. Exhibition. Brisbane: Supreme Court Library Queensland,
https://www.sclqld.org.au/services/public-programs/exhibitions/the-many-hats-of-sir-samuel-griffith
Schultz, Karen. “Schmitt's Roman Links in
The Buribunks
Enriching the Satire.” In
Carl Schmitt and The Buribunks: Technology,
Law, Literature
, edited by Kieran Tranter and Edwin Bikundo, 254–278.
London: Routledge, 2022.
Schultz, Karen. “Schmitt’s Satire in
The Buribunks
Intertextual Links in Diary-writing’s Dystopia.”
Griffith Law
28, no 2 (2019): 206–230.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10383441.2019.1672253
Schultz, Karen. “Sir Samuel Griffith and Utopia: Characterising the
Politician.” In
Cultural Legal Studies of Science Fiction
by Alex Green, Mitchell Travis and Kieran Tranter, 174–194. London:
Routledge, 2024.
Simon, Ed. “In Search of Thomas More’s Utopia.”
, 13 October 2020,
https://tribunemag.co.uk/2020/10/in-search-of-thomas-mores-utopia
Sutherland, John H. “A Reconsideration of Gulliver's Third
Studies in Philology
54, no 1 (1957): 45–52.
Swift, Jonathan.
Gulliver’s Travels
. Edited by Robert DeMaria
Jr. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 2003.
Tranter, Kieran.
Living in Technical Legality: Science Fiction and Law as
. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2018.
Tranter, Kieran. “Terror in the Texts: Technology – Law –
Law and Critique
13 (2002): 75–99.
Tranter, Kieran. “The Magnitudes of Law and Science Fiction.” In
Cultural Legal Studies of Science Fiction
, edited by Alex Green, Mitchell
Travis and Kieran Tranter, 17–41. London: Routledge, 2024.
Travis, Mitchell and Kieran Tranter. “Interrogating Absence: The Lawyer
in Science Fiction.”
International Journal of the Legal Profession
21, no 1 (2014): 23–37.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09695958.2014.946932
Travis, Mitchell. “Dystopian Jurisprudence.” In
Cultural Legal
Studies of Science Fiction
, edited by Alex Green, Mitchell Travis and Kieran
Tranter, 45–61. London: Routledge, 2024.
van Klink, Bart. “The Rule of Law: Between Ideology and Utopia.”
Utopian Thinking in Law, Politics, Architecture and Technology: Hope in a
Hopeless World
, edited by Bart van Klink, Marta Soniewicka and Leon van den
Broeke, 38–58. Cheltenham: Edward Edgar, 2022.
van Klink, Bart, Marta Soniewicka and Leon van den Broeke.
“Introduction: A Return to Utopia.” In
Utopian Thinking in Law,
Politics, Architecture and Technology: Hope in a Hopeless World
, edited by
Bart van Klink, Marta Soniewicka and Leon van den Broeke, 2–18.
Cheltenham: Edward Edgar, 2022.
Vieira, Fatima. “The Concept of Utopia.” In
The Cambridge
Companion to Utopian Literature
, edited by Gregory Claeys, 3–27.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Weinberger, Jerry. “On the Miracles in Bacon’s New
Atlantis.” In
Francis Bacon's New Atlantis: New Interdisciplinary
, edited by Jeff Wallace, John Whale and Bronwen Price, 106–128.
Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2003.
Weinberger, Jerry. “Introduction to the Second Edition.” In
New Atlantis and The Great Instauration
, edited by Francis Bacon and
Jerry Weinberger, xv–xxi. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 2017.
Weinberger, Jerry. “On Bacon’s New Atlantis.” In
Atlantis and The Great Instauration
, edited by Francis Bacon and Jerry
Weinberger, 133–157. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 2017.
White, Thomas I. “Pride and the Public Good: Thomas More's Use of Plato
in Utopia.”
Journal of the History of Philosophy
20, no 4 (1982):
WIPO. “Frontier Technologies.”
https://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/about-ip/en/frontier_technologies/pdf/frontier-tech-6th-factsheet.pdf
WIPO. “Intellectual Property and Frontier Technologies.”
https://www.wipo.int/about-ip/en/frontier_technologies
The use of ‘utopia’
broadly includes ‘dystopia’: Samaan, “Death and the
Death-Penalty,” 5.
O’Har, “Technology
and its Discontents,” 479.
Travis, “Dystopian
Jurisprudence,” 45, 50ff; Tranter, “Terror in the Texts”;
Sargisson, Fool’s Gold,
“Introduction,” 2–3; Sargisson, Fool’s Gold,
Schultz, “Schmitt’s
Roman Links” and “Schmitt’s Satire”, for Schmitt’s
fictional and non-fictional
works inflected with utopian references; Schultz,
“Sir Samuel Griffith” and “Griffith the Utopian”, for
reading of fictional and non-fictional utopias that influenced
his law reforms.
“Introduction,” 3; Lancaster, “Instantiating Critical
Utopia,” 111; Cooper, Everyday Utopias.
Sargisson, Fool’s Gold,
6–40; Lancaster, “Instantiating Critical Utopia”; Moylan,
Demand the Impossible,
10–11 (on critical utopia).
Douglas, “Law,” 4,
6; van Klink, “The Rule of Law,” 40ff.
Douglas, “Law,” 2;
van Klink, “Introduction,” 4ff; Moylan, “Transgressive,”
Houghton and
O’Donoghue, “Utopia as ‘No-Place’,” 205; van
Klink, “Introduction,” 7.
van Klink, “The Rule
of Law,” 56.
Kadar, “Critique of
Technology,” 54, 55.
“Technology and its Discontents,” 479, 480.
“Technology and its Discontents,” 479.
“Ancients’ Tech Anxiety,” 80.
“Ancients’ Tech Anxiety,” 81.
“Ancients’ Tech Anxiety,” 81.
“Ancients’ Tech Anxiety,” 86.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 182–183.
Samaan, “Death and the
Death-Penalty,” 5.
“Transgressive,” 309 (Title, Abstract), 311; Lancaster,
“Instantiating Critical Utopia,” 111.
“Instantiating Critical Utopia,” 111; van Klink,
“Introduction,” 6; Moylan, Demand the Impossible,
“Introduction,” xxii.
Adams, “Social
Responsibilities of Science,” 374.
Adams, “Social
Responsibilities of Science,” 374–375.
Tranter, “The
Magnitudes,” 17.
Tranter, “Terror in
the Texts,” 75, 76.
Tranter, “Terror in
the Texts,” 75, 82, respectively.
Tranter, “Living in
Technical Legality,” 193, 191, respectively.
Eagleton, “Utopias,
Past and Present.”
Vieira, “Concept of
Utopia,” 4; Davis, “Thomas More’s Utopia.”
“Afterward,” 154.
Davis, “Thomas
More’s Utopia,” 29; Book 1 (1516, London); Book 2 (1515,
Netherlands).
Davis, “More,
Morton,” 40–41.
Paul, “Beyond
Utopia,” 353.
Sargent, “Five Hundred
Years,” 185; Noletto, “Glossopoesis,” 361–362.
“Introduction,” viii; Noletto, “Glossopoesis,”
Vieira, “Concept of
Utopia,” 5: “lexical neologism (utopia) and a derivation neologism
(eutopia)”.
Sargent, “Five Hundred
Years,” 185.
Vieira, “Concept of
Utopia,” 5.
“Glossopoesis,” 358.
“Glossopoesis,” 362–363; Amaurote (“invisible
vere aureus, nec minus salutaris quam festivus
More, Utopia,
“Afterward,” 154–155.
“Introduction,” ix.
“Introduction,” ix.
More, Utopia, 134.
More, Utopia, 134; Harp,
“Afterward,” 155.
More, Utopia, 135.
Query a criminal code:
Brink, “Utopians to the Yahoos,” 59–60.
More, Utopia, 101, 102.
More, Utopia, 101-102.
Travis and Tranter,
“Interrogating Absence,” 34, 25, respectively.
Travis and Tranter,
“Interrogating Absence,” 26.
Sargent, “A
More, Utopia, 102.
More, Utopia,
Frietzsche, “Impact of
Applied Science,” 36.
More, Utopia, 94, 92,
respectively.
More, Utopia, 86.
More, Utopia, 57.
More, Utopia, 94.
More, Utopia, 92.
More, Utopia, 94.
More, Utopia, 80.
More, Utopia, 117; Sargent,
“Five Hundred Years,” 186–187.
More, Utopia, 93–94,
supplied by Hythloday.
“Afterward,” 158.
Lucas, “Bacon’s
New Atlantis,” 115.
Sargent, ”Five Hundred
Years,” 187.
Weinberger,
“Introduction,” xix–xx.
Bacon died on 9 April 1626,
and William Rawley published
New Atlantis
: Lucas, “Bacon’s
New Atlantis,” 115.
Lucas, “Bacon’s
New Atlantis,” 115.
“Son of Peace”:
Liebeskind, “If Scientists Were Angels,” 74.
Bacon, New Atlantis, 98ff;
‘functions’ otherwise appears as ‘offices’ (108).
Adams, “Social
Responsibilities of Science,” 386.
Less probably, Plato:
Weinberger, “On Bacon’s New Atlantis,” 148; Weinberger,
“On the Miracles,” 109.
Bacon, New Atlantis, 95
(emphasis in original).
Queried (Weinberger,
“On the Miracles,” 109) and adopted (Salzman, “Narrative
Contexts,” 28).
Bacon, New Atlantis,
Adams, “Social
Responsibilities of Science,” 382.
Adams, “Social
Responsibilities of Science,” 386.
Adams, “Social
Responsibilities of Science,” 387.
Adams, “Social
Responsibilities of Science,” 387.
Weinberger, “On the
Miracles,” 106.
Liebeskind, “If
Scientists Were Angels,” 76.
Frietzsche, “Impact of
Applied Science,” 37.
Frietzsche, “Impact of
Applied Science,” 38; Adams, “Social Responsibilities of
Science,” 387.
Liebeskind, “If
Scientists Were Angels,” 80.
Weinberger, “On the
Miracles,” 107.
Liebeskind, “If
Scientists Were Angels,” 80.
Liebeskind, “If
Scientists Were Angels,” 81.
Hale, “Francis
Bacon’s New Atlantis,” 4.
Hale, “Francis
Bacon’s New Atlantis,” 11.
McKnight, “Francis
Bacon’s God,” 85.
Bacon, New Atlantis, 86.
Liebeskind, “If
Scientists Were Angels,” 83.
Bacon, New Atlantis, 108.
“Bacon’s New Atlantis,” 116.
Bacon, New Atlantis, 107,
Sargent, “Five
Hundred Years,” 186-187.
Adams, “Social
Responsibilities of Science,” 376.
Benedict, “A
Voyage,” 151, 150.
Sutherland, “A
Reconsideration,” 46.
Sutherland, “A
Reconsideration,” 47.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 150, 155.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 148.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 152.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 152.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 155.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 148–149.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 150; “Hautboys” (oboes) n 11.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 153.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 163.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 164.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 164.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 164.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 164–165.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 167.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 167–168.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 169.
Falk, “Artificial
Stupidity,” 44.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 171 (original).
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 179.
Benedict, “A
Voyage,” 155.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 180.
Sutherland, “A
Reconsideration,” 47.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 183.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 182–183.
Brink, “Utopians to
the Yahoos,” 63, 66.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 184; Sutherland, “A Reconsideration,” 47–48.
Goodwin, “Volatile
Spirits,” 70–71.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 192.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 194.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 196.
Higgins, “Why
Jonathan Swift.”
Frietzsche, “Impact
of Applied Science,” 39.
Benedict, “A
Voyage,” 162.
Sutherland, “A
Reconsideration,” 45.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 155, 152.
Swift, Gulliver’s
Travels, 159–160.
Goodwin, “Volatile
Spirits,” 68.
Nicholson and Mohler,
”Scientific Background”; Nicholson and Mohler, “Swift’s
‘Flying Island’”;
Knowles, ”Gulliver’s
Travels,” 103ff.
Nicholson and Mohler,
”Scientific Background”; Nicholson and Mohler, ”Swift’s
‘Flying Island’.”
”Gulliver’s Travels,” 100.
Falk, “Artificial
Stupidity,” 45.
WIPO, “Frontier
Technologies.”
JSTOR Editors,
“What if AI Operated.’ Interview/Podcast paragraph [5], Heng Li
“President’s Council,” 102 (original).
“President’s Council,” 100.
“President’s Council,” 102.
“President’s Council,” 103.
“President’s Council,” 102, 105.
JSTOR Editors,
“What if AI Operated.”
Carpenter, “9
“Intellectual Humility.”
“Intellectual Humility.”
Frietzsche, “Impact
of Applied Science,” 41.
Frietzsche, “Impact
of Applied Science,” 41.
“Helldorado,” 388.
Paul, “Beyond
Utopia,” 355.
White, “Pride and
the Public Good,” 343.
Paul, “Nothing is
Private,” 93–95.
Paul, “Nothing is
Private,” 97–98.
More, Utopia, 68, 77, 85,
Caudle, “Sir Thomas
More’s Utopia,” 168.
Sargent, “A
Sargent, “A
Liebeskind, “If
Scientists Were Angels,” 74.
Adams, “Social
Responsibilities of Science,” 391.
Adams, “Social
Responsibilities of Science,” 391–392.
Adams, “Social
Responsibilities of Science,” 391.
Adams, “Social
Responsibilities of Science,” 390.
Adams, “Social
Responsibilities of Science,” 390–391.
Adams, “Social
Responsibilities of Science,” 393.
Bacon, New Atlantis,
Weinberger, “On the
Miracles,” 107.
Weinberger, “On the
Miracles,” 110.
Liebeskind, “If
Scientists Were Angels,” 88.
Liebeskind, “If
Scientists Were Angels,” 88-89.
“Swift’s Critique,” 104.
Goodwin, “Volatile
Spirits,” 70–71.
“Swift’s Critique,” 103–104.
Sutherland, “A
Reconsideration,” 50.
“Swift’s Critique,” 104.
Niezen, #Human Rights,
Weinberger, “On the
Miracles,” 110.
Robertson, Political
Philosophy, 4.
Robertson, Political
Philosophy, 4.
More, Utopia, 134.
“Afterward,” 159–160.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (329 KB)
PDF format (490 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter