URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AULegHist/2007/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:36:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hawkes, Emma --- "Preliminary Notes on Consent in the 1382 Rape and Ravishment Laws of Richard II" [2007] AULegHist 6; (2007) 11(1) Legal History 117
Preliminary Notes on Consent in the 1382 Rape and Ravishment Laws of Richard II
I Legislative Framework
II Court Records
III Rape and Ravishment in the Legal Records
IV Rape and Ravishment of Wives
V Rape and Ravishment of Daughters
VI Rape and Ravishment of Servants
VII Rape and Ravishment of Other Women
VIII Consent in Records of Rape and Ravishment
IX Conclusions
Preliminary Notes on Consent in the 1382 Rape and
Ravishment Laws of Richard II
EMMA HAWKES
The focus of this work is on late-medieval conceptions of consent in rape and
ravishment cases, and, in particular, on whether these
understandings changed
after the promulgation of the 1382 statute against rape and ravishment. I
consider how consent was defined
in the courts, what importance was given to the
category, and whether the concept was significantly revised in the
late-fourteenth
The statute of 6 Richard II has traditionally been seen as a
‘fundamental modification’ of the English common law of rape
ravishment, but this evaluation is based purely on the wording of the statute
and does not consider how the law was interpreted
I test the proposition that
the 1382 statute represented a significant legal change through an examination
of a sample of 132 indictments
of rape and ravishment made before itinerate
justices in the late-fourteenth century. These records are formulaic, but in the
of the indictments something of the conceptualisation of consent in rape
and ravishment cases can be seen.
I Legislative Framework
The issue of consent in rape and ravishment was a complex one in medieval
law. The modern distinction between rape - for the purposes
of this article
defined as forcible coitus – and ravishment – here defined as
abduction which did not necessarily involve
forcible coitus – was blurred
in medieval common law.
Bracton described both as being ‘forcibly ravished against the
king’s peace’ (
violenter oppressam contra pacem domini
The late thirteenth- or
early fourteenth-century
Mirror of Justice
described both abduction and
forced coitus as rape.
terms were used to describe the crimes in indictments, and both rape and
ravishment were covered by the same
The first statute law on the subject of rape and ravishment was passed by
Edward I. Chapter 13 of Westminster II (1275) defined ravishment
abduction of a girl under the age of fourteen whether she consented or not, and
as the abduction of a woman over the age of
fourteen without her consent. 3
Edward I prohibited ‘ravish[ing or] tak[ing] away by force’
ravise ne preigne a force
) women ‘against [their] will’
malgre foen
punishment was downgraded from the rarely enforced castration and blinding of
post-Conquest law, and instead a penalty of two
years imprisonment and a fine
was set. Further, this statute changed the Anglo-Saxon ruling on who had the
right to initiate legal
proceedings. The abused woman was no longer the sole
potential complainant. If a case had not been lodged within forty days, the
had the right to sue.
A decade later, in 1285 this law was revised, and chapter 34 of Westminster
II upgraded ravishment to a felony and a capital offence.
It was declared that
even if the ravished woman later consented, the ravisher was still to be tried.
This meant that it was a felony
to rape or ravish women ‘even if they
consented afterwards’ (
ele se assente
Punishments for a man
who took a nun from her house, even with her consent, were outlined. The statute
also introduced an innovation
under which a woman who willingly left her husband
was debarred from inheritance unless she was reconciled with him and living with
him when he died. This was intended to prevent women from willingly leaving with
men under the guise of abductions, but the statute
also points to some
ambivalence about the importance of the women's consent if this agreement came
only after the rape or abduction.
This ambivalence was continued in the legislation of 6 Richard II in 1382.
Chapter 6 debarred the ravisher from inheritance. It was
stated that if a woman
was ravished and then consented, she too was cut off from all inheritance, dower
or joint-enfeoffment. Both
inheritances passed on as if those involved in the
abduction were dead. 6 Richard II ‘disabled’ (
‘ravishers’ (
) and women who ‘after such rape
do consent to such ravishers’ (
post huius ... raptum juismodi rap ...
consenserint
). This concern with consent after the ravishment stemmed from
the fact that some crimes were reconciled by marriages between the
rapists and
their victims, a pattern which made it possible for women to elope in the guise
of ravishment with partners their parents
did not approve of and for men to
abduct women and arrange advantageous
Although rape and
ravishment were defined as actions which took place against the will of the
women, there was a mistrust for those
cases where women agreed to the abduction
after the fact.
Most importantly, 6 Richard II authorised the women’s paternal
guardians to pursue the cases if the women would not take them
This change has been
described as completing ‘the extension of legal wrong from the woman to
her family’
reinforcing the ‘prevailing view ... that families had the right to the
final decision’.
provision was a significant change to the law. Prior to that point criminal
proceedings against rapists and abductors could
be brought by the victims or by
officials; after 1382 the male kin could also bring actions.
This article considers some of the litigation arising from the legislation in
order to examine whether there was a fundamental modification
in the ways rape
and ravishment cases were brought to the courts. Specifically the focus is on
whether men were more involved in
bringing indictments after the law was
promulgated and whether the way consent was defined changed in rape and
ravishment cases.
To this end I examined 132 indictments of rape and ravishment
brought before itinerate sessions of local justice in the late fourteenth
II Court Records
I examined 132 indictments of rape and ravishment brought before sessions of
goal delivery, oyer and terminer, trailbaston and King’s
Bench in the late
fourteenth century to consider how accusations of rape or abduction were made
and how consent was defined. I have
included all indictments in these records
which used verbs such as
carnaliter cognito
to describe crimes
against women.
Some caveats about the records must be made. Significantly more records
survive from the period 1382 to 1399 than for the period 1352
Improvements in record keeping in reign of Richard II mean that there are 20
surviving rape and ravishment indictments from
the period 1352 to 1381 and 112
from the period 1382 to 1399.
The records are indictments only. They are not decisions and the ultimate
conclusions in the cases are unknown. Most importantly,
the sources follow
formulaic legal conventions.
royal judges gathered juries of local men and instructed them to investigate and
list breaches of the peace. These representatives
of the townships gave the
indictments orally in the courts where they were fashioned into formal Latin
records by the clerks and
the judges. The documents were heavily mediated and
had to include certain legal phrases, but some still preserve a degree of
individuality.
So, for instance, a 1357-8 indictment said the accused ‘lay with’
Joan Iweyn (
Iohanna concubuit
). This was a standard formulation but the
scribe added that he was ‘a common prowler and malefactor and breaker of
et quod est communis noctauigans et communis malefactor et
perturbator pacis
Similarly, in 1392 John de Kyrkeby was described as a ‘common
) who peered through various men’s
windows with evil intent before breaking into the house of John Brineman and
raping his wife
Agnetem ux'em ipius Johis Brineman ...
A marginal note was
made about the indictment of Robert Traunter in 1362 or 1363. The scribe wrote
‘felony’ next to the
These variants
and notes were not legal requirements. Rather, they can be examined for some
insights into how the scribes regarded
the crimes they described. It is even
possible that they reflect the ways the juries described the accusations to the
Jury records are particularly important in understanding cases of medieval
rape and ravishment.
indictments have been read closely, and it is arguable that the phrases
describe both rape
and ravishment.
On the other
hand, the phrases
carnaliter cognito
seem to describe
what would today be recognised as rape or forced
These nuances –
and other details preserved in the records of the local justices – are
examined for understandings of
the conceptualisation of rape and ravishment in
the fourteenth century.
There are many limitations to these sources but it may be tentatively
suggested that these records do not show a clear cut or straightforward
brought about by the 1382 statute.
III Rape and Ravishment in
the Legal Records
Comparisons of the men named in the indictments shows similarity between the
pre-1382 and post-1382 groups. There were twenty one
men named in the twenty
pre-1382 indictments. That is to say, there were twenty indictments, one of
which named two men. The largest
identifiable group of the accused were clerics,
possibly because the rape charge was sometimes used to admonish sexually active
In addition to the
seven clerics (33.3%), one man was identified as a servant (4.7%) and one as a
tailor (4.7%).
These men can be contrasted with the group of 152 men named in the 112
post-1382 indictments. Thirty five of these men were clerics
(23.0%), eight were
servants (5.2%) and seven were tailors (4.6%). No further details on the men
were recorded, but this scant information
suggests the composition of the groups
of accused rapists and abductors did not vary significantly over time.
Likewise, very little change over time can be detected in profile of the
women described as victims of rape or ravishment. In most
legal records of the
time women were defined by their marital status – as daughters, wives or
widows. In both periods most
of the women named in indictments of rape and
ravishment were wives.
Groups of Women
Miscellaneous
Table One: Marital Status of Women Listed in Rape and
Ravishment Indictments
There were 14 wives in the pre-1382 group (70%) and 74 in the post-1382 group
(65.5%). Wives were the clear majority in both time
periods. Wives were
described in the court records using the formula ‘Jane, wife of John
In both pre- and post-1392 groups the next largest sets were women described
using the formula ‘Jane, daughter of John Smith’.
There were 4
daughters in the pre-1382 group (20%) an 18 in the post-1382 group (15.9%).
A small number of women were widows and servants. They were also described in
relation to men, as ‘Jane, wife of the late John
‘Jane, servant of John Smith’. Additionally, there were a handful of
women whose status can only be inferred
from the unusual absence of male
relatives in the descriptions of them in the legal records. This small group has
been classed as
miscellaneous in this analysis.
IV Rape and Ravishment of Wives
88 of the 132 indictments listed crimes against wives. Rape and abduction
were predominantly presented in the courts as crimes enacted
against married
The majority of these indictments – 67 of the 88 – also alleged
that property had been taken when the wives were raped
or abducted. The value
ascribed to the stolen property varied from 40 pennies to 20 marks, but, given
that it was often described
as consisting of cloth of wool and linen, in many
cases it seems likely that this property was the women's clothing. So the
of Walter Pylmere for the rape of Matilda, the wife of John Smith,
noted that he had taken goods, especially one ‘clota’
shillings with a ‘towaylle’ worth sixpence and ‘one parr bedes
de ambyr’ worth two
The fact that men
owned the stolen property was underlined in records such as the 1387 indictment
of Robert, the vicar of Bydford,
for the rape of Margaret, the wife of Robert
And [the jurors] said that Robert, vicar de Bydford came to the house of Robert
Hugges ... and raped Margaret, wife of the said Robert
Hugges at Bydford, and
took goods of the said Robert, especially cloth and ‘bedes de
lambre’ to the value of ten marks.
Et dicunt quod Robertus, vicar de Bydford venit ad domum Robertus Hugges...
et rapuit Margaretam ux[or] predicti Robertus, et dicunt
quod idem Robertus
cepit et abduxit bona et catalla de preficti Robertus, vidilicit pannus et
bedes de lambre ad valenciam 10
The clerk of the Michaelmas session at Berkshire in 1387 was not content to
describe the theft of goods along with abduction of the
women and inserted
comments that the goods were belongings ‘of
indictment of Thomas Duke included the accusation that he had taken the goods of
Robert Hackworthy
(bonis et catallis euisdem Robti
Even more strikingly, one of the few cases not to include this allegation
instead bothered to note that William, the servant of John
Est, had damaged
goods to the value of sixpence when he broke into William de Kele’s house
and raped his wife.
suggests that the property crimes were an adjunct to the crimes against women,
used to reinforce the accusations.
The theft of property was consistently described with the verbs
while descriptions of actions enacted against
women very often used the ambiguous verb
. A typical example is the
accusation that Henry Orius Wygorm ‘
’ Katerina, the
wife of John Henke, and ‘
cepit et asportit
’ goods to the
value of 40 shillings in 1387 in
Gloucestershire.
difficult, if not impossible, to determine whether Katerina was abducted, raped,
or left voluntarily with Henry.
On the other hand, it is sometimes possible to infer the nature of the crime
with some confidence. Another indictment was brought
before the same
Gloucestershire session of King's Bench in 1387 which stated that Adam Papu had
’ Elena, the wife of Robert Tyler, and ‘laid
with her carnally’ (
cum ea carnaliste
He was also
accused of ‘taking’ (
cepit et asportit
) goods, specifically
cloth to the value of 40 shillings. These two indictments described similar
crimes but the scribe’s additions
make it clear that Elena was sexually
The consistent use of different verbs to describe the theft of goods and
crimes against women suggests a clear distinction was made
between crimes of
property and crimes against the person. It is, however, difficult to know what
meant. Crimes described with this verb remain ambiguous,
but additions were sometimes made which seem to clarify the jurors'
understandings
of the crimes.
V Rape and Ravishment of Daughters
The 132 indictments for rape and ravishment included 22 presentments that
defined women in relation to their fathers. This meant that
the women were
neither married nor widowed.
One of the indictments from the 1392 King’s Bench session was unusually
lengthy and specific, perhaps as a reflection of the
seriousness of the crime.
The jurors indicted a group of men headed by Adam de Faxede the younger of
abducting, imprisoning, assaulting,
and raping Alice, the daughter and heir of
John de Biggynges. They took Alice and tied her up and imprisoned her in the
town of Cederugh
where they assaulted Alice, who was infirm in her mind
demente in mente
). The indictment concluded by stating that Adam de
Faxede had carnal intercourse with her (
carnalite concubi
), and all her
relatives and friends had been afraid that Alice would die in his custody, and
that the houses and barns of her friends
were burned and their servants were
In this case the jurors highlighted the heinousness of the crimes of Adam de
Faxede and his followers, and the record included much
damning detail. The
jurors did not, however, accuse the miscreants of deflowering Alice de
Biggynges. Although the allegation that
Alice had been raped as a virgin could
plausibly have been made in this case – since she was neither married nor
the indictment did not note this.
Indeed, only one of the indictments concerned with the rape of never-married
women noted that the woman had been a virgin. In 1393
John de Stanton, chaplain,
was indicted for ‘feloniously raping’ Isabella, daughter of Henry
Tailor of Whitewell, ‘of
her virginity’ (
de virginitate sua ...
felon[ice] rapuit
accusation was probably intended to underscore the severity of his crime, but
was not repeated elsewhere in the records.
The silence of the records on this issue is striking, since the theory of
rape law - in both the common and canon law traditions -
emphasised the special
status of virgins and the heinousness of raping them. These legal traditions
drew on Isidore of Seville's
sixth-century definition of rape which presented
rape as a form of corruption which was, of course, particularly defiling for
‘Rape proper is unlawful coitus, which is said to corrupt.’
Raptus proprie est inlicitus coitus, a conrumpendo
Canon law decreed
that anyone who took a virgin, or helped another to do so, was
The only example of a
rape case included in the twelfth-century common law text,
Narrationes
, was of the ‘rape of [a woman's] maidenhead’ (
rape de soun pucellage
thirteenth-century legal theorist Bracton stated that the death penalty had
previously been in place for the rape of virgins,
and that, although penalties
in his time were more lenient, the rape of virgins continued to merit the
harshest punishment.
Virginity was, of course, a favoured state in medieval
The Blessed Virgin Mary
was the summit of womanhood, and the Church Fathers praised virginity. The
horror of the rape of virgins
was expounded on in the hagiography of virgin
martyrs who evaded being raped by pagan
The struggles and
suffering of these women were recorded in Latin tracts such as the Golden
Legends, translated into English, and
doubtless recalled with particular
devotion in those churches dedicated to these
This abhorrence for the
rape of virgins was reflected in the severe penalties for this crime outlined in
legal theory.
In this context it is difficult to see why so few indictments of the rape of
daughters noted they had been deprived of their virginity.
There was no legal
obligation to mention whether or not the victims of rape had been deflowered,
but the accusation could plausibly
have been made for most never-married women
and would presumably have strengthened the indictments. Given the degree of
which was shown in the indictments and the extent to which the
available tropes of rape and ravishment were manipulated in these
sources, it is
striking that only a single indictment made this accusation. There is a
significant gap between legal theory and the
apparent practices of late-medieval
VI Rape and Ravishment of Servants
The 132 indictments for rape also include ten which named the victims as
serving women. While it is impossible to definitively distinguish
the crimes the
juries had in mind, the language of the indictments suggests that many of the
crimes described were abductions of
valued workers.
For instance, John Derwent was accused of abducting Alice, the servant of Sir
William de Belesby ‘out of his service’
ex servius dicti’
) and described this as a great loss, which suggests a focus on
her economic value.
indictments – such as a 1395 or 1396 Duchy of Lancaster indictment
concerning the abduction of Julien, servant of Robert
Rady – seem to note
that the servants had entered into the service of the
These allegations of
the abduction of servants can probably be viewed as part of the post-plague
labour crisis. They were included
in the rape indictments because the laws of
abduction and rape were so closely intertwined in the middle ages, but it seems
that the servants were taken primarily for sexual reasons.
Indeed, these records are comparable to the handful of late
fourteenth-century indictments which described the ravishment of men,
male servants.
For instance, in
the 1380s John de Grunne took Thomas Isborne,
and in 1389 John Holt
took Thomas, servant of Richard
These records have been
excluded from the cohort examined in this article though those naming serving
women have been included in
the interests of consistency.
On the other hand, a handful of these indictments unequivocally described the
forcible rape of female servants. In Lindsey in the
1380s Robert, a servant of
Master Henry, rector, was indicted for the rape of Alice, a former servant of
Robert Dyon.
[The jurors] said that Robert, the servant of Master Henry, rector of the church
at Alesby ... took Alice ... and cut her with his
knife, raped her and knew her
carnally against her will.
[E]t dicunt quod Robertus, servient Master Henry, rector de eccl[esia] de
Alesby... secuit ea cu[m] cultello suo... et ea ibm rapui[t]
carnalit[e] con[tra] voluntat[e]
In an unusual case in 1395 Alan Baroun, miller, was indicted for seizing
Joan, a servant of Laurence atte Wode, overwhelming her and
unsuccessfully to rape her (
cepit Joham s[er]viente [L]auren atte [W]ode et
eam oppressit et cu[m] ea concubit voluit tamen non
This incident was
not included in the cohort examined here as it was technically a record of an
assault, but it clearly had a sexual
element to it.
These indictments describing forced coitus stand almost alone. There were
very few indictments which unequivocally described sexual
assault, and none at
all which stated that masters had raped their own servants despite the seeming
probability of such activity.
It may be that the absence of serving women from
the records of judicial sessions stems from their absence in the laws concerned
with rape and ravishment. Serving women were not listed in the laws of 1275,
1285 or 1382, except generally in the category of ‘other
aliarumque mulierum
Indeed, in the following century 3 Henry VII specifically exempted bond women,
very likely to be serving women, from the protection
of rape laws. The 1487
legislation tightened the laws concerned with rape and ravishment, but included
the provision that ‘this
act extend not to any person taking any woman,
only claiming her as his ...
bond-woman’.
climate, it is unsurprising that the rape and ravishment of serving women was
overlooked by the law.
VII Rape and Ravishment of Other Women
The indictments also listed a handful of women who were not described in
relation to their male relatives. In 1392 Robert Manfeld,
a cleric, was indicted
for the rape of a woman described simply by her name, Agnes
In the same year John
de Kyrkeby, the vicar of Longtoft, was indicted for raping Margaret Wakefield
and was described as a ‘common
malefactor and raper of women’ (e
q[uo]d est co’is malefacter et rapter
These women
were presumably single.
Other victims were even more obscurely described or actually unknown to the
jurors. There is a single record describing the rape and
murder of an unknown,
underage victim. At the 1392 King’s Bench session in Yorkshire, the jury
from Doncaster asserted that:
Robert Ripman, formerly of Thornton, met a girl whose name is unknown to the
jurors at Thornton and cut her secret parts with a knife
and raped her and she
was under nine years of age. And jurors say that because of this assault the
girl died within three days.
[O]bviavit quid[a]m puelle cuius nomeri jur[es] p[re]d[i]cti igorant apud
Thornton et ib[ida]m d[i]c[ta]m puella cum quod[e]m cultello
in secretis suis
vulnus et ipam Johem rapiend et q[uo]d d[i]c[t]a puell[a] invenis fuit et
int[ra] etate ix annor[um] et sic ipam
Joham rapuit et ult[er]ius dic[t]
q[uo]d[a]m jurur dic q[uo]d causa cuius injurius d[i]c[t]a puella intra tres
dies p[ro]x[ime] seu
Other women belonged to very specific subgroups, such as the two nuns who
left the abbey of Elmestarre with William Cross in 1394.
William Cross, the
parson of Shryngton in Buckinghamshire, was indicted for abducting Elizabeth
Camoys and Alice Russheby. He was
also accused of stealing a book of accounts
and other deeds from the abbey and of assaulting William
The tendency for most women to defined in relation to their male relatives is
consistent in medieval legal records. A study of King's
Bench cases between 1422
and 1442 found that only a tiny proportion of litigants used categories such as
‘gentlewoman’
‘spinster’.
after the introduction of the Statute of Additions in 1413 some terms used to
define women could be categorised as unacceptable
to the courts. When Joan
Botiller ‘sengilwoman’ was indicted before in the justices of the
peace in Cambridge in 1437
it was decided that the description was
insufficient.
The legal system
was simply not set up in such a way that women could be presented autonomously.
It is unsurprising that only a tiny
number of the women named in these 132
fourteenth-century indictments were not described in relation to their male
VIII Consent in Records of Rape and
It is striking that the introduction of the new law in 1382 did not alter the
profile of the women named in the indictments. The majority
continued to be
married women, with smaller numbers of servants and daughters. Prior to 1382
married women made up 70% of those named
in indictments; after 1382 this was
65.5%, still a clear predominance.
Figure One: Women named in indictments pre-1382
Figure Two: Women named in indictments post-1382
There was no increase in the proportion of women described as daughters
despite the introduction of the law enabling fathers to bring
indictments in
cases where daughters had eloped. Daughters made up 4 of the 20 women in the
pre-1382 group (20%) and 19 of the 119
women in the post-1382 group (15.9%).
There is no evidence that fathers were using their newly extended right to
litigate in the
case of elopements or forced marriages which the women became
reconciled to. Men do not seem to have taken up the rights transferred
by the 1382 statute.
If there was no change in the profile of the people named in the indictments,
was there a change in the ways the indictments defined
consent? Did the
intentions and perceptions of the men - the fathers and husbands - become more
important in the records after 1382?
There is some evidence that after 1382 rape and ravishment were sometimes
defined as events which took place against the will of the
male kin. There are
records which prioritise the will of the husbands, and it is striking that these
exist only after the passing
of 6 Richard II.
This would suggest that the 1382 statute may have influenced a move to
defining rape as an event which took place against the will
of the husband or
male guardian. So, for instance, in 1387 Master Richard Topclyf, cleric, was
indicted for raping Diana wife of
Robert at Grene ‘against the will of the
said Robert’ (
contra voluntate ipius
Between 1381
and 1388 there was an indictment against John Godeson of Malberthorpe which
stated that he broke into the house of Gilbert
Prenton and ‘raped his wife
Matilda, contrary to Gilbert's will’ (
Matill uxm contra voluntat' ipius
Gilbt violanit
). The indictment added that he injured Gilbert against the
ipm Gilbtm iniurat ad occadenet con’
Gloucestershire there was an indictment against Adam Papu, chaplain, in which he
was accused of raping Elena wife of Robert
Tylere at Aulton and of taking goods
‘against the King's peace and against the will of the said Robert her
contra pacem Regis et contra voluntate p’dicte Robti
This choice of
phrasing is revealing. It suggests a conception of rape and ravishment as a
crime against the male guardian, in this
case the husband.
The handful of records which explicitly defined rape and ravishment as events
taking place against the will of the husbands only survive
from after 1382. On
the other hand, there are so few records for the 30 years before 1382 that it
might not be significant that there
are no records of this sort surviving from
prior to the passing of the statute.
Sometimes rape and ravishment were defined in terms of the will of the women.
This was particularly clear in cases where single women
were the victims. For
example, the 1389 indictment of Richard Lynthe and William at Well for the rape
of Agnes, widow of John at
Marsh, was described as being ‘against her
contra voluntatem
Records of Duchy of
Lancaster for the period 1381-1388 show that Robert, servant of the rector of
the church at Alesby, was indicted
of taking Alice, who had been servant of
Robert Dyon of Larceby, and ‘cutting her with his knife, raping her and
knowing her
carnally against her will’ (
secuit ea cum cultello suo ...
et ea ibm rapuit et cognent carnalit[er] con’ voluntat’
The 1392 indictment of
the cleric Robert Manfeld was described in a similar way. He was accused of
raping Agnes Salmayn and carnally
knowing her against her will (
Salmayn ... felonice rapuit et cum ea carnalite concubit contr’ suis
In 1389 John
Barker was accused of two separate crimes - against Alice Percyvall and Maria,
the daughter of John Saxten – and
both crimes were said to be against
their will (
contra voluntatem
In these cases the consent of the women was prioritised in the records of the
courts. The same emphasis on female consent can be seen
before the introduction
of Richard II’s legislation. Thomas Jankyns was indicted for the rape of
Edith Winterbourn in 1357
or 1358. The indictment said that he
‘feloniously raped and ravished a certain Edith Winterbourn ... and lay
with her against
her will’ (
quedam Editham Wynterbourn felonice rapuit
et abduxit .... et cum ea concubuit contra voluntatem
The issue of women’s consent and will was also central in an indictment
of assault brought in the Duchy of Lancaster in the
reign of Richard II. In 1388
John de Stokbrig of Burowe was accused of having assaulted Joanne de Cotes of
Bondby and having threatened
to rape her ‘against her will’
rapuisse volu’ cont’
an assault case but the threat of rape was also recorded. The legal record
centred her consent as the issue which defined
potential rape.
It should be noted, however, that once again the issue of consent was
important in a case which featured a single woman. There are
no records naming
married women which defined rape or ravishment in terms of their consent.
Women's consent was only ever foregrounded
in indictments involving single women
– a distinct minority of legal actions.
IX Conclusions
This close examination of the indictments of rape and abduction brought in
the period 1352 to 1399 suggests that consent in rape or
ravishment was
sometimes defined in terms of what male guardians wanted, but that in cases
where the victims were single women rape
and ravishment was sometimes defined in
terms of their consent.
The records suggest that the impact of the 1382 law was subtle. It is not
directly or quantitatively apparent in the court records.
While the statute
nominally increased the role of fathers and husbands, there is no evidence of an
increased role in litigation.
There are no surviving records in which fathers
took action on behalf of daughters who had later consented to rape.
However, there may have been a slight increase in the significance of the
consent of husbands after 1382 I have found no records which
said rape took
place against will of husband from before 1382 and they begin to be recorded
after that date. Adding that a rape or
ravishment was ‘against the will of
the husband’ was an unnecessary flourish, not a requirement of the law.
this phrase by some clerks after 1382 suggests a move to
conceptualising rape and ravishment in terms of the consent of these men.
While it is possible that this is a result of the anomalies in the survival
of the records, there is some evidence showing 1382 law
influenced judgments
that the rape statute of 1382
allowed a husband to bring an action of rape on
behalf of his wife, saying ‘the husband should have power to have him
of life and of member’ (
le baron eit poiar de veta et de membro
ipsum conuincendi
This analysis of case law shows that the rape and ravishment law of 1382 had
an indirect but significant impact. It appears to have
further prioritised male
concerns in the definition of rape and ravishment although it had little effect
on the profile of those
bringing legal action.
BA (Hons in English and
History) (UWA) PhD (Hist) (UWA).
I wish to acknowledge the assistance of
a grant from Griffith University which provided funding for the archival
research. I would
like to thank Dr Jenny Bailey-Smith for her assistance.
J B Post, ‘Sir Thomas
West and the Statute of Rapes, 1382’ (1980) 53
Bulletin of the
Institute of Historical Research
Philippa Maddern,
and Social Order: East Anglia, 1422-1442
(1992) 99-103.
Henry Bracton,
et Consuetudinibus Angliae: On the Laws and Customs of England
http://bracton.law.cornell.edu/bracton/Common/index.html.
‘Rape is committed in
two manners: ... For stuprum is one thing ... and rape yet another, if we speak
correctly and differentiate
sins of which some are greater than others. Stuprum
is the felonious taking away of a woman's maidenhood ... but rape is strictly
speaking the abduction of a woman with intent to marry her.’ ‘
se fet en ij maneres .... Car j. est stupre .... et autre rap, pur proprement
parler e le pecchie destincter, dunt li j. pecche
est greignur de lautre.
Stupre est a despuceler femme felounessement. ... Rap est proprement alopement
de femme pur desir del marriage
William Joseph Whittaker
The Mirror of Justice
(1895) 28-9.
Christopher Cannon,
in the Chaumpaigne Release and a Newly Discovered Document
concerning the Life of Geoffrey Chaucer’ (1993) 68
Westminster I, 3 Edward I,
Westminster II, 13 Edward I,
Statute I, c.34.
J B Post, ‘Ravishment of
Women and the Statute of Westminster’ in J H Baker (ed),
Legal Records
and the Historian: Papers Presented to the Cambridge Legal History Conference,
7-10 July 1975, and in Lincoln’s
Inn Old Hall on 3 July 1974
158-160; Emma Hawkes, ‘“She was Ravished against her Will, What so
ever she Say”: Female Consent in Rape
and Ravishment in late-medieval
England’ (1995) 1.1
6 Richard II, Statute I, c.
Post, above n 1, 26.
Barbara Toner,
For instance, the claim of
detention of deeds could be used to bring a bill to Chancery rather than a
common law court, and it was
often used as a legal fiction for this purpose.
Similarly, the phrase
vi et armis
had to be used if claims were to be
taken to King’s Bench. Alan Harding,
The Law Courts of Medieval
(1973) 106; S F C Milsom,
Historical Foundations of Common
(1975) 246.
Somerset, 31 Edward III,
Ancient Indictments 104, 1357-1358 in Bertha Haven Putnam (ed),
Proceedings
before the Justices of the Peace in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries
(1938) 190.
KB 9/144, f 27, 16 Richard
II, Michaelmas 1392.
Assize Roll 812,
Staffordshire, 35-37 Edward III, 1361-1363, in
Proceedings before the
Justices of the Peace in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries
Sue Sheridan Walker,
‘Common Law Juries and Feudal Marriage Customs in Medieval England: The
Pleas of Ravishment’ (1984)
University of Illinois Law Review
Sue Sheridan Walker,
‘Wrongdoing and Compensation: The Pleas of Wardship in Thirteenth and
Fourteenth Century England’
Journal of Legal History
Cannon, above n 5, 82.
Maddern, above n 2,
There were 133 women named
in the 132 indictments as William Cross was accused of abducting two nuns,
Elizabeth Camoys and Alice
Russheby, from the abbey of Elmestarre. KB 9/172/1, f
9, 18 Richard II, Michaelmas 1394.
KB 9/32, f 11 –
Westbury, 11 Richard II, Michaelmas 1387.
JUST 1/977, f19, 10 Richard
II, Trinity 1387.
KB 9/1054, f 3, 11 Richard
II, Michaelmas 1387.
KB 9/1054, f 3, 11 Richard
II, Michaelmas 1387.
JUST 1/197, Special Oyer et
Terminer Proceedings, Devon 30-31 Edward III, 1356-1357.
KB 9/63, f 5, 11 Richard
III, 1381-1388.
KB 9/32, f 6 –
Gloucestershire, 11 Richard II, Michaelmas 1387.
KB 9/32, f 6 –
Gloucestershire, 11 Richard II, Michaelmas 1387.
KB 9/144, f 35, 16 Richard
II, Michaelmas 1392.
KB 9/989, ff1-4 (stitched
together), 16 Richard II, Trinity 1393.
Isidore of Seville,
Isidori Hispalensis Episcopi: Etymologiarum sive Originum
, W M Lindsay
(ed), Book 1 (c.1911) 5.26.
Chapter 11, ‘If
anyone seizes a virgin, unless he has espoused her, or forcibly takes her for
his wife, let him be anathema
along with all his supporters.’ Pope
Gregory, Grat. C. 36, q. 2 c. 5. John Gilchrist (ed),
The Collection in
Seventy Four Titles: A Canon Law Manual of the Gregorian Revolution
Elsie Shanks (ed),
Narrationes
(1963) 341-4.
‘In times past the
defilers of virginity and chastity [suffered capital punishment], as did their
abettors, since such men
were not free of the crime of killing, especially since
virginity and chastity cannot be restored, and since virgins and widows as
as nuns are dedicated to God [and] their defilement is committed not only to the
hurt of mankind, but indeed, in scorn of Almighty
God Himself, and [since]
without punishment of this kind such infamy may not be put down. But in modern
times the practice is otherwise
and for the defilement of a virgin they lose
their members, as aforesaid, and their abettors suffer severe corporal
punishment but
without loss of life or members.’ ‘
Modernis tamen
temporibus aliter observatur, quod pro corruptione virginis amittuntur membra ut
prædictum est, et de aliis sequitur
gravis p|na corporalis, sed tamen sine
amissione vitæ vel membrorum. Et cum virgines et viduæ necnon
sanctimoniales deo
sint dedicatæ, corruptio earum non solum ad iniuriam
hominum, verum etiam ad ipsius dei omnipotentis irreverentiam committitur,
sine vindicta talis non quiescat infamia
.’ Henry Bracton,
Legibus et Consuetudinibus Angliae: On the Laws and Customs of England
http://bracton.law.cornell.edu/bracton/Common/index.html.
John Bugge,
Virginitas:
An Essay on the History of a Medieval Ideal,
International Archive of the
History of Ideas
(1975); Marina Warner,
Alone of All her Sex: the Myth
and Cult of the Virgin Mary
Corinne Saunders,
and Ravishment in the Literature of Medieval England
There are over 170 medieval
bells dedicated to St Katherine still in existence, and there were 62 medieval
English churches dedicated
to her. At the same time there were over 200 churches
dedicated to St Margaret in medieval England. David Hugh Farmer (ed),
Oxford Dictionary of Saints
(1978) 69-70, 260-1.
KB 9/63, 4-11 Richard II,
KB 9/63, f 48, 18-19
Richard II, 1395-1396.
The fourteen accusations
naming male victims were: John Boteler and others took Randolph, the son and
heir of William de Stanfield
– KB 9/144, f 53, 16 Richard II, Michaelmas
1392; Henry Boorn and Simon Page of London took two servants of John More,
– KB 9/173/1, f 4, 17 Richard II, Hilary 1394; John de Bateford
and others took Thomas Sampson – KB 9 166/1, item 16,
5 Richard II, 1381;
John, son of John of Lincoln took a servant of Thomas Maynes – KB 9/63,
4-11 Richard II, 1381-1388; John
Holt took Thomas, servant of Richard Howe
– KB 9/32, 11 Richard II, Michaelmas 1389; Richard Dyk and others took
and Richard Brig - KB 9/181, 17 Richard II, Easter 1394; Roger Smith
and John FitzJohn took a servant of Thomas Mayne – KB
9/63, 4-11 Richard
II, 1381-1388; Joan Savage took Adam, a servant of William Nicolness – KB
9/63, 4-11 Richard II, 1381-1388;
Robert de Coms took Thomas None – KB
9/63, 4-11 Richard II, 1381-1388; John de Grunne took Thomas Isborne, servant
KB 9/63, 4-11 Richard II, 1381-1388; John Ward and John Skirnoy took
Roger Calf and John Fichet, servants of the abbot of Nenhouse
4-11 Richard II, 1381-1388; Sibia Whitebred took John Whitebred, servant of
Simon Edwards – KB 9/63, 18-19
Richard II, 1395-1396; Adam Pulter and
others took Reginald de Ecles, justice of the king – KB 9/166/1, f 119, 5
Richard II,
1381; John de Shipton and others took Thomas de Kent, William
Symson, William Meggessonwarde and Hugo de Skelton, tenants of the
Abbey of St
Mary’s and also sixteen oxen – KB 9/144, 16 Richard II, Michaelmas
KB 9/63, 4-11 Richard II,
KB 9/32, 11 Richard II,
Michaelmas 1389.
KB 9/63 Duchy of Lancaster
– Lindsey, 4-11 Richard II, 1381 – 1388.
KB 9/173, f 5 – Kent,
18 Richard II, Easter 1395.
6 Richard II, c 6.
3 Henry VII, c 2.
KB 9/144, 16 Richard II,
Michaelmas 1392.
KB 9/144, ff 45, 49, 16
Richard II, Michaelmas 1392.
KB 9/144, f 10 –
Doncaster, 16 Richard II, Michaelmas 1392.
KB 9/172/1, f 9, 18 Richard
II, Michaelmas 1394.
Maddern, above n 2, 41.
JUST 3/7/4, m 3r.
JUST 1/977, 10 Richard II,
Trinity 1387.
KB 9/63, Duchy of
Lancaster, Lindsey, 4-11 Richard II, 1381-1388.
KB 9/32, f 7, 11 Richard
II, Michaelmas 1387.
KB 9/5, 13 Richard II,
Michaelmas 1389.
KB 9/63 Duchy of Lancaster,
Lindsey, 4-11 Richard II, 1381-1388.
KB 9/144, 16 Richard II,
Michaelmas 1392.
KB 9/5, f 17, 13 Richard
II, Michaelmas 1389; KB 9/5, f 17, 13 Richard II, Michaelmas 1389.
Ancient Indictments 104,
Somerset, 31 Edward III, 1357-1358, in
Proceedings before the Justices of the
Peace in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries
(1938) 188.
KB 9/63, Duchy of Lancaster
– Lindsey, 4-11 Richard II, 1381-1388.
Athern v Bigg
(1422). C H Williams (ed),
Year Books of Henry VI, 1 Henry VI (1422)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.5 MB)
PDF format (594 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter