URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/DTLJ/1999/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:54:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kendall, Christopher N --- "Australia's New Internet Censorship Regime: Is this Progress?" [1999] DigTechLawJl 16; (1999) 1(3) Digital Technology Law Journal 16
Australia's New Internet Censorship Regime: Is this
Christopher
Senior Lecturer, School of Law, Murdoch
This paper examines Australia's new Broadcasting Services Amendment
(Online Services) Act. This legislation, which now awaits Royal
aims to regulate the distribution of obscenity via the Internet. The
author argues that Australia's new Internet censorship
regime stands as
an example of how not to address the harms that result from the
production and distribution of pornography. The
author focuses
specifically on the extent to which the legislation's definitions of
what is and is not prohibited Internet content
relies on a misguided
understanding of what pornography is and what it does. He argues that
while there is much merit in the claims
of those who argue that little
thought has gone into how best to implement control mechanisms, there
is little point in trying to
improve technological capacity if, after
having done so, little thought has gone into what it is, exactly, we
want to regulate and
why we want to do it. The author concludes that
the legislation is more indicative of the federal government's desire
to assert values
than punish those whose actions threaten the equality
rights of those most harmed by pornographic material.
The question pornography poses in cyberspace is the same one it poses
everywhere else: whether anything will be done about it.
Catharine A
Introduction:
What is "offensive online material"? - the moralist in Cyberspace
Pornography
as an Issue of Sex Discrimination: the Case of R v
Re-Thinking "Obscenity" Post-
: An Australian
Comparative Perspective
Australia's
New Internet Regulators
Pornography
as a Human Rights Violation
Introduction: What
is "offensive online material"? - the moralist in Cyberspace
In Australia, pornography on the Net is big business and, if recent international
findings are any indication, immensely popular.
Indeed, trading in sexually explicit material is now one of
the biggest recreational applications of users of computer networks,
frequently visited newsgroups sporting names like "
alt.sex.stories
rec.arts.erotica
alt.sex.bondage
" -- newsgroups which, in
addition to providing materials now readily available via mail order etc,
offer the on line browser
materials featuring paedophilia (the use of children
in sexual acts), hebaphilia (the use of youths in sexual acts) and paraphilia
(material that includes images of bondage, sadomasochism, urination,
defecation, and sex acts with animals).
In June, 1999, the Commonwealth Parliament passed the
Broadcasting Services Amendment (Online Services) Act
legislation, which now awaits Royal assent, amends the
Broadcasting
Services Act 1992
, to include Internet
regulation as part of regulatory framework. Specifically, the main elements of
this new framework are
a complaints mechanism will be established
under which any person can complain to the Australian Broadcasting Authority
(ABA) about offensive material online;
material that will trigger action by the ABA will be defined, on the
basis of current National Classification Board guidelines
for film, as
material Refused Classification and rated X, and material rated R that is
not protected by adult verification
procedures;
the ABA will be given powers to issue notices to service providers aimed
at preventing access to prohibited material which is
subject to a complaint
if it is hosted in Australia or,
indemnities will be provided for service providers to protect them from
litigation by customers affected by ABA notices;
a graduated scale of sanctions against service providers breaching ABA
notices or the legislation will apply;
the framework will not apply to private or
restricted distribution communications such as Intranets or communications
not in a stored form; however, current provisions of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) in relation to offensive or harassing use of a
telecommunications service will
apply in this context;
a community advisory body will be established to monitor material,
operate a 'hotline' to receive complaints about illegal material
this information to the ABA and police authorities, and advise the public
that are available to address
concerns about online content;
the Commonwealth will be responsible for regulating
the activities of Internet service providers (ISPs) and Internet content
hosts (ICHs) and the Attorney-General will encourage the development of
uniform State and Territory offence provisions
complementing the
Commonwealth legislation (including section 85ZE of the
) that create offences for the
publication and transmission
of prohibited material by users and content
The Act's overriding intention is to prohibit the
availability of sexually explicit materials "likely to cause offence to the
reasonable adult." Given this, it should come as no surprise that there has
been much public debate and outcry regarding
the Act's scope and possible
The issue of how best to address the harms caused by the
unbridled production and distribution of pornography in our society
one of the more contentious issues facing modern legislators. The Internet
offers nothing new in this regard,
at least in so far as defining the harms
that result from pornography is concerned. For many, pornography represents
clearest example and source of sexualized, systemic gender inequality.
This is a view best summarised by
Catharine MacKinnon, who argues that:
Pornography, in the feminist view, is a form of
forced sex, a practice of sexual politics, an institution of gender
inequality.
In this perspective, pornography is not harmless fantasy or a
corrupt and confused misrepresentation of an otherwise natural
and healthy
sexuality. Along with the rape and prostitution in which it participates,
pornography institutionalizes the sexuality
of male supremacy, which fuses the
eroticization of dominance and submission with the social construction of male
and female.
Gender is sexual. Pornography constitutes the meaning of that
sexuality. Men treat women as who they see women as being. Pornography
constructs who that is. Men's power over women means that the way men see
women defines who women can be. Pornography is
For others, any
attempt to regulate what to them represents little more than sexual expression
represents an unacceptable
infringement on their right to practise and access
free speech and to do in private what they wish and with whom they wish.
Still others, while acknowledging that pornography might
actually undermine the rights of some to participate freely and equally
society, query how best to ensure that the power to censor is not used
arbitrarily and in a discriminatory manner.
One might have hoped, given the amount of writing and research already
undertaken on pornography and state censorship of it, that
those governments
presently attempting to regulate pornographic content would take seriously and
attempt to address in an
equitable manner the concerns of those for whom
pornography is an issue in need of attention. Indeed, given the amount of
academic and judicial pronouncements on this topic, both within Australia and
internationally, one might have expected that
any government undertaking this
task might find itself in the unique position of devising a truly progressive
means of ensuring
that the harms of pornography are addressed both effectively
and fairly.
It is my purpose in writing this paper to argue that,
expectations aside, Australia's new Internet censorship regime stands as
rather unfortunate example of how
to address the individual and systemic harms
that result from the production and distribution
of pornography. I write this
paper from the perspective of those who accept that the types of material
available on WebPages
alt.sex.stories
rec.arts.erotica
alt.sex.bondage
" are but one source of the
daily discrimination to which many are subjected on account of their gender. I
accept that pornography
does in fact cause considerable harm to those used to
produce it and to those harmed by its primary message (ie, that female
subordination is the norm and sexual inequality empowering). Specifically, I
accept that pornography is sex discrimination
and should be addressed as such.
It is not my purpose in writing this paper to change the views of those who
refuse to believe
or acknowledge the reality of those who claim to be harmed
by the inequality that is pornography.
This is an effort that has been tackled elsewhere.
Nor is it my intention to outline and critique every aspect
of Australia's new Internet censorship legislation.
While many have focussed on the technical difficulties
involved in regulating Internet content,
I intend to focus on an issue that has
received surprisingly little media attention in this country - that is, the
to which this legislation's definitions of what is and is not
prohibited Internet content relies on a misguided understanding
pornography and is and what it
While there is much merit in the claims of those who argue that little
thought has gone into how best to implement control mechanisms,
my own view,
expressed in this paper, is that there is little point in trying to improve
our technological capacity if, after
having done so, we have not given any
thought to what it is, exactly, we want to regulate and why we want to do it.
My conclusion
in this regard is that this legislation, in its present form, is
more indicative of the federal government's desire to assert
values than
punish those whose actions threaten and undermine the equality rights of those
most harmed by the production
and distribution of pornographic material.
Broadcasting Services Amendment (Online
Services) Act
, although lauded by the
Australian government as an effective means to address pornographic harm, will
fail as a means of doing so because it fails to understand the
pornographic production and distribution. It also fails to offer any effective
means through which to curtail and compensate
for these harms. By focussing on
pornography as an issue of immorality, rather than as an issue of inequality
(and the harms
that result from inequality), the government fails to ensure
that those most in need of recourse and protection will find it.
It also risks
imposing unjustified limits on legitimate forms of sexual expression --
expression which, far from harmful,
may in fact prove quite liberatory to those
who use it and central to the goal of systemic equality.
My own belief is that by redefining
pornography as a threat to social equality and by adopting enforcement
measures which
that this threat is curtailed, our legislators
could do much to ensure that the harms of pornography are taken seriously,
while guaranteeing that the "right to speak" is a right shared by
To assist me in this regard, I will turn to
international precedent in an effort to convince legislators that pornography
must be seen and addressed for what it is -- a practice of sex discrimination.
Specifically, I will look to recent case law in
Canada and recent legislative
efforts in the United States. In 1992, in the case of
a case concerning the interpretation and application of
Canada's Criminal Code obscenity provisions, the Canadian Supreme Court
that pornography is an issue of sex discrimination and that laws aimed at
restricting pornographic materials, in so
far as they aim to eliminate this
injustice, are in the best interests of any society committed to systemic
equality. The
Court's findings on the effects of pornography and the need to
balance the need for free speech with the need for equality are
particularly
instructive. They offer a solid starting point from which legislators can
begin to tackle the harms articulated
by those who claim to be harmed by
pornography.
Although I accept the equality-based analysis articulated in
also acknowledge that much has been written since the decision in
the way in which the decision is likely to be enforced and the problems that
result from enforcement mechanisms generally.
It has been argued that the
application of the Supreme Court of Canada's equality-based test is
susceptible to abuse in the
hands of police and law enforcement officials who
understand little if anything about the need to protect society's equality
interests. I accept these concerns but believe that they can be addressed such
that the equality test for pornographic harm
is implemented fairly and
effectively. Specifically, I believe the civil-rights approach to pornographic
harm devised by
American feminists Catharine MacKinnon and Andrea Dworkin
offers a fair and effective solution to the issue of how best to address
In 1983, Andrea Dworkin and Catharine MacKinnon drafted and attempted to
implement a civil rights ordinance for the City of Minneapolis
addressing the harms to equality caused by the production and distribution of
pornography.
The Ordinance was originally drafted and implemented in
Minneapolis, Minnesota. In 1983, residents of two working class areas
town Minneapolis asked Andrea Dworkin and Catharine MacKinnon to assist them
in doing something about the pornography
in their neighbourhoods. Although the
city originally intended to draft a zoning ordinance, which would only permit
of pornography in specified (low income) neighbourhoods, Dworkin and
MacKinnon convinced the Zoning and Planning Committee that
such a measure
would only legitimize pornography. They urged the city to take a "civil
rights" approach which would allow
those harmed by the production and sale of
pornography to sue those responsible for their harm. The idea was ultimately
implemented
as an amendment to the sexual discrimination provisions of the
Minneapolis Civil Rights Ordinance. The legislation was ultimately
then Mayor Donald M Fraser.
In April, 1984, similar legislation was passed in
Indianapolis and supported by Mayor William H Hudnut III. This legislation
challenged as unconstitutional by an alliance of booksellers. In
Booksellers Association v Hudnut
the Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit held that the
Indiannapolis Ordinance was unconstitutional as a violation of free
The Court accepted the factual premises of the ordinance, conceding that
"depictions of subordination tend to perpetuate
subordination" and that the "
subordinate status of women in turn leads to affront and lower pay at work,
insult and injury
at home, battery and rape on the streets." Despite this, the
Court also held that "racial bigotry, anti-Semitism, violence on
[and other forms of expression also] influence culture and shape our
socialization. Yet all is protected speech,
however insidious. Any other
answer leaves the government in control of all of the institutions of culture,
the great censor
and director of which thoughts are good for us."
It is not my intention in this paper to critique the
decision in
I will, however, outline in some detail the Canadian Supreme
Court's decision in
as indicative of an approach which accurately
recognizes the need to link the need for speech with the need for equality and
which thus justifies and permits legislative efforts aimed at preventing the
sale of those pornographic materials which undermine
sex equality. It is my
belief that this decision accurately summarises the real harms and role of
pornography and, when supplemented
with the regulatory approach provided in
the MacKinnon-Dworkin Ordinances, offers the Australian Parliament a unique
opportunity
to radically overhaul its anti-pornography mandate. The Ordinance
declared that pornography and sexual harassment injure the
public welfare by
degrading women and fostering intolerance for other persons. It also stated
that pornography is a systemic
practice of exploitation and subordination
which plays a central role in maintaining sexual inequality. Unlike other
aimed at reducing the harms of pornography, the Ordinance removed the
power to regulate and control pornographic harm from those
least harmed by
pornography -- ie the state and those who exercise its power -- and allowed
those most harmed by pornography
to take direct legal action against the
agents of their harm without relying on the state to act on their behalf.
Although the Ordinance was ultimately struck down as a violation of the right
to free speech guaranteed in the First Amendment
of the United States
Constitution
, I believe that in light of the equality-based analysis of
pornographic harm recently offered in Canada in
(an approach which
essentially rejects the US approach to free speech and pornography), the
Ordinance offers a valid approach
to addressing the harms of pornography in
Australia. In particular, in light of Australia's recognition of the need for
and its willingness to impose restrictions on speech which undermine
this equality (as evidenced most recently in attempts to
anti-vilification statutes)
the Dworkin-MacKinnon anti-pornography ordinance can be
successfully integrated into already existing equal opportunity legislation.
By focussing on what I perceive to be one of the many troublesome aspects of
Australia's new Internet censorship legislation,
I will outline why exactly
our legislators should radically re-think the methods they have chosen to
combat pornographic
harm. I will further outline why I believe the
MacKinnon-Dworkin anti-pornography approach offers the best method with which
to achieve this objective.
Pornography as an Issue of Sex Discrimination: the Case
I was abused, molested, insulted and
frightened by my older brother when I was seven and he was thirteen. He had
a waist-high
stack of pornographic magazines. It is something I will never
forget. Pornography is about hate for women, power over women,
women, ridicule and contempt of women.
My large bust presumably means that I am available and an easy
lay. I feel these ridiculous connections can only come from
page 3-type porn
where big equals no brain.
On August 21, 1987, most of the inventory
(pornographic videotapes and pornographic magazines) in the Avenue Video
in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada was seized by Winnipeg police. The
owner of the Boutique, Donald Victor Butler, was
subsequently
charged pursuant to s. 159 (now s. 163) of the
Criminal Code
for various offences
related to the possession and sale of obscene materials.
On June 6, 1991 Donald Butler's case was heard by the
Supreme Court of Canada. The Court was asked to consider two constitutional
questions in determining the validity of Butler's conviction:
Whether s. 163 of the
Criminal Code
violated the appellants right to free expression as guaranteed under s.
2(b) of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (the
If so, whether it could be demonstrably justified
under s. 1 of
the Charter
as a reasonable limit prescribed by law?
Although the constitutional questions raised on
appeal brought into scrutiny the entirety of s. 163 of the
, the Supreme Court
confined its examination to the constitutional validity of the definition of
in s. 163(8), which provides:
(8) For the purposes of this
any publication a dominant
characteristic of which is the undue exploitation of sex, or of sex and one or
more of the
following subjects, namely crime, horror, cruelty and violence,
shall be deemed to be obscene.
Much has already been written outlining the
constitutional analysis offered by the Court and I do not intend to repeat
What is important to note, however, is the Court's analysis
regarding the interaction between the right to speak and
the right to
participate equally and without discrimination in society. Although
Canadian-based, the analysis offered by
the Court stands as strong precedent
for any future judicial and legislative efforts to regulate pornographic harm.
important within the context of an analysis of the Australia's new
Internet censorship regime is the Court's finding on the need
traditional approaches to obscenity regulation (like those embodied in
legislation throughout Australia and which,
I will argue, is best typified in
the new Commonwealth Australian legislation which is the focus of this paper)
which views
pornography in terms of its effect on public morality and which,
as such, does little to protect those most in need of protection
unjustifiably limiting speech which should not be limited.
Donald Butler argued that
the test for obscenity in section 163(8) of the
Canadian Criminal
prohibited him from asserting his constitutional right to free
expression. In the final analysis, the Court found that although
section 163
indeed violate Butler's
constitutional right to free expression, the section nonetheless constituted a
reasonable limit on
this right and was saved by virtue of section 1 of the
. The Court held that the limit imposed on
Butler's right to distribute and display pornography
was justifiable because the
overriding objective of
the Criminal Code
provision is
to prevent harm to society -- specifically, the harms that result from the
production and
distribution of pornographic representations and pictures that
undermine the right of other people to live equally, without fear
harassment and discrimination.
In rendering its decision, the Court outlines what
creates and promotes this harm. It is this analysis which is most
ground-breaking. At a very basic level, the Court completely
redrafts the law
of obscenity by offering a radical reconceptualisation of the analysis
traditionally offered by the Courts.
Quoting from the
on the effects of pornography, the Court notes that the harm
of pornography is the harm of gender inequality:
The effect of this material is to
reinforce male-female stereotypes to the detriment of both sexes. It
attempts to make
degradation, humiliation, victimization, and violence in
human relationships appear normal and acceptable. A society which
egalitarianism (is) basic to any human interaction
, is clearly justified in
controlling any medium of depiction which
violates this principle (emphasis
In rendering its decision, the Court relied on, and
certainly had available to it, a considerable amount of social and scientific
research on the harmful effects of pornography on women, on men, and thus on
society as a whole -- research from which there
is sufficient reason to
believe that pornography amounts to a practice of sex discrimination.
Generally, these findings indicate that when explicit sex
and express violence against women are combined, particularly when
portrayed as pleasurable for the victim, the risk of violence against women is
known to increase.
There is also considerable evidence regarding materials
which are not violent but which are nonetheless degrading or dehumanising.
These findings indicate that pornographic materials lower inhibitions on
aggression by men against women, increase acceptance
of women's sexual
servitude, increase sexual callousness toward women, decrease the desire of
both sexes to have female children
and increase the belief in male dominance
in intimate relationships.
When read in conjunction with the testimonies of those women
harmed during the production of pornography,
with the concerns of those whose partners have humiliated or
terrorised them into imitating pornographic materials and who have
and psychologically harmed them when they have refused,
and when read in conjunction with the testimonies of those
women who have simply stated point blank that pornography renders
them unsafe,
open to harassment, or unable to function as equals in a society rife with
sexual inequality,
these findings all provide an undeniably strong case in
support of the argument that pornography is a practice of sex discrimination
resulting in systemic gender inequality.
Admittedly, there is research that
questions some of these findings -- a point pro-porn advocates are quick to
The Court in
accepts this but notes that although
scientific proof can never provided, absolute accuracy is not required
and this is particularly so if one aims, as one must, to
place speech rights
within the context of undeniable systemic inequality. In making this decision
the Court relies specifically
on its judgment in
a case concerning Canada's hate speech laws, in which the
Court notes that although a direct causal connection between hate speech
minority victimization cannot be proven, this does not render the resulting
harm any less real:
Essentially, there are two sorts of injury caused by hate
propaganda. First, there is harm done to members of the target group.
indisputable that the emotional damage caused by words may be of grave
psychological and social consequence....Words
and writings that
wilfully promote hatred can constitute a serious attack on persons belonging
to a racial or religious group,
and in this regard...these persons are humiliated and
degraded...A second harmful effect of hate propaganda which is of pressing
substantial concern is its influence upon society at large. The Cohen
Committee noted that individuals can be persuaded
to believe almost anything
if information or ideas are communicated using the right technique and in the
proper circumstances...The
threat to the self respect of target group members is thus matched by the possibility
that prejudice will gain some credence,
with the attendant result of
discrimination, and perhaps even violence, against minority groups in
, the Court affirmed its reasoning in
concluding that to require absolute proof of harm ignores the very real
consequences of speech which promotes inequality
and which, in the process,
silences those most in need of speech and equality.
Noting that pornography can be seen to negatively affect
individual attitudes and behaviours and in the process create a substantial
risk of harm to individual women and society at large (because society's
equality interest will be threatened), the Court
goes a long way towards
addressing the many discriminatory effects of pornographic "speech." By taking
seriously the voices
of those most harmed by pornography, by understanding
that, for example, "images of a speculum inserted in a woman's anus, of
woman jerking off a pig, of a woman tied up, hooded and hanging from her
breasts from the ceiling",
actually say something to some people (indeed, a great many
I would imagine) about the accepted and expected role of women and
society, and by noting that this in turn results in some rather discriminatory
attitudes which go a long way towards
undermining systemic equality, the Court
finally takes seriously and puts into perspective the meaning of and need for
In the final analysis, the Court offers a test for
obscenity which recognizes that the ultimate community harm to be addressed
the harm caused by expression which makes degradation, humiliation,
victimization and violence in human relationships
-- all of which, the Court
recognizes, can be seen to threaten the right to equality -- appear normal and
acceptable. Implicit
in this reasoning is the conclusion that although free
expression is a fundamental value, it is not the
value worth protecting
and it does not always rank above other values. Indeed, noting that any
constitutional
guarantee of free expression which develops without taking "the
reality of substantive social inequality or the guarantee of
legal equality
into account"
only serves to preserve, if not promote, present
inequalities, the Court further notes that "the harm caused by the
proliferation
of materials which seriously offend other values fundamental to
our society is a substantial concern which justifies restricting
the otherwise
full exercise of the freedom of expression".
The fact that the Court focuses so predominantly on
the effect that pornography, once distributed, has on equality, should not
seen as implying that it does not acknowledge that real women are actually
physically harmed in the production of these
materials. The Court
evidence of this fact. Rather than focus on it exclusively, however, the Court
relies on this
evidence as a further indication that pornography is a tool of
inequality through which those with power control those without
inequality evident during the production of the material is real and
self-evident.
Once distributed, however, it serves to reinforce the very
inequalities that make its production possible in the first place.
By focusing on this inequality, the Court also specifically
rejects the notion that pornographic speech should be limited in order
protect public morality. In so doing, it rejects an entire history of judicial
reasoning concerned only with the preservation
of majoritarian moral codes
...this particular objective is no longer
defensible in view of the
. To impose a certain standard of public and sexual
morality, solely because it reflects the conventions of a
given community, is
inimical to the exercise and enjoyment of individual freedoms...This is "legal
moralism" - a majority
deciding what values should inform individual lives
and then coercively imposing those values on minorities. The prevention
"dirt for dirt's sake" is not a legitimate objective which would justify the
violation of one of the most fundamental
freedoms enshrined in the
The Court, rejecting morality, thus defines the harms of
pornography within a strict sex equality context, adding that "if true
equality between male and female persons is to be achieved, we cannot ignore
the threat to equality resulting from exposure
to audiences of certain types
of violent and degrading materials."
With respect to what constitutes
degrading or dehumanizing behaviour, the Court accepts the graphic but all too
description of the Manitoba Queen's Bench in
R v Ramsingh
, which described the type of
material that qualified for this label as follows:
(Individuals) are
exploited, portrayed as desiring pleasure from pain, by being humiliated and
treated only as an object of
male domination sexually, or in cruel or violent
bondage. Women are portrayed in these films as pining away their lives waiting
for a huge male penis to come along, on the person of a so-called sex
therapist, or window washer, supposedly to transport
them into sexual ecstasy.
Or even more false and degrading one is led to believe their raison d'etre is
to savour semen as
a life elixir, or that they secretly desire to be
forcefully taken by a male.
Accepting this definition, the Court in
then explains that:
among other things, degrading or
dehumanizing materials place women (and sometimes men) in positions of
subordination,
servile submission or humiliation.
They run against the
principles of equality and dignity of all human beings
(Emphasis added.)
, the Supreme
Court of Canada mandates that the overriding objective in limiting the
production and distribution of pornography
is the avoidance of real harm to
society - the harm caused to real people from materials that exploit them and
depict them
as inferior and
In so ruling, the Court recognizes that not all speech is
equal and that some speech is in fact the very source of that inequality.
right to express oneself must thus be viewed within the context of real
systemic inequalities.
Re-Thinking "Obscenity" Post-
: An Australian
Comparative Perspective
As women and minority persons are all too aware, our right to free expression has
for too long been silenced by a majority discourse
that refuses to give our
ideas, politics and pains expression. In the name of free speech, we have been
subjected to expression
that does little more than oppress and further
entrench our place in society as second class citizens or, for those of us who
have been completely denied any voice, non-existent citizens.
By recognizing that some speech encourages and promotes
those societal norms that cause inequality, the Canadian Supreme Court
done much to advance the rights of all persons who do not benefit from a now
recognized unequal distribution of power.
It is a recognition long overdue and
one which others would do well to emulate.
If we accept the reasoning of the Court in
, then the question
that needs to be asked is whether or not any lessons can be or should be
learned from it and ultimately
applied within the context of Australian laws
attempting to limit the harms of pornography. It is my belief that the
most definitely is instructive and, if we truly are committed to both
the concept of equality and to eliminating the harms of
pornography, a review
of Australia's most recent censorship legislation demonstrates why it must be.
The argument can, of course, be made that Canadian precedent holds no weight
in Australian law. While it is arguably true that
nations are under no
obligation to follow the legislative and judicial efforts of other nations, it
would seem to me that
any nation truly committed to the concept of systemic
equality would attempt to do all that it can do to ensure that this objective
is met. The Canadian Courts have long struggled with the concept of obscenity.
Until recently, Canadian and Australian approaches
to the regulation of
obscenity remained almost indistinguishable.
Similarly, both nations have done much to pass legislation
aimed at eliminating social inequalities. In 1993, the Canadian Supreme
took this step one step further by acknowledging the role of pornography in
maintaining these inequalities. While Australian
obligation to do the same, it would seem to us that, given this country's
apparent commitment
to systemic justice, that the decision in
least merit consideration. Again, this becomes particularly evident if we
examine the possible implications of our
most recent efforts to regulate the
harms of pornography.
In 1868, in the case of
R v Hicklin
Cockburn CJ, outlined when the State can
justifiably limit the distribution of materials it deems obscene. He held that
depravation and corruption of "those whose minds are open to such immoral
influences, and into whose hands a publication of this
sort may fall" is the
primary issue to be considered. This test, concerned primarily with corruption
of those who use pornography
and the need to impose a rigid moral code, again
finds expression throughout the soon to be implemented
Broadcasting
Services Amendment Act
analysis of which
Australia's
New Internet Regulators
In May 1999, the Australian Senate Select Committee on
Information Technologies released its Report on the
Broadcasting Services
Amendment Bill
The Committee's findings indicate that the government's
agenda in this regard is to establish a regulatory framework relating
"illegal or offensive material published and transmitted through online
services such as the Internet."
The Committee explains that this objective will be achieved
in the following manner.
The substantive part of the legislation amends the
Broadcasting Services Act
(BSA) to add a comprehensive legislative framework to
regulate a new category: online services. The legislation
establishes a regime
to be administered by the Australian Broadcasting Authority (ABA) to regulate
the carriage of content
over such online services as the Internet. In particular,
the regime aims to remove and exclude certain material (described as
either prohibited content or potential prohibited content - discussed in
detail below) from the Internet.
The Committee explains that the objects of the newly amended
BSA will be to provide a means for addressing complaints about certain
Internet content; restricting access to Internet content likely to "cause
offence to a reasonable adult; and protecting children
from exposure to
Internet content that is unsuitable for children."
In order to achieve its stated objects, the legislation
amends the BSA so that the ABA will be responsible for monitoring the
industry as well as the broadcasting services.
A new schedule 5 is to be inserted in the BSA that will
establish a regime for regulating certain aspects of the online industry.
regime will operate via a complaints mechanism. If a person has reason to
believe that an Internet Service Provider is
supplying an Internet carriage
service enabling end-users to access either prohibited content or potential
prohibited content
or that an ICH is hosting prohibited content or potential
prohibited content, then that person may make a complaint to the ABA.
must investigate such complaints except where the complaint is, amongst other
things, frivolous, vexatious or not
made in good faith. The ABA must notify
complainants about the outcome of the investigation. The ABA may also
investigate
any of the above matters on its own initiative.
One of the essential elements of the regulatory scheme is
that it defines material that will trigger a complaint as either prohibited
content or potential prohibited content. The classification of Internet
content is central to those definitions.
The legislation requires that written
information and static information on the Internet be classified by a
Classification
Board established under the
Classification (Publications,
Films and Computer Games) Act
as if it were a film.
If the material was classified under the
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act
Internet content will be deemed to have the same classification. If the
material has not been so classified, then the
Classification Board must give
the Internet content the same classification it would be given as a film under
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act
result is such that Internet content hosted
in Australia
classified as prohibited content if it has been classified RC (refused
classification) or X by the Classification
Board or it has been classified R
by the Classification Board and access to the content is not subject to a
restricted access
system. Internet content hosted
outside Australia
is prohibited content if the content has been classified RC
or X by the Classification Board. Potential
prohibited content is content that
has not be classified by the Classification Board but, were it to be so
classified, there
is a substantial likelihood that the content would be
prohibited content.
This material may also be removed until by the ABA until a
formal classification can occur.
The Bill divides the regulatory regime into
two parts: that dealing with prohibited content hosted in Australia and that
with prohibited content hosted outside Australia.
If the ABA is satisfied that Internet content hosted in
Australia is prohibited content, the ABA must give the Internet content
written notice, being a final take-down notice, directing the host not to host
the prohibited content.
Other provisions apply where the ABA is satisfied that the
Internet content is potential prohibited content. If the ABA is satisfied
there is a substantial likelihood that the content would be classified as RC
or X, the ABA must issue the host with
a (written) interim take-down notice
directing the host not to host the content pending an actual classification by
the Classification
Board. Further, the ABA must request such a classification
from that Board. If, however, the ABA is satisfied that there is a
substantial
likelihood the Internet content would be given an R classification, then the
ABA must only request the Classification
Board to classify the content. In
either case, the ABA must notify the ICH of the result of the classification
the result is that the content is prohibited, then the ABA must
issue a final take-down notice,
which requires that the material be permanently removed from
the Internet.
Particular provisions apply where the ABA is satisfied that
Internet content hosted outside Australia is sufficiently serious
referral to a law enforcement agency (within or outside Australia). In those
circumstances, the ABA must notify,
amongst others, a member of an Australian
police force.
Finally, the legislation introduces an
amendment to section 85ZE of the
. That section prohibits a person from knowingly or
recklessly using a carriage service supplied by a carrier
to menace or harass
others or from using that carriage service in an offensive manner.
To understand the extent to which this new legislative
scheme will prove ineffective in regulating that which must be regulated,
must take a closer look at the actual definitions provided in the
Classification (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act
Recall that under the
Broadcasting Services Amendment (Online Services)
, all Internet images will be classified by the OFLC in the same
way as they would classify films under the
Classification Act
1995. This is problematic.
Pursuant to section 9 of the
Classification
, all films (read: all forms of Internet presentation), are to be
classified in accordance with the "National Classification Code",
Schedule 5 of the
Classification Act
and the "Classification
Guidelines." Pursuant to section 11 of the
Classification Act
, the matters to be taken into account when making a
decision on
the classification of a film include:
the standards of morality, decency and propriety generally accepted by
reasonable adults.
Pursuant to the National Classification Code, all Internet content should
now be classified as followed:
Description of film
Classification
Films that:
depict, express or otherwise deal with matters of sex,
drug misuse or addiction, crime, cruelty, violence or revolting or abhorrent
phenomena in such a way that they offend against the standards of morality,
decency and propriety generally accepted
by reasonable adults to the extent
that they should not be classified; or
depict in a way that is likely to
cause offence to a reasonable adult a minor who is, or who appears to be,
under 16 (whether
or not engaged in sexual activity); or
promote, incite
or instruct in matters of crime or violence.
Films (except RC films) that:
depict sexual activity between adults, where there is no sexual
violence, coercion or non consent of any kind, in a way
that is likely
to cause offence to a reasonable adult; and
are unsuitable for a minor to see.
Films (except RC films and X films) that are unsuitable for a minor to see.
The Classification Guidelines, referred to in section
Classification Act
, are detailed in the Classification Board and
Classification Review Board Annual Report for 1998. Important for
our purposes
is the fact that the Guidelines (which are quite brief and arguably lacking in
content) state that, when making
its classification decisions, the Board is
required to "reflect contemporary community standards". With respect to R
films, the Guidelines outline that films will be rated 'R' if:
Sexual activity is only realistically simulated; the general rule
is 'simulation yes - the real thing no'.
Nudity in a sexual context does not include actual genital contact
Verbal references are more detailed than actual depictions
The Guidelines also point out that films must be refused classification if
they "offend against generally accepted standards of
morality, decency and
propriety" and if they contain:
depictions of child sexual abuse or any other exploitative or offensive
depictions involving a person who is or who looks like
a child under 16;
detailed instruction in:
i. matters of crime or violence,
ii. the use of proscribed drugs;
depictions of practices such as bestiality.
Films and videos will be also be refused
classification if they contain gratuitous, exploitative or offensive
depictions of:
violence with a very high degree of impact or which are excessively
frequent, prolonged or detailed;
cruelty or real violence which are very detailed or which have a high
sexual violence;
sexual activity accompanied by fetishes or practices which are offensive
or abhorrent;
incest fantasies or other fantasies which are
offensive or abhorrent.
A review of the above would seem to indicate that the
primary focus of the
is on the regulation of
materials which are likely to offend those who view them and which, because
they are indecent (hence
offensive), are likely to undermine society's moral
fibre. This focus permeates the entire
and as such, tends to
undermine those sections of it which might in fact prove useful. For example,
although the
seems to recognise the link between
pornography and violence, this recognition is undermined by the fact that it
fails at a very basic level to also recognise
the harms of non-violent
pornography. This is problematic, for as Susan Cole notes:
But what do we do
with the real facts, the ones that tell us that it isn't only the violent
materials that are being used
to keep women down or used as sex manuals forced
on the victims of battery? What about the fact that the so-called
"non-violent"
materials are often made under near violent conditions? In fact,
much of the pornography implicated in the battery of women has
so-called non-violent materials. More to the point, the items through which
women are forced into sexual acts
are very often soft-core items that, even
given the long arm of the law, obscenity legislation cannot and will not
Similarly, the determination of what is violent seems
to depend on the
preoccupation with what, in the eyes of the reasonable
person, is not in the community interest. This is problematic,
least. In the eyes of the law, the reasonable "person" has tended to find
expression through the voice of the
reasonable "man".
The reasonable man, charged with the responsibility of
protecting the community against public indecency, lives in a community
which violence against women is ideologically encouraged; a community where
women are battered and raped daily, simply
for being women. As Andrea Dworkin
What do community standards mean in a society when violence against
women is pandemic, when according to the FBI a woman is battered
eighteen seconds and it's the most commonly committed crime in the country?
What would community standards have meant
in the segregated south? What would
community standards have meant as we approached the atrocity of Nazi Germany?
community standards in a society where women are persecuted for being
women and pornography is a form of political persecution?
The community standards approach, defined as it is by a male
standard far removed from this reality, also ignores the fact that
pornography (because it glorifies and normalises these harms) is allowed to
exist, the more likely it is that it
will set the standards for those men
expected to determine whether or not they, as the reasonable person and
representative
of the community, are offended. The determination of whether
something is "decent" will thus tend to be measured against that
find more and more sexually arousing -- resulting, ultimately, in a situation
where inequality (because it is sexualized,
normalized and romanticised in
pornography and in society generally) ultimately becomes the community
standard, such that
inequality is unlikely to be seen as corruptive, hence
indecent, hence harmful to the public interest.
Because morality in our society has come to be linked with
the community's perception of decency and offensiveness and because
is unlikely to be seen as offensive to those for whom inequality is not a
daily reality and for whom it is, in
fact, sexually arousing -- ie those men
to whom we turn in determining what is in the public interest -- any attempt
to regulate
pornography which uses concepts like immorality, indecency or
impropriety as the basis for determining harm, will ultimately
prove futile in
protecting those who do not benefit from a community standard set by gender
male privilege and who do not
benefit from debates about morality which centre
on little more than the proper boundaries of female objectification. The
question that legislation of this sort poses is whether men are offended by
what they see, rather than whether women are abused,
violated and degraded as
a consequence of the production and use of what these men see. By emphasising
the corruptive effect
of pornography on the consumer (usually male), laws of
this sort ignore the fact that women are overwhelmingly pornography's
They concern themselves "more with whether men blush than with whether women
such that the harms caused to women and ultimately to the
public's equality interest are completely ignored.
The above becomes even more apparent once we note the extent to which the
interpretation of what is and is not "reasonable" or
"morally acceptable" will
now need to be made by adjudicators appointed by a government which sees
itself as the guardian
of Australian family values. One of the other real
concerns with legislation which focuses on moral upkeep, is the extent to
which it will be used to suppress the expression of sexual practices and
identities which are not socially harmful. This
is particularly true of some
images and representations of same-sex sexual activity -- images which, it can
be argued, are
liberating and central to the formations of a positive sexual
identity. For as Jerald Moldenhaur explains:
As gay people, we know how
important literature is in informing our evolving identity and furthering our
social empowerment.
Because our 'difference' as gay and lesbian people is
largely defined by our sexuality, it is especially important for us to
to communicate and share experiences about this subject.
Although I generally agree with Moldenhaur's views, it is
important to clarify that not all representations of same-sex sexuality
necessarily empowering. Indeed, some lesbian and gay activists (myself
included) have expressed the concern that a great
deal of gay and lesbian
pornography is far from a tool of liberation and is, in fact, central to the
promotion of the very
inequalities that lesbians and gay men must reject if
they are truly committed to the goal of social equality. These writers
issue with the claims of some gay activists
that lesbian and gay male pornography
undermines the gendered power inequalities evident in heterosexual pornography
it presents a sexuality which tends to subvert and challenge
heterosexual male power. In particular, it has been argued that:
Gay male pornography creates a sexual
hierarchy in which 'he' who is aggressive and dominant (read masculine) is
(read the epitome of what it means to be male as socially defined)
and the person over/upon whom that power is exercised is
non-masculine,
hence feminised, hence non-powerful (read 'female' as socially defined). It
is this sexuality that violates
women and it is this sexuality that leads to
the oppression of gay men. Gay male pornography, because it glorifies the
masculine, reinforces a male/female social dichotomy. In doing so, it
strengthens those stereotypes that allow society to
view certain behaviour
as feminine, hence inferior, and reaffirms, because it reinforces, the idea
that it is unnatural
to engage in a sexual dynamic not premised on
male/female polarity. It is, in essence, homophobic and, as such, central to
the maintenance of sex discrimination and systemic inequality.
These writers, and those who support them, agree that
some same-sex sexual imagery can be affirming and central to a more liberating
identity. They also accept and understand that positive images of same sex
sexuality are vital for those coming to terms
with their sexuality in an
environment which does much to portray it as deviant and abnormal. Most
importantly, these writers
agree that present efforts to restrict pornography,
because they tend to focus on the need to protect public morality, risk
restricting much needed lesbian and gay male expression. Where these activists
disagree with other activists, however, is
in their analysis of the importance
of the types of lesbian and gay male pornography presently lauded as
liberating, hence
in need of protection. These writers believe that present
efforts to protect gay pornography do little more than promote and
those gender constructs that are the very source of gay male suppression and
sex discrimination.
This in turn leads them to believe that
efforts which aim to limit the distribution and production of pornography in
name of sex equality (as opposed to present procedures that appear to do
so on the grounds of public morality) should be supported
by lesbian and gay
male activists alike, rather than condemned as anti-speech or anti-gay. Their
goal is to ensure the implementation
of anti-pornography measures which both
protect against the harms of pornography while ensuring that legitimate forms
minority sexual expression (ie those which do not simply support gender
inequality) are allowed production and distribution and
not arbitrarily
It is not my purpose in writing this paper to "prove"
that lesbian or gay male pornography undermines society's sex equality
interest. This is clearly beyond the scope of this work. Having said this, I
do write this paper from the perspective of those
who believe that it does do
so. I acknowledge, however, that present obscenity regulations are susceptible
to considerable
abuse -- abuse which frequently results in the seizure of
materials which clearly should
be restricted
and which fails to restrict those materials which clearly
be. This obviously poses a challenge to all
persons committed to equality. That is, how should those representations of
sex sexuality which
undermine systemic
equality be regulated and how do we ensure that those which do
, are not regulated?
This is a point to which I will return later in this
paper, as I believe the MacKinnon-Dworkin anti-pornography ordinances offer
effective solution to this challenge by allowing
persons who claim to have had their equality rights undermined by
pornography (lesbians and gay men included) to personally challenge
they believe are responsible for this harm. It is my assertion that the best
way to reconcile the interests of
those who quite justifiably fear unwarranted
state censorship with the interests of those who are frustrated with the
ineffective
use of state censorship is to take away the power to regulate and
control pornographic harm from those least harmed by pornography
state and those who exercise its power -- and allow those most harmed by
pornography to take direct legal action
against the agents of their harm
without relying on the state to act on their behalf. The MacKinnon Dworkin
Anti-Pornography
Ordinance offers this alternative and, far from threatening
the interests of lesbians and gay men, provides a creative solution
problems of gender inequality and discriminatory, thus ineffective censorship
guidelines and practices.
For the time being, however, it is worth noting
recent statements by elected officials throughout Australia on the issue of
sexuality and equality. When viewed within the context of the government's new
censorship legislation, these comments highlight
the very real likelihood that
legislation which is completely devoid of any equality analysis will prove
ineffective in dealing
with sexual representations which
harmful, while being used to restrict some
representations which clearly are not.
In 1995, the work of Robert Mapplethorpe was
exhibited in Perth, Western Australia. Prior to the retrospectives arrival in
Perth, a "Life Ministries" church representative, Dwight Randall, stated that
"the depraved works of a dead homosexual were
sick and should be banned" and
argued that the Attorney General should act swiftly to ensure that the exhibit
was banned.
Although the exhibit was not banned, it
was denied funding by the government's arts sponsoring ministry, Healthway.
Minister Graham Kierath, the Minister ultimately responsible for
pulling funding from the exhibit, explained his decision by
telling Parliament
that, although much of Mapplethorpe's work is brilliant, some of the
photographs were "nauseating, perverse,
sleazy and depraved...(showing) some
of the most horrific records of anal sex." He later added that "if it were not
sort of activity that is displayed in some of Mapplethorpe's works, he
and many other talented people might be alive today."
There are many valid reasons to oppose the work of
Robert Mapplethorpe. One might start with the fact that much of his work
sexualizes and celebrates some of society's most oppressive racial stereotypes
and the inequalities built on racial difference.
Indeed, one might ultimately ask
whether the images encourage racial hatred and promote racial inequality.
These questions
were not asked, however. Instead, those who are concerned with
sexualized racism and inequality again found themselves confronted
government minister concerned only with what, in his eyes, was the perverse
expression of a perverse sexuality.
Similar concerns have arisen elsewhere throughout
Australia, particularly within the context of those efforts aimed at educating
young gay men about the need for safe-sex practices. It is clear that safe sex
education materials, to be effective, must
demonstrate to young gay men and
lesbians what, exactly, safe sex constitutes. As such, visual representations
of such safe
sexual activity will often form an integral role within the
context of educational policies aimed at teaching necessary safe
practices. Unfortunately, a reading of these new censorship laws in Australia
reveals that this may not prove feasible.
Recall that the legislation in place aims to regulate
"offensive" materials which are likely to undermine "the standards of
morality, decency and propriety generally accepted by reasonable adults."
Although relatively recent, experience thus far in
a number of Australian
interest can, once applied,
be used in a discriminatory and harmful manner.
Because legislation of this sort focuses solely on the harms of immorality, it
is quite feasible that those materials which are not harmful, but which are
deemed "offensive", will be deemed illegal and
ultimately censored.
This is particularly problematic for
educators who now find themselves having to teach the realities of safe same
activity but who are confronted with a piece of legislation which
appears to disallow access to those materials needed to do
Lest it be thought that these concerns are
far-fetched, one need only examine recent censorship campaigns targeted
at HIV/AIDS prevention campaigns to see that the opposite is in fact
quite true. In 1996, for example, Queensland Health Minister
Mike Horan banned
an AIDS education campaign aimed at young men. The campaign included "some
explicit sexual images, in association
with information about how to minimise
the transmission of HIV during sexual practices including oral and anal sex"
based on "research conducted among service providers which
acknowledged changes to the ways in which gay men approach sex and
such factors as 'safe sex fatigue' and 'negotiated safety'. Although the
campaign had already been released in
Victoria and was widely regarded as
having an important role in the HIV/AIDS education, Horan argued that the
campaign did
little more than promote the homosexual lifestyle and was far too
graphic for release to the public.
He was supported in his conclusions by
Mr Laurie Toppling, the director of a Brisbane-based AIDS counselling service
heterosexuals, who argued that the campaign did little more than promote
"immoral behaviour" - statements not assisted by Federal
Minister for Health,
Dr Woolridge's assertion that although Queensland risked "significant health
and social costs if they
failed to provide an appropriately targeted
alternative", governments do "have the right to ban material they regard as
pornographic."
In 1998, Mr Horan again blocked
publication of an advertisement designed to reduce HIV transmission among men
with other men in rural areas. The ad, intended for a local
newspaper in rural Queensland, was to read: "There are many guys
who enjoy sex
with other guys and have a girlfriend or a wife", and "You don't have to be
gay or bi to want to have sex with
guys." The ad then encourages "men who like
to get together with other men" to contact the AIDS Council." Mr Horan banned
the ad on the basis that it "offends public decency". He added, "We have
always told the AIDS Council that their money is not
to be used to for the
promotion of a particular lifestyle."
Similar views were expressed by Senator Herron during
debate on the scope and impact of the government's Internet amendments to
Broadcasting Act
. The Senate debate is
interesting in that it reveals the type of publications that individual
senators believe should not
be allowed as unrestricted publications. Senator
Herron's comments, in particular, reveal a rather obsessive fixation with anal
sex, which he refers to as a 'deviant practice.' Referring to a safe sex
publication put out by the Ministry of Health in
which depicts safe sex activity, the Senator is quoted in the 1
March 1995 Hansard at 1212 as saying:
Where do we go when we get an X-rated
pornographic government publication that is put out by the Minister of Human
and Health, and which advocates deviant sexual practices and is
not, as she says in the preamble to it, a non judgemental resource.
called safe sex guide is an official government publication, endorsed by the
government . . . It is X-rated and
pornographic, and any right minded person
. . . would classify it unsuitable for publication, but it is on the
of this country and can be bought by any 13 year old child.
I have on record the names and addresses of people
who want to speak out because they are so enraged at this attack on the
morals, as well as the health aspects, of this publication. This is an
official government publication. It is full of
lies. The publication states
that between 40 and 60 per cent of women in this country have anal sex. This
is an official
government publication. . . . I have been a colorectal
surgeon . . . I have treated many AIDS patients. I have treated many
homosexual patients. The damage that occurs through this deviant practice is
unimaginable, and we have the government
advocating it as normal
Regardless of one's personal views on anal or oral
intercourse, it should by now be evident to even the most prudish that
systemic harm is unlikely to arise from consensual non-vaginal penetrative sex
and, indeed, that for young gay men who are raised
to believe that homosexual
same-sex sexuality can
in fact be quite life affirming. This is an issue that
has as much as been laid to rest in other jurisdictions, for as explained
the recent Canadian case of
Little Sisters Book and
Art Emporium v. AG Canada
There is no jurisprudence supporting the
proposition that all depictions or descriptions of anal intercourse are
in and of themselves on the basis that anal penetration is
inherently degrading or dehumanizing.
The prohibition of representations of
that practice (anal sex) discriminated against male homosexuals. It deprived
of representations central to the values and culture of the minority
group to which they belong. It (also) constituted an embargo
on safe-sex
guidelines within Canadian homosexual communities at a time, in the context
of the AIDS epidemic, when such
guidelines have been particularly
The rationale articulated in the
Little Sisters
case arose within the context of the
equality analysis outlined in
. Important
for our purposes is the Court's reasoning that presentations of those sexual
practices equated with homosexual
sex are not, per se, harmful. This is not to
say that same sex pornography cannot be seen to violate the equality standard
against which pornography should be tested,
but that gay sex, per se, is not
harmful unless presented in such a way as to make degradation, dehumanisation
and the harms
of inequality that result from stereotypical gender differences
appear normal.
What is clear from the above is that anti-pornography
legislation which fails to see pornography as an issue of systemic gender
equality is ripe for abuse, inconsistent application and overall
ineffectiveness. Given the attitude of the government in
charge of enforcing
the legislation, reflected in the comments of a number of elected officials,
there is little reason to
believe that Australia's most recent efforts will
prove any different in this regard. This is particularly troubling given that
this officials will now be responsible for appointing those persons required
to adjudicate the varied effects of an entire
host of Internet images and
representations - a decision making process which is made more difficult and
ineffective as a
result of the standards set under this legislative scheme and
by the fact that there are few if any guidelines in place for determining
exactly, is an appropriate person for making this determination. Section 48 of
Classification Act
states only that the
Minister shall appoint persons who are "broadly representative of the
Australian community." It offers
little guidance as to how and on what basis
these people should be appointed and the Classification Guidelines are
disturbingly
silent in this regard.
For those harmed by pornography, the apparent lack of
experience of, and guidance given to, Board members is further compounded
the fact that the appeal mechanisms in place do not appear to grant any right
of appeal to persons other than those responsible
for producing or
distributing the material which is the subject of the classification. Section
states only that "persons
aggrieved" by any classification decision can apply to a Review Board for a
review of a decision.
does not explain
what is meant by the term "aggrieved person." Similar legislation at the state
level does clarify the expression,
however, such that "person aggrieved" means
an author or publisher of the publication to which the appeal relates.
Given the extent to which the federal
government wishes to work closely with the states in this regard, there is
little reason
to believe this definition will not apply the federal level. If
this is to be the case, the
little in the way of ensuring a voice to those most in need of one.
Specifically, no reference is made in this
section (or indeed in any other
section of the
) to those "aggrieved" during
the production of the pornography now available online -- predominantly women
who, as MacKinnon
and Dworkin explain, are pornography's first victims:
Pornography indelibly makes those it uses
into its presentation of them, so that no matter who they are or what they
they are pornography for life. Pornographers promote
an image of free
consent because it is good for business. But most women in pornography are
poor, were sexually abused
as children, and have reached the end of this
society's options for them, options that were biased against them as women
in the first place. The fact that some women may "choose" pornography from a
stacked deck of life pursuits (if you call
a loaded choice a choice, like
the "choice" of those with brown skin to pick cabbages or the "choice" of
those with black
skin to clean toilets) and the fact that some women in
pornography say they made a free choice do not mean that women who are
coerced into pornography are
not coerced
Broadcasting Act
does nothing to ensure that those used during the production of
pornography are offered an opportunity to ensure that those who
profit or who
find sexual arousal in their abuse are not entitled to do so. Nor does it
offer any recourse to those who suffer
considerable physical and psychological
harm as a result of the distribution of this pornography. Rather than empower
pornography's
victims, it does little more than provide yet another
opportunity for those who produce and profit from victimization to justify
sexism and legitimise inequality.
Although designed to radically re-write Australia's
censorship laws in the area of Internet regulation, a careful reading of the
legislation reveals that the
Broadcasting Services
Amendment (Online Services) Act
stands as a rather unfortunate example of
how not to address the individual and systemic harms that result from the
and distribution of pornography. Focusing solely on the need to
protect against moral corruption, as opposed to seeing pornography
for what it
really is (a form of sex discrimination resulting in systemic inequality), the
legislation fails to ensure that
those most in need of protection from
pornographic harm are not so protected.
By focussing on pornography as an issue of
immorality, rather than as an issue of inequality and the harms that result
inequality, the Australian government fails to ensure that those most in
need of legal recourse will find it. It also risks imposing
unjustified limits
on legitimate forms of sexual expression -- expression which, far from
harmful, may in fact prove quite
central to the goal of achieving systemic
equality. What is needed is legislation which
radical in so far as it really does offer those who have been harmed by
pornography the opportunity to do something about it.
By redefining
pornography as a threat to social equality and by adopting enforcement
measures which
that this threat is
curtailed, our legislators would do much to ensure that the harms of
pornography are taken seriously,
while guaranteeing that the "right to speak"
is a right shared by all citizens. This legislation, in its present form, does
Pornography as a Human Rights Violation
Through its
production, pornography is a traffic in female sexual slavery. Through its
consumption, pornography further
institutionalizes a subhuman, victimized,
second-class status for women by conditioning orgasm to sex inequality. When
men use pornography, they experience in their bodies that one-sided sex -
sex between a person and a thing - is sex, that
sexual use is sex, sexual
abuse is sex, sexual domination is sex. This is the sexuality they then
demand, practice, and
purchase. Pornography makes sexism sexy. It is a major
way that gender hierarchy is enjoyed and practiced.
The question that needs to be asked then is: where to
from here? It has been my purpose in writing this paper to convince those
claim to take the issue of pornography seriously to re-think the law of
obscenity. I have argued that the recent decision
of the Canadian Supreme
offers strong support for the claims of those committed to the elimination of
sex discrimination that pornography must be
seen as a source of the types of
gendered inequalities that result in sex discrimination. An analysis of
Australia's new
Internet censorship legislation demonstrates just what can go
wrong when a radical re-thinking is not undertaken. I am not convinced,
however, that simply re-defining pornography as an issue of inequality is
enough. It is an important and necessary start,
but it is not enough.
While the reasoning of the Supreme Court of Canada in
applauded, it is important to note that the Court could only go so far in
ensuring that its goal of equality was
in fact achieved. Specifically, the
distribution of pornography in Canada remains a criminal offence. As a result,
the determination
of whether or not attempts should be made to stop
pornographic distribution remains in the hands of the police -- a fact which
essentially ensures that those most harmed by pornography are again provided
no say as to whether or not something should
be regulated. Similarly, the
decision in
, although progressive and much
needed, does nothing to provide compensation to those who have been victimised
as a result
of the production an distribution of pornography. While the
decision might ensure, assuming the state does decide to act, this
does little
to compensate victims of past abuse.
While the equality test adopted in
improves on traditional obscenity law
standards, and should be adopted in principle throughout Australia, the test
will not succeed in halting the production of pornography and the harms
that result from it so long as the power to do so remains
in the hands of
those for whom pornography is not an issue of inequality and personal harm.
What is needed is an approach
which empowers pornography's victims and which,
as such, effectively and fairly addresses the systemic inequality caused by
sexualized gender discrimination - an approach which allows those most harmed
by pornography to fight back against those who
harm them and which, as such,
puts some teeth into the
equality mandate.
The human rights approach to pornographic harm
drafted by American feminists Catharine MacKinnon and Andrea Dworkin offers
such an approach. MacKinnon and Dworkin conceptualise pornography as a
practice of sex discrimination, arguing that it actively
promotes inequality
between the sexes by eroticising dominance and male supremacy. It is unique
both in procedure and substance
in that the approach offered provides a
definition of pornography which is specific and unambiguous and allows those
harmed by it to do something about it, without relying on the
determination of others as to whether or not to act on their behalf.
importantly, it locates the regulation of pornography within the context of
eliminating sexualized gender hierarchies
and the inequalities that result
from them. While it is not my intention to provide a complete analysis of the
(as this has been done quite effectively elsewhere)
it is worth noting that pornography
under this approach is defined as follows:
Pornography. Pornography is a form of discrimination
on the basis of sex.
Pornography is the sexually
explicit subordination of women, graphically depicted, whether in
pictures or
in words, that also includes one or more of the following:
women are presented dehumanized as sexual
objects, things or commodities; or
women are presented as sexual objects who
enjoy pain or humiliation; or
women are presented as sexual objects who
experience sexual pleasure in being raped; or
women are presented as sexual objects tied up
or cut up or mutilated or bruised or physically hurt; or
women are presented in postures of sexual
submission; or
women's body parts - including but not
limited to vaginas, breasts, and buttocks - are exhibited, such that
women are reduced to those parts; or
women are presented as whores by nature; or
women are presented being penetrated by
objects or animals; or
women are presented in scenarios of
degradation, injury, abasement, torture, shown as filthy or inferior,
bleeding, bruised, or hurt in a context that makes these conditions
The use of men, children, or
transsexuals in the place of women in (1)(i-ix) above is pornography
purposes of this statute.
The Ordinance allows those harmed by pornography to
bring a civil or human rights-based action against those responsible for their
harm. It can be passed as an amendment to an already existing civil or human
rights law or it can be passed as a freestanding
In Australia, this can best be achieved
by amending state and federal Equal Opportunity legislation, with necessary
being made to the compensation limits imposed by legislation of
Under its provisions, it is deemed to
be sex discrimination to coerce, intimidate or fraudulently coerce any person
performing for pornography.
The makers, sellers, exhibitors and/or
distributors of any resulting pornography can then be sued for damages and for
injunction to eliminate the product of the performance from public view.
It is also deemed to be sex
discrimination to produce, sell, exhibit, or distribute pornography, including
through private
clubs and to force pornography on a person in any place of
employment, education, home or public place.
Finally, victims of an assault,
physical attack, or injury that is directly caused by specific pornography are
entitled to
file a complaint against the maker(s), seller(s), exhibitor(s) or
distributor(s) of the pornography believed to have caused the
Catharine MacKinnon and Andrea Dworkin argue that
pornography contributes to the social construction of the masculine (read
dominant) norm and feminine (read submissive) "other". This is an analysis
with which I agree. Ultimately, it constructs and
defines the way in which we
see and interpret the roles of men and women. Rather than mere harmless
fantasy, pornography
is a sexual reality -- an agent for the construction of
those denied male privilege as that of inferior, worthless, and best
for sexual slavery. The end result is an identity-discourse that results in a
male-as-dominant over female-as-subordinate
politic - a politic that
translates into "cultural-sadism" or an ideology which encourages sexual
violence by presenting
it as appropriate behaviour.
By normalising male sexual violence,
pornography creates the normative gender identity of men as powerful and women
as powerless.
Male dominance is thereby legitimised. The result is a system of
inequality through which degradation and harm are sexualized,
romanticised and
ultimately normalized.
Any attempt to regulate pornography that fails to see
pornographic harm for what it is -- an issue of sex discrimination resulting
in social inequality -- will ultimately prove futile. The Australian
Parliament has enacted legislation which it claims can
tackle the harms that
result from the distribution of online pornography. Unfortunately, given that
this legislation is aimed
solely at controlling the public's access to
materials deemed obscene, offensive, indecent and morally repugnant, it is
that it will most definitely fail to address the harms that must be
addressed. Void of any equality analysis, and relying solely
on the personal
views of those least harmed by pornography to determine harm, the government's
may well prove to be as socially
short-sighted and regressive as its critics claim while proving as ineffective
as those who
most need a protection fear it will be.
The MacKinnon-Dworkin Ordinances have not been
adopted in any Australian jurisdiction. Throughout Australia, pornography
an issue of indecency and immorality. The Supreme Court of Canada's
decision in R v.
offers hope for those who
believe and who know that pornography is much more than an issue of impure
thoughts. The Ordinances
take this approach to its logical conclusion.
Naturally, there will those who argue that an approach of this sort is ill
suited to Internet regulation. I have yet to be convinced that this is the
case. The advent of electronic communications will,
of course, change how
pornography is distributed. It will not, however, change the nature of the
harms that result from this
distribution - other than to make them more
pervasive. As MacKinnon concludes:
Each new technology raises anew the
question of legal approaches. Cyberspace makes vivid, if it was not already,
the inefficacy
of current obscenity law, which coexists with this exploding
market in human abuse, as it has with every other means of sexual
trafficking. Just as the harms pornography does are no different online than
anywhere else, the legal approach taken
to them need be no different. It
need only be effective. Computer networks present a newly democratic, yet
newly elite,
mass form of pornography becoming less elite by the minute,
just as pornography always has. In whatever form pornography exists,
harms remain harms to the equality of women, so it is through addressing
these harms that pornography can be confronted.
Civil rights legislation
designed to remedy pornography's harms at their point of impact is well
suited to this task.
Computer technology does pose newly complex issues
of anonymity and privacy. Unidentified speech has always presented dangers
of harassment and reputational destruction but never before on this scale.
before has it been possible to
find out what a person is reading while they are reading it. Technical
problems of proving
liability and measuring damages also exist, although now
that the pornographers are figuring out how to get paid for pornography
cyberspace, many of these problems will be solved, as the transactions will
leave a trace. Once a legal approach through
actual harms is taken,
accountability for pornography on computer networks poses no new conceptual
problems, only practical
problems of delivery. The legal problem is, women
hurt by pornography have no rights against it anywhere. If circulating
pornography in this new, still legitimate, forum reframes the same old abuse
to alter that impunity, this new technology
will be the first to be
revolutionary.
By making freedom from pornographic harm a human
right, a right that takes precedence over any perceived right to unlimited
speech, the Ordinance puts into practice the conceptual shift towards equality
outlined in
. It also addresses the
inadequacies and biases inherent in those procedures presently designed to
prevent pornographic harm
- procedures which are susceptible to abuse and
inconsistent application and which do very little to address the real harms of
pornography identified by those most harmed by it. The Australian Parliament
has declared that it intends to take the issue
of pornography seriously. It
has yet to prove itself capable of doing so. By allowing those harmed by
pornography to tackle
it as an abuse of human rights, however, the government
will do much to ensure that it does.
BA(Hons), LLB (Queen. s), LLM (Michigan), Senior Lecturer
in Law, Research Fellow, Asia Pacific Intellectual Property Law Institute,
Murdoch University, Perth, Western Australia.
The author wishes to thank Associate
Professor Fiona Macmillan, Copyright Director at the Asia Pacific Intellectual
Law Institute for her assistance throughout the writing of this
you also to Mr Bruce Leishman, student in law, for his invaluable research
assistance.
Quoted in Philip Elmer-Dewitt, "On a
Screen Near You: Cyberporn",
Time Magazine
July 1995 48 at 53.
See generally, Philip Elmer-Dewitt, supra
note 1 at 48; Marty Rimm, "Marketing Pornography on the Information
Superhighway"
Georgetown Law Journal
; Jeffrey Gentleman, "Porn Again Stars Pump Billions Into Limp Film
The West Australian
, 14 September
1999 at 44; Robert Kirwin and Nicole Mankeltow, "Sex Online",
Australian Net Guide
, March 1996 at 29.
Elmer-Dewitt, supra. note 1 at 50.
Second Reading Speech,
Broadcasting
Services Amendment (Online Services) Bill 1999
, at wysiwyg://www.dcita.gov.au.
See also, Senator Richard Alston, Explanatory Memorandum, available from
Senate Table Office,
Canberra and "Principles for a regulatory Framework for
Online Services in the
Broadcasting Services
Amendment Act
http://www.dca.gov.au/policy/framework.html.
See generally, Niranjan
Arasaratnam, "Internet Censorship: See No Evil, Speak No Evil, Hear No Evil"
(1999) 18(2)
Communications Law
; Brendan Scott, "The Dawn of a New Dark Age:
Censorship and Amendments to the
Broadcasting Services Act
wysiwyg://69/http://www.gtlaw.com.au/pubs/newdarkage.html; Mike Van
Niererk, "Free Speech May Be Online Casualty of
Anti-Porn Laws" ,
, 22 August 1995 at 16; Alan Kohler, "Governing
Desire: How Pornography on the Internet became Captive to Politics",
The Financial
, 8 May 1999 at 23; Elizabeth Feitzkhah, "Policing the
Wild Net. ,
Time Magazine
June 1999 at 52; Action Alert, "Australia Needs Your Help" at
http://www.efa.org.au/Campaigns/slert99.html;
Koomen, "Illegal and Harmful Content on the Internet: Some Issues and
Computers and Law
; Kimberley Corner,
"Censorship A Burning Issue",
Sunday Times
, 21 April 1996; David Watts, "Oh What a Tangled
Net We Weave",
West Australian
, 8 May 1999 at 31; Kirsty Needham, "Net Bill
and Investor Turn-Off",
Sydney Morning Herald
, 7 June 1999 at 36;
Anon, "Censors Take Us Back to the 60's" ,
1999 at 18; Anne Summers, "Opinion: Now Anything But Liberal", Sydney Morning
Herald, 3 June 1999 at 17; Shaun Anhgony,
"MPs Speak Out on Web Censorship" ,
West Australian
June 1999 at 12; Dan Tebbutt, "Censor and Be Damned",
1999 at 53; Jenny Sinclair, "Dismay Over Net Freedom Curb" ,
Age (Melbourne)
June 1999 at 2; Sandy Plunkett, "Internet Censorship: The Joke's On Us" ,
Sydney Morning
, 31 May 1999 at 40; Anon, "Net Bill: A Modern Day Book
Sydney Morning
, 31 May 1999 at 18; Anon, "Protest Against Government.
s Draconian Censorship",
Illawarra Mercury
, 28 May 1999 at 15
Catharine A MacKinnon
Feminism Unmodified
(Boston: Harvard University
Press, 1987) at 148. See also, Andrea Dworkin and Catharine MacKinnon,
"Memorandum to the Minneapolis
City Council", 28 December, 1983, as cited in
Hilary Charlesworth "Pornography as Sex Discrimination"
(1983) 63(8)
Law Institute Journal
See generally, Nadine Strossen,
Defending Pornography
Speech, Sex, and the Right for Women's Rights
(New York: Scribner, 1995)
and Nan Hunter, "Brief Amici Curiae of Feminist Anti-Censorship Task Force",
Michigan Journal of Law Reform 69
This is an argument most frequently
articulated by lesbian and gay male activists and tends, at times, to blur
with the above
argument that pornography should be seen as protected speech.
For an analysis of this argument and how best to reconcile it with
anti-pornography efforts, see my discussion at notes 71 to 73.
By which I mean only that I will not
attempt to respond to the claims of those who reject the claim that
pornography is a
source of considerable individual and systemic harm. I will
outline why I believe pornography is an issue of inequality, rather
issue of immorality, but do so only for the purpose of convincing the
Commonwealth Parliament that the morality-based
approach it has chosen is
inappropriate and ineffective. For an excellent analysis and critique of many
of the claims made
by pro-pornographers and those who refute the approach we
offer, see: J Hoff, "Why Is There No History of Pornography" pp17-46
Gubar and J Hoff (eds)
The Dilemma of Violent
Pornography: For Adult users Only
(Indiana: Indiana University Press,
1989); H.E. Longino "Pornography, Oppression, and Freedom: A Closer Look" at
L. Lederer (ed),
Take Back the Night: Women
on Pornography
(New York: William Morrow & Co., 1980); A. Dworkin
"Pornography Happens To Women" at 181-190 in L. Lederer and R. Delgado
The Price We Pay:
The case Against Racist Speech,
Hate Propaganda, And Pornography
(New York: Hill and Wang, 1995); J.
Stoltenberg "Pornography and Freedom at 65-77 in D. Russell (ed),
Making Violence Sexy: Feminist Views On Pornography
(New York: Teachers College Press, 1993).
See at notes 41 and 42.
This is a task which has been
undertaken elsewhere. See, for example, Graham Greenleaf, "Law in Cyberspace"
Australian Law Journal
Toohey, "The Net Given a New Nanny",
, December 5, 1995 at 39; Victoria Laurie, "Moral Guardians on
", The Bulletin
, December 19, 1995 at
82; Brendan Scott, "A Layman's Guide to Internet Censorship in Australia" at
http://www.gllaw.com.au/pubs/sobershock.html
See generally, Arasaratnam, supra. note
5 at 1; CSIRO,
Technical Aspects of Blocking Internet
, (1999); Philip McCrea, Bob Smart and Mark Andrews, "Blocking
Content on the Internet: A Technical Perspective" (1998); Gordan
"Regulation of the Internet",
Law Institute
; Shaun Anthony, "Crackdown on Net Porn Will Fail, Senators
The West Australian
, 4 May 1999 at 27; David
Watts, "Move to Curb Internet Fails to Understand the Medium. ,
The West Australian
, 1 June 1999 at 12; David Iliffe,
"Net Porn Bill is Useless,"
The Illawarra Mercury
31 May 1999 at 17; Garry Barker, "Net Porn Law Too Weak: Experts",
, 28 May 1999 at 8.
With respect to the claim that some
representations of sexuality can be empowering and liberatory (hence,
non-harmful) see
my analysis of the need for positive images of same-sex
sexual images at notes 78 to 84 and the work of the authors noted therein.
Note also my analysis of the recent Canadian case of
Little Sisters Art and Book Emporium
(at note 84) and
the potential for abuse and discriminatory application of obscenity-type
legislation like that adopted by
the Australian government.
[1992] 1 SCR 452 (SCC)
See Andrea Dworkin and Catharine A
Pornography and Civil Rights: A New Day
for Women's Equality
, (Minneapolis: Organising Against Pornography,
Majesty's Feast: Gender, Power, Speech and Equality
(Unpublished LLM
Thesis, York University, 1989) at 10. A detailed account of the history of the
Minneapolis ordinances is
provided in Paul Best and Ann Vandenberg, "Politics,
Feminism and the
Constitution
: The Anti-Pornography Movement in Minneapolis"
Stanford Law Review
771 F. 2d 323
(7th Cir 1985).
For a critique of the Court's
conclusion that pornography is protected speech, see John Stoltenberg,
"Confronting Pornography
as a Civil-Rights Issue" in
Refusing To Be A Man
(New York: Meridian, 1990) and
Cass Sunstein, "Pornography and the First Amendment"
See also Catharine A MacKinnon,
(Boston: Harvard University Press, 1994).
An analysis of these efforts and
resulting legislation is offered by Anne Scahill, "Can Hate Speech Be Free
Australasian Gay and Lesbian Law
and Ryan Takach, "Gay and Lesbian Inequality: The
Anti-Vilification Measures",
Australasian
Gay and Lesbian Law Journal
; Anthony Henderson, "An Analysis of NSW
Attorney General's Anti-Anti-Discrimination (Amendment) Bill 1993", (1993) 3
Australasian Gay and Lesbian Law Journal
Castan, "Targets of Race Hate Entitled to Redress",
The Australian
, 15 November 1994, 17.
Cited in Catherine Itzin and Corinne
Sweet, "Women's Experience of Pornography: UK Magazine Survey Evidence", in C.
Pornography: Women, Violence and Civil
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992) at 230-232.
RSC 1985, c. C-46.
charged with 173 counts of illegal possession: three counts of selling obscene
material contrary to s 163(2)(a) of the
Code, 41 counts of possessing obscene
material for the purpose of distribution contrary to s 163(1)(a) of the Code,
of possessing obscene material for the purpose of sale contrary to
s 163(2)(a) of the Code and one count of exposing obscene
material to public
view contrary to s 163(2)(a) of the Code. At trial,
was convicted on eight counts relating to
eight films. He was acquitted on all other counts ((1989),
50 C.C.C. (3d) 97).
The Manitoba Court of Appeal allowed the appeal and entered convictions with
respect to all counts ((1990),
60 CCC (3d) 219).
Section 2(b) of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (the Charter)
reads: "Everyone has the following fundamental freedoms: (b) freedom of
thought, belief, opinion and expression, including freedom
of the press and
other media communication".
Although the protections enunciated in
are expressed widely, the actual
scope of these protections is determined by the Charter's first clause which
requires the
Courts to recognise limits on the rights provided in it. Section
1 states: The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees
and freedoms set out in it subject only to such reasonable limits prescribed
by law as can be demonstrably justified
in a free and democratic society. For
the most part, section 1 has been applied in a constrained and reasoned
manner. This
result has been produced by the Supreme Court of Canada's
decision in
[1986] 2 SCR 103
case in which the Court devised the judicial test according to which section 1
should be applied in order to determine
if proven Charter violations are
demonstrably justified. (For an analysis of the Court's reasoning see L.
Weinrib, "The Supreme
Court of Canada and Section One of the Charter", (1988)
Supreme Court L.R.
469). In Oakes, Dickson
C.J.C. set out the structure of a s. 1 analysis as follows: first, the
objective of the legislation
held to violate a Charter provision must be of
sufficient importance to do so and must relate to concerns which are pressing
and substantial in a free and democratic society. Once the legislation passes
these requirements, it is then scrutinised
to determine (1) whether the
measures adopted and which infringe the right in question are rationally
connected to the objective
in question; (2) whether the measures employed
impair as little as possible the right or freedom; and, (3) whether the
deleterious
effects of the measures held to violate an alleged right are
proportional to its objective or purpose. (As outlined in V. Ramraj,
Positive Liberty: A Glimmer of Hope for the Faithful",
University of Toronto Faculty of Law Review
See generally, Sheila Noonan, "Harm
Constitutional Forum
; Debra McAllister, "
: A Triumph for Equality Rights"
(1992-92) 2
National Journal of Constitutional Law
Richard Cameron, "
: A New Approach to
Obscenity Law or Return to Morality Play?",
Criminal Law Quarterly
; Ian Hunter, "
: Feminism Trumps Morality"
Criminal Law Quarterly
; Richard Moon, "The
Limits of the Supreme Court's Feminist Re-Interpretation of Section 163",
Canada, House of Commons Standing
Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs,
Pornography
, Issue No. 18 (March 22, 1978).
An excellent compilation of these
findings is found in Catherine Itzin,
Pornography:
Women, Violence and Civil Liberties
(London: Oxford University Press,
1992). See also
Factum of the Intervener Women's
Legal Education and Action Fund in R v Butler
, File No. 22191 (hereafter,
the LEAF Factum). Copies of the LEAF Factum are available from the LEAF
National Office, 415
Young Street, Suite 1800, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5B
2B7. All relevant studies, together with analysis of victim testimony,
also listed in the
Attorney General's Commission on
Pornography, Final Report
(Washington: July 1986).
See for example, E. Donnerstein,
"Pornography: Its Effect on Violence Against Women, in Malamuth and
Donnerstein (eds),
Pornography and Sexual Aggression
(New York: Academic Press, 1984); D Zillman, Connections
Between Sex and Aggression
(Hillsdale, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum, 1984); J. Check,
The Effects of
Violent and Nonviolent Pornography
(Ottawa: Canadian Department of
Justice, 1985); Donnerstein and Berkowitz (1983), J. Check and T.H. Guloin,
"Reported Proclivity
for Coercive Sex Following Repeated Exposure to Sexually
Violent Pornography, Nonviolent Pornography and Erotica" in Zillmann
Bryant (eds)
Pornography: Research Advances and
Policy Considerations
(Hillside, NJ: Erlbaum, 1989); Diana Russel
"Pornography and Rape: A Causal Model" (1988) 9(1) Political Psychology 41.
See D. Zillmann and J.B. Weaver;
"Pornography and Men's Sexual Callousness Towards Women" in Zillmann and
Bryant (1989);
Diana Russel,
Sexual Exploitation:
Rape, Child Sexual Abuse, and Workplace Harassment
(Beverley Hills,
Calif: Sage, 1984).
See Catharine MacKinnon and Andrea
, In Harm's Way: The Pornography Civil Rights
(Boston: Harvard University Press).
See, Susan Cole,
Pornography and the Sex Crisis
(Toronto: Amanita
Press, 1989.
See, Catherine Itzin and Corinne Sweet,
"Women's Experience of Pornography: UK Magazine Survey Evidence" in Itzin,
note 28 at 222.
See generally, "Proof, Who Needs
Proof", XS:
A Supplement to Xtra! Magazine
November 1992 at 3 and Nadine Strossen,
Pornography
, supra. note 7. I find these arguments somewhat misleading
and query why, legally and socially, pornography is always signalled
special case in need of a standard of proof that would seem ridiculous in many
other circumstance. As Diana Russel
notes ("Nadine Strossen: the Pornography
Industry's Wet Dream",
On the Issues
1995 at 32) within the context of Nadine Strossen's request for more evidence:
Many people share Strossen's opinion that men who
consume porn but who have never raped a woman disprove the theory that porn
can cause rape. This is comparable to arguing that because some cigarette
smokers don't die of lung cancer, there cannot
be a causal relationship
between smoking and lung cancer. Only members of the tobacco industry and
some seriously addicted
smokers consider this a valid augment today.
Although the scientific evidence that porn can cause rape is at least as
strong as the evidence that smoking can cause lung cancer, many people are
so ideologically committed to the view that porn
is harmless that they find
a multitude of excuses to disregard it. Strossen and the ACLU's strategy
seems to be to ignore
information, arguments and theories that they find too
difficult to tackle, no matter how much dishonesty and misrepresentation
[1990] INSC 224
[1990] 3 SCR 697.
The case of
the interpretation and application of sections 318 and 319 of the
Canadian Criminal Code
. These provisions make it an
indictable offence to communicate statements which wilfully promote hatred
against any identifiable
Canadian Supreme Court held that although the provisions do infringe on the
right to free expression, the infringement
is nonetheless justified because of
the threat to equality posed to target groups and to society at large from
speech aimed
at undermining equality. Specifically, the Court held (at 777)
Hate propaganda seriously threatens both the
enthusiasm with which the value of equality is accepted and acted upon by
society and the connection of target group members to their
community....Hatred...is a most extreme emotion that belies reason;
emotion that if exercised against members of an identifiable group implies
that those individuals are to be despised,
scorned, denied respect and made
subject to ill-treatment on the basis of group affiliation.
Ibid. at 746.
McLachlin J. (dissenting at 857) best
summarises this conclusion when noting in
To view hate propaganda as "victimless" in
the absence of any proof that it moved listeners to hatred is to discount
wrenching impact it may have on members of the target group
themselves....Moreover, it is simply not possible to assess with
precision the effects that expression of a particular message will have on
all those who are ultimately exposed to
Dickson CJC agrees and notes (at 846) that this lack
of precision does not discount the concerns of those who claim to be harmed
it, particularly if these concerns are expressed within the context of
undeniable systemic inequality and daily discrimination
against minority
The message of the expressive activity
covered by s. 319(2) is that members of identifiable groups are not to be
equal standing in society, and are not human beings equally deserving
of concern, respect and consideration. The harms caused
by this message run
directly counter to the values central to a free and democratic society, and
in restricting the promotion
of hatred Parliament is therefore seeking to
bolster the notion of mutual respect necessary in a nation which venerates
the equality of all persons.
As noted in Mark Hussey, "Book Review:
Defending Pornography -- Free Speech, Sex and the Fight for Women's Rights"
On the Issues
, Summer 1995 at 48.
Ibid at 496.
Note for example the experiences of
Linda Marchiano (Lovelace), who was physically and psychologically abused
production of the movie "Deepthroat". Marchiano has described in
graphic detail how, during the production of this film, she
was pimped,
beaten, and forced at gun point to partake in sexual activities with animals
and men who, prior to and during
filming, subjected her to considerable
physical abuse. See Linda Marchiano,
Jersey: Citadel Press, 1980). Marchiano's experiences are neither unusual nor
unique. As Susan Cole notes, "to the women
who are in the pictures, it is real
sex; it happened to them. To the women who are forced by consumers to look at
the pornography,
or forced to imitate the sex in the pictures, it becomes sex
in their real lives." (S. Cole, "Book Review:
Against Censorship
(1985) 1 CJWL 226
at 228.). Many women also testified
to experiences similar to those of Marchiano at the public hearings held by
the Minneapolis
City Council when it first considered adopting the
Dworkin-MacKinnon Civil Rights Ordinances (See Pornography and Sexual
Violence: Evidence of the Links -- the
Public Hearings
on Ordinances to Add Pornography as Discrimination Against Women by the
Committee on Government Operations
, City Council, Minneapolis (London:
Everywoman, 1988)). On the potential for harm during the production of gay
male pornography
see C Kendall, "Real Dominant, Real Fun: Gay Male Pornography
and the Pursuit of Masculinity"
Saskatchewan
As MacKinnon and Dworkin (
Pornography and Civil Rights
, supra. note 15 at 47
and 48) note with respect to some of the testimony documented at the
Minneapolis hearings:
Researchers and clinicians documented what
women know from life; pornography increases attitudes and behaviours of
and other discrimination by men against women. Women testified
that pornography was used to break their self-esteem, to train
sexual submission, to season them to forced sex, to intimidate them out of
job opportunities, to blackmail them
into prostitution and keep them there,
to terrorize and humiliate them into sexual compliance, and to silence their
They told how it takes coercion to make pornography, how
pornography is forced on women and children in ways that give them
pornography stimulates and condones rape,
battery, sexual harassment, sexual
abuse of children, and forced prostitution. We learned from the testimony
more pornography men see, the more abusive and violent they want it
to be; the more abusive and violent it becomes, the more
they enjoy it, the
more abusive and violent they become, and the less harm they see in it. In
other words, pornography's
consumers become unable to see its harm because
they are enjoying it sexually. Men often think that they use pornography but
do not do these things. But the evidence makes it clear that pornography
makes it impossible for them to tell when sex
is forced, that women are
human, and that rape is rape. Evidence of a direct correlation between the
rate of reported
rape and consumption figures of major men's-entertainment
magazines supports this. Pornography makes men hostile and aggressive
women, and it makes women silent. Anyone who does not believe this should
speak out against pornography in public
Canadian obscenity law originally
developed within the context of preventing moral corruption through exposure
to sexually
explicit materials. An overlapping but broader purpose was to
prevent offence to public sensibilities. Underlying assumptions
these views were and are that women's naked bodies are indecent, sexual
displays are immodest, unchaste and impure,
homosexuality is repulsive and sex
outside of traditional marriage or in other than traditional configurations is
(As outlined in the
LEAF Factum
note 20 at 3). In 1959, a significant step was taken to move beyond morality.
At that time, the law was amended to
define obscenity as "crime, horror,
cruelty and violence" combined with sex, as well as the undue exploitation of
sex. Unfortunately,
the way in which this law was interpreted was such that
"undue exploitation of sex" depended upon sexual explicitness alone -
actual harms resulting from sexual explicitness. See eg,
R v Odean Theatres Ltd et al
(1974), 16 CCC (2d) (Man
CA) at 197;
(1977), 35 CCC (2d) 168
(1981), 65 CCC (2) 353
(Ont HC) at 355. As LEAF explains, some Courts assiduously and deliberately
avoided identifying harm
of any kind. Notwithstanding the accumulating
evidence of harm, the Courts still took the approach of criminalising "dirt
for dirt's sake": See eg,
R v Coles Co Ltd
[1965] 2 CCC 304 (Ont
CA) at 322-23;
R v Prairie
Schooner News Ltd
(1970), 1 CCC (2d) 252 (Man
CA). (LEAF Factum at 3 and
Ibid. at 495.
(1984), 14 CCC (3d) 230 (Man
Accepting that the harm imposed by
speech which undermines equality is fundamentally a threat to society's
interests in the
equality of all persons, the Court explains (at page 485)
that s. 163 can now justifiably be applied with the following test
Specifically, materials can be seized when they violate those equality values
outlined by the Court as fundamental.
These values will be violated when the
materials constitute the undue exploitation of sex. In determining whether the
exploitation
is "undue", the Court explains that pornography can be usefully
divided into three categories: 1) explicit sex with violence;
2) explicit sex
without violence but which subjects people to treatment that is degrading or
dehumanising; and 3) explicit
sex without violence that is neither degrading
nor dehumanising. The Court then explains that in making the determination of
what amounts to the undue exploitation of sex with respect to these three
categories, the portrayal of sex coupled with violence
will almost always
constitute the undue exploitation of sex. Explicit sex which is degrading or
dehumanising will be undue
if the risk of harm (to inequality) is substantial.
Finally, explicit sex that is not violent and neither degrading nor
dehumanising
will not qualify as the undue exploitation of sex unless children
are used to produce it.
An argument brilliantly articulated by
Mari Matsuda in "Public Response to Racist Speech: Considering the Victim's
Michigan Law Review
J.C Love, "Tort Actions for Hate Speech and the First Amendment:
Reconceptualizing the Competing Interests"
Law and Sexuality
An overview of the law of obscenity
regulation in Australia can be found in Stella Rozanski, "Obscenity: Common
Law and the
Abuse of Women"
[1991] AdelLawRw 9
See also Alison Carroll; "A History of Moral Censorship and the
Visual Arts in Australia" in
The Australian Centre
for Contemporary Arts, Moral Censorship and the Visual Arts
(Melbourne,
L.R. 3 QB 360 (1868). The reasoning in
has been expressly adopted in Australian
cases on the regulation of obscenity. See, for example,
Ex p Collins
[1888] NSWLawRp 59
(1889) 9 LR (NSW) 497
Crow v Graham
[1968] HCA 6
(1968) 121 CLR 375.
, the Court held (at 395) that in determining
whether material is obscene, the Courts should assess whether the material "by
reason of the extent to which and the manner in which it deals with sexual
matters, transgress[es] the generally accepted
boundaries of decency" (as
outlined in Regina Graycar and Jenny Morgan,
Hidden Gender of Law
(Annandale: The Federation Press, 1992) at 373).
Senate Select Committee on Information
Technologies,
Broadcasting Services Amendment (Online
Services) Bill 1999
(Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia, 1999).
Ibid. at para. 1.1
Ibid. at para. 2.2.
Ibid. at para. 2.4.
Ibid. at para. 2.6.
Ibid. at para. 2.7.
Ibid. at para. 2.9.
Irene Graham, "Blinded by Smoke: The
Hidden Agenda of the Online Services Bill 1999", at
http://rene.efa.org.au/liberty/blinded.html.
Broadcasting Services Amendment (Online
Services) Act
states that Internet content is to be classified "in a
corresponding way" to films. As Graham notes, there is little reason to
believe that the expression "corresponding way" will not be interpreted to
mean "same as".
Senate Report at para. 2.10.
Ibid. at para. 2.13.
Ibid. at para. 2.14.
Ibid. at para. 2.15
Ibid. at para. 2.20.
Ibid. at para. 2.37.
Susan Cole (
Power Surge: Sex, Violence and Pornography
Second Story Press, 1995) at 101. It is worth noting that, while the
Guidelines do call for the regulation of materials
which are "demeaning", this
requirement does not appear in the actual Code or in any of the classification
terminology used
throughout the rest of the legislation. It is difficult to
see how the use of the word can have any real significance, at least
as systemic gender equality is concerned, given the rest of the Act's
preoccupation with moral upkeep.
An analysis in this regard is offered
by Caroline Forell, "Reasonable Woman Standard of Care"
[1992] UTasLawRw 1
University of Tasmania Law Review
who argues:
Take a look at the examples of the
reasonable man/person standard. In the United States the example given is
the man who
mows the lawn in his shirtsleeves and who takes the magazines at
And I've heard
tell the Aussie translation of this is 'the man who rides the Bondi tram.'
These symbols of the reasonable
person explicitly set up middle class male
values as the source of the objective neutral standard. They define
reasonableness
as what a member of that particular class and gender might
Andrea Dworkin, "Pornography is a Civil
Rights Issue for Women", (1988) 21
Michigan Journal
of Law Reform
46 at 51 and 54.
As argued by Catharine A MacKinnon in
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1993) at 87-89. MacKinnon's conclusion is supported by the reasoning
articulated in
the 1986 U.S. case of
584 F. Sup 419, 433 (District Court, Michigan) in which the Court
For better or worse, modern America
features open displays of written and pictorial erotica. Shopping centers,
candy stores
and prime time television regularly display pictures of naked
bodies and erotic real or simulated sex acts. Living in this
milieu, the
average American should not be legally offended by sexually explicit
Catharine MacKinnon,
Toward A Feminist Theory of the State
(Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1989) at 199.
Jerald Moldenhaur, as quoted in
Censorship Bulletin (
Toronto: Glad Day Bookshop and the Glad Day
Censorship Fund, 1986) at 13.
See, in particular, Carl Stychin
"Exploring the Limits: Feminism and the Legal Regulation of Gay Male
Pornography",
Vermont Law Review
John Burger,
One Handed Histories: The Eroto-Politics
of Gay Male Video Pornography
(New York: Harrington park Press, 1995).
Christopher Kendall, "Gay Male
Pornography: An Issue of Sex Discrimination" (1995) 5
Australian Feminist Law Review
81 at 83. See also
John Stoltenberg, "Gays and the Pornography Movement: Having the Hots for Sex
Discrimination" in Kimmel
Men Confront
Pornography
(New York: Crown Publishers) 248; John Stoltenberg,
Refusing to Be a Man
(Meridian Books: New York,
1990); Irene Reti,
Unleashing Feminism: Critiquing
Lesbian Sadomasochism in the Gay Nineties
(Santa Cruz, CA: HerBooks,
1993) and Sheila Jeffreys, "Eroticizing Women's Subordination" in D Leidholt
and J Raymond,
The Sexual Liberals and the Attack on
(New York: Teachers College Press, 1990)).
On the links between homophobia and sex
discrimination see Marc Fajer, "Can Two Real Men Eat Quiche Together?:
Storytelling,
Gender Role Stereotypes and Legal protection for Lesbians and
gay Men", (1992) 46
511; A Koppelman,
"The Miscegenation Analogy: Sodomy Law as Sex Discrimination",
; C Kendall, "Homophobia as an Issue of
Sex Discrimination: Lesbian and Gay Equality and the Systemic Effects of
Forced Invisibility",
E Law - Murdoch
University Electronic Journal of Law
Victoria Laurie, "Moral Guardians on
the March" in
The Bulletin Arts
, December 19,
1995 at 83.
See, for example, the work of Patricia
Mapplethorpe
(New York: Random House,
1995) who notes Mapplethorpe's obsession with the sexual use of African
American men and his preference
for presenting stereotypical images of black
male sexuality in his work. On the use and effect of racism in pornography
Aminatta Forna, "Pornography and Racism: Sexualizing Oppression and
Inciting Hatred" in Catherine Itzin (ed),
Pornography: Women Violence and Civil Liberties
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992); Frank Browning,
The Culture of Desire: Paradox and Perversity in Gay
Lives Today
(New York: Crown Publishers, 1993) at 193-203 and Kobena
Mercer "Race, Sexual Politics and Black Masculinity: A Dossier" in Rowena
Chapman (ed),
Male Order: Unwrapping Masculinity
(London: Lawrence and Wisehart, 1988).
See Alan Brotherton, "Protect Me From
What I Want". (1999) 12(6)
National AIDS Bulletin
4. This has certainly been the case in those jurisdictions where lesbian
and gay materials continue to be seized on the basis
of moral harm, as opposed
to any real understanding of the actual threat to equality caused by those
materials which sexualise
inequality. This point is analyzed in more detail in
Christopher Kendall, "Gay Male Pornography After
Little Sisters Book and Art Emporium
: A Call for Gay
Male Cooperation in the Struggle for Sex Equality"
(1997) 12(1)
Wisconsin Women's Law Journal
Anon, "Queensland Government Bans Ad
Campaign" (1996) 7(4)
Legal Link 13.
As reported in
The Courier Mail
, March 2 and 7 1998. Summarised in
(1998) 9(2)
HIV/AIDS Link 3-4.
(1996) 131 DLR 4th 486 (SCC).
Little Sisters
, a case concerning the seizure of
lesbian and gay male pornography by Canada Customs, the Court held that Canada
procedures regrading the seizure of pornography are arbitrary and
discriminate against lesbians and gay men. The Court also held
that Canada
Customs had failed to effectively implement the equality-based approach
outlined by the Supreme Court of Canada
In addition the Court recognized that, applying the test in
, it is clear that some lesbian and gay male
pornography can be held to violate widely accepted equality principles.
Ibid. at 557.
Ibid. at 558.
A fact which the Court in
Little Sisters
readily notes at page 558. Having
reviewed the equality-based test outlined in
, the Court accepted that "pornography for
homosexual audiences may cause the kinds of changes in attitudes, emotions and
behaviours" that are deemed "harmful to society."
See, for example,
Censorship Act
1996, Western Australia, s. 19(4).
Dworkin and MacKinnon,
Pornography and Civil Rights
, supra. note 15 at 43.
See, for example, John Stoltenberg,
"Confronting Pornography as a Civil-Rights Issue" in
Refusing to be a Man: Essays on Sex and Justice
York: Meridian Press, 1990); Marian Leslie Klausner "Redefining Pornography as
Sex Discrimination: an Innovative Civil
Rights Approach"
New England Law Review
; J Scutt, "Incorporating
the Dworkin/MacKinnon Approach Into Australian Law" (1991)
5; Anon, "Pornography: Freedom v Censorship?"
Communications Law Bulletin
Horniblow, "Power Undressing" in
; Chilla Bulbeck, "Words Can Never Hurt Me?" (1990) 15(2)
Legal Services Bulletin
79; Andrea Dworkin,
"Pornography is a Civil Rights Issue for Women" (1988) 21
Michigan Journal of Law Reform
55; and Catharine
Pornography and Civil Rights
Dworkin and MacKinnon,
Pornography and Civil Rights
, supra. note 15 at 101.
Procedures set up by the ordinance
provide for complaints in respect of the defined discriminatory practices set
to be followed by investigation and conciliation. Unresolved
complaints can proceed to a public hearing at which an order to
desist can be made along with the payment of damages to the complainant.
Throughout Australia, this procedure is
best suited as an amendment to the
various Equal Opportunity Acts as these Acts already forbid sexual harassment
and discrimination
on the basis of sex and all of which attempt to address
complaints of sex discrimination by way of investigation and tribunal-type
For an excellent analysis of how one
might implement the Ordinances in other Australian jurisdictions, see
Jocelynne Scutt,
"Incorporating The Dworkin/MacKinnon Approach Into Australian
Law (1991) 5
3. See also, Hillary
Charlesworth, "Pornography as Sex Discrimination" (August
Law Institute Journal
; Beth Gaze, "Pornography
and Freedom of Speech: An American Feminist Approach" (June 1986)
Legal Services Bulletin
As MacKinnon and Dworkin explain (
Pornography and Civil Rights
, supra. note 15 at
43-44), the first victims of pornography are those used to make it:
Girls are enticed into posing for the
photographer next door, confused at their feelings of uncomfortableness,
and affirmation. He makes them feel beautiful, with his approval,
admiration, solicitude, presents, molestation. Fathers sell
pictures of sex
acts with their own children to international pornography rings. Aspiring
actresses and models are fraudulently
induced into posing for nude or
seminude shots, told the genitals will not show or it will be a silhouette
or they will
not be recognised-until they see themselves fully exposed and
fully identified in Penthouse. Or they are told it will be their
the top, only to find that most legitimate avenues are then closed to them
because they appeared nude, so it
is their ticket to the bottom. Until women
are socially equal to men, it will be impossible to know whether any women
are in pornography freely. And until women can bring an effective action for
coercion into pornography, and get the product
of their abuse off the
market, it will be impossible even to begin to know how many of them are
As MacKinnon and Dworkin again note (at
pages 45, 46 ,48 and 49):
The trafficking provision makes it possible
for any woman to bring a complaint against pornographers for subordinating
women. It is not necessary for an individual woman to show that she has been
harmed more than all other women have by pornography.
It is definitely
necessary for her to prove that the materials meet the definition of
pornography, for which it is necessary
to prove that they do the harm of
subordinating women.
Although the social position of men, children, and
transsexuals is not absolutely defined by pornography in the way women's
they are often used in pornography in ways similar to the ways women are
used. The Ordinance makes it possible for
them to sue. The Ordinance also
permits civil suits against the use of children in pornography. Specific
subgroups of
men, particularly gay men and Black men, would also have strong
potential cases. For both, their civil status is made lower
sexualization in pornography and in society. For both, one can see a direct
relation between their use in pornography
and their low social status. Gay
men are often used literally in the same ways women are in pornography;
their status
being lowered to that of a woman is part of the sex. Abuse of
gay men is also eroticized in pornography, promoting self-hatred
oppressed group as its pleasure and identity.
See supra. at note 15.
As MacKinnon and Dworkin explain (at 50
and 51): The debate over the relationship between pornography and violence
women has been haunted by a spectre of absurdity; the man who rapes
with a pornographic book in his back pocket. As it turns
out, these spectres
are real. The assault section of the Ordinance does not resolve the debate on
the connection between
pornography and rape. It does make it possible for an
individual woman to sue a man who rapes her with a pornographic book in
back pocket and its maker, distributor and seller too. It gives her a chance
try to prove
that there is a direct causal
relationship between an act of violence against her and the specific piece if
pornography.
Under this provision, no one could sue pornographers for the
general contribution pornography makes to a rape culture, a culture
equates sex with death. Specific pornographers could, however, be sued in an
attempt to prove the causal contribution
of specific pornography to the
specific physical injury.
Susan M Easton,
The Problem of Pornography: Regulation and the Right to
Free Speech
(Routledge: London, 1994) at 25.
Catharine A MacKinnon, "Vindication and
Resistance: A Response to the Carnegie Mellon Study of Pornography in
Cyberspace",
Georgetown Law Journal
at 1966-1967.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter