URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2024/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:38:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Zhou, Catherine; Ruan, William --- "Unearthing Language Rights Protections in the Racial Discrimination Act 1975 (Cth)" [2024] SydLawRw 15; (2024) 46(3) Sydney Law Review 293
I Introduction
II The Threat to Language
A Minority Languages in a Linguistic Market
B Government Policy
III The Relationship between Language and the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
A Language Ability as Personal Characteristic
B Language and Proportionality
C Positive Existence of a Right
D Referring to or Targeting Race
E Rights Categorisation and Characterisation
IV Laws That Confer Rights
V Conclusion
Unearthing Language Rights Protections in the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
has been ineffective at preventing discrimination based on language. Australian
courts have adopted narrow approaches to
deny language-based claims by
misconstruing the relationship between language and racial discrimination. These
approaches portray
language as an individual characteristic, subject language
rights to proportionality analysis, require the positive existence of
right, or narrow the scope of rights protected by the
language claims. This article argues that these denials have no basis.
Historically, the use of language as a proxy for
race has been a means of
effecting exclusionary policies which fail to defend against racial and
linguistic discrimination. Recognition
of these dimensions of language supports
the deconstruction of the doctrinal arguments which have been deployed to deny
from racial discrimination in the context of language.
Introduction
Language is fundamental to the construction of identities — personal,
communal, social, cultural, religious and national. Yet
the languages of
dominant and minority groups are enjoyed to different extents. Increasingly,
more dominant languages have encroached
upon the right of minority groups to
sustain their languages. Assimilationist pressures prevent the use of minority
languages in
private and public spaces.
In this context, the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
’) provides a possible avenue for redress where acts or
laws discriminate against linguistic minorities. The
gives effect to
Australia’s obligations assumed under the
International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
’) which, in its preamble, recites the purposes to
secure the ‘understanding of and respect for the dignity of the human
person’ and to eliminate racial
discrimination.
However, although several litigants have argued claims based on differential
enjoyment of language rights, Australian courts have
generally refused to
recognise that linguistic discrimination is a form of racial discrimination that
falls within the
. The justifications for this refusal reflect
misconceptions surrounding language which devalue its sociocultural importance
the ongoing effects of injustice on racial and linguistic minorities.
This article argues that judicial failures to recognise language
protection in
are founded on weak premises. By analysing these cases in turn,
we contend that the
can defend against racial and linguistic
discrimination, contributing to a conception of language which is more firmly
situated in
its sociological context.
The article is organised into three main parts.
outlines the present
threat against minority languages, considering the connections between language,
culture and race that have
been forged by communities and imposed by colonial
structures and the state.
considers the context of the
It argues that current jurisprudence on language claims under the
fails to adequately theorise the role of language in racial discrimination.
Instead, courts have adopted an approach which fails to
recognise the use of
language as a proxy for race, relegating language to an individual
characteristic which has no collective effects.
Claims are also barred by other
justifications such as proportionality analysis, the lack of a positive right,
the absence of racial
reference or ‘targeting’, and the
ineffectiveness of deriving language rights from other rights and freedoms. We
that each of these justifications is untenable such that the
has a greater capacity to uphold language rights than is evidenced by its
considers arguments against the overbroad operation of the
where conferral of rights might result in the enjoyment of rights to
a greater extent. It concludes that it is nonetheless appropriate
to import a
beneficial and remedial construction into the
to address historical
injustices, especially when language and race are conceived in collective,
contingent capacities.
The Threat to Language
Minority Languages in a Linguistic
The value of language is typically theorised through two lenses which justify
its protection under language rights, being rights which
language-related acts and values.3F
The first lens claims that language preserves cultural identities. Those
identities are both personal and
Having full language rights is part of securing the long-term viability of a
The second lens suggests that linguistic pluralism is desirable for enhancing
the diversity of society. These justifications are
echoed in international legal
protections for minority languages. Article 27 of the
International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights
’) provides that
linguistic minorities ‘shall not be denied the right, in community with
the other members of their group
... to use their own
language’.6F
Nations Human Rights Committee (‘UNHRC’) states that art 27
‘is directed towards ensuring the survival
and continued development of
the cultural, religious and social identity of the minorities concerned, thus
enriching the fabric of
society as a
As such, language preserves individual and communal
identities,
but is also a constitutive force which shapes identities and societal
pluralism.9F
conceptions, language is fundamentally connected to the cultural, national and
racial identities with which it intersects.
The UNHRC’s statement of value captures part of the importance of
language. But minority languages must also be understood as
existing within a
system in which they are continuously under threat. That threat originates in
the historical weaponisation of language
and race against minority populations.
The historical entanglement of language and race recurringly involves the
co-extensive construction
of both through colonial projects which created racial
and linguistic ‘others’ by privileging the European subject and
These ideologies ascribed colonised subjects with a state of
‘languagelessness’ in which representations of non-European
languages were characterised as simplistic or animalistic modes of illegitimate
communication.11F
Further, the
privileging of the English language served as a proxy for racial exclusion. In
Australia, for example, the White Australia
policy was facilitated by tests of
linguistic fluency which operated as forms of indirect racial
discrimination.12F
policy, the Queensland Parliament mandated a ‘dictation test’ which
‘operate[d] specifically, in fact
if not in form, against Asiatic
labourers’.
Immigration Restriction Act 1901
(Cth) enshrined a similar dictation
test, which ‘except in one or two instances [was] never ... applied to
Europeans’.14F
languages of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples have also been
systematically targeted by decades of bans on Indigenous
language use by
governments and churches.15F
These policies illustrate how language has been used as a mechanism to
facilitate racial discrimination and cultural destruction.
Colonial concepts of
language and race are interlinked in that both are complicit in effecting
exclusion and linguicide.
Language is also an instrument of nationhood. It has been described as
‘the crucial criterion of
nationality’.
In Australia, that nexus is demonstrated by a focus on English language
competency in citizenship
In this context, the
value of minority languages cannot be understood absent their standing in a
‘linguistic
mediated by the means through which states choose to value or devalue them.
State formation creates the conditions for ‘the
constitution of a unified
linguistic market, dominated by the official
language’.19F
of a linguistic market is such that minority languages are always in tension
with dominant languages associated with linguistic
capital, power and
authority.20F
They are under
threat when they do not facilitate the stability of a unified political
structure. As such, linguistic exchanges are
‘relations of symbolic power
in which the power relations between speakers of their respective groups are
actualized’.
This tension extends to the absence of positive measures: ‘the absence of
explicit policy ... is in itself an act of language
policy’.22F
Further, the
absence of explicit policy is situated against a baseline of assimilationist
pressure. As such, it is a myth that the
state can be ethnoculturally
‘neutral’ without privileging a particular identity or
culture.23F
The value of
language is not constitutive in a vacuum; it is also preservation against
assimilation.
Legal protections internationally have largely failed to intervene where
minority languages are under threat, with one exception —
courts are more
willing to give credence to language rights in the context of preserving
political compromises between majority and
minority groups. This is illustrated
by leading cases in overseas jurisdictions founded on compromises that involve
bargains of language.
In Canada, the
Canadian Charter of Rights and
provides that English and French are the two official languages of
Canada ‘and have equality of
status’.24F
It also grants
minority language educational rights, including the right for children of an
English or French linguistic minority
population to be educated in the first
language of their parents.25F
Mahe v Alberta
, for example, the Canadian Supreme Court upheld a claim by
French-speaking parents that a new school be established with an autonomous
French school board due to dissatisfaction with the quality of French-language
schools provided by their
government.26F
Dickson CJ stated
that the purpose of s 23 of the
Canadian Charter
(which enshrines
minority language educational rights) is ‘to preserve and promote the two
official languages of Canada, and
their respective
cultures’.27F
The section
‘places positive obligations on government to alter or develop major
institutional
structures’.28F
category of protection does not rely on an identity-constitutive justification
for language rights.29F
does not afford linguistic protection to other linguistic minorities, and
concedes that the English and French are privileged
over other linguistic groups
by virtue of their special status in
Simultaneously,
political compromises can compel linguistic minorities to conform to the terms
of a national bargain. In
Mathieu-Mohin v Belgium
, the European Court of
Human Rights held that two French-speaking citizens who resided in the Flemish
region of Belgium were required
to take a parliamentary oath in Dutch to assume
their positions in office.31F
That gave effect to a principle by which the institutional system of the Belgian
State was designed, being ‘to achieve an equilibrium
between the
Kingdom’s various regions and cultural communities by means of a complex
system of checks and
balances’.32F
examples evidence how certain national circumstances can extend strong legal
protection for minority languages, but only where
such protection facilitates
the political compromises and negotiations enabling the existence of a unitary
nation. The respect afforded
to these languages is not in their capacity to be
culturally constitutive at an individual or communal level, but in their
to facilitate a political structure. There is accordingly a vacuum of
language protection in the absence of a political structure
that relies on
bargains of language, as is evident in Australia.
Government Policy
Within this context, there are varying degrees to which governments can
intervene along an axis of pluralism, integration and
assimilation.33F
A policy of
pluralism may grant linguistic minorities significant latitude in the
administration of their own
affairs.34F
Integration
‘aims at the unity of the various groups of a given society while allowing
them to maintain their own characteristics
through the adoption of specific
measures’.35F
governments may also attempt active efforts at improving intergroup relations,
including increasing representation of members
of various minority groups in
civic institutions and emphasising cultural exchange in
education.36F
Conversely, other
policy positions tend to de-emphasise intergroup
differences.37F
through mechanisms of assimilation, these policies effect enforced homogeneity
in which minority groups are forced to
abandon their traditions, culture and
language in favour of majoritarian
A desire for unity
through assimilation can perversely undermine intergroup relationships. When
groups feel alienated or are victims
of discrimination, they may feel that they
do not identify with the nation and that they cannot participate in public
This desire also
reveals an ideological assumption that the language practices of racialised
subjects are unfit for legitimate social
participation.40F
Simultaneously, the law tends to favour and reinforce policies that subordinate
language protection — for example, through
emphasising the importance of
learning the English language rather than protecting the longevity of minority
languages.41F
Those practices
are evident in Australia’s historical White Australia policy and the
present English language requirements
of the Australian citizenship
Another axis through which these policy orientations are theorised spans
tolerance and promotion. Kloss distinguishes between
‘tolerance-oriented’
and ‘promotion-oriented’ minority
rights. Tolerance-oriented minority rights are laws and measures which
for the minorities and which, if need be, protect for the
minorities the right to cultivate their language in a private sphere, namely,
the family and in private
organizations’.
It may also involve privileging a majority language in the public sphere —
through, for example, subsidising public schools
that use the majority
language.44F
Conversely,
promotion-oriented rights ‘regulate how public institutions may use and
cultivate the languages and cultures of
minorities’.45F
tolerance-oriented rights derive from formal equality, promotion-oriented rights
can only be derived from material
equality.46F
Increasingly, however, these axes have begun to represent a divide between
the use of minority languages in private and public life.
Approaches which
emphasise unity and tolerance may accept minority languages in private spaces
but actively impede the use of minority
languages in public life. International
materials discuss language rights as operating within linguistic communities but
General Comment No 23
, the UNHRC states that the
relevant right is ‘[t]he right of individuals belonging to a linguistic
minority to use their language
themselves’.47F
that qualification has manifested in human rights jurisprudence as a mode of
exclusion from the public sphere. The distinction
between the right to use a
language internally and the absence of a right to use it externally has been
mapped onto the distinction
between private and public life. For example, in
Ballantyne v Canada
, a leading case on language rights under the
, the UNHRC considered whether a Quebec law mandating the use of
French in advertising was a violation of the rights of individuals
advertise in English, including the right to freedom of
expression.48F
determined that ‘[a] State may choose one or more official languages, but
it may not exclude, outside the spheres
of public life, the freedom to express
oneself in a language of one’s
choice’.49F
Commissioner of Corrective Services
at first instance, Bellew J stated that
the corollary of this is that a state ‘may exclude the freedom to express
a language of one’s choice within spheres of what might be
regarded as “public
The enforcement of a monolingual public life is capable of marginalising
linguistic minorities such that their use of language is
relegated to the
private domain. This marginalisation has downstream effects on the capacity of
linguistic minorities to partake
in domains such as schooling, work and religion
— all of which are facilitated through the medium of
language.51F
In Australia,
courts have reinforced this divide and refused to recognise both the independent
importance of minority languages,
and the discriminatory effects of a
monolingual public life. That position is discussed in the next Part in relation
The Relationship between Language and the
Racial Discrimination Act
Claims to language rights have primarily been litigated through s 10 of the
. Section 10 provides a right to equality before the law. If, due to
the operation of a Commonwealth or state or territory law,
persons of a particular race, colour or national or ethnic origin do not enjoy a
right that is enjoyed by persons of another race,
colour or national or ethnic
origin, [then those persons] shall, by force of this section, enjoy that right
to the same extent ...
As such, s 10 is a provision that is
uniquely directed toward the operation and effect of
legislation
than individual
Section 10 also does not require the complainant to show that a law expressly
makes a distinction based on race. Rather, it is ‘directed
discriminatory operation and effect of the
legislation’.
As Hayne J drew attention to in
Maloney v The Queen
, ‘s 10(1) does
not use the word “discriminatory” or any cognate
expression’.54F
of rights by some but not by
others’.55F
from this focus is that s 10 applies to laws that are facially neutral but have
disparate impacts on different racial
groups. Section 10 is therefore well
suited to target not only laws that explicitly privilege the English language
the laws considered in the
— but also laws
that cause a disparate impact on linguistic minorities as a result of unofficial
preferences for English in
public life — such as the impugned laws in
Nguyen v Refugee Review
Sahak v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
An incompatibility with s 10 may have substantial consequences. For instance,
where the incompatible legislation is a state law that
expresses a limitation,
that law would be rendered inoperative by s 109 of the
Constitution
For this reason, the
has been described as ‘almost
constitutional’.61F
other hand, where the incompatible legislation is a law that confers a relevant
positive right but does not do so universally,
will extend the conferral of
that right so that it is not unequally enjoyed by people of different
has also been used to litigate language rights
claims, though its operation is more limited.
Section 9(1)
makes unlawful any
acts of ‘direct’ racial discrimination that have the purpose or
effect of ‘nullifying or impairing
the recognition, enjoyment or exercise,
on an equal footing, of any human right or fundamental freedom ...’
Section 9(1A)
extends these protections to ‘indirect’ racial
discrimination in circumstances where a person ‘requires another
comply with a term, condition or requirement which is not reasonable’ and
the other person ‘does not or cannot
While the link between racial discrimination and language has been
recognised,63F
protection against racialised linguistic discrimination made pursuant to
have been entirely
unsuccessful.
In contradistinction to the existing case law, this Part argues that the
has the potential to be a bulwark against policies of language
assimilation and a rare mechanism that supports the advancement of
promotion-oriented language rights. This potential exists despite the evidence
that courts have so far resisted recognising the force
and breadth of the
. This resistance has manifested itself in several approaches evident
in the case law that have been or could be used to deny language
rights claims:
first, that language is a personal characteristic that is not linked to race;
second, that even if language is linked
to race, a law (or act) cannot be
impugned if it is proportionate to a legitimate end; third, that a right must
positively be protected
for members of other races before
is engaged in
relation to that right; fourth, that a law must target or single out a race
before it engages
; and finally, that relevant rights must be characterised
or identified in an exceedingly narrow way.
In our view, these approaches are unsupportable, even within the current
framework of the
. They cut against ‘the large objects which the
evidently pursues and the generality of the words which it
In the following
sections, we evaluate each of these approaches in detail. Our analysis centres
, but we also refer to
where appropriate given the similarities
between the two sections and how reasoning about one overlaps with the other. We
the approaches are inconsistent with the text and purpose of the
. Only once they fall away can the
begin to provide
adequate protection to language rights.
Language Ability as Personal
Characteristic
Courts have recurringly refused to recognise a link between language and race
so as to enliven
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) which prescribed a
28-day period in which an application for review of a decision of the Refugee
Review Tribunal could be
argued that the effect of
is that persons of Syrian and Afghani origin
enjoy only a limited right to equality before the law, including access to the
and their judicial review procedures, because an attribute or
characteristic of persons of those national origins is that English
spoken or written, or is a secondary language. Goldberg and Hely JJ held that
linguistic discrimination ‘is not based
on race, colour, descent or
national or ethnic origin, but rather on the individual personal circumstances
of each applicant’.67F
These circumstances may include ‘if their comprehension of the English
language is sufficient, or if they have access to friends
or professional
interpreters so as to overcome the language
barrier’.68F
disagreed, contending that Goldberg and Hely JJ’s view ‘appears ...
to adopt a verbal formula which avoids the
real and practical discrimination
which flows as a result of the operation of
analogised70F
the facts to the
decision of the United States Supreme Court in
Griggs v Duke Power Co
which an employer’s requirement that applicants for employment pass an
intelligence test or hold a school diploma was unlawful
because it operated to
disqualify African American applicants at a substantially higher rate than white
applicants.71F
articulated the importance of defending against the disparate impacts of
facially neutral policies.
Subsequent claims have been denied through the reasoning of Goldberg and Hely
, despite appellants invoking the reasoning of North
appellant challenged the validity of parts of the
Alcohol Protection Orders
’) on the basis that they
contravened the
. Sections 9 and 11 of the
provide that
a person who has been issued with an alcohol protection order may apply for
reconsideration by a senior officer or to
a Local Court for a review of the
senior officer’s decision. The appellant contended that the ‘poorer
English language
literacy of indigenous Territorians compared with
non-indigenous Territorians’ meant that the law impermissibly imposed a
disproportionate
burden on Indigenous
Territorians.73F
Blokland J held
that there was no such basis for invalidating the law, citing the finding in
that any difficulty in completing and filing applications was due
to personal characteristics and not racial
characteristics.74F
went on to state that ‘[t]he reasoning of the majority in
not contrary to the established authority concerning the application of
Racial Discrimination
Similarly, in
at first instance the plaintiff, who was serving a
sentence of full-time
imprisonment,
submitted that he had ‘the right to speak to members of his family in the
Arabic language when they visit[ed] him in custody’
pursuant to
Clause 101(1) of the
Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Regulation 2004
(NSW) impaired this right by providing that, during a visit to an extreme
high risk restricted inmate, ‘all communications must
be conducted in
English or another language approved by the Commissioner’. At first
instance, Bellew J rejected this
argument78F
stating that
‘there will be no breach of s 10(1) if a person does not enjoy a human
right, or does so to a lesser extent, because
of [their] individual personal
circumstances’.79F
Honour’s view, the fact that the plaintiff was required to speak English
arose ‘from the personal circumstances
of his being in
custody’.80F
These cases
indicate that courts are willing to individualise language at multiple stages of
analysis. First, as in
, language itself may be
treated as an individual characteristic which has no connection to race or
national origin. Second, in
at first instance the scope of
‘personal circumstances’ was extended to a context in which a
language was mandated.
was appealed to the New South Wales Supreme Court of
Appeal, Basten JA preferred to hold that a constraint on some languages
adversely impact on some groups in a multicultural society’
and therefore will engage the operation of s 9 or s 10 of the
In reaching this conclusion, Basten JA expressly endorsed the reasoning of
approach should be preferred. It should also be taken as a refutation of both
senses in which language was individualised in
previous jurisprudence, such that
language claims under the
should not be defeated on this basis.
First, it recognises an undeniable collective dimension to the nature of
language. As discussed
in Part II above, language constraints necessarily have
disproportionate impacts on persons of certain racial and national origins.
Accepting an association between language and race does not essentialise that
association. Rather, it recognises that this association
has historically been
constructed — by communities, who preserve their languages to preserve
their own identities and cultures,
and by discriminatory policies, which have
used language as a proxy for race. Second, it refutes Bellew J’s concept
of ‘personal
circumstances’ as context. Basten JA observed that
Bellew J’s description of the ‘personal circumstances of [Mr
being in custody’ does no more than describe ‘the area of operation
of the restriction on
communication’.83F
relevant comparison in racial discrimination must be whether persons within the
same context enjoy rights to different degrees.
The context in which a law
operates does not justify its unequal application within that context.
Language and Proportionality
Courts have imported proportionality in assessing ss 9 and 10 claims in two
ways: by reading proportionality into the operation of
s 10, and by constraining
the ambit of rights which engage ss 9 and 10 by reference to
proportionality.84F
High Court did not explicitly identify these plausibly separate approaches, it
decisively rejected both approaches to proportionality
analysis across separate
judgments in
. Though these approaches continue to be used to deny
language rights claims, they are unsustainable.
The former approach of reading proportionality into the operation of s 10 is
arguably evident in the reasoning of Basten JA in the
appeal. His
Honour concluded that whether an act constitutes unlawful discrimination
‘will depend on whether it has a legitimate
purpose which is pursued by
means which are not unreasonable, in the sense that the mechanism ... is
proportionate to the legitimate
purpose’.85F
approach was adopted in
. In that case, the appellant contended
that he was ‘less able to enjoy the right to be notified of the Department
[of Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs]’s decision than a person of another
race who could understand
English’.86F
Tamberlin J
held that the use of English as a de facto national language could not be said
to be discriminatory.87F
view, the use of English in official correspondence is ‘reasonable and
appropriate’, and any other approach would
be ‘impractical and
inefficient’.88F
Several of the judgments in
explicitly rejected the idea of
importing notions of proportionality to assess claims of inconsistency with s 10
otherwise than through
s 8. Hayne J (with whom Crennan J agreed) found that
‘[s]ection 10 does not say that persons of a particular race may enjoy
right to a more limited extent ... if that difference is justifiable or
proportionate to a legitimate
Kiefel J stated
that there is no foundation for proportionality analysis in the terms of s 10.
In her view, ‘[n]othing in s
10 requires or permits a justification for a
legal restriction on a human right or fundamental
freedom’.90F
‘[i]t is left to s 8 to test whether a law is a special measure to which s
10 does not apply’.91F
Bell J formed a similar view, stating that she ‘[did] not consider the
application of s 10(1) to be subject to a test of
proportionality’.92F
Gageler J indicated that proportionality may be relevant to analysis in s
his Honour ultimately
concluded that proportionality was effected through s 8 of the
The application of s 10 to a law that ‘does not meet the requirements
of a special measure, cannot be avoided by showing that
the criteria the law
adopts are nevertheless proportionate or reasonably necessary to the pursuit of
a legitimate aim’.94F
is difficult to see how proportionality may be relevant to a s 10 analysis.
Section 8 of the
provides that special measures are excepted from s
. Section 8 imports art 1(4) of the
states that special measures ‘taken for the sole purpose of securing
adequate advancement of certain racial or ethnic
groups or individuals requiring
such protection as may be necessary ... shall not be deemed racial
discrimination’. This forms
a textual basis for proportionality that is
absent from the terms of s 10. Because s 10 encompasses laws which are
necessarily detrimental
and deny or restrict a human right or fundamental
freedom, there is no capacity for it to be excepted.
The latter approach of constraining the ambit of rights by reference to
proportionality can be found in the judgment of Chesterman
JA in the Queensland
Court of Appeal decision in
His Honour quoted the observation in
Bropho v Western Australia
‘it has long been recognised in human rights jurisprudence that all rights
in a democratic society must be balanced against
other competing rights and
values’,96F
and concluded
reasonable and legitimate [impositions on the right to property] do not have the
effect that the human right and fundamental freedom
recognised by
Art 5(d)(v) [of the
] have been infringed. [Therefore, s] 10 of
engaged.97F
approach holds that if the relevant right is not infringed in the first place
because the limit placed on the right by the law
is proportional, s 10 is never
engaged. French CJ directly addressed this point in the High Court decision
, finding that it ‘diminishes, if it does not render
otiose, the particular and limited exemption for operational discrimination
provided by the special measures provisions of the
Subsequently, in
Iliafi v Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints
, the applicant relied on freedom of expression as the right which
In obiter, Kenny J appeared to suggest this approach in noting that ‘the
right to freedom of expression engages a sophisticated
jurisprudential
analysis’ and, by reference to provisions of the
jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights, stating that the
‘right to freedom of expression is in and of
itself limited ... by
measures ... proportionately
designed’.100F
Honour criticised the applicant’s submission on the basis that it
‘did not invoke, involve or depend on any aspect
of th[is] jurisprudential
analysis’.101F
This latter approach may reflect a confusion in how the
understood. The human rights jurisprudence relied upon in the foregoing cases
and formalised in international instruments takes
those rights as freestanding
rights. The relevant question there is whether the limitations imposed on those
rights can be justified.
Such a limitation on the rights themselves can be
justified so long as the limitation is reasonably necessary to achieve a
end. On the other hand, the
is concerned with the
differential
enjoyment of those human rights. The
only permits
the causing of that differential enjoyment in very limited circumstances. For
acts, the circumstances are given by 9(1A)
— when a term, condition or
requirement that is imposed via an act of indirect discrimination is reasonable.
For laws, as noted
above, s 8 carves out the only exception. To limit the
breadth of the human rights to which the
is directed by reference to
human rights jurisprudence rather than the limited circumstances prescribed by
ss 8 and 9(1A) is to mix
the two different contexts in which those rights are
protected. The statements of Southwood J in
Blackwell v Bara
apposite.102F
noted that although international law
does not recognise an unqualified right to liberty [this] does not mean that an
interference with personal liberty, which is otherwise
a valid interference,
will be valid if it directly limits the right to personal liberty of the persons
of one race to a greater extent
than the rest of the
population.103F
Positive Existence of a Right
Leeming JA, with whom Bathurst CJ agreed, did not rely on proportionality to
dismiss the s 10 claim in the
appeal. Instead, he did so on the
basis that there ‘was no other law which conferred a right enjoyed by
persons of another race,
colour or national or ethnic origin which, by dint of s
10, could be relied upon by the
appellant’.104F
To require the affirmative existence of a right that applies to members of
another race before s 10 is engaged would risk rendering
the right which it
protects — equality under the law — theoretical and illusory. At the
very least, it would significantly
narrow the scope of its operation. The
fundamental human rights under s 10(2) are often not protected under Australian
law; nor are
the particular manifestations of those rights that are the subject
of a s 10 analysis. In New South Wales (the jurisdiction in
is no law that protects the right to speak in the language of one’s
origin, which was the right raised by the appellant.
Nor is there a law that
protects the broader right to freedom of expression other than where that right
overlaps with the implied
freedom of political communication. The conclusion
reached by Leeming JA was that a law which suppressed those rights for some
but not others will still be consistent with s 10 as long as those rights
are not explicitly protected. The application of this principle
to the denial of
a prisoner’s ability to speak to their family in their mother tongue is
sufficiently unsound as to raise doubts
as to the correctness of this approach.
Under this approach, a hypothetical New South Wales law that criminalised the
use of a language
in circumstances that were not otherwise protected by the
implied freedom of political communication, while undeniably racially
discriminatory,
would not be inconsistent with s 10.
There are language rights cases where the criterion imposed by
Leeming JA in
of the existence of a positive right may seem
more straightforward to fulfil. In
the relevant human right
was the right to access the
courts.105F
That human right
was manifested in a right to judicial review which was granted in a
statute.106F
also concerned a right that was referable to
statute.107F
But these form
only a part of the universe of language rights cases. Many will concern
circumstances where the right to use a language
in a particular context is
denied and where there is no explicit conferral of the relevant right. But even
where the relevant right
is explicitly granted, a narrow construal of that right
might still see it fall outside this
Given this criterion would severely curtail the operation of s 10, it is
unsurprising that doubts were raised about it in
Commonwealth
concerned a challenge to the
Social Security Act 1991
’) by an Aboriginal
He alleged that the
provision of the age pension under the
, which begins at age 67, was
inconsistent with
because the shorter life expectancy of
Aboriginal men compared with other Australian men meant that they received the
age pension
for fewer years and their right to social security was therefore
differentially impaired.110F
Though the Full Federal Court dismissed the appeal, it questioned whether
‘a particular law giving effect to the right needs
to exist, in order for
a law curtailing its enjoyment by members of a particular race to engage
Instead, the Court considered that if the rights burdened in
kind of right protected by art 5 of the
, they would be rights
enjoyed by persons in Australia generally because ‘the common law permits
that which is not
prohibited’.112F
is the better view. As French
Gageler J114F
, the rights which engage
are not limited to the legal
rights enforceable under domestic law. It would be contrary to the purpose of
which is directed to the differential enjoyment of
‘human rights’ to require an applicant to point to a domestic law
conferring that legal right on members of other races when the practical effect
of a law is to cause the differential enjoyment of
human rights. Nothing in the
suggests that such a limitation should exist, and it would be
contrary to the rule that beneficial and remedial legislation is to
liberal construction.115F
Referring to or Targeting Race
Other judges have expressed concerns that an overbroad interpretation of the
would capture general laws with no intention to refer to or target a
particular race. In
, Bell J posed a hypothetical planning law
that required coastal buildings to meet extreme-weather specifications. Her
Honour asked
would invalidate the law if the
‘overwhelming majority of building owners affected by the law [were]
members of a particular
definitively answering the question, her Honour distinguished the laws in
from this scenario on the basis that they ‘unarguably
target Aboriginal
persons’.117F
judgment of Mitchell AJA in
Athwal v Queensland
followed a similar line
of reasoning but raised the idea that the impugned law should target race to a
requirement.
, the impugned law prohibited the carrying of knives in schools.
For many Sikhs, the carrying of a knife is a matter of religious
obligation. The
appellant argued that the law therefore limited the right of Sikhs to freedom of
movement. Mitchell AJA considered
would not apply to a ‘general
law [which] prohibits certain conduct by all members of the community, even
where that conduct
may be the subject of religious belief only by persons of a
particular ethnic
origin’.119F
only allowed the appeal because the law was subject to several reasonable
excuses, and the reasonable excuse of possessing
a knife for a genuine religious
purpose was specifically excluded, which ‘effectively single[d] out Sikhs
for differential
treatment’.120F
Often, no race is being expressly targeted by the laws that deny people their
language rights. Both laws that impose an English requirement
and laws that
entrench racial inequality through a background assumption of English use and
understanding, such as laws which provide
for a limited time for an appeal, are
general laws that do not single out a particular group for differential
There is an argument that it would be unworkable for
to be engaged by
general law that in its practical operation causes differential
impacts on the rights of different races. Many laws may, as in the
planning law
scenario given by Bell J, cause a disparate impact in an accidental and limited
way unconnected to race, and to construe
to be engaged by such laws may go
beyond the purpose of ensuring equality before the law. The literal meaning of
might therefore have to be tempered by some further limit to carve
from its ambit cases where any differential impact is accidental,
small and has
no relationship with race. One way to put the question would be when a
differential impact caused by a law becomes
‘adverse impact
discrimination’121F
more precisely, a ‘
adverse impact’ given the
‘difficulties with casting s 10(1) of the Act as an anti-discrimination
provision’.122F
However, in the context of language, we make two points. First, differential
treatment through the medium of language generally does
not arise in an
accidental way unconnected to race. This may be hard to identify when the
differential treatment is part of the construction
of Australian nationhood.
Some of the laws which effect this differential treatment may be described as
making ‘no reference,
direct or indirect, to race, ethnicity, colour or
nationality’.123F
as we have shown, the racialisation of language in Australia has been no
accident. As described in Part II(A) above, the privileging
of the English
language through both explicit and implicit requirements historically served
policies of racial exclusion; today,
they marginalise minority groups from
public life. The impugned law in
, which provided for an
exceptionally short period of three days to apply for a reconsideration of a
decision, will limit the ability
of non-English speaking minorities to make such
an application. It does so because the decisions are made in English and the
application
must be made in English, and that is the case notwithstanding the
lack of any explicit legal requirements saying so, because racially
exclusionary
and assimilationist policies have constructed English as the de facto language
of Australia.
Second, while these laws may not ‘single out’ particular racial
groups, that is not the touchstone to be used under s
10. There is no
requirement of discriminatory
intent.124F
As a matter of
authority, Bell J hypothesised in
that the planning law scenario
would not engage s 10 because any limitation would have ‘no connection to
an idea that
was also taken up in
preferred the touchstone to be whether the differential enjoyment was
‘inconsistent with persons of those two races
being accorded equal dignity
and respect’.127F
any case, while the law on this question may still be developing, s 10 can
undoubtedly apply to laws that do not ‘inarguably
target’ a racial
group but that simply ‘[treat] equally things that are
unequal’.128F
that impinge on language rights might fall on the right side of a discriminatory
intent test but should and would fall
on the wrong side of s 10.
Rights Categorisation and
Characterisation
Once a relevant human right has been identified, the question turns to how
the particular incident of that right should be characterised
in the assessment
of whether its enjoyment is limited. This is a complex issue upon which
cases have often
turned.129F
The complexity
arises from the fact that there are many ways to characterise a right. In
practice, the process of characterisation
is often unprincipled and can be
engineered to deny a claim. In the first-instance decision of
Brown J characterised the rights to be the ‘rights to religious freedom
and freedom of movement, while wearing a knife as
an article of faith in a
school’.130F
Notwithstanding the fact that Sikhs are the only ethno-religious group whose
adherents must wear knives as an article of faith, the
rights so characterised
are enjoyed in principle equally by members of all races. A similar
characterisation could have been an alternative
means to deny the claim in the
appeal: the right to freedom of expression while speaking English
in prison communications is equally enjoyed by all. Unsurprisingly,
approach to characterisation was criticised in the
appeal.131F
re-iterated the idea that s 10 is concerned with broad rights and observed that
the approach taken by Brown J meant that
‘s 10 could not operate as it was
intended’ because the characterisation incorporated ‘into the
definition of the
relevant right the attribute fastened onto by the impugned
legislative
provision’.132F
would therefore be ‘impossible to compare Sikhs’ enjoyment of the
defined right and the enjoyment of
others’.133F
preferred characterising the rights at a high level of generality as the
‘right to religious freedom and the right
to freedom of
movement’.134F
The approach of Dalton JA has much to recommend it. As his Honour observed,
it is consistent with general discrimination
and forecloses a
self-defeating characterisation of the right. But while it applies easily to
laws that impose a limitation, there
remain difficulties with laws that grant a
right because of a tendency to consider
right is really being
granted. In
, the Court bypassed a high level of generality in
rights characterisation in favour of characterising the right by reference to
statute that purported to grant the right in
practice.136F
The question
before the Court was whether the pension age was inconsistent with s 10 because
Indigenous male Australians enjoyed
on average significantly fewer years on the
age pension compared to males of other races due to a shorter
lifespan.137F
The relevant s
10(2) right was identified as the right to social
security.138F
observed that ‘[c]onsideration for the purpose of s 10(1) of the
extent to which people of different races in Australia
enjoy the right to social
security involves, primarily, analysis of how the
and concluded
that the relevant right was the ‘right to a level of income support,
covering the period from when a person reaches
“retirement age”
until death, however long that period might
There was no
differential enjoyment of the right framed in these
If contestation
had centred on this issue in the time limit cases of
, those claims could have been dismissed in a similar way. The
rights could be characterised as ‘the right to appeal a decision
the timeframe specified in the law, however long it takes for a person to
understand the original decision and consider an
Due in part to these difficulties, Taylor has argued for ‘[placing]
less emphasis on interrogating the nature of the rights
involved’142F
an approach to the
that instead considers whether the
‘discrimination complained of “touch[ed] the enjoyment” of
another protected
right or freedom’, also called the ‘ambit’
principle.143F
In our view,
while a focus on interrogating the nature of the rights may be misplaced, using
the ambit principle does not avoid the
characterisation exercise. As Taylor
describes, ‘[t]he concept of ambit requires that if the state offers a
benefit, it cannot
discriminate in the provision of that
benefit’.144F
terms, the concept of ‘benefit’ may simply be a substitute for the
concept of ‘right’ in the characterisation
exercise, with the result
that the same answer is reached. For instance, it might equally be said in
that the benefit conferred by the
is a level of income
support, covering the period from when a person reaches ‘retirement
age’ until death. With such
a characterisation, no discriminatory benefit
is conferred.
The issue with
is instead the characterisation exercise itself.
In a similar way to Brown J at first instance in
, the Court
fastened the attribute that is the subject of substantive differentiation onto
the definition of the right. The attribute
complained of in
precisely that the period of retirement age until death is substantively less on
average for Indigenous men. To characterise the
right as income support during
that period, especially with the caveat of ‘however long that period might
be’, neuters
the possibility of identifying any differentiation in the
enjoyment of the right as between different races in relation to the
complained-of
attribute. The basis for the characterisation in
drawn from what was ‘embodied in the legislation’ and
‘inherent in its
design’.145F
than reflecting a principled approach, it begs the question because the relevant
issue, at a high level of generality, is
whether the design of the legislation
is discriminatory. We consider the criticisms of Dalton JA canvassed earlier to
apply equally
in these cases where a right is granted rather than limited. In
line with his approach, a broader, less technical characterisation
of the right
is to be preferred.
The problem that a narrow approach to rights characterisation poses to
language claims may alternatively be theorised as a function
of the rigidity of
rights categorisations. The assertion of a linguistic right typically relies on
other rights given the lack of
a freestanding constitutional or legal right to
linguistic freedom. In
, the appellants contended that their right
to worship publicly as a group in the Samoan language was contravened by a
prohibition
of the Samoan language in church
services.146F
The appellants
argued that this right emerged from one or other or all of the right to
nationality; the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion; and the
right to freedom of opinion and
expression.147F
canvassed an extensive body of international law, but ultimately considered that
the claim could not be supported by any
rights.148F
considered that an individual’s freedom of religion is sufficiently
protected by their right to leave their
church.149F
Further, the
Court stated that the right to freedom of expression ‘does not guarantee
“linguistic freedom as such”
or “guarantee a right to use the
language of one’s choice” in all
circumstances’.150F
freedom of expression upon which the appellants relied was an aspect of the
right contained in art 27 of the
in relation to minority languages.
In that context, the Court held that the right to speak Samoan extended only to
a right ‘in
community with other members of their group’ — but
not in the company of non-Samoan speaking persons, and Samoan youth
unable to speak the Samoan
language.151F
Court’s approach in
reflects the subsidiarisation of
language rights, in which each potential source of a language right is
interrogated and dismissed
in turn. This approach fails to conceptualise that
the intersection of these rights may give rise to a broader conceptualisation
the enjoyment of language which is more coherent with the purposes of the
. Through that failure, ‘the crux of the claim, namely racial
discrimination, is
Laws That Confer Rights
One of the idiosyncrasies of s 10 is that where the effect of a law is to
confer a right in an unequal way, s 10 would
that conferral to ensure that its enjoyment is not
unequal.153F
especially pertinent in the context of language rights because assimilationist
pressures on minority languages largely arise
from indirect rather than direct
discrimination (such as the laws in
, however, the Court expressed several
reservations about the exercise of its powers in extending or augmenting rights
in circumstances
of indirect discrimination. If those reservations held, the
effectiveness of s 10 as a defender against assimilationist pressures
minority languages would be severely curtailed. This Part therefore briefly
attempts to address those reservations raised in
relevant to
language rights claims.
, the Court stated that an adjustment for a facially neutral
law that treats all members of a race in the same way (for instance,
extending the time limit for appeals for people of a racial group that typically
does not use English as a first language) may
not be ‘adequate or
principled’.154F
Individuals in that cohort may be fluent in English and therefore have not
suffered any limitation on their enjoyment of the relevant
right. They would end
up enjoying their right to a
extent than members of other races.
The Court in
considered that this sort of amelioration might
‘test the limits of what a court exercising the judicial power of the
Commonwealth
may properly
It pointed to
the existence of s 8 of the
as indicating that Parliament intended to
maintain its power to decide what measures would be
appropriate.156F
that statistically evident disadvantage that is not intrinsic to a race
‘may change over
However, it would also be inadequate and unprincipled for s 10 to be
operative on facially neutral laws that limit a right but not
on those that
confer a right. The fact that the relevant disadvantage — as evinced in
statistical evidence and arising from
a host of social and historical factors
— may change over time and is not an intrinsic racial characteristic
should not operate
as a limit on any s 10 claim. To conclude so reflects a
failure to acknowledge that racial categories are themselves contingent and
constructed, and that their construction is bound up in the social and
historical factors that give rise to disproportionate disadvantage.
characteristics that are intrinsic to a concept that is itself contingent is an
absurdity. The existence of s 8 also does
not mean that Parliament intended to
the operation of s 10 to augment rights in the context of a
facially neutral law; s 8 simply ensures that s 10 does not operate on
measures that
passed by Parliament. Finally, the difficulty of
framing appropriate relief in a principled way can be answered by observing that
just as a law may adopt facially neutral criteria in effecting a disparate
impact, so too can the remedy provided by the court. Where
the use of language
is a proxy for discrimination, language can also be the proxy to negate it. In
the time limit cases, the court
could augment the rights of those suffering a
disparate impact by ordering that an appropriate amount of additional time be
to those who are not fluent with the English language. This would avoid
the difficulties of treating members of the same race with
characteristics in the same way, and severely limit the scope of any
‘complex and contestable judgments, based on
potentially shifting
facts’.158F
The conclusion of our analysis is that there are reasons to doubt the
correctness of all the past language rights cases under the
have seen, the reasoning used to dismiss those claims is problematic, and
alternative lines of reasoning drawn from other
cases also betray
weaknesses. To take an example, and based on our analysis above, the appeal in
should not have been dismissed on the basis of proportionality, nor
on the lack of an explicit right. Reasoning based on either characterising
right in a way that renders comparison with other racial groups impossible or
highlighting the lack of racial targeting in the
relevant provision would also
be unhelpful. The contest for these such cases should centre on whether the
impact of the impugned
law meets the s 10 adverse impact threshold. In
, as Basten JA identified, the limitation imposed by the law did
reveal a connection to
And restricting the
ability of prisoners to speak to family members in languages other than English
is (to use the test preferred
by Gageler J in
inconsistent with those of minority language backgrounds being accorded equal
respect and dignity. The law should have been invalidated.
Language is a means for people to express themselves and communicate with
others. It is intimately bound up with a person’s
sense of identity and
community. Respect for a person’s language is therefore respect for their
human dignity. However, historically,
language has been instrumentalised as a
discriminator through which Australian governments have marginalised minorities.
Today, minority
languages continue to be undermined by assimilatory laws that
demand the use of English in public life and provide for no appropriate
affordances. We have argued that the
possesses the capacity to be a
tool to defend against both linguistic discrimination and legal regimes that
effect assimilatory pressure.
We have sought to progress toward this powerful
potential of the
by deconstructing all the justifications which have
thus far barred the success of language rights in
litigation. Our
analysis has revealed these justifications to be limited and that there are
cogent reasons for the
to be interpreted in a way that helps secure
the dignity of linguistic minorities. Nothing less ought to be expected of a
legislation that was claimed to represent our ‘best [efforts] to
redress past injustice and build a more just and tolerant
future’.161F
Please cite this article as:
Catherine Zhou and William Ruan, ‘Unearthing Language Rights
Protections in the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
[2024] SydLawRw 15
(2024) 46(3)
Sydney Law Review
DOI: https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.20424
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0. Unmodified content is free to
use with proper
attribution
∗ BA/LLB (Hons)
; ORCID ID:
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6738-545X.
† BSc/LLB (Hons)
williamruan.wr@gmail.com;
ORCID ID: https://orcid.org/0009-0006-4330-9739.
International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
signature 21 December
1965, 660 UNTS 195
(entered into force 4 January 1969)
Preamble paras 5, 10 (‘
’). For a more detailed
explication of the legal interrelationship between the
international law, see
Wotton v Queensland [No 5]
(2016) 325 ALR 146
279–81 [516]–[525] (Mortimer J).
Susanna Mancini and Bruno de
Witte, ‘Language Rights as Cultural Rights: A European Perspective’
in Francesco Francioni
and Martin Scheinin (eds),
Cultural Human Rights
(Martinus Nijhoff, 2008) 247, 247. Skutnabb-Kangas and Phillipson have also
written on a category of ‘linguistic human rights’
within language
rights, being inviolable and inalienable rights ‘which are necessary for
individuals and groups to live a dignified
life’: Tove Skutnabb-Kangas and
Robert Phillipson, ‘Introduction: Establishing Linguistic Human
Rights’ in Tove
Skutnabb-Kangas and Robert Phillipson (eds),
Handbook of Linguistic Human Rights
(John Wiley & Sons, 2023) 1, 16.
Moria Paz, ‘The Tower of
Babel: Human Rights and the Paradox of Language’
(2014) 25(2)
Journal of International Law
, 480, citing
Hernandez v New York
[1991] USSC 82
(1991). For similar arguments, including poststructuralist
perspectives, see Bonny Norton,
Identity and Language Learning: Extending the
Conversation
(Multilingual Matters, 2
ed, 2013); Bonny Norton,
‘Language and Identity’ in Nancy H Hornberger and Sandra Lee McKay,
Sociolinguistics and Language Education
(Multilingual Matters, 2010) 349;
David Block, ‘The Rise of Identity in SLA Research, Post Firth and Wagner
(1997)’ (2007)
Modern Language Journal
863; Grace Cho,
‘The Role of Heritage Language in Social Interactions and Relationships:
Reflections from a Minority Language
Group’ (2000) 24(4)
Research Journal
Will Kymlicka,
Politics in
the Vernacular: Nationalism, Multiculturalism, and Citizenship
University Press, 2001) 252.
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights
, opened for signature 16 December
1966, 999 UNTS
(entered into force 23 March 1976) art 27.
Human Rights Committee,
General Comment No 23: Article 27 (Rights of Minorities)
sess, UN Doc CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.5 (26 April 1994) [9] (‘
Comment No 23
Alice Taylor,
‘Anti-Discrimination Law As the Protector of Other Rights and Freedoms:
The Case of the
Racial Discrimination Act
(2021) 42(2)
416, citing Laura Beacroft, ‘Indigenous
Language and Language Rights in Australia after the
Mabo (No 2)
A Poor Report Card’
James Cook University Law Review
David Smillie, ‘Human Nature and Evolution: Language, Culture, and
Race’ (1996) 19(2)
Journal of Social and Evolutionary Systems
and Philip Riley,
Language, Culture and Identity: An Ethnolinguistic
Perspective
(Continuum, 2007).
Jonathan Rosa and Nelson
Flores, ‘Unsettling Race and Language: Toward a Raciolinguistic
Perspective’ (2017) 46(5)
Language in Society
Phillip Tahmindjis,
‘The Law and Indirect Racial Discrimination: Of Square Pegs, Round Holes
Babies and Bath Water?’
in Race Discrimination Commissioner,
Discrimination Act
(Australian Human Rights Commission, December
1995) 101, 102.
KH Bailey, ‘The Legal
Position of Foreigners in Australia’ in Norman MacKenzie (ed),
Legal Status of Aliens in Pacific Countries
(Oxford University Press, 1937)
Myra Willard,
the White Australia Policy to 1920
(Melbourne University Press,
ed, 1967) 122.
Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner,
Social Justice Report 2009
(Report, Australian Human Rights Commission, 2009) 58.
EJ Hobsbawm,
Nations and
Nationalism since 1780: Programme, Myth, Reality
(Cambridge University
Press, 2012) 95. For further discussion of language as ideology, including the
centralisation of monolingualism
in the ‘one nation, one language’
ideology, see Ingrid Piller, ‘Language Ideologies’ in Karen Tracy,
Ilie and Todd Sandel (eds),
The International Encyclopedia of
Language and Social Interaction
(John Wiley & Sons, 2015) vol 2,
Mostafa Rachwani,
‘The New Australian Citizenship Test: What Is It and What Has
The Guardian
(online, 18 September 2020)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2020‌/‌sep/‌18/‌the-‌new-australian-citizenship-test-what-is-it-and-what-has-changed>.
Pierre Bourdieu,
Language and Symbolic Power
(Polity Press, 1991) 39.
Pierre Bourdieu, ‘The
Economics of Linguistic Exchanges’ (1977) 16(6)
Social Science
Information
645, 648–53.
Language and
Symbolic Power
Christina Bratt Paulston,
‘Language Policies and Language Rights’ (1997) 26(1)
Review of Anthropology
73, 77 (citations omitted).
Kymlicka (n
Canada Act 1982
c 11, sch B pt I (‘
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
Ibid s 23. Legislation was
also passed in 2019 relating to respect for Indigenous languages in Canada: see
Indigenous Languages Act
, SC 2019, c 23.
Mahe v Alberta
[1990] 1 SCR 342.
Ibid 365 (Dickson CJ).
Mathieu-Mohin v Belgium
[1987] ECHR 1
(1988) 10 EHRR 1.
Ibid 19 [57].
Francesco Capotorti,
Special Rapporteur of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities,
Study on the Rights of Persons Belonging to Ethnic,
Religious and Linguistic Minorities
, UN Doc E/CN.4/Sub.2/384/Rev.1 (1979) 50
Ibid 49–50 [292].
Ibid 45 [267].
Ibid 50 [293].
Ibid 46 [272].
Rosa and Flores (n
In the European context,
) 483. Paz notes that the
European Court of Human Rights only requires language protection insofar as it
is needed for understanding.
See above nn
and accompanying text.
Heinz Kloss,
American Bilingual Tradition
(Center for Applied Linguistics, 1998) 20.
General Comment No 23
Human Rights Committee,
Views: Communications Nos 359/1989 and 385/1989
Doc CCPR/C/47/D/359/1989 (‘
Ballantyne v Canada
Ibid [11.4].
Hamzy v Commissioner of
Corrective Services
[2020] NSWSC 414
, [149] (Bellew J) (‘
’). See below Part III for a more detailed analysis of this case
and its appeal.
Alastair Pennycook,
Language as a Local Practice
(Routledge, 2010) 26.
Racial Discrimination
Discrimination Act 2004
Discrimination Act 1992
Discrimination Act 1984
Maloney v The Queen
[2012] FCA 307
(2013) 252 CLR 168
, 179–80 [11] (French CJ) (citations omitted)
’). Ms Maloney was charged and convicted under
Liquor Act 1992
(Qld) for possession of more than the
prescribed quantity of liquor in a restricted area. She appealed her conviction
on the basis
that the impugned provisions — which restricted the
possession of liquor in Palm Island, an area whose population was 97%
constituted
by Aboriginal people — were inconsistent with
, could not be rescued as special measures pursuant to
and were therefore invalid. The High Court found that the impugned
provisions were special measures and dismissed her appeal.
Ibid 200 [65].
Ibid (emphasis in
Hamzy v Commissioner of
Corrective Services (NSW)
[2022] NSWCA 16
(2022) 107 NSWLR 544
Nguyen v Refugee Review
[1997] FCA 293
(1997) 74 FCR 311
Sahak v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2002] FCAFC 215
(2002) 123 FCR 514
Munkara v Bencsevich
[2018] NTCA 4
[1985] HCA 11
(1985) 159 CLR 70
, 98–9 (Mason J)
’). See generally Beth Gaze and Belinda Smith,
Equality and Discrimination Law in Australia: An Introduction
University Press, 2017) 42–3.
Alice Taylor, ‘The
“Constitutional” Value of the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
[2021] SydLawRw 22
(2021) 43(4)
Sydney Law Review
) 98 (Mason J).
Hamzy Appeal
) 571–2 [79] (Basten JA).
It is worth acknowledging
that very few
claims reach the courts, and decisions involving
linguistic discrimination under the
are a small subset of these
claims: we refer here to the cases of
Hamzy Appeal
Iliafi v Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-Day Saints Australia
[2014] FCAFC 26
(2014) 221 FCR 86
’). None of these cases were binding on any other of
these cases, as they were either at the same level, or in a different
) 201 [68] (Hayne J).
) 517 [10] (Goldberg and Hely JJ).
Ibid 525 [45].
Ibid 516 [6]. However,
North J ultimately agreed with Goldberg and Hely JJ’s conclusion that the
appeals should be dismissed,
because ‘the only limitation is that the
appellants may be confined to instituting proceedings in the High Court rather
having available the opportunity to commence proceedings in both the High
Court and the Federal Court’: at 516 [3].
Griggs v Duke Power
[1971] USSC 46
) [118] (Blokland J).
Ibid [14] (Kelly J).
Ibid [117].
Ibid [118].
Hamzy Trial
) [1] (Bellew J). The case was appealed
unsuccessfully in
Hamzy Appeal
Ibid [125] (Bellew J).
Ibid [159]–[166].
Ibid [165], citing
) 525 [45] (Goldberg and Hely
Hamzy Trial
Hamzy Appeal
) 574 [89]. His Honour nonetheless
rejected the appeal because he considered the relevant issue to be whether
was engaged, a question which was not raised in the trial or on appeal: at
Ibid 568 [68]. See also
Alexandra Grey, ‘Lawful Limits on Freedom of Expression for Private
Communications “in Public
Life”’ (2023) 12(2)
International Law Journal
Grey (n 82) refers to
another way in which proportionality may be relevant: as a requirement for
‘Australian federal laws
that incorporate international conventions ...
because such laws rely on the “purposive” legislative power in s
Constitution
’: at 334. However, this
constitutional test of proportionality is a question of whether the
is proportional in giving effect to the
). We do not consider this to be a live
legal question and to the authors’ best knowledge it has never been tested
by any court.
Hamzy Appeal
) 574 [90]. Leeming JA, with whom
Bathurst CJ agreed, took a different approach: see below
Part III(C).
) 316 (Tamberlin J).
) 202 [68] (Hayne J, Crennan J agreeing
at 213 [112]) (citations omitted).
Ibid 232 [167].
Ibid 241 [197].
Ibid 296 [342].
Ibid 298 [348].
R v Maloney
[2012] QCA 105
Ibid 38 [20], quoting
Bropho v Western Australia
[2008] FCAFC 100
, 83 [81] (Ryan, Moore
and Tamberlin JJ).
R v Maloney
) 191 [39].
) 111 [87] (Kenny J).
Ibid 112 [92].
Ibid 112 [93].
Blackwell v Bara
(2022) 364 FLR 381.
Ibid 408 [82].
Hamzy Appeal
) 615–16 [274].
) 517 [10] (Goldberg and Hely JJ).
Ibid 524 [39]–[41]
(Goldberg and Hely JJ).
) 319 (Tamberlin J).
Fisher v Commonwealth
(2023) 298 FCR 543
Ibid 546 [4] (the
Ibid 568 [84] (the
Ibid (citations
Ibid 280 [300].
IW v City of
[1997] HCA 30
(1997) 191 CLR 1
, 12 (Brennan CJ and McHugh J).
) 244 [203].
Ibid 244 [204].
Athwal v Queensland
(2023) 379 FLR 92
, 117 [113] (‘
Athwal Appeal
Ibid 117 [109].
) 285 [308] (Gageler J);
Fraser v A-G
[2020] 3 SCR 113
, 115 (Abella J for Wagner CJ, Moldaver,
Karakatsanis, Martin and Kasirer JJ).
Athwal Appeal
) 102 [33] (Dalton JA).
) 319 (Tamberlin J).
See Neil Rees, Simon
Rice and Dominique Allen,
Australian Anti-Discrimination and Equal
Opportunity Law
(Federation Press, 3
ed, 2018) 280. See
generally Gaze and Smith (n
) 244 [204].
) 582–3 [132] (the Court).
) 294 [335].
Athwal Appeal
) 101 [30] (Dalton JA), quoting
Castlemaine Tooheys Ltd v South Australia
(1990) 169 CLR 436
(Gaudron and McHugh JJ).
[154]–[157] (Kiefel J).
Athwal v Queensland
(2022) 372 FLR 291
, 306 [67] (citations omitted).
Athwal Appeal
) 95–6 [10]–[11] (Dalton
JA), 118–9 [118] (Mitchell AJA).
Ibid 95 [5].
Addy v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2021] HCA 34
(2021) 273 CLR 613
, 631 [30] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler,
Gordon, Edelman and Gleeson JJ).
) 575–6 [107] (the Court).
Ibid 546–7 [6]
(Mortimer CJ, Katzmann, Charlesworth, Abraham and Kennett JJ).
Ibid 577 [111].
Ibid 582 [130].
Ibid 582 [131].
(citations omitted).
) 581–2 [127] (Mortimer CJ,
Katzmann, Charlesworth, Abraham and Kennett JJ).
) 95 [20] (Kenny J).
[53]–[54] (Kenny J).
Ibid 117 [110] (Kenny
Ibid 109 [78], 110 [81]
Ibid 117 [92] (Kenny
Ibid 113 [96] (Kenny J)
(emphasis omitted).
) 550–1 [15] (Mortimer CJ,
Katzmann, Charlesworth, Abraham and Kennett JJ).
Ibid 584 [140].
Ibid 585 [143].
Ibid 585 [143].
Hamzy Appeal
) 568 [68].
) 294 [335].
Gough Whitlam,
‘Proclamation of the
Racial Discrimination Act
’ (Speech, Canberra,
31 October 1975).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (239 KB)
PDF format (328 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter