URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMonashLRS/2009/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rodrick, S --- "Accessing Telecommunications Data for National Security and Law Enforcement Purposes" [2009] UMonashLRS 15
ACCESSING TELECOMMUNICATIONS DATA FOR NATIONAL SECURITY AND
LAW ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES
Sharon Rodrick*
INTRODUCTION
Technological developments, particularly the advent of the Internet and the
mobile phone, have spawned a vast increase in the volume,
of telecommunications
information.
phones are now capable of sending and receiving SMS text messages and emails,
accessing and downloading material from the
Internet, taking photographs,
streaming video and audio content and providing GPS navigation. National
security and law enforcement
agencies frequently wish to access
telecommunications information for national security and law enforcement
purposes. The desired
information may be ‘telecommunications
content’ – that is, the actual substance of a communication - or
‘telecommunications
data’ – meaning information about a
communication but not the substance of it.
Access to telecommunications information by national security and law
enforcement agencies is part of a wider debate about what constitutes
appropriate response to the threat of terrorism and to the use by criminals of
increasingly sophisticated methods. Governments
in Western democracies have
tended to react by conferring on their national security and law enforcement
agencies significantly increased
powers to obtain information about individuals,
including increased access to telecommunications information. Such governments
acted on the premise that citizens expect their government to keep them
safe, and to equip itself with the power to do
increased State power is often arrogated at the expense of human rights and
freedoms, particularly in Australia, which lacks
a Bill of Rights to
‘balance the ledger’ between the
In the context
of telecommunications, the freedom most likely to be compromised by increased
powers of access is individual privacy.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the debate regarding the extent to
which national security and law enforcement agencies should
be able to access
telecommunications information invariably focuses on the tension between the
need to protect the privacy of individuals
who use the telecommunications system
- particularly those who are suspected of planning or committing crimes or acts
of terrorism
- and the need to protect national security and facilitate law
enforcement. As a matter of principle, it is fairly uncontentious
that privacy
and national security/ law enforcement each have legitimate claims to
recognition and protection, and that there are
circumstances in which it is
justifiable to encroach on the former to protect and promote the latter. The
discussion inevitably centres
on how the law can best protect society from crime
and terrorism while continuing to preserve the rights and freedoms of
individuals,
or, if both cannot be achieved in adequate measure, which should be
given primacy.
Access to telecommunications content and data is primarily governed by the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Interception Act’
) and, to a lesser extent, by the
Telecommunications Act
Telecommunications Act
’). In deference to the fact that
technological advances have made it possible to use the telecommunications
system to communicate
in a multiplicity of ways, the
Interception Act
creates three broad access regimes. The first pertains to interception of real
time communications, primarily voice
communications.
is a general prohibition on intercepting live communications - that is,
communications as they are passing over a telecommunications
interests of protecting the privacy of the persons who make and receive such
communications.
However, the prohibition is qualified by a number of exceptions. The primary
exceptions allow for warrants to be issued to the Australian
Intelligence Organisation (‘ASIO’ or the ‘Organisation’)
and to certain State and Federal law enforcement
agencies which permit them to
intercept telecommunications for national security and law enforcement
are issued to ASIO by the federal
Attorney-General,
to law enforcement agencies by an ‘eligible judge’ – namely, a
judge of a court created by the Commonwealth
Parliament who has consented to
being nominated and who has been declared by the Minister to be an eligible
nominated members of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
The second regime regulates access to stored
communications.
These are communications that have completed their passage over the
telecommunications system, that are held on equipment that is
operated and
possessed by a carrier, and that cannot be accessed on that equipment by a
person who is not a party to the communication
without the assistance of an
employee of the
the regime applies to communications that are temporarily stored by the carrier
or carriage service provider (‘CSP’)
at some point during the course
of their transmission over the telecommunications system before being received
by the intended recipient.
They include emails, SMS and voice mail
stored communications regime only applies where communications are accessed from
the telecommunications service provider; it
does not govern access to
communications that are stored on equipment in the possession of the intended
in the interests of privacy, there is a general prohibition on accessing stored
communications,
qualified by another set of exceptions, the most significant ones being the
provision for warrants to be issued to ASIO and specified
enforcement agencies
allowing them to access stored communications for national security and law
enforcement
access stored communications using its existing interception
Enforcement agencies, however, must obtain a stored communications warrant.
These can be issued by an “issuing authority”,
being a consenting
judge of a court created by the Commonwealth Parliament, a Federal Magistrate, a
magistrate, and by nominated
members of the
When deciding whether to issue an interception or stored communications
warrant to a law enforcement agency, the relevant issuing
authority must have
regard to the extent to which methods of investigation that do not involve
interception or access are available
or have been used by the applicant, and how
much the interception or access of a target person’s communications would
The third regime regulates access to telecommunications data, which loosely
refers to ‘traffic’ or ‘transactional’
data, that is,
information
a communication rather than its
with this regime that this article is primarily concerned. While perhaps not as
useful to national security and law enforcement
agencies as the actual substance
of a communication, telecommunications data can provide these agencies with
valuable information
location. The access scheme for telecommunications data requires an
understanding
Telecommunications Act
and Chapter 4 of
Interception Act
. The former is concerned with protecting the
confidentiality of communications. It does so by imposing a general prohibition
disclosure and use of information by providers of telecommunications
services. However, the disclosure and use of this information
is authorised in
certain enumerated circumstances. Until recently, both the general prohibition
and all of the exceptions were contained
Telecommunications Act
including exceptions permitting the disclosure and use of telecommunications
data for national security and law enforcement
in 2005, the
Report of the Review of the Regulation of Access to
Communications
(the ‘Blunn Review’) concluded that the
distribution of provisions between the
Telecommunications Act
Interception Act
dealing with access to telecommunications data for
security and law enforcement purposes was ‘complicated, confusing and
dysfunctional’.
It recommended that the law enforcement and national security provisions be
shifted to the
Interception Act
, thereby making that Act a single,
comprehensive Act containing the framework for national security and law
enforcement agencies
to access all forms of telecommunications
information.
recommendation was implemented in 2007 when the exceptions permitting disclosure
and use of telecommunications data for national
security and law enforcement
purposes were removed from the
Telecommunications Act
and transferred to
Chapter 4 of the
Interception Act
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Amendment Act
(Cth). The other
exceptions remain in the
Telecommunications Act
and are expressly
preserved by s 173 of the
Interception
be noted that
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Act
(Cth) did not effect a mere transfer of provisions from the
Telecommunications Act
Interception Act
. There are some
significant modifications and additions to the exceptions, many of which are
controversial. Moreover, the transfer
of provisions has re-ignited some of the
contentious issues that were in existence even when the provisions were located
Telecommunications Act
The purpose of this article is to outline the circumstances in which
telecommunications data can be lawfully accessed for national
security and law
enforcement purposes, and to consider whether this access regime sacrifices
individual privacy to an unacceptable
extent. Since privacy is the primary
public interest against which the telecommunications data regime must be
evaluated, this article
will begin with a brief exploration of the importance of
provisions of
Telecommunications Act
before proceeding to
describe and critique both structural and operational aspects of the
telecommunications data regime, primarily
from a privacy perspective. Many of
the deficiencies of the regime were identified in submissions made to the Senate
Standing Committee
on Legal and Constitutional Affairs (the ‘Senate
Committee’ or ‘Committee’) which conducted an inquiry into
provisions of the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Bill
This article will draw on those submissions and make suggestions
for reform across a number of areas. While not directly concerned
interception and stored communications regimes, some tentative comments as to
whether the divergence in protections between
these regimes and the
telecommunications data regime is justified will be interspersed throughout the
THE LINK BETWEEN PRIVACY, TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFORMATION AND THE
THE BALANCING APPROACH
Many governments, policy makers and academic scholars evaluate legislative
regimes that seek to protect national security and enhance
law enforcement at
the expense of human rights on the assumption that it is both possible and
appropriate to resolve the tension
between public safety and individual liberty
by striving to achieve a balance between the
maintain that a balancing approach is inherently flawed.
Those who eschew the notion of balance ‘as a metaphor for the
relationship between security and
are likely to argue that to pit individual liberty against national security is
to adopt a ‘bi-polar notion of
which is too simplistic, since it assumes that ‘more of one necessarily
means less of the
is, that freedom and safety can be traded off on a sliding
maintain that this safety/freedom notion is a misleading dichotomy which tends
to conceal an irony, namely, that the pursuit
of security in order to enhance
the public interest in preventing, detecting and punishing terrorism and crime
comes at the expense
of protecting people’s liberty from the
unchecked State interference can be just as damaging to individual liberty as
terrorism and crime!
It has also been argued that the balancing rhetoric ‘rarely achieves an
accommodation of competing
interests’.
In the context of the criminal justice system, Bronitt has stated that:
In the relentless expansion of the powers of criminal investigation,
suspects’ rights are invariably “traded off”
against the
community interests in preventing, detecting and prosecuting crime. Far from
attaining the rhetoric of ‘perfect
equilibrium’, the criminal
justice system consistently favours the interests of the state over the
individual.
The same can be said of counter-terrorism legislation, including
telecommunications interception powers. Legislative initiatives that
initially hailed as atypical responses to an unusual and critical situation
(such as the threat of terrorism after 9/11 and the
Bali bombings), over time,
become normalised, and individual liberties are rarely restored to the level of
protection they previously
This article does not proffer an opinion as to whether a balancing approach
is the most appropriate means of reconciling the relationship
between security
and liberty. It simply proceeds on the assumption that individual privacy is an
inevitable casualty of according
national security and law enforcement agencies
increased access to telecommunications information, and seeks to elucidate
the intrusion on personal privacy under the telecommunications data
regime is warranted.
THE ROLE OF PRIVACY IN SHAPING LAWS PERTAINING TO STATE ACCESS TO
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFORMATION
As a precursor to identifying how privacy concerns have shaped Australian
telecommunications law, it is necessary to briefly recount
the role that privacy
has played in United States jurisprudence, as the latter has undoubtedly
influenced the former.
Although ‘privacy’ is not explicitly mentioned in the Bill of
Rights, courts have interpreted the Fourth Amendment to
the United States
Constitution
as conferring an important privacy protection which has relevance
to State access to telecommunications information. The Fourth Amendment
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and
effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall
not be violated, and
no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or
affirmation, and particularly describing
the place to be searched, and the
person or things to be seized.
Early United States Supreme Court cases such as
Olmstead v United
restricted interpretation to the concept of search and seizure, holding that it
demands a physical trespass on property or
a seizure of material goods. This
meant that wiretapping was not caught or controlled by the Fourth Amendment in
circumstances where
the defendant’s property or person was not touched. In
Katz v United
Fourth Amendment was re-interpreted by the Supreme Court as an aspect of
betting information by
telephone in violation of a federal statute. At Katz’ trial, the
government was permitted to introduce
evidence of telephone conversations at
Katz’ end. These conversations were overheard by FBI agents who had
attached an electronic
listening and recording device to the outside of the
public telephone booth from which the calls were made. It was argued that the
recordings had not been obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment, since
there was no physical entry into the area occupied by
Katz. The Supreme Court
overturned the narrow approach adopted in
and held that the
Fourth Amendment ‘protects people not
Court permitted Katz to invoke the Fourth Amendment even though he was visible
inside the booth, as he was not seeking to exclude
the eye, but the uninvited
ear, and was entitled to assume that the words he uttered in the telephone booth
would not be broadcast
to the world.
The nub of the decision is that the reach of the Fourth Amendment no longer
turns upon the presence or absence of a physical intrusion
into a given
enclosure; the Amendment was recast as a species of privacy, namely, the right
to be let alone by an intrusive
government.
J, in dissent, held that the words ‘search and seizure’ simply could
not be construed to cover eavesdropping carried
on by electronic means, and
castigated the majority for arbitrarily re-interpreting the Amendment as one
based on privacy rather
than one designed to protect citizens against
unreasonable searches and seizures. However, the concept of the
‘reasonable expectation
of privacy’ enunciated by Harlan
and is now firmly entrenched in Fourth Amendment jurisprudence,
despite the fact that the word ‘privacy’ does not appear
in the text
While Australians clearly do not enjoy the same entrenched constitutional
protections against interference by the State as Americans,
entirely unrecognised. Australia is signatory to covenants that protect privacy,
including Article 17 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, which provides that ‘[N]o one shall be subjected to arbitrary or
unlawful interference
with his privacy ... or correspondence’ and that
‘[E]veryone has the right to the protection of the law against such
interference’. Common law and
provide incidental protection of various aspects of privacy, and the common law
appears to be progressing towards recognising
the Australian Law Reform Commission has recommended that the Federal Parliament
should introduce a statutory cause of action
for a serious invasion of personal
access to telecommunications. The first time that telephone
interceptions was
regulated in Australia by means of legislation was in 1960, when the
Telephonic Communications (Interception) Act 1960
made telephone interception an offence, then proceeded to carve out some very
narrow exceptions in which interception could
It is clear
that the main object of the
Telephonic Communications (Interception) Act
was to protect the privacy of citizens in their communications, hence
the sweeping prohibition and narrowly confined exceptions.
When introducing the
Bill into the House of Representatives, Sir Garfield Barwick, the Acting
Minister for External Affairs and Attorney-General,
Eavesdropping is abhorrent to us as a people. Not one of us ... would fail to
recoil from the thought that a citizen’s privacy
could lightly be invaded
... this Government has always been alive to these natural and proper reactions
of our people. It has approached
this question of permitting the interception of
telephonic messages from that point of
Undoubtedly the significant shift in US jurisprudence concerning the meaning
of the Fourth Amendment was a contributing factor to
the early pre-eminence of
Since 1960, communications and surveillance technology have continued to
burgeon. People now communicate in ways not previously possible;
consequently,
undergone numerous modifications in
an attempt to keep pace with technology. The
1960 Act was replaced by the
Telecommunications (Interception) Act
which was renamed the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Advances in
telecommunications technology have generated debate about the continuing role of
be afforded to all modern forms of
communication as was afforded to landline telephone communications in 1960, when
legislation was
first introduced? Should individuals be expected to understand
that when their mobile phone is switched on, there is an information
between their phone and the cell towers, and to accept that a telecommunications
service provider might be required to divulge
this information to ASIO or to law
enforcement agencies? Or should they have a reasonable expectation of privacy in
respect of the
information that is transmitted between phone and cell tower? The
same issue arises in respect of Internet communications, which
can be accessed
more easily than real time communications as a result of the fact that they are
temporarily stored on various computers
during their
transmission.
The extent to which the federal government has been prepared to accommodate
individual privacy in line with developments in communications
technology varies
according to the nature of the communication in question. The
Interception
proceeds on the basis that there is a valid distinction between live
communications and stored communications. The former are considered
deserving of privacy protection, as they are more spontaneous. By contrast,
stored communications are more deliberative
in that they provide the opportunity
for ‘second thoughts’ prior to transmission; they therefore merit
less privacy
protection.
upshot is that it is more difficult for a law enforcement agency to get a
warrant to intercept a real time communication than
it is to get a warrant to
access a stored
communication.
This dichotomy has not gone
unchallenged.
are unconvinced by the notion that an email or an SMS message is a more
considered form of communication than verbal comments
made during a telephone
call. As far as telecommunications data is concerned, the government’s
stance is that because this
data does not consist of content, it deserves even
less privacy protection, which is why it can be accessed under Chapter 4 without
any warrant.
Although the extent to which privacy is protected varies according to the
modifications to the
Act have invariably continued to identify the primary focus of the legislation
as being to protect the privacy
communications.
Indeed, the Senate Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee stated that
the principal consideration of any legislation which
governs access to personal
communications should be the protection of
while lip service continues to be paid to privacy, the undoubted emphasis in the
post 9/11 additions and amendments to the
Interception Act
has been on
extending the circumstances in which national security and law enforcement
agencies can access private communications.
Notwithstanding the pervasive threat of terrorism and the increased
sophistication in criminal techniques, it is argued that the Australian
government has a responsibility to continue to protect the privacy of its
citizens’ communications. Indeed, the escalation
in the volume and form of
telecommunications information, coupled with the unremitting development of
intrusive and sophisticated
electronic surveillance devices and techniques,
makes it not only imperative that privacy concerns continue to be accommodated
legislative regimes that facilitate access to telecommunications for national
security and law enforcement purposes, but that they
are restored to a place of
primacy. Since there are ‘no longer any technical barriers to the kind of
Big Brother surveillance
society envisioned by George Orwell’, the
barriers that remain are ‘political and
Accordingly, it behoves the legislature to cast national security and law
enforcement exceptions in such a way as to minimise the
intrusion on individual
encroach on individual privacy
to an unacceptable extent. However, before
analysing the regime, it is necessary to outline
Telecommunications Act
, as the telecommunications data regime contained
in Chapter 4 of the
Interception Act
operates as an exception to Part 13
and can only be understood in that light.
RESTRICTIONS ON THE DISCLOSURE AND USE OF INFORMATION BY
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS
Telecommunications service providers obtain a large range of information in
the course of supplying telecommunications services to
their customers,
including details about subscriptions to telephone, internet and other
communications
also carry, and in some instances store, the content of
telecommunications.
Telecommunications Act
imposes an obligation on
telecommunications service providers to protect the confidentiality of this
information by prohibiting its
disclosure or
The primary disclosure and use offences are contained in Division 2 of
Section 276
provides that current and former ‘eligible
– defined as
telecommunications
contractors
their respective employees - must not disclose or use any information or
document that relates to:
the contents or
substance of a communication that has been, or is
a carrier or
services supplied or intended to be supplied to another person by a carrier or
the affairs or
personal particulars of another person, including any unlisted telephone number
or address.
These prohibitions only apply to information or documents which
have come to the person’s knowledge or possession by virtue
of the fact
that they are an ‘eligible
similar prohibition is imposed by
sections 277
on current or former
eligible number database
current or former emergency call persons respectively. Contravention of any of
these provisions is an offence punishable on conviction
by imprisonment for up
to two years.
There are no civil penalty
provisions.
These sweeping prohibitions on disclosure and use are mitigated by a lengthy
list exceptions which are contained in Division 3 of
Although the
primary exceptions pertaining to national security and law enforcement have been
relocated in the
Interception Act
, two of the exceptions that remain in
Telecommunications Act
also have relevance to these matters. The
general prohibition on disclosure and use is expressed not to apply where
information or
a document is disclosed or used in connection with the operation
of an enforcement
‘required or authorised under a
or, in any other case, where disclosure or use of information or a document is
‘required or authorised by or under
should also be noted that
Telecommunications Act
to impose a general obligation on carriers and CSPs to do their best to prevent
their telecommunications networks and facilities
from being used to commit
offences, and to give the authorities such help as is reasonably necessary for
the purposes of enforcing
the criminal law and laws which impose pecuniary
penalties, protect the public revenue and safeguard national security.
Telecommunications Act
obliges telecommunications service
providers to keep records of certain disclosures made under
disclosures made to enforcement agencies under Chapter 4 of the
Interception
and to report annually to the Australian Communications and Media
Authority (‘ACMA’) on the number of such
disclosures.
Compliance with these requirements is monitored by the Privacy
Commissioner.
2005/6 year there were 944,367 reported
disclosures.
number rose to 1,165,391 in the 2006/07
decreased to 992,946 in the 2007/08
DISCLOSURE AND USE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS DATA FOR NATIONAL SECURITY AND
LAW ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES
As explained in the Introduction, Chapter 4 of the
Interception Act
now the repository for the exceptions that permit telecommunications data to be
disclosed or used for national security and law
enforcement purposes. The
exceptions are very significant. Of the 1,165,391 disclosures made by
telecommunications service providers
in the 2006/07 year, 845,012 – almost
73% - were made for the enforcement of the criminal law or a law imposing a
penalty or for the protection of public
2007/08 year, 663,530 of the 992,946 disclosures were made for these
article will now outline those structural features of the regime that have the
greatest impact on privacy. They are conveniently
referred to as the
‘what’, ‘who’ and ‘when’ aspects of the
DEFINITION OF ‘TELECOMMUNICATIONS DATA’ – WHAT CAN BE
ACCESSED UNDER THE REGIME?
Chapter 4 of the
Interception Act
governs access to
‘telecommunications data’ for national security and law enforcement
purposes. One of the most controversial
aspects of the scheme is definitional,
namely, what constitutes ‘telecommunications data’. The problem is
that, although
the Chapter is headed ‘Access to telecommunications
data’, that phrase is not otherwise used in the Chapter, nor is it
defined. The omission is surprising, given that the entire Chapter is devoted to
the circumstances in which such data can be lawfully
disclosed or used for
national security and law enforcement purposes. The only assistance to be
derived from the Act is to be found
in sections 171 and 172. Section 171 makes
it clear that telecommunications data consists of information or a
172 operates negatively, by providing that Divisions 3 and 4 of Chapter 4 do not
permit the disclosure of information or
documents to the extent that they
contain the contents or substance of a communication. The exclusion of
‘contents or substance’
is in deference to the other regimes under
Interception Act
which require a person who wishes to gain access to
such information for national security or law enforcement purposes to obtain
interception or stored communications
upshot is that ‘telecommunications data’ is a shorthand description
of what is left in respect of information or
a document after the contents and
substance of a communication have been removed.
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
remitted to the Senate Committee for inquiry and report, many of the submissions
made to the Committee expressed concern at the
Bill’s failure to define
the phrase or to specify what remains within the concept after ‘contents
and substance’
are excised. Given that the entire scheme hinges on the
meaning of this phrase, it has been convincingly argued that the Act creates
‘unacceptable ambiguity and uncertainty about the ‘reach’ of
the various powers’ that it confers on national
security and law
enforcement
The Attorney-General’s Department defended the status quo, arguing that
any attempt to define ‘telecommunications data’
might be redundant
in 12 months time.
The Senate Committee must have been convinced by this reasoning, as it did not
recommend that the phrase be legislatively defined.
The same position was
adopted by the Australian Law Reform Commission (‘ALRC’) in its
recent report on privacy on the
basis that it is preferable to ensure that the
legislation remains technology neutral so that it can apply to new technologies
the need for legislative
the dissenting report of the Australian Democrats recommended otherwise, arguing
that the absence of a clear definition is not
‘justified by an assertion
that this will allow the law to remain current with
technology’.
The fact that Parliament has seen fit to amend the
Interception Act
than fifty times since its enactment in 1979 is testament to its readiness to
revisit the legislation whenever the need arises.
There is no reason why this
cannot continue in relation to the meaning of ‘telecommunications
The Attorney-General’s Department also expressed the belief that the
re-location of the telecommunications data regime into
the same Act as the
interception and stored communications regimes would make it ‘clearer when
advising law enforcement and
the carriers on what exactly is content and what is
call associated data as new technologies come into
respect, the fact that these regimes are now housed in the one statute does not
Indeed, the Australian Privacy
Foundation envisaged that the re-location of the national security and law
enforcement exceptions
would blur the distinction between interception
legislation and the standard telecommunications legislation which controls
to other information such as customer details and traffic data, in a
manner adverse to
The upshot of the situation is that the only authoritative repository of
information about the meaning of ‘telecommunications
data’ is the
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access)
Amendment Bill
Explanatory Memorandum states that ‘telecommunications data is available
in relation to all forms of communications, including
both fixed and mobile
telephony services and for internet based applications including internet
browsing and voice over internet
telephony’.
Having loosely divided telecommunications into telephone based communications or
internet based
telecommunications,
the Explanatory Memorandum proceeds to state that ‘telecommunications
data’ will vary according to the type of telecommunications
For telephone-based communications, telecommunications data includes
subscriber information, the telephone numbers of the parties
involved, the time
of the call and its
It then elaborates further:
For fixed and mobile voice telephony, including voice calls, and voice-
or-text messaging services, the term includes the details
of the parties to the
communication, the date, time and duration of the communication, the device used
to send or receive the information,
and (in some cases) the locations of the
In relation to Internet based applications:
... telecommunications data includes the Internet Protocol (IP) address used
for the session, the websites visited, and the start
and finish time of each
For Internet based telecommunications, such as email, web browsing, instant
messaging, or internet voice calls (Voice over Internet
Protocol or VoIP), data
includes the sender’s and recipient/s’ Internet addresses, the
devices from which they were sent
from or to, and the time and date at which it
was sent. The information does not include content such as the subject line of
the message sent by email or instant message or the details of
Whilst there are clearly some non-controversial examples of
telecommunications data – these include billing information, which
that a communication has occurred and includes details of the time and
destination of phone calls made and received, the
duration of the calls etc, and
subscriber information, which includes details of the identity of the
subscribers to a particular
telecommunications
there are areas where the difference between ‘telecommunications
data’ and the ‘contents and substance’
of communications
remains difficult to decipher. In relation to telephone based communications,
the main area of uncertainty is the
status of mobile phone location data. In
relation to Internet based communications, uncertainty surrounds the status of
email message
headers and details of Internet sessions. Each of these problem
areas will be considered.
Mobile phone location data
It is important to establish whether mobile phone location information
constitutes ‘telecommunications data’, since the
location data
provided by mobile phones is ‘generated without any specific
intervention’ and its use ‘for security
and law enforcement purposes
is obvious’.
Its potential impact on a person’s privacy is equally self evident.
Chapter 4 of the
Interception Act
is silent about the status of mobile
phone location information. However,
section 275A
Telecommunications
states that for the purposes of
, information or a document about
the location of a mobile telephone handset or other mobile communications device
is taken to be
information or a document ‘that relates to the affairs of
the customer responsible for the handset or device’. Since
information or
documents that relate to the affairs of a person are protected by
must follow that when an exception to
is created – including the
exceptions that are contained in the
Interception Act
– access to
such information is
virtue of section 275A, this would include location information. This appears to
be the view adopted in the Explanatory Memorandum
to the Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Bill
information about the location of a person is regarded as
‘telecommunications data’, it can be disclosed to ASIO and
enforcement agencies without a warrant and without any independent
impact and consequences of this assumed state of affairs on an
individual’s privacy are considered below.
Email message headers
Many of the submissions made to the Senate Committee stressed the need to
resolve the confusion surrounding the status of email message
headers. Emails
have two parts: a body section and a header section. The body section contains
the text of the message and is clearly
content, and therefore outside the
telecommunications data
is divided into fields. The most common fields are the ‘to and from’
(or ‘sender and recipient’)
email addresses, carbon copy (Cc or Bcc)
addresses, the IP addresses, the subject line of the message, and the date it
was written.
Uncertainty surrounds what parts of the header are properly regarded as
‘telecommunications data’. While the Explanatory
Memorandum states
that email subject lines are not telecommunications
nothing explicit in the legislation to that effect and ‘it cannot be known
whether the same view would be held by
all carriers and enforcement
In the interests of protecting privacy and of preserving the integrity of the
boundaries between the various access regimes established
Interception
, it is appropriate that national security and law enforcement agencies
that seek to access the subject lines in email message headers
should have to
obtain a stored communications warrant, and that this should be made clear in
the legislation.
Electronic Frontiers Australia (‘EFA’) noted a further problem
with headers:
... email messages can carry significantly more information in the header
section than is equivalent to “traffic information”
associated with
telephone calls. For example, some (probably most) email programs enable the
end-user to create their own special
header fields in outgoing messages, in
which they can place any information they wish. These are often referred to as
headers because, to ensure a user-defined name of a field will
never conflict with standard header field names, they should be given
names commencing with
EFA maintained that there is confusion as to whether this information is
considered data or content, and argued that information made
available to
national security and law enforcement agencies under Chapter 4 in relation to
emails should be limited to the sort of
data that is available in respect of
telephone calls, namely, traffic data. This would include dates, source and
destination - that
is, sender and receiver email address and IP address etc -
but not the subject line or any other information contained in the header.
The Attorney-General’s Department disputed EFA’s claim that there
is the capacity to include information in headers which
are defined by the user:
The EFA rely on an Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) standard referred
to as Request for Comment (RFC) 822. This is an obsolete
standard that was
superseded in 2001 by RFC 2822 and the relevant header fields stated by EFA
cannot be found in the current standard.
RFC 2822 also states that these
obsolete fields ‘MUST NOT be
generated’.
EFA subsequently conceded that Internet Standard RFC 822 had been rendered
obsolete by Standard RFC 2822, but maintained that user–defined
fields) continue to be allowed to be generated by RFC 2822. Consequently, the
concern remains well
then in the interests of privacy and of maintaining clear boundaries between the
various regimes, the legislation should specify
which parts of a header
constitute telecommunications data.
Internet sessions that involve web browsing
When a person browses the world wide web, the following details will always
be generated: an Internet Protocol (‘IP’)
address, a domain name and
URLs. An IP address is a number that identifies a computer that is connected to
the internet, and enables
that device to locate other devices on the
address has been likened to a telephone number, which identifies a particular
telephone on a telephone network. A domain name
is an alphanumeric,
‘human-readable’ equivalent of an IP
is, they are names for host computers connected to the
Domain names are of no assistance to machines, which identify and communicate
with each other using IP addresses. They are strictly
used for human
convenience.
Domain name servers transfer the human readable domain name into a machine
readable IP
Uniform Resource Locators (URLs) are different again. Unlike domain names, URLs
are designed to locate resources on the web. A URL
is the address used to reach
a document, page, file, image, website or other resource on the world wide web.
It is made up of a number
of parts. The first part is a protocol identifier,
which tells the web browser what sort of server it will be communicating with
order to fetch the file/ page/
next component of a URL is the domain
might also be a path which indicates where the web page is located within the
web space of the website, that is, within that
computer. Paths take the user to
files, folders and sub-directories.
The issue that arises is whether the details that are generated when a person
engages in a web browsing internet session can be appropriately
described as
‘telecommunications
Chapter 4 of the
Interception Act
is silent about the status of such
details. To make matters worse, the Explanatory Memorandum contains
contradictory statements about
which details of an internet session are properly
regarded as telecommunications data. The quotes reproduced earlier reveal that
at one point, telecommunications data is said to include ‘the Internet
Protocol (IP) address used for the session, the websites
visited and the start
and finish time of each session’, but later, telecommunications data
pertaining to internet based communications
is said not to include the details
of Internet sessions.
While there is a general consensus that the Explanatory Memorandum is
ambiguous and needs to be clarified, the submissions made to
Committee reveal strong disagreement as to which details of internet sessions
are correctly characterised as telecommunications
data. The disagreement centres
on the extent to which the data that is captured in an internet session is
qualitatively different
from data about telephone calls and email messages.
The Attorney-General’s Department argued that IP addresses should be
regarded as telecommunications data since they do not reveal
in anything but the
most general terms the nature of the communication or the activity of the
individual at that site:
In relation to getting call-associated data regarding an IP address that can
identify a web page, that is not content because all
it does is tell a law
enforcement agency that a certain target went to a certain website. It does not
tell them any other details.
It does not tell them that they then went into
their bookings on line or via their travel agent or that they downloaded
information. It does not give them any knowledge of the substance as
to why they were on that web page. URLs are a little different
because they will
then point out the continuum of where the person actually went
The Attorney-General’s Department likened access to an IP address to
the knowledge gained from a phone number. For example,
a telephone call to the
switchboard of a large organisation shows the caller’s interest in that
organisation but will not reveal
which extension within the PABX system the
caller was connected
an IP address only indicates that an individual visited a specific internet
page; it does not indicate the activities
occurring when that site was visited.
In relation to URLs the following comments were made:
With regard to web URLs ... and how an apparatus finds that on the internet,
I will go back to the analogy of when we used to make
telephone calls; if we had
call charge records we would have a list of numbers that a person called but it
does not show content.
It is the same reason with the URL. It would have a web
server log with a list of URLs and by that nature it does not show content,
just shows a list of URLs. If an officer wants to phone those numbers and find
out what they are they could ring them systematically.
It is the same with a
computer. When they go and click that button to search that URL, it is the same
thing. The request is done
automatically from that PC to a domain name server or
system to find that URL over the Internet. But it does not actually look at
EFA took a different view. Firstly, it maintained that web site and web page
addresses can provide information about the content of
a communication; indeed,
it can be as revealing as an email subject line. Therefore, as a matter of
parity, and in the interests
of technological neutrality, if the subject lines
of emails should be excluded from the concept of ‘telecommunications
so should web page addresses. EFA also argued that once details of
web pages visited are obtained by a national security or law enforcement
this is likely to provide the agency with access to the actual content that was
communicated to the person. Of course, if
historical Internet content is being
accessed, the content that is retrieved may not be identical to that which was
accessed by the
target at an earlier point in time. However, as EFA pointed out,
it is often possible to go to a web archive to find actual content
as at a past
relation to prospective information supplied in near real time, ‘the
probability that enforcement agencies will be able
to access, at the provided
web page address, the actual content communicated to the person is vastly
increased.’
Unlike the Attorney-General’s Department, EFA took the view that access
to web browsing activity is qualitatively different
to access to telephone call
data, being more privacy invasive:
It is akin to filming individuals’ activities in a manner that records
every item they purchase in shops, every film they see
at the cinema or hire or
buy, every book and magazine they glance through and/or purchase or take out on
loan from a library and
Similar comments were made by the Australian Privacy
Foundation.
is argued that this view more closely approximates the true nature of what is
being accessed, and that accordingly, web page addresses
and details of web
pages visited should be treated as content, not as telecommunications data. This
should be made clear in the legislation.
These three problem areas do not exhaust the definitional issues that are
capable of arising. The ALRC has recently conceded that
stakeholders need a
clearer understanding of what is encompassed by the term
‘telecommunications data’. It recommended
that this clarity be
provided via guidelines issued by the Attorney-General’s Department,
rather than by legislative
definition.
However, definitional issues should be addressed in the legislation that
establishes the scheme; the provision of guidance should
not be relegated to a
government department which may have a stake in the outcome, particularly if
national security is involved.
Nicholls and Rowland make the concerning point that in the absence of a
defined meaning, law enforcement agencies themselves are likely
to shape the
meaning of the
explain that these agencies ‘represent an epistemic community’,
meaning that they ‘discuss issues with each
other and created (sic) a
consensus view which relates to all of the agencies’
The authors anticipate that this phenomenon creates a danger that the meaning of
‘telecommunications data’ will evolve
rapidly, resulting in an
‘environment where the data delivered is determined by the
This has obvious implications for individual privacy.
WHO CAN ACCESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS DATA UNDER THE REGIME?
Chapter 4 contemplates that telecommunications data can be disclosed to ASIO
and to enforcement agencies. An ‘enforcement agency’
is defined as:
the Australian
Federal Police;
a State police
force or service;
the Australian
Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity;
the Australian
Crime Commission;
the New South
Wales Crime Commission;
the Independent
Commission Against Corruption of New South Wales;
Integrity Commission of New South Wales;
the Office of
Police Integrity in Victoria;
the Crime and
Misconduct Commission of Queensland;
the Corruption
and Crime Commission of Western Australia;
an authority
established by or under a law of the Commonwealth, State or Territory that is
prescribed by the regulations to be an
enforcement agency;
organisation responsible to the Ministerial Council for Police and Emergency
Management-Police;
the CrimTrac
any body whose
functions include administering a law which imposes a pecuniary penalty or which
relates to the protection of the public
There is cause for concern about some of the organisations that are
included in this definition. The first area of controversy pertains
to paragraph
(k) of the definition, which allows for additions and expansions to the list by
regulation. In its submission to the
Senate Committee, the Law Council of
Australia objected to the fact that the executive is empowered to expand the
definition, noting
that no justification had been proffered as to why the
efficient operation of the
Interception Act
requires the executive to
have this degree of
flexibility.
The Attorney-General’s Department sought to justify the inclusion of the
power, arguing that it will allow agencies to be included
whenever their
investigative functions change to the extent that access to telecommunications
data becomes
2008, the Australian Customs Service was added to the definition of an
enforcement agency pursuant to this
A second area of controversy relates to the inclusion of CrimTrac in the
list. CrimTrac was established in 2000 by agreement between
the Commonwealth,
Territories.
describes itself as an agency that ‘assists Australian police services to
take advantages of the opportunities opened up
by forensic science, information
technology and communications
It aims to generate national approaches to law enforcement techniques and
information sharing solutions by delivering national database
systems such as a
National Child Sex Offender Register, a National Automated Fingerprint
Identification System and a National Criminal
Investigation DNA Database. The
objection to the inclusion of CrimTrac in the list is that it is neither a
criminal law enforcement
agency, nor an agency that conducts investigations into
Rather, it is in the nature of a service agency that provides databases for a
number of enforcement
that it does not perform investigatory or enforcement functions, there appears
to be no justification for empowering it to
issue authorisations for access to
telecommunications
The Attorney-General’s Department appealed to the fact that the
inclusion of CrimTrac is not new, but is simply a transfer from
Telecommunications Act
, and that until it is established that it is
inappropriate to include CrimTrac, it should remain on the list. With respect,
does not address the aforementioned concerns. Moreover, it is the inclusion
of an agency that should be justified, not its exclusion.
The Senate Committee, having considered the submissions and the response of
the Attorney-General’s Department, recommended that
CrimTrac be removed
from the definition of enforcement agency. The Committee maintained that in
light of the intrusive nature of
the authorisation powers, the default position
should be that an agency should not be included unless there is a positive
justification
the recommendation was not implemented, and CrimTrac remains in the list.
A final area of controversy pertains to the inclusion on the list of any body
whose functions include administering a law which imposes
a pecuniary penalty or
which relates to the protection of the public revenue. This would include bodies
such as the Australian Tax
Office, the Australian Securities and Investment
Commission and similar State and Territory agencies. The main concern is the
in wording of this provision during its transition from the
Telecommunications Act
Interception Act
. Under the former
Act, only agencies that were ‘responsible for’ administering a law
imposing a pecuniary penalty or
a law relating to the protection of public
revenue were included in the definition; now, such agencies need only have
functions that
‘include’ administering such laws. It has been
observed that a body can have functions that ‘include’ administering
such laws, without necessarily being ‘responsible’ for their
administration.
The extent to which the bodies added to the list as a result of this change of
wording is unclear. In light of this uncertainty,
it would be preferable to
identify these agencies by name and to justify their
Given the significant powers that are reposed in enforcement agencies under
Chapter 4 and their impact on privacy, the definition
of an ‘enforcement
agency’ should be narrowly circumscribed, and certainly should not be a
matter for conjecture.
WHEN CAN TELECOMMUNICATIONS DATA BE ACCESSED UNDER THE REGIME?
This section will critically analyse the precise circumstances in which
telecommunications data – whatever that phrase may mean
- can be accessed
by ASIO and enforcement agencies for national security and law enforcement
purposes. Divisions 3 and 4 of Chapter
Interception Act
the circumstances in which
Telecommunications Act
do not prohibit the
of telecommunications data -
whether in the form of information or a document - for national security or law
enforcement purposes.
Division 5 sets out the circumstances in which these
provisions do not prohibit the
of such data.
Chapter 4 makes provision for two types of permitted disclosure: voluntary
disclosure and authorised disclosure. Both the voluntary
and authorised
disclosure provisions contemplate that telecommunications data can be lawfully
disclosed to ASIO and ‘enforcement
agencies’. In respect of
authorised disclosure, a distinction is drawn between data that is in existence
at the time of the
request – that is, historical data – and
prospective data. More stringent restrictions are imposed on access to the
VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE
Sections 276
Telecommunications Act
do not prohibit
the voluntary disclosure by a person of information or a document to ASIO if the
disclosure is in connection with
the performance of ASIO’s
similar vein, information and documents can be disclosed to an enforcement
agency if the disclosure is reasonably necessary for
the enforcement of the
criminal law or a law imposing a pecuniary penalty, or for the protection of the
public revenue.
The person making the disclosure would be one of the persons referred to in
sections 276
, most likely a carrier or CSP. The voluntary
disclosure provisions do not apply if the Director-General of Security, the
Deputy-Director
of Security or an officer or employee of ASIO, or, in the case
of an enforcement agency, a ‘relevant staff
requests the holder to disclose the information or document, since other
provisions deal with the disclosure of information pursuant
authorisation.
The requirement that voluntary disclosures must be unsolicited is intended to
prevent agencies from pressuring carriers into supplying
them with information
rather than utilise the authorisation
The voluntary disclosure provisions cater to the situation where an employee
of a carrier or CSP encounters information in the course
of his or her duties
that the employee regards as being ‘in connection with’ ASIO’s
functions or ‘reasonably
necessary’ for the enforcement of the
criminal law etc. It permits the disclosure to be made, notwithstanding that a
has not emanated from those bodies. The ALRC observed that the provision
creates difficulties for employees who do not believe they
are in a position to
make an effective judgment as to whether a disclosure is ‘in connection
with ...’ or ‘reasonably
necessary for
also creates the possibility of oversupply, meaning that an employee might
disclose more information than is necessary for ASIO
and enforcement agencies to
perform their
has implications for privacy. However, despite these risks, it is not advocated
that provision for voluntary disclosure be removed,
as it is important that
carriers and CSPs who come across vital information be free to divulge it.
Rather, it is preferable to limit
the risk of oversupply, and the consequent
intrusion on privacy, by means of controls. Suggestions as to how this can be
include: a proposal by the Australian Democrats that there should be a
positive obligation on ASIO and enforcement agencies to warn
employees that they
are not legally obliged to make voluntary
disclosures;
recommendation by the Blunn Review that the provisions be reviewed with a view
to clarifying the objective and better identifying
the process to be
recommendation by the ALRC that the Attorney-General’s Department develop
guidelines as to the circumstances in which
voluntary disclosure is
AUTHORISED DISCLOSURE OF EXISTING INFORMATION OR DOCUMENTS
Notwithstanding
Telecommunications Act
certain persons within ASIO and the enforcement agencies are empowered to
authorise telecommunications service providers to disclose
specified information
or documents that were in existence at the time the person from whom the
disclosure is sought received notification
of the authorisation.
In the case of ASIO, the persons who can make such authorisations are the
Director-General of Security, the Deputy Director-General
of Security, or an
officer or employee of the Organisation who has been approved in writing by the
Director-General to authorise
disclosures to be
disclosure can be authorised, the authorising person must be satisfied that the
disclosure would be ‘in connection
with’ the performance by the
Organisation of its
These functions are set out in the
Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Act
In the case of an enforcement agency, an ‘authorised officer’ may
authorise the disclosure of specified information or
documents only if he or she
is satisfied that the disclosure is reasonably necessary for the enforcement of
the criminal law or a
law imposing a pecuniary penalty, or for the protection of
Although there is no express nexus with the agency’s functions, this is
probably implicit in the reasonable necessity requirement.
‘reasonably necessary’ appears to impose a higher threshold than the
‘in connection with’ that
is required before a disclosure to ASIO
can be authorised. Presumably this reflects a view that a lower threshold is
appropriate
in cases involving national security. An authorised officer of an
enforcement agency is defined as the incumbent or acting head or
deputy head of
the agency, or a person who holds or is acting in a particular management
position or office in the agency that has
been designated by the head of the
agency as an authorised
The requirement that the authorising officer merely be
‘satisfied’ that a disclosure would be ‘in connection with
..’ or ‘reasonably necessary for ...’ has attracted criticism.
The Queensland Council for Civil Liberties noted
that the legislation fails to
specify precise criteria that would entitle the authorising officer to be
satisfied that the disclosure
would be in connection with the performance of
omission enables the authorising person to give the broadest interpretation to
ASIO’s functions. The same point can be
made in relation to enforcement
agencies. This state of affairs makes it practically impossible for a person
whose telecommunications
data is or was sought by ASIO or an enforcement agency
to contest the
disclosure.
AUTHORISED DISCLOSURE OF PROSPECTIVE INFORMATION OR DOCUMENTS
Separate provision is made for the disclosure of prospective information on
an ongoing basis. Despite the description of the information
‘prospective’, in reality, the information would be delivered or
streamed to ASIO or an agency in near real time.
It is prospective only in the
sense that it is not in existence at the time the authorisation is made. The
information might consist
of information about a person’s web browsing
activities,
might concern the real time location of a phone or
need to differentiate between historical and prospective data is justified in
the Explanatory Memorandum as ‘a reflection
of the advances in technology,
which enables the use of telecommunications data to provide location
information’.
A prospective authorisation is qualitatively different to a request to produce
information that is already kept as part of the provider’s
operational
system. It is essentially a request to the carriers and CSPs to
‘proactively monitor their customers and intentionally
store every piece
of information they are able to
In deference to the higher privacy implications of accessing prospective data,
more restrictive access conditions are imposed. This
section of the article will
describe the prospective information regime, consider the adequacy of the
in-built privacy protections,
and offer suggestions as to how the current regime
might be improved. Ultimately, it will be argued that the privacy protections
not meet the objections to the scheme, and that in view of the fact that access
to prospective data is more akin to real time
interception and
surveillance,
rather than traffic data in the customary sense of the word, access to such data
should be procured via a warrant.
Authorised disclosure to ASIO
Sections 276
Telecommunications Act
are expressed
not to prohibit the disclosure of prospective information or documents if the
disclosure is covered by an
authorisation.
Due to the greater privacy implications involved in accessing prospective data,
an authorisation can be issued only by the Director-General
of Security, the
Deputy Director-General of Security or certain other high ranking officers or
employees of the
Organisation.
The authorisation can sanction the disclosure of specified information or
documents that come into existence during the period for
which the authorisation
is in force, provided the authorising person is satisfied that the disclosure
would be in connection with
the performance of the Organisation’s
authorisation comes into force when the person from whom the disclosure is
sought is notified of its existence, and ends at the
time specified in the
authorisation, which must be no longer than 90 days from the day it was made,
unless it is revoked
authorisation must be revoked if it is no longer
would be the case if the reasons for granting it no longer exist. The
authorisation can also sanction the disclosure of information
or documents that
were already in existence before the authorisation came into force, thereby
avoiding the need for a separate authorisation
to be made for access to
In a submission to the Senate Committee, the Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security (‘IGIS’) proposed that his
office should
have a role in examining authorisations by ASIO to access prospective
telecommunications
an independent statutory position created by the
Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security Act
(Cth) which reviews a number of security
agencies, including ASIO, to ensure that they are held accountable for their
with the law, the propriety of their activities and their respect for
human rights.
In discharging these duties, IGIS is empowered to conduct inspection
activities.
Inspector-General proposed that as part of his office’s inspection
program, he should examine requests for access to prospective
data to ensure
that there is sufficient justification for the authorisations and that any
procedural requirements imposed by the
Communications Access Co-ordinator are
Committee agreed, and recommended that the Inspector-General incorporate such
oversight into his regular inspection
Authorised disclosure to enforcement agencies
Prospective information can be lawfully disclosed pursuant to an
authorisation made by an authorised officer of a criminal law-enforcement
criminal law-enforcement agency includes all the agencies that come within the
definition of enforcement agency except: a body
or organisation responsible to
the Ministerial Council for Police and Emergency Management-Police; the CrimTrac
Agency; or any body
whose functions include administering a law imposing a
pecuniary penalty or administering a law relating to the protection of the
public revenue.
The more restrictive control over who may authorise the disclosure of
prospective information is said to be a concession to the greater
implications involved in accessing such data. An authorisation can be made in
respect of specified information or documents
that come into existence during
the period for which the authorisation is in
authorisation comes into force when the person from whom the disclosure is
sought is notified of it, and ends no more than 45
days from when it is made,
unless it is revoked earlier, which must be done if disclosure is no longer
Prospective authorisations cannot be issued unless the authorised officer is
satisfied that disclosure is reasonably necessary for
the investigation of an
offence against a law of the Commonwealth, State or Territory that is punishable
by imprisonment for at least
Moreover, before the authorisation is made, the authorised officer must have
regard to the extent to which the privacy of any person(s)
would be likely to be
interfered with by the
disclosure.
Interestingly, the same requirement is not imposed on ASIO officers seeking
access to prospective data, although the IGIS would be
well placed to make an
assessment of the regard had to privacy by authorised officers of ASIO as part
of his inspection program.
This is the only occasion in Chapter 4 in which
interference with privacy is expressly required to be taken into account. Given
the stated primary raison d’etre of the
Interception Act
protect privacy, it is unclear why privacy is not required to be taken into
account in respect of all authorisations.
The legislation does not specify how this responsibility pertaining to
ought to be explicit legislative guidance as to how this obligation should be
discharged.
Attorney-General’s Department disagreed, claiming that privacy
considerations ‘will vary enormously according to
the unique circumstances
of each situation’, and ‘may include the relationship between the
seriousness of the offences
being investigated, the value of the information
likely to be obtained, and the extent to which accessing this information would,
in the circumstances, breach an individual’s
The Explanatory Memorandum suggests that having regard to privacy would involve
an assessment of the value of the information sought,
compared to the privacy of
the user(s) of the telecommunications service(s) in
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) (Requirements for
Authorisations, Notifications and Revocations) Determination 2007
which lays down procedural requirements relating to authorisations, requires an
authorisation of this nature to include a statement
that the authorised officer
‘had regard to how much the privacy of any person(s) would be likely to be
interfered with by the
disclosure and is satisfied that the impact on privacy is
outweighed by the seriousness of the conduct being investigated’.
requirement imposes an obligation on the authorising officer to conduct a
balancing process between privacy and the expected
benefits to the criminal
investigation in question. However, it does not require the authorising
officer’s ‘satisfaction’
to be based on reasonable grounds;
nor does it contain a list of specific factors that must be taken into account
in the process
of reaching a conclusion. Without these, the process can be
easily reduced to one of box
Accordingly, it is argued that a set of specific criteria should be included in
the legislation to which the authorising officer
must have regard and must
THE MOBILE PHONE AS TRACKING DEVICE – USING THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS
DATA REGIME FOR SURVEILLANCE PURPOSES
Although the
Interception Act
imposes stricter controls over access to
prospective information in light of the greater encroachment on privacy, these
do not counteract all the problems inherent in the prospective
authorisation scheme. As far as telephone based communications are
the prospective data most likely to be sought will be the location information
generated by a mobile
dangers associated with this in terms of its impact on privacy will now be
considered. However, before doing so, it should be
noted that other objections
can be raised to the prospective data regime. While these will not be considered
in this article, two
are worthy of mention. First, there is a concern that the
access scheme for prospective telecommunications data weakens the protection
conferred by the
Surveillance Devices Act
(Cth) and the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
. Second, it has
been suggested that a CSP may not be able to give effect to prospective
information authorisations in relation to
email traffic information without
engaging in unlawful interception.
The tracking technologies
Technology is constantly improving the accuracy of the mobile phone as a
tracking device. As location technologies become increasingly
accurate, the
greater will be their potential to track an individual’s activities not
just their general location. The implications
for that individual’s
the appropriateness
of a scheme which facilitates access to such information
without a warrant or any other form of rigorous, independent oversight.
Currently, there are several technologies that can be used to determine the
position of a particular mobile phone user. They include
cell identification and
The cell identification system relies on the cellular signal emitted by the
mobile phone and picked up by the mobile phone towers
to compute the position of
signal passes from cell to cell as the phone moves from place to place whenever
the phone is switched on, not just when the
user is engaged in a call. This
technology ‘calculates mobile location from network available
information’.
The cell identification system has its shortcomings. For example, it only gives
an approximate location, since it can only track
people to towers. Accordingly,
the larger a cell area, the less accurate is the location information. Moreover,
the signal can be
easily interrupted by hills and buildings. However, despite
its limitations, this system has proven successful for law enforcement
Notable examples include the minor speeding offence that turned into serious
criminal charges against former Federal Court
judge Marcus
trial of Ian Huntley for the murder of two girls in Soham in the United
The other main tracking technology is ‘built in GPS’, which is a
global positioning system built in to the mobile phone
itself. It is a hand set
based geo-location technology which is becoming a standard feature in most new
mobile phones.
Like an ordinary mobile phone, a GPS receiver relies on radio waves, but instead
of using towers on the ground it communicates with
a network of 26 satellites
that orbit the
determine a phone’s location, a GPS receiver has to determine the
locations of at least three satellites above the phone
and where the phone is in
relation to those
satellites.
Using trilateration, the receiver can determine the phone’s location to
within a few metres, based on the time it takes for
signals to get to and from
the satellites.
Once the handset has calculated its own position, the calculation is sent to the
A phone with a stand alone GPS receiver can struggle to lock on to the GPS
satellite signal in a central business district or inside
a building, and can
take several minutes to establish a location fix, especially when the phone is
first switched
GPS is designed to address this problem. Assisted GPS is the name given to a
system whereby an outside source (an assistance
server), on request, helps the
GPS receiver inside the phone to establish a location
assistance server has vastly superior computing power than the built in GPS
receiver, and boosts the performance of what the
receiver could do on its own,
both in terms of the time needed to determine a location using GPS and the
accuracy of the mobile phone
information.
communicate with an assistance server, the mobile phone must be able to access
the internet, as the assistance server is on the
internet. The assistance data
goes from the internet to the cellular network to the mobile phone. Assisted GPS
is therefore a combination
of network based and hand set based location
The objections
Assuming location information constitutes ‘telecommunications
data’, ASIO and criminal law-enforcement agencies are likely
to authorise
access to such information held by telecommunications service providers under
the Chapter 4 regime. Many of the submissions
to the Senate Committee argued
that access to prospective mobile telephone data should be subject to more
stringent control than
mere authorisation by officers in ASIO or a criminal-law
enforcement agency, albeit that the authorised officers are high ranking
Of particular concern is the fact that a mobile phone that a person carries
voluntarily can be used to track that person without
the law enforcement agency
having to go to the trouble of covertly installing a tracking device on the
person’s property or
body. The dissenting report of the Australian
Democrats stated that ‘a person’s mobile phone ... should not be
a surrogate tracking and tracing technology for people in the absence of
any countervailing public interest, significant independent
oversight and public
reporting’.
The Democrats recommended that a warrant should be required for access to
location information. In similar vein, EFA argued that
‘a warrant should
be required similar to the existing surveillance device warrants in the
Commonwealth and the various states,
or with similar conditions attached as the
stored communications
The Attorney-General’s Department responded to these arguments by
appealing to the fact that the power to access location information
was already
extant under the
Telecommunications Act
; the only difference is that
Chapter 4 explicitly acknowledges that the sought after telecommunications data
can be historical or
prospective. As regards prospective data, the Department
argued that the concerns about the heightened invasion of privacy are allayed
the more stringent controls on access outlined earlier, namely, the tighter
limits on the agencies that can access prospective
information, the stricter
time limitations and the restriction to more serious offences. However, this
does not meet the objections
outlined above. In light of the fact that
prospective location information is tantamount to surveillance, access to it
procured only via a warrant, and, as is the case with the interception
and stored communications regimes, in deciding whether to
issue a warrant, the
issuing authority should be required to have regard to the degree to which the
interfered with.
USE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS DATA CONNECTED WITH PROVISION OF ACCESS
Division 5 provides that
sections 276
Telecommunications
do not prohibit information or a document from being
a person - as distinct from being
– provided that, by
reason of Division 3 (access to telecommunications data by ASIO) or Division 4
(access to telecommunications
data by enforcement agencies), the disclosure of
the information or document by the telecommunications service provider was
and the use is for the purposes of, or connected with, the lawful
disclosure.
SECONDARY DISCLOSURE AND USE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS DATA
The primary disclosure and use provisions regulate the disclosure of
information by telecommunications providers to ASIO or enforcement
agencies, and
control the use to which that information can be put by the recipient agency. In
contrast, Division 6 focuses on secondary
disclosure and use, that is, on the
subsequent disclosure and use of telecommunications data that has been lawfully
obtained by ASIO
or an enforcement agency under the primary disclosure
provisions.
such information be passed on to other bodies by the recipient of the primary
disclosure and used by them?
INFORMATION DISCLOSED TO ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES
It is an offence for an enforcement agency to use or disclose
telecommunications data it has received by reason of a lawful
disclosure.
However, this general prohibition on the secondary use and disclosure of
information by enforcement agencies is qualified by a number
of exceptions. The
prohibition is expressed not to apply to disclosures to ASIO where the
disclosure is reasonably necessary for
the performance by ASIO of its
does it apply to disclosures or uses that are reasonably necessary for the
enforcement of the criminal law or a law imposing
a pecuniary penalty, or for
the protection of public
example, if, during an investigation into a taxation fraud, the Australian
Taxation Office obtains telecommunications data that
concerns drug trafficking,
the Australian Taxation Office could lawfully disclose this information to a
relevant police agency to
investigate.
This concession is significant, as it means that the information can be used in
a different investigation from that for which it
was initially sought.
There is disagreement as to whether these lawful secondary disclosures are
effectively limited to situations where the agency receiving
the secondary
disclosure could have obtained the information directly from the carrier or CSP
under the primary disclosure rules.
The view of the then Attorney-General is
that secondary disclosures can be made only to agencies that could have accessed
the information
directly from the telecommunication provider under the primary
provisions are justifiable because all they are doing is permitting agencies to
give information to another agency in circumstances
where the recipient agency
could have accessed the information itself, the advantage being that the
recipient agency may not have
been aware that the information existed or, if it
did become aware, it may no longer exist on the carrier’s
contrast, EFA argues that, at least in relation to prospective information, the
secondary disclosures are not subject to the same
limitations as primary
disclosures and gives the following example:
In relation to criminal law-enforcement agencies ....
secondary disclosure and use of “prospective” information for
purposes for which the information could not have
been disclosed/obtained in the
first place ie: secondary disclosure/use in relation to investigation of
offences with a penalty of
less than 3 years. The authorisation of
initial/primary disclosure of prospective information is restricted to when
reasonably necessary
for the investigation of an offence that is punishable by
imprisonment for at least 3 years and before making the authorisation the
authorised officer must have regard to how much the privacy of any person or
persons would be likely to be interfered with by the
disclosure.
EFA argued that
should be amended to prohibit secondary disclosure
and use of information except under the same conditions as primary disclosure
The Law Council of Australia identified another anomaly in the secondary
disclosure and use provisions as regards authorisations for
prospective information. It is clear that Chapter 4 does not permit agencies
such as the Australian Taxation Office to
issue authorisations for access to
prospective information as they are not criminal law-enforcement agencies. Nor
can such authorisations
be issued for the purpose of enforcing a law that
imposes a pecuniary remedy or the protection of public revenue, as they can be
made only for the investigation of serious criminal offences. These protections
would be meaningless if the information can be shared
amongst these agencies by
way of a secondary disclosure for a variety of purposes. Yet the Law Council
maintains that
allows such sharing to legally occur. It recommended that
be amended to prevent criminal law-enforcement agencies from disclosing
prospective information to an agency that cannot itself authorise
prospective information or from disclosing prospective information for a purpose
which is not itself capable of providing
grounds for such an
authorisation.
INFORMATION DISCLOSED TO ASIO
Interception Act
does not prohibit the secondary disclosure and
use of information that has been lawfully disclosed to ASIO under Division 3. At
blush, the consequence appears to be that ASIO is free to disclose
information – including prospective telecommunications data
person for any purpose, including secondary disclosures to agencies that are not
empowered by Chapter 4 to access that information
directly from carriers and
the communication of intelligence information by ASIO officers, employees and
contractors is regulated by the
. That Act imposes a general
obligation of secrecy, but outlines a number of circumstances in which
information can be lawfully disclosed
authorities.
OPERATIONAL ASPECTS OF THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS DATA REGIME: PROCESS,
OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY
Up to now, this article has focussed on the boundaries of the
telecommunications data regime – the ‘what’, ‘who’
and ‘when’ questions. Other objections to the scheme pertain not to
its scope, but to its operational aspects.
Responsibility for formulating requirements for the procedural aspects of
authorisations, notifications of authorisations and revocations
authorisations is reposed in the Communications Access Co-ordinator
(‘CAC’), which is a statutory position created
Interception
The CAC is empowered under Chapter 4 to determine these requirements
following consultation with ACMA and the Privacy
Commissioner.
The requirements are contained in the
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) (Requirements for Authorisations, Notifications and Revocations)
Determination 2007
. For the most part, the Determination simply specifies
the information that must be included in authorisations, notifications and
revocations
provides that they must be signed by their
The main objection to the process is that insufficient provision is made for
oversight ‘before the event’, that is, before
the telecommunications
data is disclosed. Oversight cannot be entrusted to the individuals whose
telecommunications data is targeted,
as they are unlikely to be aware that ASIO
or enforcement agencies are seeking access to their data. Accordingly, they are
a position to take steps to ensure that their privacy is adequately
respected and the legislation is complied with. An independent
therefore needed to ensure that the scheme operates properly and according to
law. However, no ‘voice’ is built
in to the authorisation process
system which can speak or act on behalf of individuals whose data is sought to
be accessed.
Too much is left to the good faith of the agencies.
The fact that no warrant is required to access telecommunications data means
that there is no involvement or oversight in the authorisation
members of the judiciary or the AAT. This is to be compared with the
interception and stored communications regimes, where
a warrant is
it might be justifiable to dispense with the need for a warrant for access to
historical telecommunications data on the basis
that it does not involve content
and consists of what has traditionally been regarded as traffic data, it is not
appropriate to permit
access to prospective data on the authorisation of a
public servant. In this respect, the scheme appears to be beset by a lack of
parity with the interception and stored access regimes. It has also been
observed that this approach sets Australia apart from the
United States and
European countries, where a warrant is required for access to location based
information.
However, it should be conceded that the warrant regime that applies to
interception and stored communications has its own problems.
First, very few
federal court judges have agreed to be nominated as eligible
hesitancy appears to be attributable to
which the High Court held that the power to issue warrants is not part of the
judicial power of the Commonwealth, but an exercise
of executive power. Although
the High Court proceeded to hold that judges could undertake this function in
their personal capacity
provided certain conditions were
judges have been reluctant to be nominated. Accordingly, the vast majority of
warrants are issued by members of the AAT rather than
by members of the
Second the statistics reveal that when an interception or stored communications
warrant is sought, it is almost never refused, thus
indicating that law
enforcement and national security considerations will almost always trump
led Bronitt and Stellios to claim that the warrant system that governs
interceptions and access to stored communications is
not necessarily an
‘effective bulwark against the arbitrary intrusion into
One way in which concerns about the interests of individuals might be
addressed is by introducing an independent Public Interest Monitor
(‘PIM’) into the regime, such as exists in Queensland under the
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act
that Act, the role of the PIM is to monitor applications for, and the use of,
(inter alia) surveillance device warrants, retrieval
warrants and covert search
particular, the PIM monitors compliance by police officers with the requirements
pertaining to applications for warrants and appears
at any hearings of an
application to a judge or magistrate for a warrant to test the validity of the
application by presenting questions
for the applicant to answer, by examining or
cross examining any witnesses and by making submissions on the appropriateness
of granting
application.
The PIM also gathers statistical information on the use and effectiveness of the
warrants, and makes annual reports to the
In their Supplementary Report on the
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Amendment Bill 2007
, the Australian Democrats recommended that the
Queensland PIM model should be incorporated into the telecommunications data
The Democrats perceived that a PIM would act as an independent umpire
who would ‘balance necessary, lawful, and proportionate
access by law
enforcement agencies to telecommunications data with the public’s right to
communicate free from
surveillance’.
The suggestion has merit, irrespective of whether a warrant system is
introduced. Under the current system, the PIM could have a
consultation role
with agencies before they apply for an authorisation for historical or
prospective data, or, in the event that
a warrant system is introduced for
access to prospective data, the PIM could be permitted to appear whenever an
application for such
a warrant is made to an issuing authority in order to
question the applicant, cross examine any witnesses and make submissions to
issuing authority. The Democrats’ recommendations for a warrant system for
prospective telecommunications data and/or for
the appointment of a PIM were not
adopted by the government when the draft legislation was being considered.
The telecommunications data regime contains certain provisions that are
designed to secure accountability ‘after the event’.
For example,
the heads of enforcement agencies are required to retain authorisations for
historical and prospective information for
a period of three
report annually to the Minister on the number of authorisations
reporting requirements are imposed on ASIO under Chapter
The Minister
must prepare a report that contains the information set out in each report made
by the head of the enforcement agency,
and must table this report in
Parliament.
None of these reports can enable a person to be
identified,
which is entirely appropriate given that they ultimately become a matter of
public record.
Certain criticisms can be made of these ‘back
end’ accountability
Firstly, Chapter 4 does not require the destruction of records where the
information obtained pursuant to an authorisation is irrelevant
or is no longer
likely to be required for a permitted purpose. This is to be compared with the
situation that exists in relation
to interceptions and stored communications,
where destruction of records is required in certain
circumstances.
While it might be argued that the primary use provision in s 181 creates an
equivalent protection, since it effectively prohibits
the use of data that is
not relevant to an investigation, making a destruction requirement unnecessary,
in the interests of privacy,
and in order to achieve parity with the
interception and stored communications regimes, such information should be
required to be
problem with this recommendation is that an agency can conclude that information
provided to it pursuant to an authorisation
is not relevant to an investigation
only if the question is considered and a view is formed. Accordingly, there is a
need for a complementary
requirement that there be a regular review of
information.
Secondly, enforcement agencies need only report annually to the Minister on
of authorisations made during that
reports are not required to contain any details of the authorisations, although
the Minister is able to request that a report
set out ‘any other
Nor are they required to include details of secondary disclosures; hence there
are no statistics on the extent to which telecommunications
data is passed on.
Moreover, the regime does not confer on anyone an inspection role in relation to
authorisations.
This is in contrast to the interception and stored communications regimes, where
the Commonwealth Ombudsman is given a large degree
of oversight. In relation to
interceptions, the Commonwealth Ombudsman is required to inspect the records of
interceptions that must
be kept by Commonwealth agencies in order to ascertain
the extent to which these agencies have complied with obligations pertaining
record destruction and the keeping of records and documents connected with the
issue of interception warrants. The Ombudsman must
report the results of the
inspection to the Minister on an annual
the record keeping requirements imposed on the agencies are so detailed, an
inspection is likely to reveal any deficiencies
in procedure. The
Ombudsman’s report must include particulars of any such deficiencies that
impact on the integrity of the
telecommunications interception regime and
particulars of any remedial action, if any, taken or proposed to be taken to
address those
deficiencies.
Inspections that expose any other breaches of the
Interception Act
also be the subject of a
inspections and reports must be made in respect of stored communications in
order to ascertain, so far as is practicable,
the extent of compliance with the
record keeping and destruction
requirements.
The relevant State or Territory Ombudsman generally undertakes this function for
State and Territory
ensure parity, consideration should be given to whether the Ombudsman should be
given a similar role over the telecommunications
data regime.
This article has examined the telecommunications data regime contained in
Chapter 4 of the
Interception Act
. Overall, the greatest objection to the
regime pertains to its impact on privacy, particularly in relation to
prospective data. In
light of the fact that prospective data includes location
data, the regime essentially sanctions surveillance of an individual’s
movements. This is a far cry from the traditional notion of telecommunications
data as basic traffic information. While to date,
the use of the prospective
data regime has been
potential exists for criminal law-enforcement agencies to make increased use of
these powers in the future.
As it currently stands, the Chapter 4 regime errs on the side of liberality
rather than caution in facilitating access to telecommunications
Suggestions have been made throughout this article as to how the regime could be
reconfigured to accord more protection to
advocate tightening the scope of the boundaries of the regime – the
‘who’ and ‘when’ questions.
Suggestions have also been made as to how the operational aspects of the scheme
should be reconfigured so that an independent voice either oversees the
operation of the regime, or at least represents the interests
of individuals
whose data is sought to be accessed.
Calls for a review of the operation of the regime have come from a number of
sources, including the Senate
to be hoped that a review does eventuate, and that full consideration is given
to the need to amend the regime to restore an
appropriate level of personal
* BA, LLB(Hons)(Melb), LLM (Melb), Senior Lecturer in Law, Faculty of Law,
Monash University. My sincere thanks go to Dr David Lindsay
for his critical
comments on an earlier draft of this article, and also to the anonymous
New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access)
Amendment Bill 2007
11 July 2007.
N Selvadurai, P
Gillies and Md R Islam, ‘Maintaining an Effective Legislative Framework
for Telecommunication Interception
in Australia’
S Bronitt and J
Stellios ‘Telecommunications Interception in Australia: Recent Trends and
Regulatory Prospects’
Telecommunications Policy
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
(Cth) Chapter
This phrase has
been judicially considered in the context of telephone tapping in a number of
cases. See, eg:
Miller v Miller
[1978] HCA 44
(1978) 141 CLR 269
R v Curran and
[1983] VicRp 77
[1983] 2 VR 133
(1984) 57 ALR 543
Investigating Committee of New South Wales
(1986) 7 NSWLR
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
. Provision is made for warrants to be issued by the Director-General of
Security in emergencies:
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Eligible judges can be drawn from the Federal Court of Australia, the Family
Court of Australia or the Federal Magistrates Court.
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
. The Deputy President, full time and certain part time senior members,
and members of the AAT can be nominated by the Minister to
issue warrants:
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
To be eligible for nomination, part-time senior members and members of the AAT
must have been enrolled as a legal practitioner of
the High Court, the
Federal Court or a State or Territory Supreme Court for no less than five
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
(Cth) Chapter 3.
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Starey, ‘Getting the Message: A Comparative Analysis of Laws Regulating
Law Enforcement Agencies’ Access to
Stored Communications in Australia and
Media and Arts Law Review
, 24-26. It appears
that Instant Messaging systems fall outside the stored communications regime: N
Selvadurai, P Gillies and R Islam,
‘Maintaining an Effective Legislative
Framework for Telecommunication Interception in Australia’
, 42. See also note 88.
Explanatory
Memorandum, Telecommunications (Interception) Amendment Bill 2006 4. Access to
communications that are stored on a person’s
mobile phone or computer can
be procured pursuant to other lawful access arrangements, such as a general
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Section 109
expands the authority of an interception warrant to cover stored
communications provided the warrant would have authorised interception
communication if it were still passing over a telecommunications system.
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
(definition of “issuing authority”). The Minister can nominate the
Deputy President and certain full or part time senior
members, and members of
the AAT to issue warrants:
Telecommunications (Interception and Access)
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
(2)(a),(d).
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
(Cth) Chapter 4.
The boundary between the substance of a communication and information about a
communication is not easily defined.
This issue is addressed at length
The national
security and law enforcement exceptions were contained in
Telecommunications Act
A.S. Blunn,
Report of the Review of the Regulation of Access to Communications
(2005) 6 “Findings”.
recommendation (i). See also: Parliament of Australia, Senate Standing Committee
on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Amendment Bill 2007
[Provisions]
, Report (2007) [1.3].
Telecommunications Act
preserves the exceptions in
Chapter 4 of the
Interception Act
part, telecommunications service providers are required to develop procedures to
ensure that the communications that are
carried over their systems are capable
of being intercepted and accessed, thus enabling them to comply with requests
for access from
national security and law enforcement agencies. These matters
are addressed in Chapter 5 of the
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Act
(Cth) but are not considered in this article.
for example, Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs,
Report of Inquiry into the
Security Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Bill
[No 2] and Related Bills - Interim Report
(May 2002); B Golder and G
Williams, ‘Balancing National Security and Human Rights: Assessing the
Legal Response of Common
Law Nations to the Threat of Terrorism’ (2006)
Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis
43. Of course there will be
differences of opinion amongst these proponents as to how an appropriate balance
L Zedner, ‘Securing Liberty in the Face of Terror: Reflections from
Criminal Justice’
(2005) 32(4)
Journal of Law and Society
`Emergency and Anti-Terrorist Powers 9/11: USA and UK'
International Law Journal
‘Securing Liberty in the Face of Terror: Reflections from Criminal
(2005) 32(4)
Journal of Law and Society
Simon Bronitt
and James Stellios, ‘Regulating Telecommunications Interception &
Access: A Seachange in Surveillance Laws’
in Michael and Michael (eds)
Social Implications of Information Security Measures on Citizens and
‘Electronic Surveillance, Human Rights and Criminal Justice’
[1997] AUJlHRights 10
Australian Journal of Human Rights
Thomas, `Emergency and Anti-Terrorist Powers 9/11: USA and UK'
Fordham International Law Journal
[1928] USSC 133
(1928). See also:
Goldman v United States
[1942] USSC 85
On Lee v United States
[1952] USSC 87
[1967] USSC 262
[1967] USSC 262
, 351 (1967) per Stewart J.
perception of the Fourth Amendment as a species of privacy protection did not
begin with the
case: Ken Gormley, ‘One Hundred Years of
Wisconsin Law Review
1335 (1992). Rather, it has its roots
in the case of
Boyd v United States
[1886] USSC 48
(1886) and the seminal
article by Warren and Brandeis, in which privacy was famously described as
‘the right to be let alone’:
Samuel D Warren and Louis D Brandeis,
‘The Right to Privacy’
Harvard Law Review
Brandeis, who was a Harvard law professor at the time the article was published,
was subsequently appointed to the United
States Supreme Court. He sat on the
case, but dissented. However his dissenting judgment ‘laid
the groundwork for the constitutionalization of his notion of privacy’:
Ken Gormley, ‘One Hundred Years of Privacy’
Wisconsin Law
[1967] USSC 262
, 361 (1967).
The Supreme
Court of Canada has also adopted the notion of a reasonable expectation of
Canadian Charter of Rights and
which states that ‘everyone has the right to be secure
against unreasonable search or seizure’:
Hunter (Director of
Investigation and Research, Combines Investigation Branch) v Southam Inc
SCR 145 (1984).
example, the
Human Rights (Sexual Conduct) Act 1994
Broadcasting Corporation v Lenah Game Meats Pty Ltd
(2001) 208 CLR 199
Grosse v Purves
[2003] QDC 151
[2007] VCC 281.
Giller v Procopets
[2008] VSCA 236
, which may have halted its
Australian Law reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy
Law and Practice
Report 108 (2008) Recommendation 74-1.
Before 1960,
telecommunications interception was an executive act subject to prime
ministerial directions which governed the exercise
of executive power:
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 5 May 1960
1423-4 (Sir Garfield Barwick, Acting Minister for External Affairs and
Attorney-General); T
Regulation of Interception of Communications in
Selected Jurisdictions
http://www.legco.gov.hk/yr04-05/english/sec/library/0405rp02e.pdf
For example,
Telephonic Communications (Interception) Act
permitted interceptions to be carried out, with a warrant, for national security
purposes, but not for general law enforcement
purposes. Subsequently, the
Telecommunications (Interception) Act
permitted interception
as a means of investigating crime, but initially only in relation to serious
narcotic offences.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 5 May 1960, 1423-4. See
Edelsten v Investigating Committee of New South Wales
R v Edelsten
(1990) 21 NSWLR 542
v Keelty, Australian Federal Police Commissioner
(2004) FCA 1688
Bradley Holland, ‘Overtaking Privacy in the Telecommunications Transit
(2004) 11(6)
The renaming
Telecommunications (Interception) Act
was effected by
Telecommunications (Interception) Amendment Act
Starey, above
n 13, 28. These issues are currently being canvassed in the United States in the
context of determining the extent
to which individuals have a legitimate
expectation of privacy under the Fourth Amendment: Daniel R Sovocool and Kristin
‘Tracking a User’s Location Via Cell Phone’
http://www.ipfrontline.com/depts/article.asp?id=9633&deptid=5
at 1 February 2009.
A.S. Blunn,
Report of the Review of the Regulation of Access to Communications
(2005) [1.4.2].
For example,
stored communications warrants can be issued in relation to less serious
criminal offences than interception warrants.
example: Senator Stott Despoja, Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
Senate, 28 March 2006, 85; Simon Bronitt & James Stellios, ‘Regulating
Telecommunications Interception and Access in the
Twenty-First Century:
Technological or Legal Revolution?’ (2006) 24(4)
example, the Explanatory Memorandum, Telecommunications (Interception) Amendment
Bill 2006 9; Commonwealth Security Legislation
Review Committee,
the Security Legislation Review Committee
(2006) 182;
Attorney-General’s Department,
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access Act 1979
, Annual Report for the Year Ending 30 June 2008
Senate, Legal
and Constitutional Legislation Committee, Provisions of the Telecommunications
(Interception) Amendment Bill 2006,
[3.1]. A similar viewpoint was expressed in
the Blunn Review: A.S. Blunn, AO,
Report of the Review of the Regulation of
Access to Communications
Steinhardt, ‘Liberty in the Age of Technology’ (2004)
Government, Office of the Privacy Commissioner
Getting in on the Act: The
Review of the Private Sector Provisions of the Privacy Act 1988
concerned only with the use and disclosure of information. It does not deal with
other aspects of information handling,
such as collection and storage:
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Australian Privacy Law,
Discussion Paper 72 (2007) [63.144]. The handling of ‘personal
information’ by telecommunications service providers
is also subject to
(Cth) (‘the
Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy
Law and Practice
, Report No 108 (2008) [71.1]. The interaction between the
Telecommunications Act
is unclear,
and has been considered in a number of reviews: see, for example: Australian
Government, Office of the Privacy Commissioner
Getting in on the Act: The
Review of the Private Sector Provisions of the Privacy Act 1988
49-63; Commonwealth, Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
The Real Big Brother: Inquiry into Privacy Act 1988
Chapter 4; Australian Law Reform Commission,
Review of Australian Privacy
Discussion Paper 72 (2007) Chapter 63; Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
, Report No 108
(2008) Chapter 71. A discussion of the
is beyond the scope of
this article.
Telecommunications Act
A carrier is
the holder of a carrier licence granted under Division 3 of
Telecommunications Act
. A carrier licence must be held before certain
infrastructure can be used to carry communications by means of guided and/ or
electromagnetic energy:
Telecommunications Act
service provider is described as one who makes use of the infrastructure owned
by a carrier to carry communications by
means of guided and/ or unguided
electromagnetic energy: Australian Law Reform Commission,
Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
, Report No 108 (2008)
[71.8]. Internet service providers are carriage service providers.
telecommunications contractor is a person who performs services for or on behalf
of a carrier or CSP, otherwise than in the capacity
of an employee:
Telecommunications Act
communications that ‘is being’ carried includes a communication that
has been collected or received by a carrier or
CSP for carriage by it, but which
has not been delivered by it:
s 276(1)(a)(ii).
prohibition only applies to a communication that is, or has been, carried by a
carrier or CSP if the carriage was, is, or is
proposed to be, delivered by means
of guided and/ or unguided electromagnetic energy:
Information
or documents that do not come to a person’s knowledge or possession in
these circumstances is not within the purview
However, if such
information constitutes ‘personal information’, it may nevertheless
be regulated under the
(Cth): Australian Law Reform
Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
Report No 108 (2008) [71.19].
and their employees. A number data base
operator is a person in respect of whom
a declaration is in force under s 472(1):
Telecommunications Act
Since there are currently no number data base
operators, as no declaration is in force, this prohibition will not be explained
detail. See: Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information:
, Report No 108 (2008) [71.9].
Telecommunications Act 1997
(3). There have
been no prosecutions for breaches of the prohibitions under
enactment of the
Telecommunications Act
(Cth): Australian Law
Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and
Report No 108 (2008) [71.84].
Australian Law Reform Commission has recommended that civil penalties be
introduced in addition to the criminal penalties: Australian
Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice,
Report No 108 (2008) [71.83]-[71.98].
definition of an enforcement agency is dealt with below. See also
Telecommunications Act 1997
Telecommunications Act
s 280(1)(a).
Telecommunications Act
s 280(1)(b).
The disclosures
and uses permitted under Chapter 4 are ‘authorised’ for the purposes
For the sake of clarity, the Australian Law Reform Commission has
recommended that a note cross-referencing to Chapter 4 be inserted
Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy
Law and Practice
, Report No 108 (2008) Recommendation 72-6.
Telecommunications Act 1997
Division 5. The
reporting differs from that under the
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Act 1979
(Cth), which is to
Parliament.
Telecommunications Act 1997
Communications and Media Authority,
Annual Report
2005-06, Appendix
Australian Communications and Media Authority,
Annual Report
Appendix 12.
Communications and Media Authority,
Annual Report
2007-08, Appendix 12.
This figure includes disclosures made under the new Chapter 4.
Communications and Media Authority,
Annual Report
2006-07, Appendix 12
Disclosure of Information. These statistics do not include disclosures made to
Communications and Media Authority,
Annual Report
2007-08, Appendix 12,
Disclosures of Information. These statistics do not include disclosures made to
The Chapter
describes itself as setting out circumstances where
does not prohibit a
disclosure or use of information or a document:
Explanatory
Memorandum, Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Bill 2007 8. These
regimes have been briefly described in the
Introduction.
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Amendment Bill 2007
July 2007. A number of submissions to the
Australian Law Reform Commission reference into privacy also argued that the
phrase should
be defined in the Act: Australian Law Reform Commission,
Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice,
Report No 108 (2008)
Evidence to Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Parliament of Australia, Canberra, 16 July 2007, 28 (Ms
Smith) cited in
Commonwealth, Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
[Provisions]
(2007) [3.17].
Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and
Report No 108 (2008) [73.33].
Supplementary Report with Additional Comments of Dissent by the Australian
Evidence to
Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, Parliament of
Australia, Canberra, 16 July 2007, 28-9
(Ms Smith) cited in Commonwealth, Senate
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
[Provisions]
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Amendment Bill 2007
Interpretation Act 1901
s 15AB(2)(e).
Explanatory
Memorandum, Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Bill 2007 (Cth) 6.
distinction is becoming increasingly blurred as a result of ‘IP
telephony’, which ‘enables facsimile messages,
video and other forms
of data traditionally transmitted via the PTSN (‘Public Switched Telephone
Network’) to be transmitted
via the internet’: Australian Law Reform
Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
Report No 108 (2008) [9.79]. Voice over the Internet Protocol services (VoIP),
which enable verbal conversations to be conducted
in real time over the
Internet, is a subset of IP telephony. The Australian Law Reform Commission
notes that:
VoIP services usually will be classified as carriage
services for the purposes of the
Telecommunications Act 1997
(Cth). This
means that VoIP service providers generally will be ‘carriage service
providers’ that are required to observe
the provisions in
Telecommunications Act
that protect the confidentiality of
telecommunications information: Australian Law Reform Commission,
Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
, Report No 108 (2008)
However, VoIP services can be isolated from the traditional PSTN, thereby
allowing users to make and receive calls solely over the
internet. Examples
given by the ALRC include instant messaging products such as Yahoo Messenger and
MSN Messenger: Australian Law
Reform Commission,
For Your Information:
Australian Privacy Law and Practice
, Report No 108 (2008) [71.101]. If a
VoIP service does not connect with the PSTN at all, the service provider may not
be regulated
Telecommunications Act
although it might be
regulated by the
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
, Report No 108 (2008)
[9.81], [71.101].
Explanatory
Memorandum, Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Bill 2007 (Cth) 6.
Explanatory
Memorandum, Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Bill 2007 (Cth) 8.
Explanatory
Memorandum, Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Bill 2007 (Cth) 6.
Explanatory
Memorandum, Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Bill 2007 (Cth) 8.
Government, Attorney-General’s Department,
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act
, Annual Report for the Year Ending 30 June
A.S. Blunn,
Report of the Review of the Regulation of Access to Communications
(2005) 1.1.25
Frontiers Australia Inc,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
10 July 2007
Explanatory Memorandum, Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Bill 2007
Frontiers Australia Inc,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
10 July 2007 [3.2].
Access to the
body section of an email would require a stored communications
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E-mail
at 10 December 2008.
Explanatory Memorandum, Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Bill 2007
8. The same view is taken by the Attorney-General’s
Department:
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
Attorney-General’s Department, Item 11, Answers to Questions on
Notice, 24 July 2007.
Frontiers Australia Inc,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
10 July 2007 [3.3].
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
Attorney-General’s Department, Item 12, Answers to Questions on
Notice, 24 July 2007.
Frontiers Australia Inc,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
26 July 2007. EFA took the view that the
phrase “MUST NOT be generated” referred to obsolete syntax, not
field names.
addresses are 32 bit numbers expressed in four octets. Lindsay explains that:
‘The IP address has two main parts: the network
prefix (or network
address), which identifies the network a computer is attached to; and the host
ID (or host address), which identifies
the logical location of the host computer
on the network.’ David Lindsay,
International Domain Name Law
International Domain Name Law
How Domain Name Servers Work
http://www.howstuffworks.com/dns.htm
at 2 February 2009.
http://www.webopedia.com/TERM/D/domain_name.html
at 2 February 2009.
http://www.boutell.com/newfaq/definitions/url.html
at 1 February 2009. The most common protocol is the hypertext transfer protocol
(‘http’) which is the protocol used
to transfer web pages.
protocol identifier and the domain name are separated by a colon and two forward
captured as ‘telecommunications data’, access to information
regarding Internet sessions would be permitted only
under a stored
communications warrant.
to Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, Parliament of
Australia, Canberra, 16 July 2007, 41-2
(Ms Smith) cited in Commonwealth, Senate
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
[Provisions]
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
Attorney-General’s Department, Item 18, Answers to Questions on
Notice, 24 July 2007.
to Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, Parliament of
Australia, Canberra, 16 July 2007, 42 (Mr
Frontiers Australia Inc,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
10 July 2007 [3.4].
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Amendment Bill 2007
Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and
Report No 108 (2008) [73.35]; Recommendation 73-5. The ALRC Report
noted that the Attorney-General’s Department maintains that
‘provides guidance to agencies and carriers regarding these issues, both
generally and on a case-by-case basis’:
Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice,
Report No 108
(2008) [73.32].
Nicholls and Michelle Rowland, ‘Regulating the Use of Telecommunications
Location Data by Australian Law Enforcement Agencies’
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Council of Australia,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
July 2007 13.
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
Attorney-General’s Department, Item 10, Answers to Questions on
Notice, 24 July
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Regulations 2008
was originally called the National Exchange of Police Information. The agency is
underpinned by an Inter-Governmental Agreement
signed by all Australian police
ministers to establish and operate
http://www.crimtrac.gov.au/about_us/index.html
accessed at 2 February 2009.
of Australia, Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
[Provisions]
[3.6]. There is also a concern that CrimTrac’s inclusion
in the list would enable it to access stored communications.
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Amendment Bill 2007
CrimTrac from the definition does not necessarily mean that it could never be
privy to telecommunications data. This would
depend on whether such data could
be deposited in its databases by other agencies making a permissible use of the
secondary use provisions,
which are discussed below.
Dissenting Report issued by the Australian Democrats also recommended that
CrimTrac be removed from the definition:
Supplementary Report with Additional
Comments of Dissent by the Australian Democrats
Frontiers Australia Inc,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
10 July 2007 [5.2.2(b)].
Australian Privacy Foundation,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on
Legal and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
staff member of an enforcement agency is the head or deputy head of the agency,
or any employee, member of staff or officer
of the agency:
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Amendment Bill 2007
Law Reform Commission,
Review of Australian Privacy Law
(2007) Discussion
Paper 72 [63.50]. The observation was made in respect of the voluntary
disclosure provisions as they then appeared
Telecommunications
particularly true of ASIO, whose functions are listed in very general terms. For
example, one of its functions is ‘to
obtain, correlate and evaluate
intelligence relevant to security’:
Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation 1979
s 17(1)(a).
Supplementary Report with Additional Comments of Dissent by the Australian
Report of the Review of the Regulation of Access to
Communications
(2005) [1.7.6].
Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and
Report No 108 (2008) [73.78]-[73.79].
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
. Note that in relation to the enforcement of a law imposing a pecuniary
penalty or protecting public revenue, it is only
Telecommunications Act 1997
that are expressed not to prevent a
disclosure, not
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
(definition of ‘authorised officer’), 5AB. The definition is
designed to reflect the differing management structures
of enforcement agencies:
Explanatory Memorandum,
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment
Council for Civil Liberties,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on
Legal and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
10 July 2007.
Wales Council for Civil Liberties,
Submission to the Senate Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
to which details generated by web browsing constitute telecommunications data
was considered in an earlier section of
this article.
Frontiers Australia Inc,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
10 July 2007 [3.2], [5.4].
Explanatory Memorandum, Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Bill 2007
to Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, Parliament of
Australia, Canberra, 16 July 2007, 13 (Ms
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
be officers or employees who hold or are acting in a position that is equivalent
to, or higher than, an SES (Senior Executive
Service) band 2 position in the
Department:
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
These persons are the Organisation’s senior management and
leadership: Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information:
Australian Privacy Law and Practice,
Report No 108 (2008)
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security,
Submission to the Senate
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act
Inspector-General also reviews the Australian Secret Intelligence Service, the
Defence Intelligence Organisation, the Defence
Imagery and Geospatial
Organisation, the Defence Signals Directorate and the Office of National
Assessments.
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act
provenance of these procedural requirements is explained below.
of Australia, Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
[Provisions]
[3.79]. The Senate Committee took the view (on advice from the
Attorney-General’s Department) that IGIS already has jurisdiction
oversee ASIO’s use of its power to obtain prospective telecommunications
data under s 8(1) of its establishing Act and that
accordingly, legislative
amendment was not necessary to enable this to
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
case with ASIO, the authorising person can also authorise the disclosure of
specified historical information or documents,
thereby avoiding the need for a
separate application to be made for access to historical data:
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Office of the Privacy Commissioner,
Submission to the Senate Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
Attorney-General’s Department, Item 4, Answers to Questions on Notice,
24 July 2007.
Explanatory Memorandum, Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Bill 2007
South Wales Council for Civil Liberties described it as ‘lip
service’ that ‘could use some teeth’:
New South Wales Council
for Civil Liberties,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Amendment Bill 2007
11 July 2007.
discussion in this section proceeds on the assumption that location information
is ‘telecommunications data’. This
issue has been explored earlier
in this article.
location of a phone can be determined in a number of ways, based on the
measurements of the signal. These include the signal’s
angle of approach
to the cell towers, how long it takes the signal to travel to multiple towers
and the strength of the signal when
it reaches the towers: Tracy Wilson,
GPS Phones Work
http://electronics.howstuffworks.com/gps-phone.htm
at 2 February 2009. These various methods are explained in greater detail
in: Australian Communication Authority,
Location, Location, Location: The
Future Use of Location Information to Enhance the Handling of Emergency Mobile
Phone Calls
(2004) 27-32. This report can be viewed at
http://www.acma.gov.au/webwr/consumer_info/location.pdf
Communications Authority,
Location, Location, Location: The Future Use of
Location Information to Enhance the Handling of Emergency Mobile Phone Calls
Einfeld’s mobile phone records suggested that he had lied under oath when
he said that he was not in Sydney at the
time the driving offence was committed
and that his car was being driven by a friend. The records demonstrated that he
calls from his mobile phone in the area where the car was caught
speeding. He has since pleaded guilty to one count of perjury and
one count of
acting to pervert the course of justice: Janet Fife-Yeomans, ‘Former Judge
Marcus Einfeld Admits Lie, Has Cancer’,
Daily Telegraph,
2008; James Madden, ‘Guilty Marcus Einfeld Faces Jail as Prosecutors Push
for Prison Sentence’
The Australian
, 1 November 2008.
automatic electronic ‘goodbye’ from a phone belonging to one of the
girls as it was turned off showed that the girls
could be traced to a spot
outside the home of Ian Huntley, who was ultimately convicted of their murders.
Mobile phone records also
ex-girlfriend, who said that she was with him at the time of the murders:
trial: crucial phone evidence’
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/england/cambridgeshire/3246111.stm
at 13 December 2008.
Communications Authority,
Location, Location, Location: The Future Use of
Location Information to Enhance the Handling of Emergency Mobile Phone Calls
satellites are established and operated by the United States Department of
Defence: Australian Communications Authority,
Location, Location, Location:
The Future Use of Location Information to Enhance the Handling of Emergency
Mobile Phone Calls
(2004) 32. The European Union is currently building a
global navigation satellite system called the Galileo System as an alternative
to the US Global Positioning System. The system is expected to be operational by
2013. Unlike the US system which is under military
control, the Galileo system
will be under civilian control: T D’Roza and G Bilchev, ‘An Overview
of Location-Based Services’
(2003) 21(1)
BT Technology Journal
How GPS Phones Work
http://electronics.howstuffworks.com/gps-phone.htm
at 2 February 2009.
handsets do not transmit any information to the satellites; thus the satellites
are not cognisant of individual receivers or
aware that a user’s location
is being calculated: Australian Communications Authority,
Location, Location,
Location: The Future Use of Location Information to Enhance the Handling of
Emergency Mobile Phone Calls
Note, however, that Waters has stated that there is ‘no evidence that this
detailed location information (generated
by mobile phones incorporating GPS
technology) is routinely accessible to the telco providing the service’:
Nigel Waters,
Government Surveillance in Australia
http://home.iprimus.com.au/nigelwaters/Government%20Surveillance%20in%20Australia%20v6.pdf
at 2 February 2009.
Communications Authority,
Location, Location, Location: The Future Use of
Location Information to Enhance the Handling of Emergency Mobile Phone Calls
(2004) 33; ‘Assisted GPS (A-GPS) Powering the Real World Web’
http://gpstekreviews.com/2006/12/01/assisted-gps-a-gps-powering-the-real-world-web/
at 2 February 2009.
Communications Authority,
Location, Location, Location: The Future Use of
Location Information to Enhance the Handling of Emergency Mobile Phone Calls
LaMance, Jani Janvinen, Javier DeSalas,
Assisted GPS: A Low-Infrastructure
http://www.gpsworld.com/gpsworld/article/articleDetail.jsp?id=12287
at 2 February
Supplementary Report with Additional Comments of Dissent by the Australian
to Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, Parliament of
Australia, Canberra, 16 July 2007, 12 (Ms
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Act does not deal with third and subsequent disclosure or use.
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
The penalty for breach is imprisonment for 2
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
Explanatory Memorandum, Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Bill 2007
Attorney-General The Hon Philip Ruddock, Letter to Mr Burgess, Chief Executive
Officer, Police Federation of Australia, 07/2852.
This letter is attached to:
Police Federation of Australia,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee
on Legal and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
9 July 2007. See also:
Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
Attorney-General’s Department, Item 14, Answers to Questions on
Notice, 24 July 2007.
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
Attorney-General’s Department, Item 14, Answers to Questions on
Notice, 24 July 2007.
Frontiers Australia Inc,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
10 July 2007 [5.6].
Council of Australia,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
July 2007 9.
Frontiers Australia Inc,
Submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs Re Inquiry into the
Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
10 July 2007
Australian Security and Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
(Cth) s 18,
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
position is currently filled by the First Assistant Secretary, National Security
Law and Policy Division in the Australian
Attorney-General’s Department:
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) (Communications Access Coordinator) Specification
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
include the identity of the eligible person making the authorisation and proof
of their eligibility, the relevant provision
of the Act under which
authorisation is sought, details of the information or documents to be
disclosed, the date on which the authorisation
was made etc.
notifications or revocations of authorisations are in electronic form, it is
sufficient if they state a unique identifier of
the Organisation or agency.
that some oversight will be exercised by the IGIS, but only at the behest of his
own initiative.
that warrants issued to ASIO are issued by the federal Attorney-General and, in
some cases, by the Director-General of
Security, not by members of the judiciary
Nicholls and Michelle Rowland, ‘Regulating the Use of Telecommunications
Location Data by Australian Law Enforcement Agencies’
Federal Court judges and 12 Family Court judges have made themselves available,
compared with 34 Federal Magistrates and
37 AAT members: Australian Government,
Attorney-General’s Department,
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Act
, Annual Report for the Year Ending 30 June 2008
[1995] HCA 26
184 CLR 348.
must consent to the conferral of the non judicial function and the non-judicial
function must not be incompatible with
the judge’s judicial functions.
2007/08 year, 90.72% of telecommunications interception warrants were issued by
AAT members, 5.85% by Family Court Judges,
3.14% by Federal Magistrates and
0.22% by Federal Court Judges: Australian Government, Attorney-General’s
Department,
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
, Annual Report
for the Year Ending 30 June 2008
2007/08 year, 3254 applications were made for interception warrants. 3246 were
granted and only eight were refused or
withdrawn. In the same year, all 117
applications for stored communications warrants were granted: Australian
Government, Attorney-General’s
Department,
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act
, Annual Report for the Year Ending 30 June 2008
Table One, Table 47.
Bronitt and James Stellios, ‘Regulating Telecommunications Interception
and Access: A Seachange in Surveillance Laws’
in Michael and Michael (eds)
Social Implications of Information Security Measures on Citizens and
(2006) 146. For further observations about the warrant system see:
S Bronitt and J Stellios, ‘Telecommunications Interception
in Australia:
Recent Trends and Regulatory Prospects’
Telecommunications
Crime and Misconduct Act
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
ss 742(2)(e)
Supplementary Report with Additional Comments of Dissent by the Australian
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
The report must break down the authorisations into the various categories: the
number of authorisations for access to existing information
or documents for the
enforcement of the criminal law, for the enforcement of a law imposing a
pecuniary penalty or for the protection
of the public revenue and, for criminal
law-enforcement agencies, the number of authorisations for access to prospective
information
or documents.
subject to certain reporting requirements under
Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
but they do not relate to
authorisations under Chapter 4 of the
Interception Act.
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
phrase is coined by S Bronitt and J Stellios ‘Telecommunications
Interception in Australia: Recent Trends and Regulatory
Telecommunications Policy
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Australian Law Reform Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy
Law and Practice
, Report No 108 (2008) [73.98]-[73.103].
Senate, Legal and Constitutional Legislation Committee, Provisions of the
Telecommunications (Interception) Amendment Bill 2006
(2006) [3.74]-[3.81] for a
recommendation to this effect in relation to the stored communications
explained, the Minister, in turn, reports to Parliament:
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
s 186(1)(d).
It should be noted that telecommunications service providers are obliged to keep
records of authorisations:
Telecommunications Act
Communications Access Co-ordinator is given a role in scoping the form of
authorisations, notifications of authorisations and
revocation of authorisations
but this is not an inspection role.
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
These record keeping and record destruction obligations are imposed on agencies
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
(Cth) ss 152-158.
These record keeping and record destruction obligations are imposed on agencies
. They are less onerous than the record keeping requirements
imposed in respect of interceptions.
not true in all cases. Inspection of the South Australian Police is undertaken
by the Police Complaints Authority (South
Australia), not by the State
Ombudsman, while inspections of the Victoria Police and the Office of Police
Integrity are undertaken
by the Special Investigations Monitor (Victoria):
Attorney-General’s Department,
Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Act
, Annual Report for the Year Ending 30 June 2008
period from 1 November 2007 to 30 June 2008, only 1,135 disclosures of
prospective information were made to criminal law-enforcement
agencies, compared
with 289,745 disclosures of existing information for the enforcement of the
criminal law and 88,144 disclosures
of existing information for the enforcement
of a law imposing a pecuniary penalty or the protection of the public revenue:
Communications and Media Authority,
Annual Report
Appendix 12, Disclosures of Information.
Committee recommended that the Attorney-General's Department arrange for an
independent review of the operation of the
Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Act 1979
within five years: Parliament of Australia, Senate
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs,
Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Amendment Bill 2007
[Provisions]
, Report (2007)
Recommendation 4.
recommended that the
Telecommunications Act
Interception
be reviewed to consider whether they continue to be effective in light
of changes in the structure of communication industries and
changing community
perceptions and expectations about communication technologies. In particular, it
called for a consideration of
whether the
Interception Act
should provide
for a PIM to oversee interception and access of communications before
interception or access takes place, although
in making this recommendation, the
ALRC was not only concerned with the Chapter 4 regime: Australian Law Reform
Commission,
For Your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice
Report No 108 (2008) [71.61]-[71.71], Recommendation 71-2.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (509 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter