URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2025/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:38:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Burrell, Robert; Handler, Michael --- "Reputation, Confusion and Discretion in Australian Trade Mark Law: Taylor v Killer Queen Llc" [2025] SydLawRw 8; (2025) 47(1) Sydney Law Review 21428
I Introduction
Trade Marks Act 1995
ss 88(2)(a)/60
Trade Marks Act 1995
Trade Marks Act 1995
V Conclusion
Before the High Court
Reputation, Confusion and Discretion in Australian Trade Mark Law:
Taylor v Killer Queen LLC
and Michael
Taylor v Killer Queen LLC
, the High Court of Australia will have
the opportunity to address three complex and unresolved issues under the
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth). The first issue relates to one of the key
grounds for cancellation of a trade mark registration, namely that another mark
had acquired a reputation at the registered mark’s priority date and that
the use of the later mark at that time would have
caused confusion. The appeal
will require consideration of how to determine when a trade mark has acquired a
reputation and when
the use of a similar mark, but in a different commercial
field, will cause confusion. The second issue relates to a separate cancellation
ground that applies where the use of the registered mark has come to cause
confusion post-registration, and will require the High
Court to clarify the
nature of the use that needs to be considered. The third issue goes to the
interpretation of a provision that
gives the court discretion not to order the
cancellation of a registration, even if one of the aforementioned grounds of
cancellation
has been made out. We explore each of these issues, highlighting
the main areas of uncertainty on which it would be useful to receive
from the High Court. We pay particular attention to the third issue, arguing
that the provision in question should be interpreted
so that it does not in fact
give a court
discretion to refuse cancellation where the application
for cancellation is based on the first cancellation ground at issue in this
Introduction
Australian trade mark disputes are often characterised by ‘byzantine
complexity’,
an epithet that
can also be applied to the
Trade Marks Act 1995
Taylor v Killer Queen
the High Court of
Australia will be required to resolve uncertainties over the operation of some
of the more complicated provisions
, in the context of
heavily contested
involving a quite remarkable set of facts.
The dispute in question is between:
• Katie Taylor (the appellant), an Australian fashion designer whose
birth name is Katie Perry; and
• the globally famous American entertainer Katy Perry (the stage name
adopted by Katheryn Hudson in 2002) and a number of companies
associated with
Hudson, namely Killer Queen LLC, Kitty Purry Inc and Purrfect Ventures LLC (the
respondents).
Taylor adopted the trade mark ‘Katie Perry’ in early 2007 and
subsequently applied under the
to register the word mark KATIE
PERRY for ‘clothing’, with a priority date of 29 September 2008.
Before that time, and
especially from around June 2008, Hudson (as Katy Perry)
had come to develop a reputation in Australia as a pop music artist and
performer — notably, she had the number one single in the country from
mid-July to late August 2008.
However, by Taylor’s priority date Hudson had not sold any ‘Katy
Perry’ branded clothes in Australia. Hudson threatened
to, but did not,
oppose the registration of Taylor’s mark, and after the parties failed to
reach a co-existence agreement,
Taylor’s mark was entered on the Register
of Trade Marks in mid-2009. From the early 2010s, and during a period of time
Katy Perry’s global fame grew rapidly, a merchandising company
engaged by Hudson and her associated companies sold ‘Katy
branded clothing and merchandise in Australia. It was only in October 2019 that
Taylor sued Hudson and her associated
companies for various acts of infringement
of the KATIE PERRY mark, dating back to 2014. The respondents cross-claimed for
the cancellation
of the registration of the KATIE PERRY mark on 20 December
In the Federal Court of Australia, the primary judge relevantly found that
the merchandising company had infringed the registered
KATIE PERRY mark on
various occasions, with one of the three companies associated with Hudson being
liable as a joint
tortfeasor.
Importantly, her Honour also rejected the respondents’ arguments that the
registration of KATIE PERRY should be
On appeal, the Full
Court of the Federal Court of Australia (‘Full Federal Court’) found
that Hudson was also a joint
tortfeasor in relation to the infringing conduct of
the merchandising company.
Critically, however, it held that the KATIE PERRY registration was liable to be
cancelled under both s 88(2)(a) and s 88(2)(c) of
The Full Federal Court
also found that the discretion not to cancel the registration under s 89 of
and that even if it
had been enlivened, it would not have exercised its discretion in Taylor’s
The effect of this was
that Hudson and her associated company avoided liability for infringement.
The High Court has granted Taylor special leave to appeal on three issues
that relate solely to the cancellation of the KATIE PERRY
registration. The
first issue relates to the cancellation ground in s 88(2)(a), which
provides that an application for cancellation
can be made on ‘any of the
grounds on which the registration of the trade mark could have been opposed
under this Act’.
One effect of this provision is to turn s 60 of the
into a cancellation ground. Section 60 provides:
The registration of a trade mark in respect of particular goods or services
may be opposed on the ground that:
(a) another trade mark had, before the priority date for the registration of
the first-mentioned trade mark in respect of those goods
or services, acquired a
reputation in Australia; and
(b) because of the reputation of that other trade mark, the use of the
first-mentioned trade mark would be likely to deceive or cause
The ss 88(2)(a)/60 issue is, therefore, whether the Full Federal Court
erred in finding that the registration of KATIE PERRY for ‘clothing’
should be cancelled because, before 29 September 2008, a ‘Katy
Perry’ trade mark had acquired a reputation in Australia
and, because of
that reputation, the use of KATIE PERRY for ‘clothing’ would have
been likely to have caused confusion
at that time.
The second issue relates to the cancellation ground in s 88(2)(c). This
provides for cancellation where, ‘because of the circumstances
applying at
the time when the application for rectification is filed, the use of the trade
mark is likely to deceive or cause confusion’.
The application for
cancellation was filed on 20 December 2019. The High Court will have
to determine whether, at that time, Taylor’s
use or, in the
alternative, the
notional normal and fair
use of KATIE PERRY would have
caused confusion.
The third issue, which arises if at least one of the s 88 cancellation
grounds is made out, relates to the interpretation of s 89(1).
subsection provides:
(1) The court may decide not to grant an application for rectification
(a) under section 87; or
(b) on the ground that the trade mark is liable to deceive or confuse (a
ground on which its registration could have been opposed,
see paragraph
88(2)(a)); or
(c) on the ground referred to in paragraph 88(2)(c);
if the registered owner of the trade mark satisfies the court that the ground
relied on by the applicant has not arisen through any
act or fault of the
If the High Court addresses s 89, the key questions it will need to consider
are what constitutes an ‘act or fault’ on
the part of the registered
owner, and whether the Full Federal Court was wrong to find that either or both
of the cancellation grounds
arose through Taylor’s acts or fault. If the
High Court finds that the Full Federal Court erred, it will still need to
whether the Full Federal Court committed a ‘
House v The
stated, in obiter dicta, that even if the discretion had been enlivened it would
not have exercised it in Taylor’s
Each of the above three issues will be discussed in Parts II to IV. Our view
is that the Full Federal Court’s finding that the
KATIE PERRY registration
should be cancelled under ss 88(2)(a)/60 is perhaps open to question, but
that its conclusion that cancellation
should be ordered under s 88(2)(c) is
clearly correct. That said, we have no commitment to the outcome of the case.
The cancellation
grounds at issue turn on fact-intensive enquiries and we
confine our comments to matters on which it would be useful to receive guidance
from the High Court. In particular, we suggest that the first two issues present
the High Court with a valuable opportunity to clarify
the complex relationship
between ‘reputation’ and ‘confusion’ in ss 60 and
88(2)(c) and, in relation to the
latter ground, the nature of the registered
owner’s use that must be considered. It is the third issue, concerning the
under s 89, that is of greatest legal significance and on which
the High Court’s guidance would be particularly welcome. We
argue that the
Full Federal Court reached the right conclusion that the s 89 discretion
was not enlivened in relation to either s
88 cancellation ground, due to
the existence of a disqualifying act or fault on the part of Taylor. However, we
suggest that in relation
to the ss 88(2)(a)/60 ground, this is for a
different reason than that on which the respondents seek to rely before the High
In essence, we argue that, despite the text of s 89(1)(b), s 89 can
in fact be enlivened where the application for cancellation was
made under s 60, or other opposition grounds such as
We explain this
redundancy by reference to the convoluted history of s 89 and the High
Court’s decision in
Campomar Sociedad, Limitada v Nike International
In our view, the High Court in
Taylor v Killer Queen LLC
strain to interpret ‘act or fault’ in s 89 to give the section
work to do in cases where cancellation is sought
under s 88(2)(a). We also
briefly discuss a counter-factual not considered by the Full Federal Court
— that is, whether the
s 89 discretion might be enlivened where only
the cancellation ground under s 88(2)(c) is made out — and explain
why a disqualifying
act or fault can still be found in such circumstances.
Trade Marks Act 1995
ss 88(2)(a)/60
Section 60 is unsatisfactory in a number of respects. We have written about
the difficulties of this provision at length
but in outline the problems with this provision include:
(1) It is subject to a range of different interpretations. The provision is
now understood to have a broad sphere of operation, in
that there is no
requirement that the reputation in the earlier mark be specific to the goods or
services that are the subject of
the application for
registration.
interpretation is, however, by no means inevitable. One might read the reference
in s 60(a) to a mark having acquired a reputation
‘in respect of
goods or services’ (emphasis added) to be a reference back to
the applicant’s goods or services in the opening words
of the section. The
punctuation of s 60(a) tends against this reading, but it is an
interpretation that remains open on the text.
(2) The standard of the reputation required under s 60(a) is not
particularly exacting, being judged by reference to the market for
opponent’s goods or services. This means, for example, that it can be
enough for an opponent to demonstrate reputation
in a geographically restricted
area, at least in cases where the goods or services are generally provided at a
local level.
Again, however,
this reading is not inevitable. One might readily read the reference to a trade
mark having acquired a reputation
‘in Australia’ as setting a high
bar. In the European Union (‘EU’) it has been said that ‘[i]n
terms, the threshold for establishing whether a trade mark is well
known or enjoys reputation will usually be the
This statement of
EU law might admittedly be said to lack nuance, but our point here is simply
that almost identical wording under
the harmonised European regime has been held
to set a much higher bar and does not extend to protect the sort of local
that has been held to be sufficient for the purposes of
(3) In more conceptual terms, the role of s 60 seems confused. It is a
provision that doubles to allow owners of earlier unregistered
marks to keep
later conflicting marks off the Register and
owners of well-known
(usually registered) marks to prevent registration of similar marks for
unrelated goods or services. Neither
of these aims is controversial. On the
contrary, it is clearly desirable that owners of earlier marks that would be
entitled to an
injunction to prevent a later mark from being used in the
marketplace ought to be able to prevent the later mark from being registered.
Learned Hand J put it in 1928, ‘[i]t would plainly be a fatuity to
decree the registration of a mark whose use another could
The problem is
that s 60 has a sphere of operation that overlaps with, but is by no means
coterminous with, either passing off /
misleading or deceptive conduct under the
Australian Consumer Law
or s 120(3) of the
, which provides for infringement of a
‘well-known’ registered trade mark
Other jurisdictions, in
contrast, have ensured that the legal standards that apply at the opposition
stage adhere as closely as possible
to those that apply in enforcement
proceedings,
bearing in mind
that, even then, differences in the sorts of evidence that are likely to be
available mean that decisions will map
imperfectly.
We raise these points not out of concern with where the law stands. On the
contrary, it seems to us that tribunals have generally
done a good job of making
sense of an unsatisfactory provision.
One should, however, be unsurprised that a strange and unfortunately worded
provision can cause real difficulties in application.
This is particularly true
in cases like the one at hand, where courts are trying to work out how consumers
might have responded —
at a point many years in the past — to the
notional use of a mark across the full range of specified goods or services.
Understanding
this complexity helps explain where the primary judge erred. In
particular, the primary judge downplayed the ‘notional use’
and focused too much on elements of Taylor’s actual use of her mark,
including placing too much weight on the absence
of confusion at and after the
priority date, since that was very much the product of Taylor’s limited
use on a narrow category
of clothing (specifically, luxury
loungewear).
The Full Federal
Court was therefore right to step in and form its own view as to the likelihood
of confusion at the priority date.
It also seems clear beyond question that
Hudson enjoyed a reputation as a pop music artist and performer at that date
and, as the
Full Federal Court found, this was a reputation in ‘Katy
as a trade mark
in relation to a limited range of
entertainment services
anyone booking tickets to see Katy Perry in concert at the relevant date would
have been expecting to enjoy services delivered
by Hudson and not some other
The question is therefore how far reputation in a mark for a limited range of
entertainment services translates into a likelihood
of confusion where a close
variant of that mark is used on clothing in a normal and fair
This might be characterised as a purely factual question, but this would be to
downplay the extent to which findings as to likelihood
of confusion are infused
by legal (and hence normative) standards. What seems inarguable is that, at the
priority date, the hypothetical
consumer seeing ‘Katie Perry’
displayed prominently on the sort of merchandise authorised by pop stars
(t-shirts, baseball
caps, etc) would have been given cause to wonder whether it
had been produced under licence from Hudson, given the reputation of
‘Katy Perry’ mark. It is therefore perfectly possible to imagine
scenarios in which Taylor could have caused confusion
in September 2008, such as
placing ‘Katie Perry’ prominently on the front of a t-shirt. We also
know that there was (and
is) a practice of using trade marks for clothing in
this way, a trend that has been variously in and out of fashion and that has
been complicating the use as a trade mark enquiry since the late
It is, however, much more of a leap to say that other, more typical, uses of
KATIE PERRY as a trade mark
for clothing (for example, on the label of a
pair of travel pants) would have given rise to a real, tangible danger of
confusion in
September 2008. In reaching the view that such a risk was likely,
the Full Federal Court was apparently persuaded by evidence that
a small number
of very famous performers move from selling merchandise to establishing their
own clothing labels.
priority date, Hudson’s fame was of a much lower order of magnitude.
Consequently, one question for the High Court is how the assessment of use of
a mark in a ‘normal
fair manner’ across the full breadth
of the specification is to be carried out. There has been surprisingly limited
of what ‘normal and fair’ use
including whether the
phrase should be read disjunctively. The High Court might need to consider
whether it covers use that, although
plausible and potentially even able to be
described as ‘normal’, would not be undertaken by any bona fide
trader keen
to avoid confusion and build their own
It might take the view
that the Full Federal Court, in reaching its conclusion on the link between
reputation and confusion, conflated
the sale of merchandise bearing the name of
a pop star with conduct that more obviously involves trade mark use but that
be undertaken by a pop star with the sort of well-developed
reputation that Hudson did not have at the relevant time. The High Court
want to signal that lower courts need to be careful in too readily assuming that
mere fame as an entertainer (which in many
cases will be ephemeral) gives a
broad right to prevent third party use of that name or a close variant as a
trade mark on ‘clothing’,
let alone on other goods that are further
removed from traditional merchandising activity.
Trade Marks Act 1995
Even if the High Court finds that cancellation under ss 88(2)(a)/60 is
not made out, this does not determine the question of whether
the separate
ground under s 88(2)(c) can be established. Subsection 88(2)(c)
contemplates the possibility that the use of a mark
that was not problematic at
its priority date
confusing after the registration of that mark.
This might occur where a situation is allowed to develop post-registration where
party comes to develop such a reputation in a similar mark that any use
by the registered owner of its mark would cause confusion
— this is, in
essence, the scenario that was considered by the High Court in
Wales Dairy Corporation v Murray Goulburn Co-operative Co Ltd
’) under former
legislation.
A critical factor in the case at hand is that at the time the rectification
proceedings were filed in December 2019, the reputation
of the ‘Katy
Perry’ mark in Australia had grown enormously from September 2008,
including in relation to
This factor, coupled
with the close resemblance between the ‘Katy Perry’ and KATIE PERRY
marks, would seem to give rise
to a strong case that any use of the latter mark
on ‘clothing’ as at December 2019 would have given consumers cause
wonder about a commercial connection with Hudson.
In arguing that the s 88(2)(c) ground is not made out, Taylor suggests
that the provision is to be interpreted by reference to the
use of its mark at the time of the rectification
proceedings, rather than the notional ‘normal and fair use’ it might
This is contrary to the position adopted by the primary
although the Full Federal
Court did not form a settled view as to whether the provision needed to be
interpreted this
Taylor points to the fact that s 88(2)(c) looks to the
‘circumstances’ applying at the relevant
and asks whether the use ‘is likely’ to cause confusion, rather than
‘would be likely’ (which is the phrase
Taylor argues that
the limited use of her mark on a range of clothes over a 10-year period
(described at trial as ‘luxury loungewear
and other women’s
), without any
evidence of actual confusion, meant that the s 88(2)(c) ground was not made
In the alternative, Taylor
argues that even if the test is based on notional use, the strength of the
reputation of the ‘Katy
Perry’ mark by late 2019
likelihood of confusion, with the effect being that notional consumers of
clothes provided under the KATIE PERRY mark would notice
the difference in
spelling between the marks and not be
Taylor’s novel reading of s 88(2)(c) as turning on the registered
owner’s actual use is open, and the High Court will
have a valuable
opportunity to resolve the ambiguity around how the subsection is to be
interpreted. In our view, there are good
reasons for rejecting Taylor’s
reading, and for affirming the Full Federal Court’s reasoning and
conclusion. It has long
been accepted that when assessing whether a mark should
be entered onto or remain on the Register attention needs to be paid to the
scope of the statutory monopoly. The
confers a right to use a mark
in relation to the goods and/or services in respect of which it is
registered,
and this right
serves as a defence to an action for
infringement
and a partial
defence to any claim brought in passing
The cancellation ground has
to be tied to the scope of the monopoly that the owner is claiming. Any other
approach would also increase
the evidential burden on the party seeking
cancellation, and might give rise to serial litigation and difficult questions
preclusion as the trade mark owner’s use shifts over time. Here
it should also be remembered that Taylor had the opportunity
to narrow her
specification to limit her mark to the goods she actually makes and sells, but
declined to do so, presumably for strategic
Taylor’s alternative argument is still less convincing. There are
indeed occasions when the fame of a mark is such that confusion
becomes less,
rather than more, likely. This is not because there is any separate legal rule
to this effect, rather it is a necessary
corollary of how we assess what
consumers are likely to (mis)remember. When one is dealing with a famous mark
— such as, say,
MALTESERS for chocolate products — the memory of the
mark is likely to be relatively fixed in the minds of consumers. Consequently,
no ordinary consumer is likely to be confused by the use of MALTITOS for
identical goods.
however, never been accepted that consumer recollection of a famous mark is
likely to be so fixed that use of an aurally
identical mark with a minor
variation in spelling is not capable of causing confusion. MALTITOS for
chocolate products may be acceptable,
MALTEASERS is not.
Trade Marks Act 1995
If the High Court finds that either or both of the s 88 cancellation
grounds are made out, it will need to consider the third issue
on appeal. This
is whether the Full Federal Court erred in finding that s 89 was not enlivened
because the cancellation grounds arose
due to Taylor’s ‘act or
fault’, such that it had no discretion not to grant the application for
cancellation.
Section 89 is a complex provision ‘aimed at dealing with some
well-known difficulties that were encountered in the construction
of relevant
provisions of the [
Trade Marks Act 1955
It applies in
three scenarios. It is relatively easy to see what role s 89 might play in
two of these scenarios:
• under s 89(1)(a), when cancellation is sought under s 87
(which primarily deals with situations where the registered mark
became generic
after its registration date); and
• under s 89(1)(c), when cancellation is sought under s 88(2)(c)
(which contemplates situations where the registered owner’s
mark became confusing, post-registration).
In these two scenarios, it would be harsh to order cancellation where the
mark became generic or confusing through no act or fault
of the registered
owner. But it is much less obvious how s 89 has a role to play in the third
• under s 89(1)(b), where cancellation is sought under
ss 88(2)(a)/60.
Here, the cancellation ground has arisen not because of a post-registration
set of circumstances, but because there was a conflict
with an earlier mark at
the registered owner’s priority date. In such circumstances, it is unclear
how it can be said that
relied on ... has not arisen
through any
act or fault
of the registered
since it would
seem to be the registered owner’s very act of applying to register that is
the ‘act’ that gave rise
to the conflict and thus the resulting
cancellation ground. This gives rise to a further, uncomfortable question: is it
that the discretion can
be enlivened when the cancellation
ground turns on s 60 (or, for that matter, s 43), notwithstanding
s 89(1)(b)?
The Full Federal Court found that the disentitling ‘act’ for the
purposes of s 89 was Taylor’s act of applying for
registration with
knowledge of Hudson, her reputation and her mark, in circumstances where Taylor
knew of the practice of popular
entertainers licensing their marks for use on
merchandise.
On appeal, the
respondents have sought to defend this
However, the
difficulty with this reasoning is that the test under s 89 looks to whether
the cancellation
has not arisen through any ‘act or
fault’ of the registered owner. Taylor’s knowledge was irrelevant to
the s 60 ground (that is, whether there was a likelihood of
confusion) was made out. This point has been recognised by
although we would
disagree with her suggestion that ‘something more’ than the act of
filing for registration is needed
for there to be a relevant ‘act or
suggestion suffers from exactly the same problem as the Full Federal
Court’s decision in looking beyond the act
that gave rise to the
cancellation ground.
Obviously, statutes should be interpreted to avoid redundancy whenever
possible. However, in this case, when the complex history of
what s 89 was
designed to achieve, together with the previously unacknowledged impact of the
High Court’s decision in
, are properly understood, our
view is that s 89 contains a redundancy.
To explain, in 1992 the Working Party appointed by the Government to consider
potential reform of Australia’s trade mark laws
recommended various new
opposition grounds, including one for ‘inherently deceptive’ signs
and another in a form similar
to what would become s 60 of the
The Working Party also
recommended two separate rectification grounds: the first based on the
opposition grounds;
second applying where the owner’s use was likely to deceive at the time of
the rectification proceedings.
Only the latter ground was recommended to be made subject to a
‘fault’ proviso. This was an attempt to deal with uncertainties
arising out of the
In that case, a majority of the High Court held that a mark could be removed
from the Register on the basis of confusion that had
arisen post-registration,
but only where the owner had engaged in ‘blameworthy conduct’, with
different understandings
being put forward as to what that might
The Working Party’s recommendations were not adopted in the short-lived
and never-commenced
Trade Marks Act 1994
Understanding
the rectification provisions in the
provides the key to
understanding s 89 of the
Subsection 89(2)(a) of the
contained a single rectification
ground based on the opposition grounds — there was no separate ground
based on the owner’s
use being likely to deceive or cause confusion at the
time of the rectification proceedings. Importantly, however, the effect of
s 89(3)(b) was to make the s 89(2)(a) rectification ground, to the
extent it was based on an opposition ground ‘that the trade
mark is liable
to deceive or confuse’, subject to a ‘no act or fault’ proviso
in s 89(3). To understand why this
approach was taken, it is worth saying
more about the rectification ground in issue in
. That case required
the High Court to consider whether, in rectification proceedings, one of the
grounds (the ‘use would be likely to cause
confusion’ ground in s 28(a) of the
interpreted not only by reference to the situation at the mark’s priority
date, but also by reference to whether
the use would cause confusion at the time
of the rectification proceedings. A majority of the Court held this to be the
case, subject
to the ‘blameworthy conduct’
Parliament’s
expectation in enacting s 89(2)(a) of the
must have been
that it would be read in light of
. That is, s 89(2)(a) was
designed to enable an applicant for rectification to argue that an opposition
ground would have been made
at the priority date,
the basis of the mark being likely to deceive or cause confusion at the time of
the rectification proceedings due to circumstances
arising post-registration.
Given the latter possibility, it made sense to make s 89(2)(a) subject
to a ‘no act or fault’
However, a difficulty with what was set up in the
did not contain an equivalent of s 28(a) of the
there was no ground of opposition applying simply where the use of the mark
would be likely to cause confusion. The closest
such ground in the
was s 42(2), which provided a ground of opposition based on the use
of the mark being
likely to deceive or cause confusion regarding:
(a) the nature, quality, origin, intended purpose, or some other
characteristic, of the goods or services; or
(b) any connection or relationship that they may have with any particular
Such a ground could have had a continuing operation, like s 28(a) of the
, in rectification proceedings. It is, however, worth noting that
the opposition ground in s 61 of the
(the equivalent to
s 60 of the
have been interpreted to
cover ‘post-registration confusion’ in a rectification action.
Unlike s 28(a) of the
, s 61 of the
explicitly turned on the existence of an earlier mark having a reputation at the
filing date
of the later mark, and on confusion by the use of the later
mark resulting from that reputation.
The key point to note from this analysis is that there was an internal logic
to the treatment of the rectification grounds in the
. Given that
ss 89(2)(a)/42(2) of the
could have been raised as a
rectification ground in relation to some types of use that were not confusing at
the priority date but
had come to cause confusion at the time of the
rectification proceedings, the s 89(3)(b) ‘no act or fault’
proviso had
some work to do in this scenario — albeit not in a case where
the rectification ground was brought under ss 89(2)(a)/61.
This is vital in understanding how we ended up with s 89(1)(b) of the
and, critically, why it might have been redundant from the very
commencement of the
or, in any event, why it became entirely
redundant after
in 2000. Sections 88(2)(a) and 89(1)(b) of the
were simply transpositions of ss 89(2)(a) and 89(3)(b) of the
. However, the
arguably adopted a different
understanding of rectification based on the opposition grounds. The adoption of
the new, separate rectification
ground in s 88(2)(c) of the
which explicitly refers to use causing deception or confusion at the time of the
rectification proceedings, strongly suggests that,
for the purposes of
s 88(2)(a), the opposition grounds were to be interpreted as applying
at the owner’s filing/priority date, and that they were not
intended to have a continuing
This meant that there was no longer any need for an ‘act or fault’
proviso to modify s 88(2)(a). On this reading, s 89(1)(b)
was an unnecessary hangover from the
, and should be seen
as nothing more than an unfortunate drafting error.
Even if s 88(2)(a) of the
had been drafted on the
assumption that, at the very least, the ‘confusing connotation’
ground of opposition in s 43
could have a continuing operation in
rectification proceedings, based on the majority approach in
that s 89(1)(b) might have had some limited work to do), that reading of
s 88(2)(a) became unsustainable after
. In that case, the
High Court unanimously rejected the majority’s approach in
holding that s 28(a) of the
continuing operation.
removed any suggestion that s 43 of the
could have a
continuing operation.
words, even if s 89(1)(b) might have had some work to do in the first few
years of the
in cases where an applicant for cancellation sought
to rely on ss 88(2)(a)/s 43, pointing to confusion arising at the time
rectification proceedings, s 89(1)(b) became entirely redundant
Consequently, there are sound reasons for the High Court to find in
v Killer Queen LLC
that s 89 can
be enlivened where the
application for cancellation is made under ss 88(2)(a)/60 (or s 43).
Finding otherwise will involve introducing
a degree of incoherence into the
legislative regime, in that courts will be required to look for ‘acts or
fault’ that
have no logical bearing on whether the cancellation ground in
question applies or whether confusion would be likely to result from
We recognise that there is an unfortunate consequence of our reading. Whereas
a registered owner who finds that its registration is
liable for cancellation
under s 88(2)(a) on opposition grounds other than those falling within the
scope of s 89(1)(b) (for example,
for lack of distinctiveness under s 41)
can seek to persuade the court to exercise its ‘at large’ discretion
88(1) not to order the cancellation of the registration, this
opportunity is not open to registered owners where the opposition grounds
within the scope of s 89(1)(b) (for example, under ss 43 and 60). To our
mind, this demonstrates that s 89 needs to be addressed
by the legislature,
with the simplest solution being to repeal s 89(1)(b). This approach is
preferable to one that stretches the
meaning of ‘act or fault’ in s
89 beyond breaking point.
Finally, there remains the separate issue of whether the Full Federal Court
was correct to find that s 89 was not enlivened in relation
application for cancellation under s 88(2)(c). This will be critical if the
High Court finds that the ss 88(2)(a)/60 cancellation
ground is not made
out, but that the s 88(2)(c) ground is made out on the basis that any
confusion arose only in light of post-registration
circumstances. Our view is
that the Full Federal Court was correct on this issue, although its reasoning
might have been clearer.
The Court identified two post-priority date factors as
relevant to whether it would have exercised its discretion not to order the
cancellation of the KATIE PERRY registration had s 89 been enlivened,
namely: that Taylor at times sought to align herself with Hudson
to obtain a
commercial benefit;
Taylor rejected a co-existence
As the respondents
have submitted,
these factors
can be more relevantly characterised as being ‘acts’ or
‘fault’ that contributed to the s 88(2)(c)
cancellation ground,
such that s 89 was not in fact enlivened. More generally, the fact that
Taylor did not take action to enforce
her rights against the respondents for
more than 10 years, although understandable for financial reasons, must be
considered to be
a ‘fault’ that gave rise to the cancellation
If the High Court is
required to interpret ‘act or fault’ in s 89 in this scenario,
we would hope that it takes a broader
approach than looking for what can be
characterised as ‘blameworthy conduct’ as this concept was
understood by courts
interpreting differently-worded former
legislation.
The litigation between Taylor and Hudson and her associated companies has
given rise to a range of complex questions and issues under
not all of which are before the High Court. Some of these are matters on which
guidance from the High Court would be welcome in
a future case, such as: how to
interpret the specification of goods and services in respect of which a mark is
registered;
who can rely on the
‘own name’ defence to
infringement;
and what is the
meaning of ‘good faith’ in the defences to
infringement.
For other issues,
reform of the
may be needed, such as whether the prevailing
interpretation of the defence to infringement in s 122(1)(fa), which
applies where
the prima face infringer would be able to obtain registration of
its mark in its own name, renders it largely
Notwithstanding this,
Taylor v Killer Queen LLC
will still provide the High Court with a rare
and valuable opportunity to consider, and hopefully resolve, important questions
to the three fundamental concepts of reputation, confusion and discretion,
as they arise under the
Please cite this column as:
Robert Burrell and Michael Handler, ‘Reputation, Confusion and
Discretion in Australian Trade Mark Law:
Taylor v Killer Queen LLC
Sydney Law Review
21428: 1–15
<https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.21428>.
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0>.
Unmodified content is free to use with proper attribution.
Professor, Melbourne Law School, University of Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia; Professor, Intellectual Property and Information Technology
Law, Faculty of Law, University of Oxford, Oxfordshire, England. Email:
robert.burrell@unimelb.edu.au; ORCID iD:
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4076-2582.
Professor, School of Private and Commercial Law, Faculty
of Law & Justice, UNSW Sydney, Australia. Email: m.handler@unsw.edu.au.
https://orcid.org/0000-000
-8980-5099.
Fanatics, LLC v FanFirm Pty
[2025] FCAFC 87
, [305] (Burley, Jackson and Downes JJ).
Trade Marks Act 1995
Taylor v Killer Queen
(High Court of Australia, Case No S49/2025).
Killer Queen LLC v
[2024] FCAFC 149
(2024) 306 FCR 199
, 206 [4] (Yates, Burley and Rofe JJ)
Killer Queen (FCAFC)
Australian Recording Industry
Association (‘ARIA’), ‘All the ARIA Singles Chart #1s’,
<https://www.aria.com.au/charts/news/all-the-aria-singles-chart-1s>.
Taylor v Killer Queen, LLC
[2023] FCA 364
(2023) 172 IPR 1
, 106–12 [390]–[407], 119–20 [443],
137 [516] (Markovic J) (‘
Taylor (FCA)
Ibid 187–91
[740]–[753] (on
) ss 88(2)(a)/60), 195 [770]–[773]
(on ss 88(2)(a)/42(b) and 43), 198–200 [783]–[796] (on s
Killer Queen (FCAFC)
) 230–2 [110]–[121]
(Yates, Burley and Rofe JJ)
Ibid 258–63
[271]–[302] (on
) ss 88(2)(a)/60), 267–8
[331]–[339] (on s 88(2)(c)).
[303]–[317], 268 [340]–[342].
[318]–[323], 269 [343]–[344].
See further
Trade Marks Regulations
(Cth) reg 8.2.
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
, 504–5 (Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ).
We do not seek to comment on
whether the Full Federal Court’s exercise of its discretion
miscarried.
Killer Queen LLC et al,
‘Respondents’ Submissions’, Submission in
Taylor v Killer
, High Court of Australia, Case No
, 27 June 2025,
[41]–[44] (‘Respondents’ Submissions’).
Section 43 of the
(n 2) is a ground of opposition to registration by virtue of s 57, and
An application for the registration of a trade mark in respect of particular
goods or services must be rejected if, because of some
connotation that the
trade mark or a sign contained in the trade mark has, the use of the trade mark
in relation to those goods or
services would be likely to deceive or cause
Campomar Sociedad,
Limitada v Nike International Ltd
[2000] HCA 12
(2000) 202 CLR 45
See, eg, Robert Burrell and
Michael Handler,
Australian Trade Mark Law
(LexisNexis, 3
ed, 2024) [7.2]–[7.11], [8.17]–[8.19]; Robert Burrell and Michael
Handler, ‘The Intersection between Registered
and Unregistered Trade
[2007] FedLawRw 15
(2007) 35(3)
Federal Law Review
Killer Queen
) 258 [277] (Yates,
Burley and Rofe JJ).
Toddler Kindy
Gymbaroo Pty Ltd v Gymboree Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 618
(2000) 100 FCR 166
[26]–[31], 194 [94] (Moore J).
European Union Intellectual
Property Office (‘EUIPO’),
Trade Mark Guidelines
pt C s 5 [2.1.2], citing World Intellectual Property Organization
Joint Recommendation Concerning Provisions on the
Protection of Well-Known Marks
, WIPO Doc 833(E) (29 September 1999) art
2(2)(b)–(c) (on the threshold for ‘well-known’ marks) and
General Motors Corporation v Yplon SA
[1999] EUECJ C-375/97
[1999] ECR I-5421
I-5446 [26] (on the threshold for marks with a reputation).
Yale Electric Corporation
v Robertson
26 F 2d 972
Cir, 1928).
Competition and Consumer
(Cth) sch 2 (‘
Australian Consumer Law
Trade Marks Act
Taylor (FCA)
) 188 [743], 190–1 [751]–[752]
(Markovic J). See also at 28 [112] for the description of Taylor’s clothes
loungewear’.
Killer Queen (FCAFC)
) 260 [289] (Yates, Burley and Rofe
JJ). The Full Federal Court referred to the ‘Katy Perry’ mark
enjoying a reputation
in relation to ‘entertainment services’, but
this is to overstate the position. At the relevant date, Hudson enjoyed
reputation as a pop singer and not, say, as a children’s magician or
performer of Kabuki theatre. One problem with the Full
Federal Court’s
decision is that it at times conflates the questions of the scope of reputation
with the likelihood of confusion.
This conflation can be seen in the finding at
260–1 [290]–[291] that Taylor also had a reputation in clothes,
better understood as going to the issue under
Taylor’s use would have caused confusion given the relationship between
the relevant subset of entertainment services
(in which Hudson had a reputation)
and clothing (Taylor’s specified goods).
Taylor has sought to argue
that the Full Federal Court erred in placing weight on the marks being
‘deceptively similar’
to have been made out: Katie
Taylor, ‘Appellant’s Submissions’, Submission in
Killer Queen LLC
, High Court of Australia, Case No
[43]–[45] (‘Appellant’s Submissions’). However, the
close similarity between the marks is clearly
a relevant (albeit not
determinative) consideration under
in assessing whether the use of the
later mark would have caused confusion.
Unidoor Ltd v Marks and
Spencer plc
[1988] RPC 275
, 278 (Whitford J) (‘
(the law must take cognisance of the practice of placing clothing marks
‘boldly on the article in question’).
Killer Queen (FCAFC)
) 260–1 [291] (Yates, Burley
and Rofe JJ).
The language of
‘normal and fair’ can be traced back to
Re Smith Hayden and Co
Ltd’s Application
(1946) 63 RPC 97
, 101 (Evershed J). It has been
generally adopted by Australian tribunals since at least
Gardenia Overseas
Pte Ltd v The Garden Co Ltd
[1994] FCA 1280
(1994) 29 IPR 485
, 493 (Lindgren J)
(‘notional normal and fair use’), but with little analysis of what
might fall outside the scope of
what is ‘normal and fair’.
In a similar vein, in
relation to s 12 of the
Trade Marks Act 1938
(UK) Blanco White and
Jacob said that ‘it is convenient to consider the applicant’s mark
as used upon goods in a plain
get-up; not one chosen to be easily confused with
the opponent’s, nor one specially chosen to distinguish from it’: TA
Blanco White and Robin Jacob,
Kerly’s Law of Trade Marks and Trade
(Sweet & Maxwell, 10
ed, 1972) 175. They also said
that where there
evidence of how the applicant intends to use its mark
where this use would increase the risk of confusion, this evidence can be relied
on ‘to prevent such use being dismissed as unfair or fanciful’ (at
175). We might add that, on our reading of
Taylor (FCA)
), there was no finding of fact that
Taylor used her mark ‘boldly on [any] article’ (
) 278) after the time at which
Hudson’s reputation became firmly established. The only evidence of
‘bold’ use of
the ‘Katie Perry’ mark on the front of a
t-shirt was from a photoshoot in mid-July 2008 (see
Taylor (FCA)
) 29–30 [116] (Markovic J)), at a
time Hudson’s reputation in the ‘Katy Perry’ mark in Australia
emerging (see at 12 [33]–[34], 17–19 [62]–[72], 182
[723(1)–(3)]).
New South Wales Dairy
Corporation v Murray Goulburn Co-operative Co Ltd
[1990] HCA 60
(1990) 171 CLR 363
In addition to continued
merchandising activity, Hudson launched ‘Katy Perry’ shoes in 2018:
Taylor (FCA)
[241], 198 [785] (Markovic J).
Appellant’s
Submissions (n
Taylor (FCA)
) 199 [787].
Killer Queen (FCAFC)
) 268 [339] (Yates, Burley and Rofe
JJ) (but finding against Taylor under both interpretations). For other decisions
in which the
notional ‘normal and fair use’ approach has been taken
in interpreting s 88(2)(c), see
Dunlop Aircraft Tyres Ltd v Goodyear Tire
& Rubber Co
[2018] FCA 1014
(2018) 262 FCR 76
, 114 [180] (Nicholas J);
Firstmac Ltd v
[2023] FCA 540
, [377]–[378] (Markovic J), affirmed in
Firstmac Ltd v Zip Co Ltd
[2025] FCAFC 30
, [165] (Katzmann and Bromwich
JJ, Perram J agreeing at [1]) (‘
Firstmac (FCAFC)
Appellant’s
Submissions (n
Taylor (FCA)
) 198 [781] (Markovic J).
Appellant’s
Submissions (n
) [56]–[57].
Ibid [58]. See also
Taylor (FCA)
[789]–[795] (Markovic J).
Ibid s 122(1)(e).
Ibid s 230(2).
Delfi Chocolate
Manufacturing SA v Mars Australia Pty Ltd
[2015] FCA 1065
(2015) 115 IPR 82
[28]–[29] (Jessup J).
Anchorage Capital
Partners Pty Ltd v ACPA Pty Ltd
[2018] FCAFC 6
(2018) 259 FCR 514
, 547 [142] (Nicholas,
Yates and Beach JJ).
) s 89(1) (emphasis added).
Killer Queen (FCAFC)
) 265 [317] (Yates, Burley and Rofe
Respondents’
Submissions (n
) [42]–[44].
Appellant’s
Submissions (n
Working Party to Review the
Trade Marks Legislation,
Recommended Changes to the Australian Trade Marks
Legislation
(Australian Government Publishing Service, 1992) 45
(Recommendation 6A(3)), 47 (Recommendation 8A(6)).
Ibid 95 (Recommendation
Ibid 96 (Recommendation
Ibid 375–84,
387–8 (Mason CJ), 388–93 (Brennan J), 401–14 (Dawson and
Toohey JJ). See also at 399–400
(Deane J), 414 (Gaudron J) (either not
accepting or doubting that a mark could be removed from the Register on the
basis of post-registration
confusion, but agreeing in the alternative with
Dawson and Toohey JJ’s understanding of ‘blameworthy
Prior to its commencement,
Trade Marks Act 1994
(Cth) was repealed:
See above n
This reading is further
supported by the original wording of s 88(2)(c) of the
), which before its amendment by the
Trade Marks Amendment Act 2006
(Cth) applied where the use of the
registered mark was likely to deceive or cause confusion ‘for a reason
other than one for
which ... the application for the registration of the trade
mark could have been rejected under section 43 or 44; or ... the registration
the trade mark could have been opposed under section 60’.
) 76–7 [72]–[74] (Gleeson CJ,
Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne and Callinan JJ).
McCorquodale v
[2004] FCA 1247
(2004) 63 IPR 582
, 588 [23] (Kenny J).
Killer Queen (FCAFC)
) 265 [319] (Yates, Burley and Rofe
Ibid 265–6 [322].
Respondents’
Submissions (n
See Burrell and Handler,
Australian Trade Mark Law
Ibid, quoted in
) [174] (Katzmann
and Bromwich JJ, Perram J agreeing at [1]).
On some of the problems with
the prevailing Australian approach, see Robert Burrell and Michael Handler,
‘Who Reads the Trade
Marks Register?’
(2025) 45(2)
Oxford Journal
of Legal Studies
See Burrell and Handler,
Australian Trade Mark Law
) [12.4]–[12.5].
Ibid [12.7].
[12.13]–[12.14].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (182 KB)
PDF format (398 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter