URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AboriginalLawB/1997/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:41:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Annas, Marianna --- "The Label of Authenticity: A Certification Trade Mark for Goods and Services of Indigenous Origin" [1997] AboriginalLawB 20; (1997) 3(90) Aboriginal Law Bulletin 4
The Label of Authenticity: A Certification Trade Mark for Goods and Services of Indigenous Origin.
By Marianna Annas
`A few years ago, an old man from my area had a painting of his stolen to be
reproduced on tea towels made by non-Aboriginal people.
When the old man found
out, he was heart broken, and he refused to paint again for more than three
years. It wasn't just a simple
case of a white person having broken his own
land, and he had broken Aboriginal law as well.' Galarrwuy Yunupingu,
A quick trip down to Sydney's tourist trade mecca, the historic Rocks area, and
one is seduced by a vast array of t-shirts, tea towels,
boomerangs and
clapsticks seemingly bearing the work of our Aboriginal artists and
craftspeople. To the novice, the uninformed, the
unfamiliar or uneducated, the
tourist and the shopaholic, it is more than often impossible to discern the
true origin of the product.
As the appropriation of the works of Indigenous
artists has now become uncontrollably extensive, the establishment of a
labelling system is a fundamental cultural necessity.
Often, trade mark law is used as a means of gaining some protection against
`rip-offs' or passing off, through the acquisition of
the exclusive use of a
name and/or logo. A trade mark is a sign or logo which is used to distinguish
the commercial origin of goods
and services. Registration gives the owner of
the mark exclusive use of the mark for the goods and services for which it is
registered.
Up until now, due to lack of access to advice and services,
Indigenous individuals and communities have not made great use of the
Also, a trade mark is traditionally used as a marketing tool rather than a
protective mechanism. The United Nations Development
Program Report of 1994
notes that a trade mark affirming the authenticity of Indigenous peoples' work
would serve a significant purpose
if resources could be generated to allow
communities to use the trade mark and make it widely known to consumers.
The Indigenous people of Australia have been in
need of the introduction of a mark or `Label of Authenticity', which could be
to goods and services which are of genuine Indigenous origin by virtue
of their artistic craftsmanship or mode of manufacture.
With the assistance of the Australia Council and the Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Commission (ATSIC), the National Indigenous
Arts Advocacy
Association (NIAAA) has been developing a national system of labelling to
identify authentic Indigenous cultural products
which are sold to the public.
Such a system is seen as a means of giving Indigenous people a marketing
advantage in an environment
where there is an increasing number of cultural
products which are `Indigenous' in appearance, but in fact of non-Indigenous
The object of the Authenticity labelling system is to assist consumers
in identifying authentic cultural products, and thereby improve
the economic
benefits flowing to Indigenous people from the commercial use of their
NIAAA is a national Indigenous arts and cultural service and advocacy
association which advocates for the continued and increased
recognition and
protection of the rights of Indigenous artists. It supports initiatives for
change to recognise and to protect all
forms of Indigenous artistic and
cultural expression. Its `flagship' projects, such as the development of the
Label of Authenticity
trade mark, are intended to provide Indigenous artists
with significant inroads towards the ultimate cultural and legal protection
their works of art. Several years ago, NIAAA recognised that this need had
become urgent with the increasing interest in and popularity
of Indigenous
culture. As a result, NIAAA has been carrying out research in this area, and
has conducted widespread consultations
with individuals and communities across
Australia as to the usefulness of such a mark and as to the meaning of
`authenticity'.
This paper examines the background to the development of the Label of
Authenticity, and the issues surrounding its ultimate establishment
national certification trade mark.
Historical and philosophical background
Clearly, consumers have become discerning and are demanding more information
they are buying and what
the product's origins are. Indeed, the existence of the swing tags on the
carpets which were the subject
of the Aboriginal Carpets Case
is indicative of the defendants' awareness of labelling.
The swing tags on the carpets falsely and misleadingly represented that
products were of authentic Indigenous origin, and further, that the artists
were being properly remunerated for the reproduction
of their works onto
woollen carpets. These two issues could be dealt with by the introduction of a
national certification trade mark,
that is, a trade mark which certifies that a
product is of a particular standard with respect to its quality.
It should be noted that the protection which such a mark would afford is not to
be confused with the inadequacies of the
respect to Indigenous intellectual property,
nor is it intended as a means of compensating for those shortcomings. Rather
than seeking to prevent copyright infringements, it
addresses trade practices
as marketing dynamics with a view to deterring passing off, and misleading and
deceptive conduct. In other
words, the presence of an Authenticity label at
trading levels would identify, first, that the origin of the goods and services
authentic, and second, ensure that appropriate and adequate remuneration is
channelled to the Indigenous people involved in the creation
reproduction of the designs.
By way of comparison, to protect Inuit art producers as well as consumers, the
government of Canada has registered the symbol of
the igloo as a trade mark
distinguishing original Inuit art from imitations. Products bearing this symbol
are certified as handmade
by Canadian Inuits. Only legitimate Inuit artists and
their marketing agencies are entitled to use the igloo tag. Each agency is
identified by a number printed on the label, and labels may be printed only
with permission from the Department of Indian Affairs
and Northern Development
. DIAND established the igloo tag to
protect legitimate Inuit art from mass-produced igloos, polar bears and such
subject matter made
from plastic moulds. The certificate of authenticity that
could be attached to Inuit work was thought to be more effective than
legislation
prohibiting imitations. At the market level, the presence of a
certificate is an automatic and definitive indication of the product's
authenticity. In contrast, the invoking of legislative protection involves a
formal and extremely costly procedure.
It would be difficult, however, to reserve the use of the igloo and polar bear
subject matter for Inuit producers alone.
Similarly, generic Indigenous Australian artefacts could not be exclusively
produced by a particular community or clan. DIAND considers
the igloo tag,
together with the efforts to promote public awareness,s has been effective in
protecting the market for genuine Inuit
art. The igloo certificate serves to
establish the authenticity of the work, and does not constitute a judgment on
the artistic merit
of any piece.
seeking to affix a seemingly objective system of labelling on a product which
is derived from an artistic work arguably
involves an inherent dichotomy.
Therefore, in attempting to arrive at an acceptable definition of authenticity,
it is the history
or particular Indigenous source of the work's creation which
is of relevance, rather than its aesthetic appeal.
In the United States on the other hand, producers of Native American products
have been successful in introducing new legislation
which requires that any material resembling older American
Indian products must state the country of origin on the label. This protects
the producer from foreign imitations, but not from fakes produced in the United
The law states that it is unlawful to
offer or display for sale any goods, with or without a government trade mark,
in a manner that
falsely suggests that they are Indian produced, Indian
products, or the product of a particular Indian or Indian tribe or Indian
or crafts organisation, resident within the United States.
A person must be a member of an Indian tribe to be
considered an Indian artist or, for those who are not members, must be
as an Indian artisan by an Indigenous tribe. The Bureau of Indian
Affairs maintains a list of federally-recognised tribes, which
is published
periodically in the Federal Register.
Such legislative provisions go far
beyond Australian Trade Practices legislation, which do not address the
specific cultural structure
of Indigenous arts communities in such a direct
manner. Under
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) provisions for misleading
and deceptive conduct,
in connection with
the supply of goods and services, corporations are prohibited from falsely
representing that goods are of a particular
standard, quality or past history.
Although Indigenous artists may use these provisions to protect their forms of
artistic and cultural
expression, the process is not readily available to
artists in remote communities or those unable to access proper
representation.
Defining `authenticity'--research and consultation
In terms of the reproduction of Indigenous artforms, the element of `quality'
is necessarily related to source or history. The main
objectives of the Label
of Authenticity as a national certification trade mark, although somewhat
commercially oriented, are much
determined by this precondition. They are as
To maintain the cultural integrity of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander art;
To ensure a fair and equitable return to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities and
artists for their cultural produce;
To maximise for consumers certainty as to the authenticity of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander-derived works/products/services;
To maximise multiplicity and diversity of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander art;
To promote an understanding both nationally and internationally of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander cultural heritage and art.
NIAAA has conducted extensive consultation across Australia amongst individuals
and communities as to what `authorship' and `origin'
mean to them and their
works of art, with a view to arriving at an appropriately formulated definition
of `authenticity'. A large
amount of information was collected during these
consultations by Kathryn Wells,
conducted the consultations for NIAAA. The information has now been distilled
into a Draft Discussion Paper.
The result to date indicates that `authenticity' is a declaration by Indigenous
Australian artists of identity with, belonging to,
knowledge about, respect for
and responsibility towards the works of art they create.
is about upbringing, beliefs, stories, cultural ways of living
and thinking and knowing what it is to be Aboriginal or Torres Strait
means to be either connected with stories about country or
connected with the experiences of history in being in Australia.
is about both familiarity gained from actual experience and
also having a clear and certain individual perception of expression.
Respect and Responsibility
is about having regard for and looking after
culture. It is about acting in a way which is sensitive to others and which
exploit other peoples' identity, knowledge and belonging.
Wells' research and consultation process indicates that `authenticity' should
not be confused with what is considered modern or `traditional'
or `real' in
Indigenous culture, as Indigenous people define and express these norms as part
of their culture in a wide range of
It is then an integral part of the definition that the work of art has been
created by an Indigenous person who claims a belonging
to a particular story,
based on respect for that person's particular culture.
An affiliation with a `story' is not to be misconstrued
as involving folklore, mythology or fable. Instead, it is part of a cultural
regime which embraces social, genetic, religious, gender-based and other
considerations which might prescribe the right to tell or
represent a story as
a means of artistic expression. Although the criteria are intended to be
simplistic in their practical application,
they are not as unequivocal as those
of other certification trade marks. For example, the Woolmark can be affixed to
an approved
user's product which is made of 100% wool. The material's origin is
readily ascertainable and unlikely to be the subject of contention
regard. In Aboriginal communities the traditional custodians have the
collective authority to determine who may use, create,
see and reproduce a
pre-existing design, style or image. Therefore, the applicable criteria, in
being reduced to five elementary
but key words relating to source or history,
are also inextricably bound to a complex cultural structure.
Practical application
As the Label of Authenticity is intended to promote and market the origin and
authorship of Indigenous cultural products, the labelling
system will be a dual
one whereby the mark will usually be attached to another label (trading or
business name or other trade mark)
indicating that product's source and the
quality of authenticity.
As many suppliers
are regionally based, their distinguishing artistic features are defined by
their own trading name or label. The
goods and services of authentic traders
will start to become synonymous with the Label of Authenticity. In practical
terms, Indigenous
people wanting to sell and market their products and services
would apply to the registered owner for permission to use the Authenticity
trade mark as an approved user. Indigenous people would have to declare that
their products were made by a person or group of people
who identified, could
claim a belonging to the story, had knowledge of and respect for culture, and
took responsibility for what
was created.
The registered owner may delegate its authority so that the mark could also be
attached at a place where the artwork or product is
taken before sale, for
example an approved community arts centre, local gallery or Land Council. The
mark will be usable on reproductions
provided that the manufacturers meet the
requirements of Authenticity. That is, a legitimate licensing arrangement must
exist under
which the manufacturing or distributing licensee is authorised or
licensed by the original Indigenous creator.
Legal issues in establishment
(i) Rules governing use
In accordance with the regulations, rules governing the use of the trade mark
must be filed with the Australian Industrial Property
Organisation (AIPO). An
approved user must use the mark in compliance with the rules. The rules should
a list of approved certifiers or delegated `issuers';
cases in which goods and services are to be certified;
the conditions under which an approved user is allowed to use the mark;
details of use by the owner and approved user;
provisions for settlement of disputes.
Questions as to dispute resolution are likely to
arise with respect to either the refusal to issue the use of the mark, or a
refusal to certify goods and services. The determination
of the most
appropriate mechanism for resolution is dependant upon clear rules and
guidelines as to authentic quality.
(ii) Certification trade marks and the definition of `authenticity'
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) provides for the registration of
certification trade marks.
purpose is to indicate `quality, accuracy, or other characteristics including
in the case of goods, origin, material or
mode of manufacture'. Of critical
importance to the establishment of the mark is reconciling the developed
definition of `authenticity'
with a certain manifestation of quality given the
nature of a certification trade mark. Under the legislation, distinguishing a
by reference to the racial origin or community origin of the artist is
not workable.
The certifiable quality or
other characteristic must be inherent in the product. Accordingly, it is
necessary to certify a quality
of the goods themselves, for example that they
contain an authentic design or story. At this stage, the five key words
referred to
above as determining `authenticity', seem to be based upon the
existence of a particular `story' or history, as these words connote
Indigenous cultures in the ways discussed previously. This characteristic is
not specifically provided for or defined in the legislation.
Accordingly, the
formulated definition of `authenticity' will prescribe eligibility.
(iii) Selection of design/logo
NIAAA is currently working with several Indigenous artists for the development
of a design which will be registered as the mark's
logo with AIPO. Ideally,
such a mark should be simple yet distinctive. Arguably, it should also be
decidedly `Indigenous'. This evokes
some debate as to the use of a symbol which
is generic or has cultural significance. Given the controversies surrounding
perceived as `Indigenous' and what is not, NIAAA has been advised to
opt for a logo which is recognisable in a simple yet distinctively
manner. Further, a symbol which appears to be generic may be more vulnerable to
potential infringements by people wanting
to use the figure or design in their
works or products.
As mentioned, the labelling system will be a dual one whereby the Label of
Authenticity would hang alongside another registered trade
mark, trading or
business name. By necessity, that trader would have qualified to use the Label
of Authenticity after having satisfied
the requisite rules and criteria for
registration.
(iv) Registration in classes of goods and services
Many forms of cultural expression will be eligible to attract the Label,
including original works and reproductions of works (such
as a bark paper,
weaving, fabric product, boomerang, didgeridoo, shell necklace), artefacts,
designs, stories, songs, dances, engravings,
and so on. Under the current
legislation, a separate application is required for use in each class of goods
and services. The registered
owner gains the exclusive use of the mark with
respect to the classes in which it is registered.
(v) Administration
The registered owner of a certification trade mark does not normally carry on
trade in the goods and services of the kind which are
the subject of the mark.
The owner's administering entity processes applications and registrations for
the use of the trade mark
by approved users.
As discussed, the authority to issue the mark may also be delegated to local
community art centres or Land Councils, as it is considered
important that
Indigenous communities have the power to issue the mark to their own
constituents. Therefore, the application of the
mark may be at the point of
production (as opposed to sale or distribution), as producers in these cases
are likely to be those authorised
to apply for the mark locally. In any event,
the registered owner and approved certifiers with delegated authority to issue
must possess the skill required to assess whether or not the goods and
services should qualify to attract the mark.
National educational strategy
It is considered essential that extensive education on national and
international levels be undertaken, as this will measure the
effectiveness of
the Label. NIAAA has forwarded the Draft Discussion Paper produced further to
the consultations by Kathryn Wells
to selected Indigenous arts and cultural
industry practitioners for their comments prior to its finalisation and
development into
an Information Booklet. This is expected to occur over the
coming months.
Further, a vital part of the development and implementation is the production
of four promotional and educational videos by NIAAA,
intended to be
disseminated for viewing throughout the broader Australian community. The
videos will illustrate all facets of the
steps which might be involved, from
the creation of a work of art through to the retail sale of a product which
incorporates its
reproduction. They will demonstrate representations of
dealings between artists and agents, agents and manufacturers and distributors,
transactions with wholesalers and retailers, associated contractual
arrangements, and the process of registering and using the Label
certification trade mark. The videos will also illustrate the use of existing
`good practices' and legitimate ideas about business
which Indigenous people
across Australia have developed. These practices, together with general
business practice and knowledge relating
to trade marks, contracts and
transactions will then
be able to confidently participate in the use and
promotion of the trade mark.
Filming has been done on location in several regional areas and involves
artists and arts and cultural centres, communities and professional
actors. Post-production is dependent upon the gaining of required additional
Thorough education of the broader Australian community and tourist population
is considered intrinsic to the Label's potency. If
an increasingly significant
proportion of authentic suppliers are seen to be affixing the mark to their
products, consumers will
simply choose accordingly. Extensive education will
promote the use of the mark by eligible suppliers, and the Label will be at its
most effective when only non-authentic goods lack it.
The `F' word
As funding for this project to date was specifically granted for the purposes
of research, development and video production, a considerable
additional funding is now required in order to complete the project. NIAAA is
hopeful that the previous assistance of the
Australia Council and ATSIC will
continue so that the project can be implemented as soon as possible.
The Minister for Communications and the Arts, Senator the Honourable Richard
Alston, has also expressed particular interest in this
project and has
acknowledged its importance to the nation's arts and cultural industry. NIAAA
has conveyed to Senator Alston the
importance of the trade mark in the
protection and correct promotion of Indigenous art and culture as being of
paramount concern.
Further, NIAAA is naturally obliged to provide Indigenous
communities with the tangible results of the research and consultation
undertaken over the last 3 years. It is also considered imperative for the
Label of Authenticity to fulfil its purpose with
respect to merchandising
activities surrounding the Year of the Dreaming in 1997, and the Cultural
Olympiad thereafter.
The development, implementation and maintenance of a national certification
trade mark of this nature, although long overdue, is evidently
also coloured by
many factors. Apart from funding constraints, matters of a highly complex and
subjective kind are also operative,
as the above commentary would illustrate.
Nevertheless, if the response of potential funding contributors is positive,
NIAAA's aim
is that the Label of Authenticity be established over the next
year. It is thought that the project will constitute a significant
step towards
greater cultural and legal protection for Indigenous artists, and lead the way
to more comprehensive refoems in Indigenous
intellectul property.
Galarrwuy Yunupingu, `The Black/White
Conflict' in
Windows on the Dreaming: Aboriginal Paintings in the Australian
National Gallery
by Wally Caruana (ed), ANG/Ellsyd Press, Australia,
`Conserving Indigenous
Knowledge--Integrating Two Systems of Innovation',
Report by Rural
Advancement Foundation International to United Nations Development Program
1994, p 42.
Milpurrurru and Others v Indofurn Pty Ltd
Federal Court of Australia, December 1994,
`Stopping the Rip-Offs'--Intellectual
Property Protection for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples Issues
, Attorney-General's Legal Practice, October, 1994, p 6.
`The Igloo Tag',
Inuit Art World
Indian Arts and Crafts Act 1990
`The Igloo Tag',
Inuit Art World
Indian Arts and Crafts Act 1990
Title 1 of PL 101-644.
US Department of the Interior--Indian
Arts and Crafts Board
, Fact Sheet, May 1991.
Trade Practices Act 1974
Baker & McKenzie Solicitors, Sydney,
preliminary advice to NIAAA, 15 June 1995, based upon Kathryn Wells'
`Authenticity--Promotion and Protection of Aboriginal And Torres Strait
Islander Art',
December 1993 (Paper on Research and Development). Kathryn
Wells MA was the research consultant appointed by NIAAA for the Label
Authenticity project.
Wells, op cit.
Kathryn Wells,
Draft Discussion Paper
on the Proposed Authenticity Trade Mark (Promoting and Marketing ATSIC
, October 1996, p 6.
TMO Draft Manual of Practice and
, Paragraph 3.4.
Trade Marks Act 1995
Baker & McKenzie Solicitors, Sydney,
preliminary advice, 15 June 1995 and continuing, which is most gratefully
acknowledged by
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter