URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2020/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:46:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rice, Simon --- "Review: Imperatives For Legal Education Research: Then, Now And Tomorrow (Routledge, 2020)" [2020] UNSWLawJlF 1; (2020) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 1
I THE MEANING OF LEGAL EDUCATION RESEARCH
II NEOLIBERALISM
III REGULATION OF LEGAL EDUCATION
IV FUTURES FOR LEGAL EDUCATION
V CONCLUSION
IMPERATIVES FOR LEGAL EDUCATION RESEARCH: THEN,
NOW AND TOMORROW
(ROUTLEDGE, 2020)
Imperatives for Legal Education Research:
Then, Now and Tomorrow
(Ben Golder, Marina Nehme, Alex Steel and
Prue Vines (eds), Routledge, 2020, ISBN 978-1-138-38780-5)
A fact I enjoy sharing is from David Weisbrot’s invaluable monograph
Australian Lawyers
: ‘In New South Wales it was not until 1968 that
yearly admissions to practice tipped in favour of university
graduates’.
Until then, the
path to legal practice was principally by way of apprenticeship; many if not
most law teachers were practising lawyers,
and ‘legal education’ was
simply what they did, which was deliver lectures and administer
examinations.
In that context, there wasn’t much by way of ‘legal education
research’. In Australia, the
Journal of Professional Legal
began only in 1983, followed by the
Legal Education Review
in 1989. In England,
The Law Teacher
began in 1967. But whether
recently or for a long time, it is unsurprising that much of what is written
As Fiona Cownie says in the volume under review, writing ‘which focuses
the improvement of practice performs a valuable
Kate Galloway,
Melissa Castan and Alex Steel detail that value: such writing addresses
the efficacy of legal education to serve society and the profession, while
employing and advancing contemporary educational imperatives
and methods ...
[it] functions at the intersection of higher education, the law school, the
legal profession, the law, the community
Does it matter, then, whether such writing constitutes
‘research’? Increasingly it does, because unless what legal
write is formally accepted as research, their jobs are insecure, their
promotion unlikely, and their law school’s standing
and funding are
compromised. The possible inclusion of ‘legal education’ as a
recognised field of research for purposes
of the Australian Research Council
adds some urgency to the question, which is addressed by some, and only some, of
the chapters
in the volume.
I THE MEANING OF LEGAL EDUCATION RESEARCH
The book’s title,
Imperatives for Legal Education
, strikes me as ambiguous. It suggests a focus either on reasons
why legal education research is important, or on issues that are
important for
legal education research to address. Although the editors suggest the first,
titling their introductory chapter ‘Legal
education research
imperative’,
actually what the book is about. To the limited extent that the book’s
chapters directly address the idea of legal
education research, they explore not
imperatives for legal education research, but imperatives for accepting and
defining a thing
that is legal education research; this would be captured in a
title about imperatives
for the idea of
legal education research.
It is not obvious what the criteria are for a piece of academic writing to be
accepted even as ‘research’ or, more specifically,
research’, let alone as legal education research (in their chapter
addressing the question, Galloway, Castan and
Steel start with the
not-very-encouraging view of the Council of Australian Law Deans that ‘it
is not at all obvious what “legal
comprehends’).
The first step
might be to have legal education accepted as a field of research at all.
Legal education research is not currently recognised as a distinct field of
research by the Australian and New Zealand Standard Research
Classification
(‘ANZSRC’), the classification under which academic research is
measured, analysed, promoted and rewarded.
In 2012 Kathy Bowrey reported to the
Council of Australian Law Deans on the assessment of research performance in
She wrote that
[t]here has been a concerted effort to enhance research into teaching and
learning in law over the past decade. There are dedicated
researchers and
journals in this area, including Australian journals. This subject matter has
featured as specialist editions of
general law
Identifying ‘uncertainties and confusions’ created by the
‘lack of ... relevant [ANZSRC]
Bowrey recommended
that ‘Legal Education should be recognised as a six-digit specialisation
in the [ANZSRC] divisions of Law
Education’.
In 2019 it was
proposed in a revision of the ANZSRC codes to recognise legal education as a
distinct ‘field of
a decision on
the proposal is expected during 2020.
ANZSRC recognition of legal education as a distinct field of research will
bring unprecedented focus to bear on what constitutes legal
education research
in Australia, because legal education research will count for the next iteration
of the Australian Research Council’s
national research evaluation process,
‘Excellence in Research for Australia’ (‘ERA’).
Galloway, Castan and
Steel’s proposed ‘taxonomy of legal education
though not explicitly – an attempt to prepare for that day.
Their approach is to theorise legal education research ‘as a branch of
legal research’
distinctive character of ‘deriving from and serving the purposes of the
law and its practice’.
They propose a taxonomy into which, presumably, legal education researchers will
fit their work so as to make a legitimate claim
for its being counted as
‘research’. The three part taxonomy draws on ‘existing models
of education, and ... the
broader scholarship of
education’.
It describes
perspective – the ‘purpose or philosophical framework that the
author adopts’,
– ‘recognised frameworks of educational research
– curriculum, pedagogy and
The taxonomy is
generous, and aims to be inclusive; this is especially important in light of
what Cownie writes about the experience
in the United Kingdom
(‘UK’). In relation to ‘perspective’ for example,
Galloway, Castan and Steel allow
for a wide range, from description to radical
critique, in a hierarchy that is based on developments in method, not on
relative scholarly
merit: the hierarchy of perspectives is ‘not a
judgement on quality or
importance’.
Cownie’s chapter can be read as a warning against this generous and
inclusive approach. It appears that the UK’s ERA equivalent
Research Excellence Framework (‘REF’) – engages in exactly the
judgement on quality and importance
of legal education that Galloway, Castan and
Steel disavow. Cownie’s view is that ‘comments made by the expert
for law after REF 2014 suggest that research on legal education ...
did not consistently meet [the] criteria’ of ‘originality,
significance and rigour’.
These are criteria ‘that are used to judge research into substantive areas
and they cut
across Galloway, Castan and Steel’s non-judgemental hierarchy of
perspectives. Cownie’s proposed strategy
to meet REF expectations is to be
judgemental, and to distinguish between writing that is ‘research’,
and writing that
is (merely) ‘on the improvement of an aspect of learning
and teaching’.
In doing so
she relies on Ernest Boyer’s taxonomy of scholarship.
Boyer’s taxonomy sets out ‘four separate, yet overlapping,
functions [of the professoriate] ... the scholarship of discovery;
scholarship of integration; the scholarship of application; and the scholarship
of teaching’.
moved to his analysis of research by a concern that teaching is seen as a lesser
order scholarly activity behind the ‘first
and most essential form of
scholarly activity’,
This is Cownie’s
concern too, based on the UK REF comments. Her solution is to rely on
Boyer’s taxonomy as a hierarchy,
the scholarship of discovery and of integration are ‘research’ in
the traditional sense [and] the scholarship of application
and the scholarship
[of] teaching describe scholarship which is not of the same nature and which
cannot be valued in identical
She argues, therefore, that writing on legal education that falls within the
first two categories is ‘generally accepted as
“research”’, but that writing on legal education that falls
within the second two categories is ‘simply not
regarded as
“research”’.
To emphatically distinguish between the two, Cownie proposes changing the
nomenclature, and distinguishing between these two forms
of writing on legal
education. For Boyer, it is all ‘scholarship’; for Cownie, writing
that falls within Boyer’s
first two categories would be called
‘“research” in the traditional
and writing that
falls within Boyer’s second two categories would be called
‘scholarship’, which she sees merely
as ‘a process of reading
research in order to keep up to
Using the term ‘scholarship’ in this intentional way is at odds
with the well-argued preference that Boyer, and Galloway,
Castan and Steel, have
for giving substantive meaning to scholarship
research. Further,
Cownie’s nomenclature proposal would displace the well-known and widely
used term ‘Scholarship of
Learning and Teaching’, or
The term is
fourth function of the professoriate, ‘scholarship of
a term that
appears to precipitate what has become widely known as the scholarship of
learning and teaching.
the strategic sense of Cownie’s proposal, it is hard to see the widespread
renaming of what has been accepted as research
as mere scholarship.
Galloway, Castan and Steel, without reference to the existence of SoLT, call
writing-on-legal-education-which-is-legal-research, ‘Scholarship
Education’, or ‘SoLE’. The similarity of the terms may be a
coincidence, but if the term SoLE is to be
popularised and adopted it might
benefit from an explicit connection not only with SoLT, but with SoLT’s
origins in Boyer’s
influential thesis and subsequent related
In summary, where Galloway, Castan and Steel propose what legal education
research (SoLE) is, Cownie argues for what it should be
seen to be. Her approach
would exclude from formal counting of research outputs a significant amount of
academic writing on legal
education that is considered, informed, analytical,
reflective, and useful. It would exclude much of what Galloway, Castan and Steel
would include as SoLE. But it may be that, come the time, an ANZSRC code which
recognises legal education as a distinct ‘field
of research’ will
give Cownie’s thesis particular relevance to Australia.
A debate about what constitutes legal education research, or scholarship, is
an important, even existential, one. In this volume it
is not so much a debate
as two views in different parts (chapter 2 in Part I and chapter 7 in Part II).
The absence of a consolidated
and central discussion of the issue is surprising
in light of the editors’ express enthusiasm for the ‘urgently needed
... formalisation of legal education as its own distinct research field, with
its own taxonomy’.
exactly what Cownie and, very differently and separately, Galloway, Castan and
Steel address, and is one example of a weakness
in the volume that is common to
many such publications: different authors’ chapters don’t engage
with each other. Would
that Cownie, Galloway, Castan and Steel had been locked
in a room together; they might have produced a single work which canvassed,
differentiated and sought to accommodate their very different views on what
legal education research comprehends.
The theme of the meaning of legal education research is picked up in two
complementary chapters, one of which is Alex Steel’s
survey of empirical
legal education research in Australia. Steel touches on the existential question
when he defines what falls outside
‘original empirical research’,
and when he excludes as not empirical (but are they SoLE?) ‘papers that
merely reported
on teaching or assessment innovations in a single
author’s personal reflections based on their teaching experience without
objective data’.
Kristoffer Greaves’s chapter is similarly complementary to the debate
examines aspects of what
he calls ‘legal education
that are apparent in
a meta-survey of ‘legal education
scholarship’,
and proposes
criteria for identifying empirical research. Here is another missed opportunity
for different authors’ chapters
to engage with each other; it seems, for
example, that Greaves’s approach – to count as empirical research
legal education
SoLT output that is ‘based on data derived from observed
and measurable experience’
– is coextensive with Steel’s. At least the two chapters are
contiguous and can be readily read together.
After a number of intervening chapters, the volume returns to the idea of
legal education research with Paul Maharg’s chapter,
the opening address
to the conference on which the volume is based. The chapter is effectively a
capstone on the preceding discussions
of legal education research. With a
particular focus on legal education and technology, Maharg is concerned that the
research ‘lacks
the quality and rigour that we need to understand the
field and guide our
practices’.
He makes the
point that the same is true of legal education research more generally,
evidenced by the literature review he led for
the Legal Education Training
Review (‘LETR’) in England and
This concern is,
effectively, the starting point for the chapters by Cownie (who invokes the REF
expert assessors’ comments
to the same
and Galloway, Castan
and Steel. Where those authors propose different ways of characterising legal
education research so as to lift
its profile and quality, to which Steel’s
and Greaves’s chapters add the heft of empirical work, Maharg proposes
rival futures’ for legal education research: Promethean
discovery of new knowledge, Sisyphus-like isolated and repetitious
labour and,
his preference, Themistic community and openness of shared
Other chapters in the volume are about other matters relating to legal
education, but none is in any state of angst about the meaning
education research. While the existential question ‘but is it legal
education research?’ could be asked of each,
I tend to the more generous,
less hierarchical view that all but one of the chapters are what Galloway,
Castan and Steel would call
SoLE, although some may not fall within
Cownie’s upper echelon of strict ‘research’. The chapters
pursue an argument,
or tell a story, or analyse an aspect of legal education,
with implicit confidence that they are engaging in SoLE in some way.
There is, however, no clear unifying feature among the chapters in the volume
except that each is about an aspect of legal education,
and I am neither helped
nor convinced by the editors’ grouping of the chapters. Of the five
chapters that examine the editors’
theme of the meaning of legal education
research, one is in the ‘Introduction’, one is under ‘Calls
for Action’
and three are grouped under the heading ‘Current
Landscapes’. The other two chapters under that last heading more clearly
address a current landscape: neoliberalism.
II NEOLIBERALISM
Peter Burdon describes the reforms to higher education that began in the
1980s, where ‘[c]hanges in funding, combined with the
dominance of free
market liberalism in public policy, economized the idea of higher
education’,
rendering it
‘a service to the consumer that should be bought and sold like any other
commodity’.
context he reviews ten years of scholarship in two leading legal education
journals, to see the extent to which the literature
neoliberalism and engages the political and economic circumstances that
influence our teaching
environments’.
alert: Burdon’s answer is, not much. He characterises the legal
scholarship variously as ‘largely
apolitical’,
‘to be neutral’,
prioritising ‘skills, technology and practice over critical
and he offers
an extensive and considered analysis of why this might be so. The point about
lack of critical analysis harks back
to the debate about what constitutes legal
education research, but that is not an issue that Burdon is addressing.
In describing the effect of neoliberalism on higher education, Burdon
necessarily refers to Margaret Thornton’s ‘sustained
and detailed
analysis’ of that
phenomenon,
and to related
scholarship.
The extent and
nature of neoliberal influence on higher education is contested territory, and
Burdon sets out many of the criticisms
of Thornton’s
This considered
account of the neoliberalism debate contrasts starkly with the chapter that
follows, by David Dixon.
Dixon’s chapter must be in the book to be read with Burdon’s
account of neoliberalism, because it says nothing about legal
research. It is, rather, an extraordinarily blunt and at times
personally-directed attack on the work of Margaret Thornton,
Nickolas James and
Frank Carrigan. It is as startling to read as it was to hear for those who were
at the conference where Dixon
this chapter is largely
that paper, down to the comment ‘[l]ater today I am going to
Dixon’s chapter is far from apolitical and neutral. His argument
– leaving personalities out of it – is very strongly
neoliberal critique is overly pessimistic. He recounts numerous examples of
where his experience, as a law dean, has been
a much better one than the
‘antagonistic ... and dismissive’ views of
‘left-pessimists’
such as Thornton and Carrigan. While Burdon gives an account of the published
commentators’ criticisms of Thornton’s
thesis, Dixon instead points
out what he sees as Thornton’s ‘sub-Foucaultian affectation’
and ‘pretentious
‘hopelessly defeatist’
This is only a sample,
and Carrigan and James come in for a serve as well.
Parts of the chapter read as, quite frankly, highly defensive and very angry.
There is an intellectual argument in there, captured
in a closing statement
where Dixon says ‘[t]he success of neo-liberalism as a hegemonic project
is limited: I see no evidence
that [students] have internalised its
But there is
little in the chapter that rationally argues for this, and nothing in the
chapter that brings it within the theme of
the volume.
The second half of the volume – ‘Calls for Action’ –
is a collection of chapters that canvass diverse issues
in legal education. The
chapters say little directly about legal education research, and if the theme of
the volume is to be borne
out they might best be read as examples themselves of
what SoLE can be.
III REGULATION OF LEGAL EDUCATION
One topic among the remaining chapters is the regulatory environment of legal
education. Anthony Bradney gives an account of regulation
in England and
and Sally Kift does the
same for Australia,
neither refers to the other or to experience in the other jurisdiction. The
chapters are, however, side-by-side, and reading
the two gives the impression
that regulation of legal education in Australia has been less invasive and
controlling than it has been
in England and Wales, and that where legal
academics in England and Wales have been moved to resistance, legal academics in
have been more successful in managing what legal education is and how
it is done; more agentic, as Kift puts
Julian Webb’s chapter goes some way towards bringing the Bradney and
Kift chapters together, and the three form a trio on design
and regulation of
legal education. Again, it is a pity the authors were not all in a room
together, producing analyses that engaged
with and responded to each other.
Webb, an Englishman in Australia, reflects on the ‘partially
successful’
England and Wales,
for which he
led the research team, and does so in the hope that the discussion ‘may
also have some particular resonance for
educational practice in
Australia’.
recent forum in which the LETR lessons might resonate has been the project of
the Law Admissions Consultative Committee
to redraft academic requirements for
admission to practice in
but none of the 15
submissions responding to a call for public comment refers to LETR; indeed, only
one submission relies on legal
education research at all.
IV FUTURES FOR LEGAL EDUCATION
The final three chapters of the volume are again a trio, this time
anticipating possible futures for legal education. Carrie Menkel-Meadow’s
chapter was her keynote address to the conference on which the volume is based,
surveying the history of legal education in the United
States of America
(‘US’) and tracking legal education’s evolving idea of what it
means to be a lawyer. To introduce
her reflections on ‘what a good legal
education should consist
Menkel-Meadow poses a
series of provocative questions about what legal education should teach, and how
legal education should be
evaluated. Most pertinently for Australia, she asks
whether there is ‘still a core of subjects to be taught to all law
and says not, observing that ‘[t]he use that humans make
of law is too complex to be placed in an overly reductive education
observation for the Law Admissions Consultative Committee to ponder.
The future that Menkel-Meadow would prepare lawyers for is one characterised
by globalisation and technology. Similarly, Tania Leiman
anticipates lawyers
working in and with the disruption of a ‘fourth industrial
revolution’,
and examines
in some detail the ‘knowledge and skills ... required to navigate these
changes’ and how and by whom these
V CONCLUSION
The authors in this volume are significant scholars in the field of
Anglo/US/Australian legal education. To read their work is reason
enough to go
to the Taylor and Francis database (for those who can) and download chapters of
interest. The whole book in hard copy
for £120, or even an eBook for
£45, is more than most researchers will need. As a book on legal education
research the
volume is less than the sum of its parts, and the value is in
cherry-picking the chapters of interest; all but one are examples of
education research, ranging across topics such as SoLT and SoLE, neoliberalism,
education regulation, purposes of legal education,
and legal education’s
possible futures.
* Professor of Law, University of Sydney Law School.
David Weisbrot,
(Longman Cheshire, 1989) 72, citing Committee of Inquiry into Legal
Education in New South Wales,
Legal Education in New South Wales
Report, 1979) 184.
See David Barker,
of Australian Legal Education
(Federation Press, 2017) 45–6.
Fiona Cownie, ‘The
Reception of Legal Education Research in the (Legal) Academy’ in Ben
Golder, Marina Nehme, Alex Steel
and Prue Vines (eds),
Imperatives for Legal
Education Research: Then, Now and Tomorrow
(Routledge, 2020) 12, 21.
Kate Galloway, Melissa Castan
and Alex Steel, ‘Towards a Taxonomy of Legal Education’ in Ben
Golder et al (eds),
Imperatives for Legal Education Research: Then, Now and
(Routledge, 2020) 120, 126–7.
Ben Golder, Marina Nehme, Alex
Steel and Prue Vines, ‘Legal Education Research
Imperative’ in Ben Golder et al (eds),
Imperatives for Legal Education
Research: Then, Now and Tomorrow
(Routledge, 2020) 3, 3 (emphasis in
Galloway, Castan and Steel (n
4) 122, citing Council of Australian Law Deans, ‘Statement on the Nature
of Legal Research’
(Statement, October 2005).
Kathy Bowrey,
Research Performance in the Discipline of Law: The Australian Experience with
Research Metrics, 2006–2011
(Report to the Council of Australian Law
Deans, 13 March 2012).
Australian Research
Council, Australian Bureau of Statistics, New Zealand Ministry of Business,
Innovation and Employment and Stats
NZ, ‘Consultation Draft: Australian
and New Zealand Standard Research Classification Review’ (Consultation
Draft, ANZSRC
Review, 2019) 68.
Galloway, Castan and Steel
Ibid 132–6.
Cownie (n 3) 14.
Ernest L Boyer,
Scholarship Reconsidered: Priorities of the Professoriate
Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, 1990) 16 (emphasis omitted).
Cownie (n 3) 24.
Interchangeable in the
literature with ‘SoTL’, the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning.
Michael K Potter and Erika
Kustra, ‘The Relationship between Scholarly Teaching and SoTL: Models,
Distinctions, and Clarifications’
(2011) 5(1)
International Journal for
the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning
Boyer (n 23) 16.
See, eg, International
Society for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning (Web Page)
<https://issotl.com/>; Peter Ling,
‘The Scholarship of Teaching and
Learning and Higher Education Research: Boundaries and Implications’ in
Lorraine Ling
and Peter Ling (eds),
Emerging Methods and Paradigms in
Scholarship and Education Research
(IGI Global, 2020) 56.
See, eg, Kay Maxwell and
Julie Pastellas, ‘Valuing Practice: The Place of Practical Legal Research
in Academic Life’
(Conference Paper, AARE International Educational
Research Conference, 28 November–2 December 2004).
Golder et al (n 5) 4.
Alex Steel,
‘Empirical Legal Education Research in Australia: 2000–2016’
in Ben Golder et al (eds),
Imperatives for Legal Education Research: Then,
Now and Tomorrow
(Routledge, 2020) 74, 75.
Kristoffer Greaves,
‘A Meta-Survey of Scholarship of Learning and Teaching in Practice-Based
Legal Education’ in Ben
Golder et al (eds),
Imperatives for Legal
Education Research: Then, Now and Tomorrow
(Routledge, 2020) 107, 109.
Paul Maharg,
‘Prometheus, Sisyphus, Themis: Three Futures for Legal Education
Research’ in Ben Golder et al (eds),
Imperatives for Legal Education
Research: Then, Now and Tomorrow
(Routledge, 2020) 271, 280.
Ibid, citing Julian Webb,
Jane Ching, Paul Maharg and Avrom Sherr,
Setting Standards: The Future of
Legal Services Education and Training Regulation in England and Wales
Report of the Legal Education and Training Review, Solicitors Regulation
Authority, Bar Standards Board and ILEX Professional
Standards, June 2013).
Cownie (n 3) 14.
Maharg (n 40) 282.
Peter Burdon,
‘Neoliberalism in Legal Education Research’ in Ben Golder et al
Imperatives for Legal Education Research: Then, Now and Tomorrow
(Routledge, 2020) 31, 32.
Ibid 33, quoting Stuart
Macintyre, André Brett and Gwilym Croucher,
No End of a Lesson:
Australia’s Unified National System of Higher Education
University Press, 2017) 37.
Ibid 33, citing Margaret
Privatising the Public University: The Case of Law
(Routledge,
2012) and her earlier articles: Margaret Thornton, ‘Technocentrism in the
Law School: Why the Gender and Colour
of Law Remain the Same’
(1998) 36(2)
Osgoode Hall Law Journal
; Margaret Thornton, ‘Among the Ruins:
Law in the Neo-liberal Academy’ [2001] 20
Windsor Yearbook of Access to
3; Margaret Thornton, ‘The Demise of Diversity in Legal
Education: Globalisation and the New Knowledge Economy’ (2001)
International Journal of the Legal Profession
37; Margaret Thornton,
‘Gothic Horror in the Legal Academy’
(2005) 14(2)
Legal Studies
Ibid, citing Michael
Chesterman and David Weisbrot, ‘Legal Scholarship in Australia’
(1987) 50(6)
Modern Law Review
; Jane Kelsey, ‘Privatizing the
Universities’
(1998) 25(1)
Journal of Law and Society
Currie, Bev Thiele and Patricia Harris,
Gendered Universities in Globalized
Economies: Power, Careers, and Sacrifices
(Lexington Books, 2002); Nickolas
James, ‘Power-Knowledge in Australian Legal Education: Corporatism’s
[2004] SydLawRw 28
(2004) 26(4)
Sydney Law Review
Burdon (n 44)
David Dixon, ‘The
Cultural Cringe and Australian Legal Education’ (Speech, Research in Legal
Education Conference, 5
December 2017). The audio is available at
http://www.legaledconference.law.unsw.edu.au/program
David Dixon, ‘The
Poverty of Pessimism’ in Ben Golder et al (eds),
Imperatives for Legal
Education Research: Then, Now and Tomorrow
(Routledge, 2020) 49, 68.
Anthony Bradney, ‘Who
Controls University Legal Education? The Case of England and Wales’ in Ben
Golder et al (eds),
Imperatives for Legal Education Research: Then, Now and
(Routledge, 2020) 143.
Sally Kift, ‘A
Virtuous Journey through the Regulation Minefield: Reflections on Two Decades of
Australian Legal Education
Scholarship’ in Ben Golder et al (eds),
Imperatives for Legal Education Research: Then, Now and Tomorrow
(Routledge, 2020) 159.
Julian Webb,
‘Galloping Off Madly in One Direction: Legal Education Reform, the
(Im)possibility of Evidence-Based Policy Making
and a Plea for Better Design
Thinking’ in Ben Golder et al (eds),
Imperatives for Legal Education
Research: Then, Now and Tomorrow
(Routledge, 2020) 196, 211.
Webb et al (n 41).
Webb (n 63) 215.
Law Admissions Consultative
Committee, ‘Redrafting the Academic Requirements for Admission’,
Law Council of Australia
<https://www.lawcouncil.asn.au/resources/law-admissions-consultative-committee/redrafting-the-academic-requirements-for-admission>.
Carrie Menkel-Meadow,
‘Thinking or Acting Like a Lawyer? What We Don’t Know about Legal
Education and Are Afraid to
Ask’ in Ben Golder et al (eds),
Imperatives
for Legal Education Research: Then, Now and Tomorrow
(Routledge, 2020) 223,
Tania Leiman,
‘Educating for the Past, the Present or the Future?’ in Ben Golder
et al (eds),
Imperatives for Legal Education Research: Then, Now and
(Routledge, 2020) 246, 246, citing Klaus Schwab,
Industrial Revolution
(Random House, 2016).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (91.6 KB)
PDF format (349 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter