URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/HRD/2007/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:01:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Garrett, Peter --- "Securing the Environment: The challenge of protecting human rights in a changing climate" [2007] HRightsDef 18; (2007) 16(2) Human Rights Defender 19
Securing the Environment: The challenge of protecting human rights in a changing climate
Securing the Environment:
The challenge of
protecting human rights in a changing climate
Peter Garrett
Like an uninvited guest, climate change slipped through the
backdoor and into our consciousness some two decades ago. At first it
content to sit quietly on the margins, observed by a growing number of
interested scientists. Then, about 10 years ago, it
began to draw attention to
itself for all the wrong reasons.
Since then the drought in southern Australia deepened, storms and heat waves
intensified across the world, and the science began to
Slowly, almost begrudgingly, climate change moved centre stage.
So tonight, less than a week away from the 2007 Budget, I’m calling on
the Howard Government to urgently increase its commitment
to Pacific Island
states in the area of aid and development focused on climate change.
These states, already experiencing a range of economic, social and political
challenges, are on the climate change frontline, staring
straight at the tidal
wave of global warming threats. They need our help.
That there is a connection between the environment and human rights is clear.
Humans need a healthy environment to underpin their
economic, social and
political development.
In 2005 a coalition of international NGOs warned that global warming
threatens to reverse human progress and make the international
target of halving
global poverty by 2015 – the Millennium Development Goals –
unreachable.
The Independent
newspaper in the UK on 24 April 2007 highlighted the
rapid passage of global warming. In an article, ‘An island made by global
warming’, it detailed the unexpectedly rapid disintegration of the
Greenland Ice Shelf as a consequence of global warming and
the surprising
emergence of a new land mass, an island named Warming Island, that had suddenly
appeared on the maps. Warming Island,
it said, ‘has been created by a
quite undeniable, rapid and enormous physical transformation and is likely to be
seen around
the world as a potent symbol of the coming effects of climate
Just as the disappearing islands in our region will be seen around the world
as a potent symbol of the coming effects of climate change,
so great is the
transformation of the physical qualities and quantities of the planet.
“The Howard Government has been continually hostile to even
acknowledging the potential problem of climate refugees let alone
giving prudent
consideration as to how to address what is likely to be a major regional issue
in coming years.”
The article went on to say,
‘[b]ut it is only one more example of the disintegration of the Greenland
Ice Sheet, that scientists
have begun to realise, only very recently, is
proceeding far more rapidly than anyone thought’.
‘Securing the Environment’ is a very broad topic, but given the
tale of Warming Island, and the fact of the disappearing
islands in our region,
I’m taking as my starting point the urgent need to address the single most
important environmental issue
we face: the threat of dangerous climate change.
And, in particular, the issue of the physical, economic and cultural security of
our Pacific neighbours’ environment, indeed their future, as they
confront the effects of climate change, with impacts being
felt right now,
impacts that are likely to be more pronounced, and more difficult to manage, in
the future.
Labor has already begun to develop policy in this area, including releasing a
discussion paper ‘Our Drowning Neighbours’,
and will continue
working on this particular aspect of climate change policy in the run up to the
It is worth noting two matters at the outset. The first is that a number of
low-lying Pacific Island states are already experiencing
climate change; states
like Tuvalu, Kiribati and Vanuatu, and they have been attempting to draw
attention to this for a number of
years. By virtue of their close proximity to
the ocean, they are especially vulnerable to the impacts of climate change,
more intense storm events and rising sea levels causing salt
inundation and fresh water contamination; they are mostly poorly equipped
deal with this huge challenge. Second, the response to date of the Howard
Government to the concerns of these states about the
impact that global warming
is having on their island homes; a response that can be characterised as
indifference bordering on scandalous
neglect. In the past this has included
refusing to meet with Pacific Island leaders to discuss climate change, with the
making clear that it does not believe there is a responsibility for
Australia to take into account the problems these states face
and dismissing the
concerns that Pacific leaders have previously expressed about climate change as
‘exaggerated’ and
‘apocalyptic’, as the Prime Minister
did in 1997.
These words have a familiar ring to them. They are part of the denialist
mantra still emanating from the Howard Government 10 years
later. Industry
Minister Ian MacFarlane’s continued denial of climate change science on
recently is further proof that the Howard Government still
doesn’t get it on climate change. The Industry Minister denigrated
Australia’s world-leading climate scientists, saying on
‘what I am sceptical about is some of the more exaggerated claims that are
being made about the connection between CO2 emissions
and climate change’.
Just eight months ago the Industry Minister didn’t think there was any
connection at all.
The Prime Minister consistently downplays the link between climate change and
bushfires, the Treasurer downplays the link between
climate change and drought,
and the Industry Minister downplays the link between CO2 emissions and climate
On 17 February 2007 the Finance Minister maintained there were
‘significant concerns about what the Intergovernmental Panel
Change is saying, and they are only saying [that human induced climate change]
is very likely, they themselves concede
there is some doubt’.
There is, I have to say, little doubt in the IPCC reports, the most recent of
which used the expression ‘unequivocal’;
nor is there much doubt
amongst those already living with climate change.
In the 1997 South Pacific Forum, with Pacific states already alarmed at the
potential risks global warming was posing for their region
and seeking
recognition of the seriousness of the issue, Pacific Island Forum nations sought
a communiqué containing specific
references to climate change. The
Australian Government demanded that this reference be removed.
Again in 2001 at a Pacific Island Forum a number of nations tried to include
a reference to environmental refugees and compensation
for people affected by
climate change in a statement to be sent to the World Summit on Sustainable
Development, but again Australia
insisted it be removed.
The Howard Government has been continually hostile to even acknowledging the
potential problem of climate refugees let alone giving
prudent consideration as
to how to address what is likely to be a major regional issue in coming years.
In ‘Our Drowning Neighbours’ Labor identified the perilous
situation facing a number of our nearest neighbours and proposed
Change Strategy to assist Pacific Island states as they grapple with possible
evacuations, along with cultural and economic
collapse. Included in that
strategy was the need for a specific Pacific Climate Centre to provide more
comprehensive information
and advice on climate change impacts in the region.
Despite these island communities being on the front line of climate change,
the current weather monitoring systems were ‘amongst
the worst in the
world’, according to the Fijian Director of Meteorology.
Labor has canvassed assistance with mitigation, adaptation and emergency
efforts, the formation of an international coalition like
a Pacific Climate
Change Alliance, a preparedness to accept environmental refugees plus a number
of other measures; all are being
considered.
The Howard Government’s unwillingness to ratify the Kyoto Protocol is
one major block to having a coordinated international
effort, with Australia
unable to participate formally in preparatory meetings with Pacific countries
prior to major international
Climate Change conferences.
Additionally, the unwillingness of the Howard Government to ratify Kyoto
means that Australia cannot shape the Adaptation fund established
by Kyoto which
could be used by a future Pacific Climate Change Alliance to enable the fund to
play a role in financing a number
of positive measures to address the impacts of
climate change, such as designing infrastructure to accommodate sea level rise,
new water resources and storage areas, and managing a progressive
retreat from the coastline. Nor can Australia enable the Clean
Development
Mechanism of Kyoto to facilitate the implementation of clean technologies in the
Pacific region.
All of this foregone because of the Government’s ideological objection
to the Kyoto Protocol.
It is self evident that securing the environment is a prerequisite to
securing the economic, political and social foundations necessary
people to live fully in the new millennium. Central to the issue of how to
secure the environment, and what this term actually
means, is climate change and
our response to it.
The Australian Government’s hostility to those who have claimed climate
change is a real threat – church leaders, former
US vice-president Al
Gore, climate scientists, myself – is part of the Coalition’s
political repertoire, but it’s
an ideology of ignorance, it seems, of
Environment Minister Malcolm Turnbull claims that Australia is ‘the
envy of the world’ on climate change and that ‘no
country has done
more to address climate change’ than Australia.
I disagree.
Our Pacific neighbours, building makeshift barriers to stem the encroaching
sea waters, watch in disbelief as this affluent, powerful
state – the
dominant power in the region – turns its back on their plight.
Amongst the many deplorable examples of this Government’s unwillingness
to take climate change seriously, the indifference to
the situation facing our
Pacific neighbours is notable.
Labor understands the need to reconfigure our aid budget, and our overall
approach to overseas aid and development, to reflect the
immense challenge that
climate change represents. Labor would ratify Kyoto, set targets for the
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions,
increase support for renewables and clean
energy, implement a national emissions trading scheme, along with a number of
other measures.
Bob McMullan, Shadow Minister for Federal/State relations and International
Development Assistance, and Robert McClelland, Shadow
Minister for Foreign
Affairs, understand the importance of a comprehensive international approach to
climate change and the proposals
already in place about climate change refugees
and other matters.
“It is long overdue for Australia to play a leading role in global
efforts to curb greenhouse gas emissions and help our poorer
neighbours adapt to
climate change impacts.”
Major Australian aid and
environmental NGOs in their 2006 report, ‘Australia Responds: Helping our
Neighbours Fight Climate
Change’, stated clearly that ‘efforts to
end poverty amongst our poorest neighbours will fail unless the Australian
takes urgent action to tackle climate change and prepare for its
So Federal Labor is aware that addressing climate change needs to be
integrated into our approach to aid and development across the
especially the Pacific, but that the current Howard Government’s aid
program is almost completely silent on climate
change issues.
As near as we can tell, out of the Government’s $2.946 billion aid
program for 2006-07, only $7 million is directed at activities
that specifically
address climate change, with another $18 million identified as being for
‘other relevant programs, mainly
in water management or disaster
preparedness’.
Labor acknowledges the Government has recently committed $3 million for the
improvement of longterm climate change predictions, specifically
Pacific Island countries, but this is a very small amount. A great deal more
needs to be done.
It is long overdue for Australia to play a leading role in global efforts to
curb greenhouse gas emissions and help our poorer neighbours
adapt to climate
change impacts.
Specifically, Labor will reprioritise our aid program to assist developing
countries in addressing climate change. We will also consider
requiring that aid
funding programs are considered from a global warming perspective.
The impacts of climate change are not evenly distributed, and it’s
particularly the case for our South Pacific and Melanesian
neighbours if we
consider that for every 1cm of sea level rise, storm surge can affect low-lying
environments by up to a metre, and
that sea levels are posited to rise by half a
metre or more.
These measures represent the beginning of what we should contemplate as our
South Pacific neighbours try to cope with living on the
climate change
So this Government has a responsibility to act now to ensure our neighbours
have greater capacity to manage this looming crisis, but
it can only be realised
if we are prepared to take up the challenge.
And tonight I issue that challenge again to the Howard Government. After all,
for our drowning neighbours in the South Pacific and
beyond, there is no time to
This is an extract from a speech given by Peter Garrett MP, Shadow
Minister for Climate Change, Environment And Heritage, at a symposium
the Australian Human Rights Centre, UNSW, 2
Peter Garrett is the Shadow Minister for Climate Change, Environment,
Heritage and the Arts and the Labor Member for Kingsford Smith.
former president of the Australian Conservation Foundation and a former member
of Australian band Midnight Oil. Peter
received the Australian Humanitarian
Foundation Award (environment category) in 2000, and in 2003 received the Order
of Australia
(Member General Division) for his contribution to environment and
the music industry.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (32.5 KB)
PDF format (142 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter