URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrecedentAULA/2024/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:30:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Haikerwal, Jyoti --- "Top 10 Tips for Surviving the Junior Years in the Legal Industry" [2024] PrecedentAULA 5; (2024) 180 Precedent 14
Top 10 tips for surviving the junior years in the legal industry
By Jyoti Haikerwal
As a winner of the 2022 and
Lawyers Weekly
Under 30 Awards,
first in the insurance category then health, medical and personal injury, Jyoti
Haikerwal – a young practitioner
with a double degree in law and medical
science – shares some strategies for
After almost unconsciously following the well-trodden path from high school
to law school to a corporate job, I am now trying to make
active choices,
creating a version of work/life balance that works for me, my personality and my
priorities. These are 10 of the
best tips I have picked up from people along my
journey, which I try to reflect on when planning my day, week or year ahead:
Yes – the buzz word since COVID-19 but an important word and one that
we should continue to use. In my view, the first step
towards wellbeing is
understanding that this means something different to everyone. To some,
wellbeing is a facemask, bath and early
night. To others, it is competing in an
Ironman Triathlon (I have some crazy overachieving friends).
It took time to work out what wellbeing is to me and what I need to do to
fill up my cup and avoid burnout. Sometimes, wellbeing for
me is getting a task
done that has been on my list for far longer than I want to admit; sometimes it
is taking a mental health day
when I have been working long hours; sometimes it
is taking myself to a restaurant in the middle of the week and ordering a
pasta; sometimes it is tapping into my creative side by doing some water
colouring or trying a dance class; and sometimes, it simply
means finishing work
at 5:00pm, walking home and not checking my emails (this may be the hardest).
I am no expert but, after having wellbeing-focused conversations in both my
personal and professional life, I realise that no one
size fits all. Facemasks
and baths don’t work for me but might work for you, so try different
things until you discover what
suits you and, when you do, tell the people
around you so they can support you as you make time for it.
LIFE OUTSIDE OF WORK
A typical interview question is ‘What do you like to do outside of
work? What are your interests and hobbies?’
I used to hate that
question because I did not have a fun answer, just the usual: reading (although
I have not read a book in two
years); hiking and camping (actually I go
glamping); and watching international films (if you count Nordic true crime
series on Netflix).
I have some amazing friends with wicked hobbies including making wine,
creating pottery and going salsa dancing. Trying to make some
more purposeful
choices, I decided to try and commit to a hobby, and I picked up water
colouring. I am not the best at it, but I
really enjoy it. I have also mentioned
it twice now in this short article so you can see that I am excited to talk
also very much become a third space for me and so when I do it,
I immediately forget about the looming deadlines and the unanswered
Instead, I spend some time with myself doing something that makes me very happy
and relaxed. I have found it helps to have
a hobby you love and makes you feel
happy and relaxed because, when you are having a stressful day at work and all
your clients want
something, it feels nice to look forward to going home and
doing something for you.
Ah, this is a tricky one and one that I still struggle with: learning what my
capacity is and how to say
. To discover what your true capacity is
might mean being pushed over your limit, and that can be a very stressful and
difficult experience.
But if that happens, trust me, you will not let it happen
again. I am still trying to work it out myself but I do know that being
with yourself and your colleagues about your workload (including mental
workload, physical workload and personal workload)
is a good place to start.
KNOW YOUR PRIORITIES AND MAKE THEM KNOWN
The first step is working out what you want. What is important to you? If you
want to focus on work for the next little while because
you are gunning for that
promotion or pay rise, tell your family and friends that, for the next few
months, you might be working
later than usual. If you have just joined your
local frisbee team and they train at 6:00pm on Thursday nights, tell your
so they know that you will not be available after 5:00pm on Thursdays.
Do you have a scheduled date night with your partner every
Tuesday and so will
not be contactable after 5:30pm? Tell your boss.
I know that not every workplace is like this, but in my experience when you
tell your colleagues what is important to you, what you
are focusing on and what
your priorities are, they become invested and help you achieve your goals. For
example, in 2022, I decided
to train for a half-marathon. My boss, Bree
Knoester, would ask me every week how my training was going, made sure I left
was still light out to get my long run in, and encouraged me to drink
more water when I was glued to my desk convinced that I did
not have time to
take the two minutes to walk to the kitchen to fill up my water bottle. Bree
even came to the race and cheered me
on. During those three months of training,
my priority was running. I made that known and I felt supported.
VOLUNTEER AND JOIN COMMITTEES THAT YOU WANT TO BE A PART OF
I’ll be honest: I have sat on committees and working groups for the
sole purpose of bolstering my resume and impressing interviewers.
before each committee meeting, I was filled with dread about attending a meeting
I had no interest in and felt I had nothing
to contribute to. So, I said never
I still sit on committees (we all love a resume boost) but I am more
intentional with how I volunteer my time. Since making that choice,
excited about those committee meetings I do attend and I feel more fulfilled.
I do a lot of work in the medical litigation space and work with many
families impacted by birth-related trauma. After I found myself
articles, listening to podcasts and discussing issues related to birthing
practices, I decided to put my name down to volunteer
for the Australasian Birth
Trauma Association. Through this, I have met some wonderful people who I would
never have otherwise met
in my working life and am able to contribute to
meaningful conversations during the meetings.
Another area I am passionate about is mentoring and bringing people together
with shared interests. I work in a boutique personal
injury law firm, which I
love but, as with every job, there are times when I just want to get through the
day. Sometimes a boutique
law firm environment lacks the junior lawyers’
camaraderie that exists in the bigger firms. Missing this, I decided to reach
out to some friends in other boutique personal injury law firms and we created a
group: we meet over coffee to discuss cases and
career progression, and give
each other advice. We also stay connected by messaging each other when we need a
recommendation for
an expert or a barrister. The goal is to continue growing
this group so we can connect junior lawyers in personal injury boutique
firms across Victoria and build a support network.
I guess my point is you do not need to sit on a law reform or advisory
committee if that does not suit you. You can find a committee
or an organisation
that aligns with your interests and values and contribute in a way that works
for you – or, you can make
one yourself.
Yes, we all have to do it. Now that we have established that, find your
people. Networking does not mean reading up on the latest
golf shots so you can
have a conversation with someone who probably mispronounces your name.
Networking means putting yourself out
there and circulating in rooms of
different people until you find others that you feel comfortable with and
building your network
I have volunteered for and been part of the Victorian Women Lawyers since
2019 and haven't regretted it for a minute. I have been
a member, a committee
member and have led a committee and, in each of these roles, I have met genuine
people and grown my network.
TAKE THE ANNUAL LEAVE
You are not a hero if you have 100 hours of annual leave banked up and the
last time you took a holiday was pre-COVID. You are probably
burnt out and
grumpy, and have decided to delete all social media profiles after seeing your
friends enjoying Euro summer. That was
me in August 2023 when I decided to work
through winter instead of taking some time out.
There are studies and research on whether people are happier after taking one
big holiday per year or mini breaks throughout the
You can always use that as a
guide to trial which works best for you. For me, having one two-week holiday and
a few long weekends
during a year is the perfect combination for now. I know it
is sometimes stressful taking leave when there is a lot of work on, but
workplace should be supporting you and providing resources to help you take the
leave that you are entitled to. If not, then
they will probably be in for a
shock when you resign and they must pay your annual leave out. Just take the
leave, take the break
– you know you deserve it.
Find them, keep them, keep in touch with them. Mentors do not need to be in
your workplace; they do not even need to be in the law.
They just need to be
someone you trust and who will be your advocate when you are negative
self-talking and imposter syndrome starts
to creep in. Do not underestimate the
power of having someone in your corner. I know that I would not be where I am
without the support
and guidance of my mentors.
BE YOURSELF
Working in the law is tiring, stressful and challenging enough without
feeling like you need to put on an act every day when you get
into the office,
like being loud and bold when, really, you love to keep to yourself. Fitting in
is something we all crave so if
you feel like you are not being your true self
then perhaps the workplace you are in is not the best fit. Be yourself.
I left this until last because I tend to leave all my marketing tasks until
last (sorry to my wonderful marketing manager) but, arguably,
this is the most
important one. If you are given an opportunity as a junior lawyer to write an
article (especially if your name will
actually be published), to present at a
conference, or to attend a networking night or client lunch, do it. It will do
wonders for
your confidence, your brand and, if you put in the work now, the
marketing will feel easier as you grow your practice.
Also, LinkedIn. I know, but it works.
The cliché that success looks different to everyone is a cliché
because it is true. For me, success is doing excellent
work that I am proud of,
collaborating with my peers and opponents, learning something new every day and
getting the best results
for my clients. Success to me is also leaving work
before dinner time, getting some exercise in during the week, watching my
TV show, going to family dinners on Fridays, being in bed before
10.30pm, weekends away with my fiancé, and going out for
drinks with
friends on a Monday night.
Whatever your version of success is, prioritise that to make it happen.
Jyoti Haikerwal
is an Associate at Brave Legal specialising in medical
negligence claims. PHONE (03) 7042 3646 EMAIL jyoti@bravelegal.com.au.
See ‘2022 Winners and
<https://www.lawyersweekly.com.au/lawyersweekly-30under30/winners/2022-winners-and-finalists>
and ‘2023 Winners and Finalists’
<https://www.lawyersweekly.com.au/lawyersweekly-30under30/winners/2023-winners-and-finalists>.
See, for example, J Packer,
‘Taking a break: Exploring the restorative benefits of short breaks and
vacations’,
Annals of Tourism Research Empirical Insights
No 1, May 2021,
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666957920300069>.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (22.9 KB)
PDF format (440 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter