URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrecedentAULA/2024/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:29:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Townsend, David J; Ingenito, Chauntelle; McGrath, Melissa; Anderson, Brienna; Morgan, Michael --- "The Journey to the Bar" [2024] PrecedentAULA 9; (2024) 180 Precedent 28
The journey to the Bar
Dr David J Townsend, Chauntelle Ingenito, Melissa McGrath,
Brienna Anderson and Michael Morgan
We asked new members of the NSW Bar to provide insights into their respective
journeys to the Bar. Their individual stories prove
that there is more than one
way there and diversity is welcome.
DR DAVID J TOWNSEND, 3RD FLOOR WENTWORTH CHAMBERS
Called to the Bar 2020
After high school debating, undergraduate law, clerkship, postgraduate law
overseas, and working for large corporate law firms, my
journey to the Bar
became interesting when I arrived at the Bar.
The participants in my Bar Practice Course (the mandatory four-week intensive
advocacy course all new barristers must complete) had
to be split into two
groups, because the Bar Common Room in which the course is normally conducted
was not legally able to accommodate
all the readers within the prevailing
lockdown rules. Divided by surname, half of us were required to attend the
Common Room in person,
and the other half were required to attend via the then
quite novel format Zoom. It was impressed upon us that, even when appearing
Zoom, we should dress as though we were appearing in court, in full suits
(although without wig and robes, which come to be worn
only at the end of the
What might surprise you is that among the customary welcomes from the
President of the Bar Association and judicial luminaries which
commence the
course, part of the afternoon of the first day was given over to a mandatory
yoga session. Now, even for those quite
fond of yoga, the prospect of trying to
pull off an elegant sun salutation, gliding from forward bend into downward dog,
business attire, in a 3m
reader’s cubicle, staring
at 35 other equally bewildered readers on the Zoom gallery, is perhaps not quite
the confident first
steps one imagines taking at the Bar.
In a sense, though, that experience was a microcosm of the early months at
the Bar: a bit awkward, not precisely knowing what one
is doing yet, and feeling
a bit overdressed.
An exhilarating aspect of life at the Bar is that, especially in your first
few months and years, you never quite know what sort of
matters are going to
come your way. In my first year I did everything from making pleas in the Local
Court for mitigation of sentence
for minor traffic offences to appearing in
simultaneous Royal Commissions on opposite sides of the country.
One of the remarkable feats of the justice system during the pandemic was
that it adapted so readily to remote appearances, although
this did pose
challenges for readers like me who had hoped to be able to sit at the back of
courtrooms to pick up the way that a
certain List Judge managed Directions, or
to listen to some of the leading advocates exercise their skills on a nice
appellate point,
or to watch the techniques of cross-examination of expert
witnesses put into practice. When only a very small number of criminal
were being held, it seemed like a third of the reader cohort was sitting at the
back of the courtroom for ‘the one trial
that had to run’. But in
another sense, this was just a different face of the same old challenge for new
members of the Bar:
adapting to circumstances you cannot always predict or
control, and either finding a way or making one.
CHAUNTELLE INGENITO, CHALFONT CHAMBERS
Called to the Bar 2021
Barrister of the Year in the
Lawyers Weekly
30 under 30 Awards
At university, I largely spent my non-class time working in children’s
entertainment. During the lengthy university holidays,
and often on weekends, I
would perform in children’s shows. I applied for many paralegal and law
jobs, but wasn’t successful,
and needed an income!
grew up in Sydney and went to the local public high school. From the
age of 15, I wanted to be a barrister. Not because I wanted to
because I loved the idea of being a lawyer, but because ‘barrister’
was listed as one of the highest
paid jobs. I did not like the idea of going
into medicine – too much science and blood. As I went through high school,
into my HSC, my passion for being a barrister increased and became more than
monetary. I found the idea of criminal defence work
fascinating and focused my
energies on getting into law.
I attended the University of Wollongong and drove down from Sydney daily. I
didn’t get into my first preference for university
and missed out on the
local campus lifestyle of many of my classmates. I had three younger siblings
and two working parents –
I couldn’t afford to live out of home.
I also worked at Sydney Airport, pushing passengers in wheelchairs. I took
every opportunity to earn an income, so that when I graduated
from university, I
could support myself.
As I went through university, my passion for criminal law dissipated. My
focus became supporting workers who were being taken for
a ride by their
employers – as I had been, as a casual worker by a number of companies.
The University of Wollongong offers
a great program called the Lucy Mentoring
Program. This connects law students with female graduates, senior solicitors or
barristers,
for a short period of time during their last year of study. I was
matched with an employment lawyer, who was an amazing mentor and
gave me an idea
of what a life in practice was like. However, I quickly learned that I did not
enjoy the practice of employment law
and am forever grateful that I had that
insight before I went into practice.
The University of Wollongong requires students to complete a legal internship
and I was lucky enough to be placed at a private practice
boutique firm in
Sydney, Mitry Lawyers. I experienced a mixed legal practice from the principals,
Rick and Richard Mitry, and was
lucky enough to be offered a paralegal job
following my internship. While it was only one day per week during the
university term,
it gave me a great insight into criminal and family law.
I was the first person in my family to graduate from university: in 2015, at
23, with a double degree in law and psychology. I worked
at Mitry Lawyers for
the next four years, and briefing counsel during that time only reinvigorated my
passion to go to the Bar. I
was able to practise my advocacy skills daily, from
tribunal appearances to running motions before the Supreme and Federal Courts,
and short applications in the then Family Court.
I passed the NSW Bar exam on my first attempt in mid-2019. A very happy
situation. I set my sights on coming to the Bar in May 2020,
to give myself
enough time to prepare. I was due with my son in August, so I thought there
would be enough time to complete the Bar
Practice Course, and then take a short
break to be a mum. When COVID-19 hit in March, my hope was lost to lockdowns. I
instead worked
for myself after the birth of my son, as a sole practitioner, to
give myself the flexibility that was needed, and an experience of
what life at
the Bar would be like.
At 28, and as the mother of a 10-month-old, I was very nervous about taking
the leap. I came to the Bar hoping to focus mostly on
criminal law but open to
any practice area. Having practiced in such a wide array of areas as a
solicitor, I had a general knowledge
that I felt would serve me well in my first
year at the Bar.
July 2021 saw our second, and most drastic, lockdown. Criminal law trials
were largely vacated. I was left with little work. While
I had a solicitor
practice of about 30 per cent family law, I did not expect to engage in much
family law at the Bar. I soon found
myself being briefed in largely family law
work, as the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia were still running
virtually via Teams. The 2021 lockdown, in effect, sculpted my practice
into what it is today.
I am now predominantly a family law barrister and passionate about my
practice, in particular, getting litigants out of the system.
I also co-run
Family Law 101, a Facebook group that promotes education of the family law
system in Australia for self-represented
persons. We put on lectures and
workshops about legal practice and procedure, evidence and the practicalities of
family law litigation,
and co-presenters from the Bar and ex-Judiciary assist us
with demonstrations.
I hope to expand our workshops and lectures to every self-represented
litigant in Australia, to improve the efficiency of the court
system, and clear
the backlog and delays experienced by families.
MELISSA MCGRATH, NIGEL BOWEN CHAMBERS
Called to the Bar 2022
In truth I expected to study medicine. So, I started uni life as an undergrad
science student with a focus on biochemistry (genetics),
intending to study
medicine postgrad. But there I was one day, sitting on the floor outside an
anatomy lab, head down. I had unwittingly
breathed in at the precise moment my
lab partner had opened a cadaver’s stomach and the fumes did the rest.
This moment of
solitude gave me a rare opportunity to consider what on earth I
I knew science was my passion and medicine a career that would allow me to
‘live the science’. I thought back to my high
school biology teacher
who had impressed upon me the importance of science being understood in the
artificial constructs of humanity,
how the law needed to understand and
legislate for science, not against it or indifferently to it. So, I decided then
and there to
pick up law in my second year.
That moment has led to so many brilliant opportunities and I have met some
incredible people as I have built a career over nearly
22 years. I have been an
advisor to a Senator in Canberra (on issues related to stem cells, TRIPS and PBS
access) and an intellectual
property lawyer in commercial law firms in Australia
– some international and some domestic. I’ve held almost every legal
role offered in a commercial firm, from summer clerk, paralegal and in-house
secondee to partner, practice group leader and executive
committee member.
Ever since I was a summer clerk, the practice of law has always been about
court work for me. My first rotation was in commercial
litigation and I loved
it. I was working on a significant shareholder oppression case and the
barristers we had were superhuman.
I also had an amazing senior associate to
work with who soon left the firm to join the Bar (and has recently become a
judge, deservedly
so). From then, I wanted my ‘law life’ to be at
the Bar but as John Lennon sang in ‘Beautiful Boy’, ‘life
what happens to you while you’re busy making other plans’ and in
second year I had the chance to work in intellectual
property, which I took and
never looked back. My first day in IP saw me going to the Melbourne Royal Show
to buy show bags for a
trademark matter and reading in on the Viagra patent
litigation. From there, I moved from one terrific matter to another for clients
like Ferrari, Cadbury, Chanel, LVMH, Universal Music and several pharmaceutical
companies, and went on to study a Masters, move cities,
and firms, a couple of
times, study at Harvard Business School, and have a baby.
In the mix of all the fantastic subject matter and not uncommon experiences
of being gaslit and bullied, casually sexually harassed
and discriminated
against, somewhere along the way I gave up on the Bar. But there came a point
where I knew that I was finding less
joy in my work and it was time for a
change. It was time to face up to what was holding me back and what I needed to
So here I am, a twenty-year PQE lawyer and second year barrister. At the Bar,
I’ve been incredibly lucky to continue to work
on a diverse range of IP
matters and expand into other commercial and land and environment matters, my
passion. I’ve met some
really tremendous people through the readers’
course, chambers, Bar committees and beyond. And something brings me
professional
joy every day. I have an encouraging family and friends and some
amazing professional relationships, all of which have helped me
navigate the
uncertainties of the Bar on so many levels for which I am forever grateful.
If you are thinking about the Bar, just jump. The
rest will work itself out. It’s not one size fits all. It is my hope that
the future of the Bar delivers on its ongoing initiatives to drive diversity and
inclusivity so that our representatives and our
Benches are more reflective of
our community.
BRIENNA ANDERSON, GREENWAY CHAMBERS
Called to the Bar 2021
My journey to the Bar is not necessarily the most conventional (although not
entirely unconventional). I didn’t leave university
knowing that I wanted
to go to the Bar, and I was never a tipstaff or associate in court. As a junior
lawyer I felt that I wasn’t
smart enough to go to the Bar. Whether they
meant to or not, barristers made me feel that they were better than solicitors,
than having a different skill set.
While I had always enjoyed appearing in court (which I was lucky enough to do
at directions hearings as soon as I was admitted), about
two years into my
career as a lawyer, I had my first experience running a hearing myself at the
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(NCAT). I had an absolute ball. I loved
the adrenaline and excitement that came with running a hearing, including cross
examination
(not that I had any clue of what I was doing!) This got me thinking
that being a barrister could be quite fun, although I still had
concerns that I wasn’t smart enough.
As I gained more experience, I got the opportunity to speak to some
barristers and ask them about their experience. As I asked questions,
more intrigued by and interested in the process. I was encouraged to apply for
readership, even though at the time I had
no idea what readership was. I was
lucky enough to be offered a readership position at Greenway Chambers. Following
that I had to
do the exam, and I was lucky enough to pass. Now that I am here, I
cannot imagine doing anything else. I feel that I found my way
to the Bar by
I wish I had the opportunity to get more exposure to the Bar at university
and as a young lawyer. There was simply so much I didn’t
understand,
including the relationship between barristers and solicitors. I hope that
university students and young lawyers have
a greater exposure to and
understanding of the Bar as a potential opportunity.
MICHAEL MORGAN, 13
FLOOR ST JAMES HALL
Called to the Bar May 2022
Unlike others who have been called to the Bar, my journey has been a little
unorthodox. I originally intended to practice at the NSW
Bar after I graduated
from Western Sydney University in 2012. I wanted to work as a tipstaff/associate
for a judge and then work
as a solicitor before joining the Bar. Fate, however,
had other plans. I was unsuccessful in obtaining a tipstaff/associate position
and, despite being successfully admitted to practice in the Supreme Court of
NSW, I was unsuccessful in obtaining a full-time position
as a solicitor.
In contrast, I did obtain numerous learning support roles from Western Sydney
University – initially as a law tutor for Indigenous
students with the
Badanami Centre for Indigenous Education and later as a study smart tutor
assisting students with academic literacy.
Following this, I completed a Master
of Digital Information Management at the University of Technology, Sydney with
the aim of working
in information management. This led to a position as a
research administrator in what was formally the Research and Innovation Office
at UTS. This role primarily involved providing administrative support to
academics in preparing applications for research funding
and funding agreements
for research projects.
After working at UTS for about two years, I moved overseas to Canada for
approximately 18 months between 2018–2020. I lived
in Quebec City in the
French province of Quebec. Here, I learned basic French and how to survive
winters with temperatures of minus
20 degrees Celsius.
When the COVID-19 pandemic hit, I returned home to Sydney via London. It was
at this point that I became a casual lecturer in the
Graduate Diploma of
Australian Migration Law program and later the B Laws program at Western Sydney
University. Given I was working
as a casual academic who loved teaching the law,
I decided it was time to attempt the NSW Bar exam and commence practice as a
After successfully passing the Bar Exam in June 2021, I commenced reading in
May 2022. As a junior barrister, I am still very much
at the beginning of my
career. Having said that, I have come to appreciate the ability to make a real
impact on the lives of people
through my work as a barrister and as a casual
For anyone who is contemplating a career at the
Bar, the only advice I have is to step forward and embrace it. You will make
and you will have many difficult days which will serve as memorable
learning experiences. Having said that, you will engage in a
profession that
enables you to have a meaningful impact on the lives of others in a way that is
both intellectually rewarding and
emotionally satisfying.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (117 KB)
PDF format (248 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter