URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJl/2025/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:44:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Young, Stephen; Hobbs, Harry --- "The Concerning Intersections of Sovereign Citizen and Indigenous Sovereignty Claims" [2025] UNSWLawJl 26; (2025) 48(3) UNSW Law Journal 799
I INTRODUCTION
II DISTINGUISHING NON-STATE LEGAL ORDERS
A Twining’s Framework of Normative and Legal Pluralism
B The Common Law Movement as an Illegal Legal Order
1 A Brief History of the Common Law Movement
2 Adaptions and Mutations
3 Spreading Individualistic Laws Premised on the Protection of Property Rights
C Indigenous Societies as Non-state Legal Orders
1 Community and Country
2 Clashing Indigenous and European Legal Orders
3 Increasing Recognition of Indigenous Legal Orders
D Superficial Similarities, Deeper Differences
III INTERSECTING CLAIMS
IV CONCLUDING REFLECTIONS
THE CONCERNING INTERSECTIONS OF SOVEREIGN CITIZEN AND
INDIGENOUS SOVEREIGNTY CLAIMS
STEPHEN YOUNG
AND HARRY HOBBS
In Australia and Aotearoa New Zealand, the influence of sovereign citizen
pseudolaw on Indigenous sovereignty advocacy is increasingly
visible. This
influence was apparent in the referendum on an Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Voice, COVID-19 protests, and
in legal claims and native title
disputes. In this article, we explain how sovereign citizen pseudolaw damages
Indigenous peoples
and communities by undermining their efforts to obtain state
recognition of their laws and threatening the prospect of broader political
reform. To make this argument, we draw on William Twining’s scholarship on
legal pluralism to differentiate state law from
non-state and illegal legal
orders. In doing so, we emphasise the distinctions between Indigenous legal
orders as non-state legal
orders and sovereign citizen pseudolaw as an illegal
legal order. A pluralistic lens helps appreciate the distinctions between these
legal orders and helps recognise Indigenous rights while cautioning against the
adoption of spurious sovereign citizen pseudolaw.
I INTRODUCTION
Misinformation is a global concern. From climate change to COVID-19
conspiracies to US elections, ‘fake news’ is a worldwide
phenomenon.
In Australia, the
referendum on an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice to Parliament
became a ‘prime target’
for online disinformation
The referendum also
illustrated a concerning trend – the influence of an outlandish strain of
sovereign citizen conspiratorial
theorising.
During the campaign,
thousands of similar claims were asserted on TikTok, Facebook and other social
media sites.
One claim that caught
our attention was the contention that Australia has two constitutions, a lawful
Constitution
which ‘guarantees all your rights and freedoms as the
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE’ and a ‘REVISED Corporate Fake
Constitution
registered in the United States
Conspiracists argued that the referendum was a trick that sought to place
Indigenous Australians in this ‘Fake
Constitution
’ which would mean
‘the original people of this country will cede their
sovereignty’.
There was broad debate about the impact of the Voice on Indigenous
sovereignty.
While leading
Indigenous and non-Indigenous constitutional and international lawyers agreed
that a representative body enshrined
Constitution
would not and
could not ‘affect the sovereignty of any group or
some Indigenous
Australians expressed concerns.
Others, such as members of the Blak Sovereign Movement, opposed the Voice on the
basis that it both ‘disregarded’ and
failed to empower Indigenous
sovereignty.
The argument that
Australia has a real and a fake constitution is different. While it articulates
alarm over the potential impact
of the Voice on Indigenous sovereignty, the
claim is obviously incorrect. It is not simply misinformation, however, but a
species of legal
misinformation.
representative
of the growing
intersections of sovereign citizen pseudolegal arguments and Indigenous
sovereignty.
Pseudolaw is the preferred term that describes a collection of movements,
groups and practices that share a common methodological
approach to engaging
The decentralised, highly fragmented and anti-institutional phenomenon includes
groups such as sovereign citizens, as well as underpinning
the beliefs of some
‘micronation’ proponents and ‘anti-vax’ protesters.
Pseudolaw adherents adopt the forms
and structures of conventional legal
argument but substitute the substantive content and underlying principles for a
distinct and
parallel set of
It is, as Donald Netolitzky explains, ‘a collection of legal-sounding but
false rules that purport to be
While every jurisdiction has its own autochthonous strains of pseudolaw, the
sovereign citizen variant has proliferated across the
world in the wake of the
COVID-19 pandemic.
This article examines the increasing intersection and influence of sovereign
citizen pseudolaw on arguments for Indigenous sovereignty.
Such influence is
wide, problematic and, largely,
Yet, it is visible in submissions to court, public protests and more broadly
across politics.
development is dangerous. Without care and attention, Indigenous legal orders
may be misunderstood as forms of pseudolaw, rather
than their own forms of legal
cosmology emanating from and rooted in self-governing normative orders. Some
judicial officers, courts
and scholars are already making this error, suggesting
that pseudolaw is improperly infiltrating and unfairly colouring Indigenous
Indigenous communities have also expressed concern about the influence of
sovereign citizen ideology among their
The increasing influence of sovereign citizen pseudolaw on Indigenous law is a
threat to Indigenous laws and orders as well as to
the gains that Indigenous
advocates and their supporters have realised in having state law increasingly
recognise Indigenous law.
This article is divided into two substantive parts. In
, we draw on
William Twining’s scholarship on legal
to identify and distinguish the normative differences between Indigenous legal
orders (non-state legal orders), and sovereign citizen
pseudolaw claims and
rhetoric (illegal legal
After introducing Twining’s framework, we outline the origins and
evolution of sovereign citizen pseudolaw. We then consider
the legal orders of
Indigenous peoples and communities in Australia and Aotearoa New Zealand. We
note that notwithstanding colonial
and modern pressures, Indigenous laws
continue to shape the lives and cultures of peoples and communities today. We
also illustrate
how Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and Māori
peoples have asserted the rights they hold within their normative
universes in
confronting the state and its state-centric visions. These efforts are producing
results; in a haphazard way, Australia
and Aotearoa New Zealand have recognised
aspects of Indigenous law within the state legal system. We conclude by
outlining that,
despite superficial similarities, Indigenous legal orders and
sovereign citizen pseudolaw are radically distinct. Indigenous legal
connected to culture and community and tied to land such that revitalising law
is a political response to ongoing dispossession.
Sovereign citizen pseudolaw is
an anti-institutional and anti-statist legal order that seeks to protect
individual rights and property
, we illustrate how sovereign citizen pseudolaw is intersecting
with arguments involving Indigenous sovereignty. This is occurring
full gamut of legal and political advocacy. There are reasons why pseudolaw
adherents may be attracted to arguments grounded
in Indigenous legal orders.
Some might seek to draw on the moral strength of Indigenous rights claims when
seeking to avoid petty
regulation. Others might be genuinely unaware of the
logic and principles underlying state law and believe that clothing themselves
or their arguments in the language of Indigeneity offers an escape route from
unwanted government action. Still, others may be aware
of the distinctions but
fraudulently claim Indigeneity as a callous tactical exercise to obtain a
It is also concerning
that there are cases of Indigenous peoples drawing on sovereign citizen
rhetoric. So long as states continue
to deny the existence and persistence of
Indigenous sovereignty, it is understandable that individuals may grasp at any
offers a path to their goal. Alas, sovereign citizen arguments will
hinder rather than assist. As an immediate practical concern,
courts have
categorically rejected these arguments worldwide. More broadly, the overriding
focus of individualist property rights
in sovereign citizen pseudolaw undercuts
collective and communal Indigenous sovereignty claims.
II DISTINGUISHING NON-STATE LEGAL ORDERS
In this Part, we examine sovereign citizen pseudolaw and the laws of
Indigenous communities as two forms of non-state law. Section
introduces Twining’s scholarship on normative and legal pluralism to
examine these legal
Section B explains the normative and legal order (if it can be called that) that
derives from the sovereign citizen movement, while
Section C then examines
Indigenous peoples’ normative and legal orders. Section D explains how,
despite similarities, these
legal orders differ in fundamental ways. They should
not be conflated.
A Twining’s Framework of Normative and Legal
Law students and lawyers are largely trained to see only the state’s
legal order, which is a state-centric view of
According to Twining, the state-centric view of law ignores so
Indeed, as he notes, many
people willingly accept the concept of normative pluralism – that there
are multiple, overlapping
and conflicting normative orders that we encounter and
Lawyers, he says,
‘are puzzled about “legal pluralism”; some even deny the
concept, and there has been much theoretical
debate about
This confusion arises
from jurisprudence, where a central concern is with drawing the line between law
and non-law. Twining puts
that concern to one side, because ‘in most
contexts not much turns on where, or even whether, the line is
Instead, he treats
legal pluralism as a species of normative pluralism:
If normative pluralism refers to a situation in which different sets of norms or
two or more institutionalized normative orders coexist
in the same time-space
context, then legal pluralism is the species that includes those kinds of sets
of norms or normative orders
that merit the appellation
context ...
This does not solve the jurisprudential concern about what law is or is not.
However, Twining forestalls concerns about those issues
to draw attention to the
significant normative orders which exist beyond the state that are important for
legal practice (whether
it is the legal practice of the state or otherwise).
Twining’s framework identifies several distinct legal orders. These
• global (such as environmental issues, space law and perhaps an
inchoate common law of humanity);
• international (as in, relations between sovereign states, refugee law
and human rights law);
• regional (eg, the Inter-American human rights system or the European
• transnational (such as laws relating to the regulation of
international crime and religious laws such as Islamic and Jewish
• intercommunal (concerning relationships between religious and faith
communities);
• territorial (essentially official state law such as the law of
Australia);
• sub-state (encompassing the full gamut of delegated legislation); and
• non-state law (which includes ‘laws of subordinated peoples,
such as native North Americans, or Maoris [sic], or gypsies
[sic]’, and
illegal legal orders such as ‘the “common law movement” of
militias in the United States’
Twining’s phrasing could be updated, but we employ his framework
because we want to draw attention to legal orders without drawing
a firm line
between normativity and legality. In Twining’s framework, the content in
the last bullet point is most important
for our purposes. Although Twining
characterises both Indigenous legal orders and the forms of law developed by the
common law movement
as ‘non-state’, he nonetheless distinguishes
between the laws of subordinated peoples and illegal legal orders. Indigenous
communities, like those of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander nations in
Australia and Māori in Aotearoa New Zealand, exercise
forms of normative
orders and laws that have been subordinated by the
Conversely, the
‘common law movement’, upon which sovereign citizen pseudolaw
developed, is an illegal legal order.
Sovereign citizen pseudolaw and Indigenous legal orders consist of a series
of ‘general and individual norms’ that structure
and govern the
behaviour of people who inhabit that
The normative or
ideological communities from which these legal orders are generated, however,
differ substantially. Indigenous peoples
make a culturally based claim that is
moored to certain tracts of Country, predicated on kinship, and rooted in many
generations
of self-governance. In contrast, sovereign citizen pseudolaw is
marked by an ‘heterodox
it is anti-institutional, anti-state, experimentalist and individualistic. Even
if members work in groups and networks, their communities
are ephemeral and
untied to any location. Predicated upon protecting unfettered property rights,
the individualism inherent to sovereign
citizen pseudolaw undercuts and
undermines the communal obligations and responsibilities characteristic of
Indigenous societies and
norms. In fact, pseudolaw may not even constitute an
effective legal order because its characteristics ensure it cannot give rise
commonly observed rules that regulate the behaviour of adherents beyond their
common opposition to state
B The Common Law Movement as an Illegal Legal
An illegal legal order may develop out of custom in circumstances where the
state is unable to project its authority throughout its
argues that the
law identified by Boaventura de Sousa Santos is
an example of this phenomenon.
Essentially a form of ‘squatters’ law’, the
refers to the ‘institutions and processes concerning housing and other
matters’ that developed within a Rio de Janeiro
favela in the
The legal order was illegal – its members had no authority under the
official state law to inhabit their houses – but
for members within the
community, the
regulated a wide range of property relations,
including leasing, inheritance and transfer. As Twining notes, the system was
classic example of legal pluralism’, consisting of ‘an
institutionalized and stable normative order governing important
relations in a law-like way coexisting with, but separate from, state
The state largely tolerated the existence of the
Perhaps because it was conscious it could not exert and enforce its own law
within the community and that the self-contained
system largely produced stable
and consistent outcomes. Not all illegal legal orders are so moored to a
community, produce such outcomes,
or are treated in the same manner. Consider
the Common Law
1 A Brief History of the Common Law
The Common Law movement has been described as ‘the “legal”
arm of the militias in the United
The movement emerged out of a confluence of several overlapping groups in the
late 1960s. These included loosely organised right-wing
militias hostile to
federal government regulation (particularly concerning environmental regulation
and gun ownership) and the Posse
Comitatus, an outgrowth from a virulently
anti-Semitic Christian Identity religious sect that disclaimed state authority
local county
Employing ‘pseudoreligious legalisms that emphasized individual and
believed each county should remain ‘independent, a veritable law unto
itself, subject only to its own understanding
of what God required in a
particular time and
It was very much a
fringe movement until the Midwest Farm Crisis of the
An economic crunch saw
numerous farmers default on their loans and scores of banks across the Midwest
Generations of farming
families and communities lost their land, livelihoods, and
identities.
In response, some tried to use law against their enemies.
Instead of using state law, members claimed to live under an ancient, higher
form of law that recognised their inalienable natural
right to property and
autonomy. Confusingly for us, they called it Common Law. Members believed their
Common Law is consonant with
God’s law or natural law. This older, lawful,
version of law was, they argued, recognised in a series of eclectic
century legal authorities, such as the Bible, US Supreme
Court cases, quotes from America’s founding fathers, well-known
playwrights,
and ancient
The Common Law differs from our common law. The Common Law protects
individual’s private rights and property. While our own
common law once
also protected these rights, it no longer does so. This is because the State has
become corrupted and our law is
no longer consistent with the Common Law, that
is, with God’s law. Various narratives explain how the state was
some pointed to improper ratification of the Civil War Amendments to
Constitution
, others to Roosevelt’s declaration of a State of
Emergency in 1933,
others again
to the ruling in
Erie Railroad v
which held that
there is no federal common law across the US. In these narratives, state law
became incommensurate with the Common
Law and, hence, unethical, immoral, and,
even worse, illegal.
Adherents believed – and still believe today – that it is
possible to live under Common Law as sovereign, free, natural
humans with
inalienable personal and property rights as though it exists in concert with
God’s law or natural law.
To do so, they must simply opt out of the corrupted federal-corporate
government.
Some believers
formed their own Common Law court system specifically for this
They encouraged members
to file ‘Quiet Title Actions’ and present their birth certificate as
evidence they were born
in a state instead of under Federal
They believed that this
purifying act removed the ‘cloud upon the title’ that made them
‘slaves’ to the federal
government.
They also sought to
destroy any form of state identification, such as a driver’s licence, lest
they become ‘slaves’
government.
Under their law, all state law derives from concealed contractual relations; by
applying for a driver’s license, for example,
a person elects to abide by
an invisible contract regulating road
At a normative and pluralistic level, adherents claim there are two legal
orders within one territory – one that is free and
protects individual
rights and one that is
They believe that
they can communicate to those of us in the state legal system if they employ the
corrupt commercial legal language
of the state, like the
Uniform Commercial
This is the same
constitutions, one that protects freedoms
and the other that is corporate.
The legal theory underpinning these positions make little sense to those of
us who work within state law. Because adherents claim
state law is corrupt and
cite authorities that are irrelevant to most legal proceedings – like
Blackstone, the Bible and the
Articles of Confederation – their legal
claims are often summarily dismissed. Judges routinely describe these and
similar arguments
as ‘obvious
‘gobbledygook’.
law because it is obviously not law, or at least, not state
law. Although adherents refer and cite conventional legal instruments,
‘misread, misconstrue, and misunderstand’ their
They rely on
‘selective and spurious readings of legal texts to contest state authority
and assert their own
Nevertheless, for
those operating within this
, the movement has an internal
coherence. In constituting an ‘integrated and separate legal
apparatus’,
the movement may comprise an ‘alternative legal
‘parallel world of
an alternative (illegal) legal order that formed in opposition to the state and
seeks to undermine it. Nonetheless, it remains debatable
whether the Common Law
movement or more contemporary iterations of pseudolaw are legal systems or not.
Twining wrote, ‘[i]f
it warrants the label “law”, it is in the
view of some a rare example of “a crazy legal
2 Adaptions and Mutations
The legal universe of sovereign citizen pseudolaw is flexible and capacious.
It adapts, mutates and evolves as it encounters, assimilates
and intersects with
other groups and social movements. In this mix, new concepts and theories are
developed and tested. Some concepts
are discarded while others become embedded
as the basis for further adaptation and mutation. It has become unmoored from
community or social movement and developed into, in the words of
Netolitzky, a ‘Sovereign Citizen Pseudolaw
The most obvious indication of sovereign citizen pseudolaw today is the
‘strawman’ or ‘dual person’
The theory holds that every person is born a natural, living, flesh and blood
At birth, however, the
state creates an artificial duplicate legal person and links the artificial
entity to the human via concealed
It is this ‘straw man’ over whom the government exercises
By renouncing your
artificial legal personality, you can free yourself from the indignity of
government regulation (and any debt
or legal obligation that your straw person
may have incurred).
Harking back
to its origins, renunciation can take effect by refusing state
identification.
You can also
demonstrate your refusal by writing your name in non-standard ways, such as by
inserting inappropriate punctuation or
introducing obscure or obsolete
This allows
individuals to own themselves, create interpersonal relationships, and hold
their property free from government regulation
and intervention.
Adaptations like the strawman theory demonstrate the elasticity of sovereign
citizen pseudolaw. White supremacist and anti-Semitic
beliefs may mark the
Common Law militia movement, but the legal theories it developed and propagated
are sufficiently malleable to
influence other groups. The legal theory can
develop and respond to suit new and emerging communities of adherents. In the
for example, some members of the Moorish Science Temple, a religious sect
of primarily African Americans, branched into sovereign
citizen pseudolaw
forming a new movement.
Sovereign Citizens claim, amongst other things, that they are descendants of
Moroccan Moors subject to the 1786 US–Morocco
Treaty of Peace and
and thus supposedly exempt from US
Another faction of African
American sovereign citizen pseudolaw adherents style themselves as the Washitaw
Nation and claim to be
a sovereign Native American nation and thus, once again,
immune from US
Yet another group refers to themselves as Black Hebrew Israelites and invokes
Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976
, 28 USC (1976)
the Holy Bible as supposedly allowing them to avoid having their unregistered
vehicle towed away by a
In each case,
sovereign citizen pseudolaw has found fertile soil far from its origins. In each
case, the adoption of sovereign citizen
pseudolaw changes and mutates within
The malleability of sovereign citizen pseudolaw has allowed it to migrate
outside of the US. While it has become particularly prominent
in common law
it is also present in civil law
Echoing its evolution
within its homeland, on arrival, sovereign citizen-style claims have mixed with
autochthonous species of pseudolaw,
creating strange new
preading Individualistic Laws
Premised on the Protection of Property Rights
The spread of sovereign citizen arguments may suggest a large-scale social
movement or network, but the groups that adopt and adapt
these arguments are
largely transient and ephemeral. Highly dependent on charismatic individuals,
groups tend to fragment under stress
or disagreement, or when the leader is
imprisoned or withdraws. When the Empress of the Washitaw Nation retired,
several individuals
claimed to have assumed her position, meaning there are now
several rival Washitaw Nations.
As a ‘decentralised and somewhat
legal universe,
its growth is led by individual instructors or gurus.
Largely operating over the Internet and social media, instructors sell
specific idiosyncratic techniques that promise to resolve their
legal problems. This has had the effect of abstracting adherents from rooted
communities. Though adherents are bound
by a shared
opposition to state law and authority, they may be alienated from a broader
social movement or group. Courts have identified
that many adherents may operate
‘below the radar’ and not associate or self-identify with a
Even for those who are members of specific pseudolaw communities, the legal
universe is highly individualistic and premised on the
maintenance and
protection of personal autonomy and property
Social media has only intensified this trend. The ability to reach new
audiences has effectively created online markets for emerging
generations of
pseudolegal instructors. These new gurus may have little or no connection to the
original Common Law movement or any
movement. What has followed is a wide degree
of creativity as instructors fold all sorts of narratives into sovereign
citizen-style
arguments. Today, many adherents gain their understanding through
TikTok, Telegram, and other social media
This makes cataloguing
the various forms these arguments manifest challenging. Nevertheless, certain
schemes, elements and motifs
There are numerous examples to draw on. In 2011, Mr Rosario Luciani
registered a financial statement under the Ontario
Personal Property Security
1990, c P-10, stating that he enjoyed a security interest
worth CAD28 million, owed to him by MBNA Canada
MBNA Canada Bank
discovered the registration, asserted it never granted a security interest, and
asked Mr Luciani to discharge
Mr Luciani replied that he
would be happy to do so if ‘the Bank extended a $125,000 credit line to
his wife and himself’,
an offer described by the trial judge as a
‘good old-fashioned
shake-down!’
declined and sued. In response, Mr Luciani (unsuccessfully) relied on the
strawman theory:
If any living man or woman has information that will controvert and overcome
the aforementioned PPSR, since this is a commercial matter,
please advise me IN
WRITING by DECLARATION/AFFIDAVIT FORM within ten (10) days from recording hereof
and address me as ‘::rossario:luciani::;
sovereign living breathing man
created by Almighty-God-Jehovah’ ... Your silence, or failure to respond
as prescribed, stands
as your stipulation, consent, and tacit approval, for the
factual declaration of the PPSR here being established as fact, as a law
and will stand as final judgment in this
Consider a more recent example from New Zealand. In 2020, Mr Scott Larsen
appealed his conviction and sentence on the grounds that
the District Court had
not correctly convicted him as a natural
The High Court described
his submissions as follows: ‘“living sovereign man scott-william of
the house of larsen”
appeals the conviction and sentence of Scott William
Larsen (Mr Larsen) in respect to two criminal charges, on the grounds of fraud
and perjury’.
Mr Larsen explained that Scott William Larsen is a ‘corporate
name’ referring to an entirely different
It is a reference to an
‘artificial entity created through the use of artificial construct by all
Crown representatives and
forcefully against the will of the living man:
scott-william’.
how this might mean Mr Larsen could avoid a conviction for driving without a
license and assaulting a police officer was
‘::rossario:luciani::; sovereign living breathing man created by
Almighty-God-Jehovah’, the ‘living sovereign
man scott-william of
the house of Larsen’ was unsuccessful.
In these two cases, the claimants’ challenge to the state legal system
was predicated on a legal argument that purports to uphold
or protect their
individual rights. Although it is unlikely they have met or spoken to each other
and it is unclear whether they
are associated with any identifiable broader
social movement, key commonalities suggest a connection. Both reproduce the
argument and adopt similar motifs. Their claims are legally
intelligible to each other, revealing a shared legal language, perhaps
legal order. Even so, certain differences in application suggest evolution and
adaptation, if not fragmentation, disunity,
and multiplicity.
Writing about the use of pseudolaw in Germany, Anna Löbbert explains
that adherents use legalistic language to defend actions
and beliefs ‘far
outside of what is commonly thought of as acceptable’ to ‘[protect]
their self-image as a moral
person and law-abiding
Objecting to
their positioning in court through formal mechanisms, they attempt to humanise
themselves and assert their identity
by using language like ‘alive,
soulful, spirited, full capacity, rights, of the family, ancestry, freedom and
sovereignty,
and natural
As we saw in the
two cases discussed above, however, the individual ‘rights’ that
adherents claim invariably conflict
with state law and community expectations.
The sovereign citizen legal universe amounts to an attempt to justify engaging
a broad range of unrestricted illegal activity’, and
‘obtain government and social benefits without
obligation’.
This is precisely why we note that sovereign citizen pseudolaw is inherently
individualistic. It is so individualistic that, as Jonathan
Crowe has argued,
their normative world does not have the community building functions and
consistency of a legal
Pseudolaw might seem strange to those operating from within the state legal
system, but sovereign citizen pseudolaw has its own purpose,
rationality. This legal order emerged with the express purpose of avoiding or
usurping state law,
did so to preserve individual interests and property rights. Clearly, it does
not work. No court has ever accepted the submissions
raised by a sovereign
citizen claimant. It is an illegal legal order. Yet, this does not appear to
have weakened its appeal.
Instead, this legal order expands in moments of crisis when individuals blame
law and government for intruding into their lives or
failing to protect and
promote their rights.
such, it is not surprising that the COVID-19 pandemic has catalysed a
significant growth in the prevalence of these
As we will explore
in Part III, this legal order has also taken root in some communities with
long-standing historical reasons to
question the state and state law. Before
examining this intersection, however, we turn to the non-state legal order that
called, Indigenous laws and customs.
C Indigenous Societies as Non-state Legal
Indigenous legal orders have adapted and evolved in response to the state,
but their foundation is in the societies and cultures that
pre-date the state
and its legal regime. They are drawn from their own self-governing normative
orders that have structured the lives
of their communities for hundreds and
thousands of years; they are intimately connected to the land; they
‘[flow] from the
living [heart]’ of Country, and ‘[sustain]
the country’.
Henrietta Marrie explains, the complex relationships Indigenous peoples have
with Country have evolved over many hundreds of generations
and are ‘based
on systems of eco-kinship with the elements of the world that surround them,
often expressed through totemic
relationships with various species, and
religious ceremonies that involve the celebration of human–nature
relationships’.
Colonial and later state legal orders ignored and undermined these orders.
While, more recently, states have begun to acknowledge
their existence,
recognition remains limited and precarious.
1 Community and Country
The laws and knowledge systems of Indigenous societies are rooted in and
establish connections and kinship obligations to community,
Country and the
more-than-human world. In Australia, for example, Irene Watson writes of
Tanganekald and Meintangk law. Described
by Watson as ‘Raw Law’,
this normative order ‘is unlike the colonial legal system imposed upon us,
for it was not
imposed, but rather lived. It is a law way, which emanates from
the ruwe and connects the collective or mob of First Nations
people think of state law as a ‘complex maze of rules and
regulations’, Watson continues, ‘our First
Nations legal systems are
embodied in stories and songs. Our ancient laws were not written down; knowledge
of law came through living,
singing and,
storytelling’.
relational practice, ‘Indigenous knowledges ... carry obligations and
responsibilities, such as custodial obligations
to ruwe that bind future
generations’.
laws are not about owning property. Instead, Watson writes, ‘[w]e live as
a part of the natural world; we are in the
natural world. The natural world is
Tanganekald and
Meintangk law is generated from and tied to relations in the land. It is lived,
sung, and told on and through the
Similar descriptions are present across the continent. Palyku scholars Blaze
and Ambelin Kwaymullina explain that the religious, legal
and cultural systems
that comprise Aboriginal laws ‘encompasses all life as well as the
connections that link life
account, law is not a self-contained system that operates in isolation. It
‘weave[s] us all
sustaining ‘the web of relationships established by the
Ancestors’.
Law did not
emerge solely within human society but was given to the people by non-human
beings, who travelled across the land, marking
tracks and ‘leaving the
landscape imbued with sacred
The Gupapuyngu
clan of the Yolngu people explain how Ngarra,
their law, was given to
them by the Niwuda gugu (honey bee). The Niwuda gugu flew across different clan
groups ‘to invite them
to become peaceful tribal people and to recognise
each other as being part of Niwudu gugu
It is not just
that ‘everything is related’ but that these relationships impose
complex obligations to community, Country
Māori legal orders in Aotearoa operate similarly.
Māori is a coherent and complex system, consisting of ritual, custom,
spiritual, and other
dimensions.
It is built on ‘relationships with the elements of the physical world, the
spiritual world, and each other ... Kinship was
the revolving door between the
human, physical, and spiritual
These relationships tie communities to land and land to communities; as Eddie
Durie explains, ‘land derives from ancestors
and passes to blood
descendants’.
‘[t]he common feature then, of Maori law was that it was not in fact about
property, but about arranging relationships
implications for ownership, land and resource use. Justice Joseph Williams
No right in resources can be sustained without the right holder maintaining an
ongoing relationship with the resource. No relationship;
no right. The term that
describes the legal obligation is kaitiakitanga. This is the idea that any right
over a human or resource
carries with it a reciprocal obligation to care for
his, her or its physical and spiritual
This relational legal order involves obligations to ancestral land, its
inhabitants, and others.
A pluralistic lens is important for those of us who are not Indigenous to
understand that Indigenous laws and customs exist, are lived,
and are tied to
the natural world. As we explain in more detail in the following section, these
orders are radically different from
sovereign citizen pseudolaw. Indigenous
legal orders generate obligations and rights for the community that are
inextricably linked
to land. Sovereign citizen pseudolaw by contrast is unbound
to any place or obligations and, even if it is occasionally practised
communities, its ideological core is premised on protecting individual autonomy
and property rights.
2 Clashing Indigenous and European Legal
European colonists carried with them their own legal orders when they
encountered Indigenous peoples and communities. The legal systems
established ignored, undermined, and even sought to eradicate Indigenous legal
orders. Legislation and policy prohibited the
practice of Indigenous governance
traditions,
and sought to
exclude peoples and communities from their Country and kin. Courts and judicial
officers have also played a role in
marginalising Indigenous legal orders. As
Robert Cover famously described, state courts are
‘jurispathic’.
Their role is to ‘kill the diverse legal traditions that compete with the
including by
suppressing the laws and legal orders of Indigenous communities.
In Australia, colonies were asserted and formed on the basis that the
territories discovered were ‘desert and uninhabitable’
Through the
establishment of colonial governments, settlers were able to claim property
interests in land that was otherwise used,
occupied, and owned by Aboriginal
peoples. Despite efforts by some Indigenous leaders, like Eora warrior
Woolarawarre Bennelong,
to build ‘an enduring reciprocal relationship with
the British’,
mutual recognition, the interests and legal orders of the peoples that possessed
the continent for thousands of generations
were violently displaced. Colonial
courts affirmed this approach, holding that these peoples had no legal system
but only ‘the
wildest most indiscriminatory notions of
This legacy
endures. Although cracks have emerged in this facade, the High Court has
consistently maintained that the British acquisition
of sovereignty over the
continent is not justiciable before municipal
and that upon that
acquisition, the sovereignty of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander nations
was extinguished.
firm to this position, the Court and the legal system operate to kill Indigenous
legal traditions (at least for the purposes
of state law).
The relationship between Māori and non-Indigenous New Zealanders
(pākehā) rests on a treaty.
Te Tiriti o
Treaty of Waitangi
was signed in 1840 (though not by all Māori
Nevertheless,
inconsistencies between the English and te reo Māori versions of the
instrument have caused controversies as the
British pursued their colonial
endeavours. The English version of the Treaty records that the Māori
signatories ceded absolute
sovereignty to the Crown, while the te reo version
grants the Crown the power of
kawanatanga
(governorship) in the context
of Crown protection for Māori
tino rangatiratanga
(chieftainship)
over their lands, villages, and treasures. Although the Waitangi Tribunal has
found that the Māori signatories
Treaty of Waitangi
cede their sovereignty,
debate continues as to whether and how Māori sovereignty can be
Despite signing a treaty, the British largely ignored the promises they had
made. Although the state recognised aspects of Māori
law and custom, it did
so to facilitate
colonisation.
From the 1840s,
the Crown purchased land from
However, the land
market was structured to disadvantage and dispossess
and the process intended to extinguish communally held lands and convert them
into statutory native title.
Attempts to minimise Māori law reached its zenith in 1877, when in
Parata v Bishop of Wellington
’), Prendergast
CJ claimed that no body of customary law existed and dismissed the Treaty
‘as a simple nullity’
because, on the Māori side, ‘[n]o
body politic existed capable of making [a] cession of
sovereignty’.
, Māori attempts to compel the British common law to
recognise their customary rights met with little
State legal orders continued to ignore, undermine, and override Indigenous
legal orders. But in the face of significant community
pressure from Indigenous
and non-Indigenous activists, momentum began to shift in the mid-to-late
twentieth century in both New Zealand
and Australia. In the 1950s and 1960s,
Māori challenged the view that the Treaty was a
In 1975 concerted
pressure led to the establishment of the Waitangi Tribunal, a permanent
commission of inquiry. The Waitangi Tribunal
is empowered ‘to inquire into
and make recommendations’ in relation to Māori claims that they have
been prejudicially
affected by legislation or Crown action inconsistent with
Treaty principles.
Tribunal’s decisions are not binding (except in limited cases), they carry
political and moral force and serve as
the basis for Crown-iwi negotiations to
settle breaches of
In Australia, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples also asserted
their claims as sovereign peoples in political and legal
spheres. Perhaps the
most evocative example is the Tent Embassy, established in 1972 in response to
Prime Minister McMahon’s
rejection of Aboriginal land rights, but many
other examples exist. They include everyday acts of resistance, such as learning
speak in language, or reminding audiences before public speeches that
‘these lands are, always were and always will be Aboriginal
sovereignty never
includes more formal statements and petitions. In 1988, for instance, the
Northern Territory Land Council presented the Barunga
Minister Hawke, calling for a treaty ‘recognising our prior ownership,
continued occupation and sovereignty and affirming
our human rights and
Statement from the Heart also speaks in this register. It records that
‘sovereignty is a spiritual notion’
that ‘has never been ceded
or extinguished, and co-exists with the sovereignty of the
The artwork
that surrounds the Uluru Statement reflects this authority. Depicting two Anangu
creation stories, it records that ‘Uluru
has power and that power comes
from the Tjukurpa stories that converge
The referendum
to insert an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice in the
Constitution
was defeated in 2023, but these efforts have met with broader
3 Increasing
Recognition of Indigenous Legal Orders
From the 1970s and 1980s, Australia and New Zealand gradually began to
recognise the validity of Indigenous legal orders. Adapting
and responding to
accommodate and utilise non-Indigenous law and practice,
Māori and Aboriginal law exist ‘as a real force, influencing or
controlling the acts and lives’ of Indigenous peoples
across Aotearoa New
Zealand and the Australian
Australian law recognises some elements of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples’ law. Most notably, this arises in
the native title
context. In
Mabo v Queensland [No 2]
majority of the High Court held that the British acquisition of sovereignty did
not necessarily extinguish Indigenous
peoples’ rights and interests in
lands and waters under their own laws and
Brennan J explained
that the Australian common law could recognise those rights and interests
provided they met a stringent test
of traditional
connection.
While limited in
important respects, the
decision illustrates that Australian law may
be sufficiently adaptive to allow two or more legal systems to
Recovering that intersection may require political reform for the courts
remain wedded to the original approach. In 1979, for instance,
Wiradjuri man
Paul Coe argued before the High Court that Aboriginal people were a sovereign
nation who continued to possess rights
self-government.
Court disagreed, finding the proposition ‘impossible in [Australian] law
to maintain’.
Love v Commonwealth
case, the Court reiterated this decision,
declaring that a distinct and separate Indigenous sovereignty is inconsistent
assertion of sovereignty by the British
This does not mean
that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples’ inherent sovereignty
does not exist today. It just means
that Australian law does not recognise its
New Zealand may have initially recognised Māori native title for the
purposes of extinguishment, but a new approach is also evident.
Following the
commencement of the Waitangi Tribunal, legislation increasingly recognises
Māori custom and law.
Gradually, Māori rights and interests, generated within and from their own
legal order, have been protected and recognised in
the state legal order. For
instance, although
only has legal force when incorporated by
Parliament in statute, this now occurs in at least 25 pieces of legislation
settlements.
within the last ten years, there has been a resurgence in the common law
recognition of
The creation of
the Waitangi Tribunal has provided an avenue for the assertion of Māori
legal authority within the state legal
order, supporting an increase in the
recognition of Māori law and culture within New Zealand law. Of course,
this is not to
suggest that this elaboration is not precarious. Political actors
can and have sought to unwind many of these
developments.
The failure of the state to recognise Indigenous legal orders constrains and
challenges the exercise of Indigenous law and governance
for it is a
‘jurispathic’ act that erases and
‘suppresses’.
Indigenous legal orders continue to exist even in the absence of recognition.
Although we have seen a gradual shift towards recognition,
this development
remains fragile. To protect this process, it is necessary to clearly
differentiate another non-state legal order
that has the potential to harm
Indigenous societies and hamper more fulsome recognition of their laws and
D Superficial Similarities, Deeper
Differences
The categorisation offered by Twining identifies the laws of
‘subordinated peoples’ and the common law militia movement
forms of non-state law.
Although Twining recognised an important distinction between these legal orders,
superficial similarities can be acknowledged. Both
are committed to at least
three analogous claims: first, that there are two (or more) forms of sovereign
authorities; second, the
state’s assertion of sovereignty suffers from a
lack of legitimacy; and third, individuals making arguments from within these
legal universes have not consented to the authority of the state. This means
that both groups assert a non-state basis for their
legal authority, and an
alternative, ancient, and natural legal order that pre-dates the state order. On
this basis the state, and
those adopting a state-centric view of law, may fail
to differentiate between each, lumping them together – and dismissing
– as a form of pseudolaw.
Consider an example from Aotearoa New Zealand. In 1992, four Māori
defendants charged with several offences argued (among other
submissions) that
their ancestors (
) had not signed
therefore they had never consented to the jurisdiction of the New Zealand
Government.
In their case,
Berkett v Tauranga District Court
, the court rejected the submission,
concluding that ‘all persons in New Zealand are bound by New Zealand law
regardless of
the position taken by their ancestors with respect of the
claims have been raised
Some have suggested these arguments are a version of Indigenous
‘pseudolaw’ similar to sovereign citizen pseudolaw and
with a ‘radical
Such a view
bundles all ‘non-state law’ together under the umbrella of
‘pseudolaw’ and fails to appreciate
key distinctions between
Indigenous legal orders and sovereign citizen legal
It also ignores how
pseudolaw arguments are impacting the exercise of Indigenous laws. Given this,
we understand arguments like those
made by the plaintiffs in
Tauranga District
Commonwealth
reflective of a longer history of Indigenous peoples’ struggle against
colonisation and for recognition of their rights
as sovereign peoples. In this
view, we are joined by Fleur Te Aho (
Ngāti Mutunga
) and Julie
Tolmie, who have reasoned that Māori who raise these kinds of arguments are
engaging in a form of
They question the state’s legitimacy to govern because it intrudes upon
Indigenous laws, culture, and sovereignty. These claims
are thus part of a
broader legal and political movement among Indigenous peoples to assert their
continued and continuing
sovereignty.
Adopting a pluralistic view allows these differences to emerge. We identify
four relevant distinctions between Indigenous legal orders
and sovereign citizen
These differences
stem from separate historical bases, normative groundings, orientation towards
state law, and aspirations for universalism.
We explain each in turn.
First, as we have argued, the historical basis for these two legal orders
differs fundamentally. Indigenous legal orders are based
in the historical fact
that Indigenous peoples are prior self-governing communities that have developed
their own cultures, laws,
and ways of living over hundreds or tens of thousands
of years. It is not history per se that is important, however. This is not
temporal rule relating to a requirement of self-governance for some duration.
Rather, it is a recognition that Indigenous legal
orders existed, and they
continue to be lived to manage real communities. In contrast, while sovereign
citizen pseudolaw adherents
also invoke a type of ancient legal order, their
nostalgia hides the fact that this legal order never actually existed. It is a
never was a moment when a legitimate government was usurped by a corporation,
when the good or true divine law was masked and
trampled, and the people
In fact, the legal
order they reify cannot exist, for its precepts and rules are
ineffective.
While they may
seek to critique the state as unjust, their legality is inherently
individualistic, avoiding all governmental obligations
and promising to protect
their personal rights.
this orientation it offers no coherent response to circumstances where
individual rights may conflict with each other or with
the broader community.
Second, the normative basis for these two legal orders is also radically
distinct. The laws and norms that developed within Indigenous
societies are
grounded in relationships, in connection to land and community. These laws
relate to specific locations, places and
animals. Continued access to those
lands is required for the maintenance of their cultures and legalities. The
legal theory that
underpins pseudolaw, in contrast, is antithetical to
Indigenous legal orders. It is based on a reactionary, anti-institutional and
anti-establishment claim of individual sovereignty and personal identity that
protects commodified property interests. These characteristics
pseudolaw cannot operate as an effective normative or legal
This grounding abstracts adherents from communities and promotes a highly
experimentalist individualism. Even if believers occasionally
work in groups and
networks, these communities are ephemeral and untied to any place. This is
visible in the dramatic processes of
adaptation and mutation inherent to
sovereign citizen legal theorising. In an example of radical experimentalism,
multiple instructors,
or gurus, emerge advocating and selling an unconventional
collection of techniques and ideas that promise to absolve their client’s
legal liability.
prosper for a time potentially catalysing the formation of a small group or
movement, while others falter and reappear
with transformed pseudolegal
arguments. Yet, these groups do not survive for long. The guru may retire, be
arrested, or their followers
may learn that sovereign citizen pseudolaw does not
generate freedom from the state regime as the guru maintains. When communities
dissipate, those who remain committed to the underlying legal theory continue to
experiment and borrow from non-conventional discourses
in a further attempt to
oppose state authority and protect their individual interests. Because the only
consistent narrative this
order possesses is opposition to state law and
protection of individual rights, it is not just an illegal legal order, but is
to fragmentation, experimentalism, and multiplication. The proliferation
of inexplicable individualist attempts to invoke their legal
order explains why
conventional authorities (and scholars) characterise it as
‘pseudolaw’.
The primacy of individual rights intrinsic to
sovereign citizen legal orders also reveals its inability to generate the
required of a true normative community. It ‘lacks the
intellectual formation and logic of arguments based on philosophy, history,
anthropology and cultural
It also lacks
the urgency and normative basis of Indigenous claims. The language of
sovereignty employed by Indigenous peoples ‘captures
the essence of
a separate cultural entity and historical dispossession
the exclusion and lack of consent involved in the creation of the modern ...
It questions
the legitimacy of state authority and ‘accuses it of historically
excluding Indigenous people and of continuing
with that exclusion
citizen pseudolaw differs ‘from “calling out” persistent
hegemony and raising issues of the ongoing injustice
of discrepancies in social
and economic measures between Indigenous and non-Indigenous
populations’.
devolves quickly into accusations that some ‘secret and powerful elite
controls governing bodies’ to ‘inform
a worldview in which the world
is controlled by a group with nefarious
intentions’.
Third, Indigenous legal orders and sovereign citizen pseudolaw differ in
their orientation towards state law. As we demonstrated in
the previous section,
state legal processes and authorities are increasingly recognising and affirming
aspects of Indigenous law
and legal traditions. While this process is haphazard
and inconsistent and may affect ‘the nature and culture’ of
law itself,
reveals how Indigenous legal orders can coexist with the state. In Canada, the
Supreme Court has endorsed the metaphor of ‘braiding’
to explain how
Indigenous and state legal norms can ‘be interwoven, with guidance from
international law, to form a single,
This is not to
say that Indigenous legal orders must always be integrated within the state; one
aim of modern treaty processes, for
example, is to insulate a domain of
Indigenous law-making capacity from the
Where effective, these
cases involve the state withdrawing from a legal space to facilitate the
exercise of Indigenous laws. Sovereign
citizen pseudolaw allows no space for
integration; it cannot coexist with the state. These legal orders are predicated
on opposition
to state law and a reclamation of a nostalgic Common Law. Their
legal vision is explicit; there is a good and true law, and an evil
that must be eliminated. In this sense, sovereign citizen pseudolaw promotes a
duel between systems, whereas Indigenous
legal orders seek opportunities for
engagement and the mutual recognition of obligations.
Finally, relatedly, Indigenous legal orders are connected to the Country and
community they apply to and are lived by members of specific
societies. While
non-Indigenous peoples must, for example, follow the relevant laws when spending
time on Country, these laws are
primarily local, fixed to land and persons, and
focused on immediate contexts and material experiences. By contrast, sovereign
legal orders aspire to abstract and atemporal universalism. It maintains
that all citizens within the state are slaves to the illegitimate
and false law
of the state.
As such, the
process of purging the unlawful government will apply to everyone. That
sovereign citizen pseudolaw is an abstract set
of beliefs that reflect and react
to state law explains, in part, its ability to migrate internationally in a
range of different
Nevertheless, a state-centric view of law remains dominant. The
prioritisation of state law and ignorance of non-state legal orders
elide these key distinctions between sovereign citizen pseudolaw and Indigenous
legal orders. This dismissal means that
Indigenous assertions of political and
legal authority can be misunderstood as a species of pseudolegal nonsense,
threatening to
undermine the increasing state recognition of Indigenous law. It
also conceals the increasing influence of sovereign citizen pseudolegal
in Indigenous sovereignty arguments. While the Voice to Parliament referendum
highlighted this alarming pattern, the challenge
is demonstrably broader. It is
present in public protests, native title proceedings, and a range of legal
cases. It is to this concerning
development we now turn.
III INTERSECTING CLAIMS
For individuals without training in state law, sovereign citizen and
Indigenous sovereignty arguments may appear similar and might
offer an avenue to
freedom. If the foundation of law is contract, and I have not personally agreed
to follow the state’s driver
licensing regime, what basis do the police
and courts have for imposing it upon
If the land on which my property sits has never been validly ceded to the state
by treaty, what basis does the bank have for initiating
foreclosure proceedings
if I choose not to make my mortgage
repayments?
Of course, as state courts have clearly stated, these arguments have no
prospect of success.
Nevertheless, in search of legal victory, some of those who employ sovereign
citizen thinking have turned to Indigenous rights claims.
Perhaps conscious of
the rhetorical support, moral strength and increasing recognition of Indigenous
difference, they have sought
to clothe their own arguments. At the same time,
the growth and internationalisation of sovereign citizen
has led some
Indigenous peoples to articulate their rights claims as part of or alongside
sovereign citizen arguments.
Intersections have become increasingly prominent in courtrooms over the last
few years, but some early adapters are evident. Reports
suggest that some
pseudolaw gurus travelled to Australia and ‘[targeted]’ Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander communities
in the early
Some of these
arguments may have found their way across the Tasman and infiltrated Māori
communities. In 2013, for instance,
Graham Rangitaawa filed a (defective) habeas
corpus writ arguing his detention was illegal on the basis that he is only
the jurisdiction of his hapu (sub-tribe), and not the District
At first glance, this appears to be a Māori-based jurisdictional challenge
like those identified by Te Aho and
However, it also
draws from sovereign citizen pseudolaw. In support of his submissions, Mr
Rangitaawa presented a dual-person or
strawman-type claim. He submitted,
‘that he is Rangatira Graham Rangitaawa and that the person having that
name is a different
person from Graham Colin
Rangitaawa’.
Mr Rangitaawa pleaded guilty, but his written submissions suggested that Graham
Colin Rangitaawa was ‘a legal entity
in “trust” with the
Registrar-General in office with Internal Affairs New
The Court did
not engage with this proposition and dismissed his appeal.
Other examples can be noted. In 2016, Rhys Warren was detained in custody
until he could be tried on two counts of attempted murder
of law enforcement
Warren sought to
challenge the legality of his detention on three grounds. First, on a
sovereignty, Warren submitted that
‘Maori [sic] have retained “internal” sovereignty over New
and thus the
Corrections Act 2004
Corrections
’), which authorised his detention, is of no effect. The Court held
that this challenge had ‘no prospect of
Warren’s second and third claims were different; they were located
directly in sovereign citizen pseudolaw. Warren submitted
Corrections Act
was ‘passed by an unlawful Parliament’ because
the original
New Zealand
Constitution
had been ‘repealed and
replaced’ by the
Constitution
third argument was equally tenuous; he explained he was not actually Rhys Warren
but, ‘Te Tangata Whenua, in
counsil [sic] with Te Tangata Whenua ...
party to the Corporate title, the juristic person a legal fiction
the deceased estate Rhys
Tangata Whenua
is te reo Māori for ‘people of the land’, an important aspect
Māori. Of course, when expressed through a strawman
claim, its legal and cultural significance are undermined. The Court
evidentially
agreed, clarifying that it also ‘has no prospect of
These cases are also found in Australia. In 2023, David Cole, an Indigenous
man in the Northern Territory, sought to avoid the operation
of Australian law
by arguing he is a ‘sovereign tribal
Although this
claim appears merely to echo Paul Coe’s challenge to the Australian state
in the 1970s, closer analysis reveals
a sovereign citizen strain. Cole is a
prominent anti-vaxxer and a leader of the Original Sovereign Tribal
Federation.
He was charged
with contravening COVID-19 public health directions by visiting a remote
Aboriginal community without a permit issued
by the Northern Land Council (or
the support of Elders within that
community).
Cole was unsuccessful.
This case further demonstrates the weakness of sovereign citizen pseudolaw,
which likely lacks the normative foundation of an actual
Despite attempting to
appropriate Indigenous legal systems to further his individual claim, Cole fell
afoul of two normative systems
of law. He breached state COVID-19 regulations
and violated the legal systems of the Indigenous community in Arnhem Land he
to support. Rirratjingu elder, Witiyana Marika noted Cole had ‘no
business’ being in Yirrkala and that ‘he should
just go away and
leave us alone. He’s coming in here and s***-stirring Yirrkala ...
he’s got no
The Cole example demonstrates that some Indigenous people have adopted
sovereign citizen legal theorising in seeking to promote their
Sovereign citizen
rhetoric and pseudolegal arguments are also percolating within Indigenous
communities. A recent anthropological
study of native title processes found
practitioners report hearing the same or very similar phrases to reflect
underlying arguments about being outside of the jurisdiction
of the legal
system, or the belief that the government is an illegitimate corporation which
has usurped the legal system of
government.
The authors continue, ‘[i]t is not uncommon for people to intuit
arguments, such as repeating the “fact” that they
have “common
law rights”’.
A point of clarification seems appropriate here, as the term ‘common
law’ is being used in different ways that create
confusion. In one sense,
‘common law’ is legally specific to the state. For instance, native
title is a creation of the
In Aotearoa New Zealand,
it was used to convert Māori customary land holdings into a form of title
issued by the Crown,
Māori Land Court can now recognise Māori customary land as
‘native title’.
In Australia, native title is state-based, common law recognition of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander peoples’ rights
and interests in lands and
waters generated within their own legal systems. The phrase ‘common
law’ is the system of
state law and a system that specifically recognises
particular claims, like negligence or native title, which is shared among former
British colonies (at least in name). However, the invocation of ‘common
law’ above is indicative of a higher, non-state-based
inalienable right
and is associated with sovereign citizen pseudolaw. This equivocation of
‘common law’ is confusing
and potentially disruptive to sound and
efficient decision-making within Indigenous
It is more common for non-Indigenous people to make sovereign citizen
pseudolegal arguments that misappropriate Indigenous rights
recognised within
the state legal system. In
James v District Court at Whanganui
instance, a self-represented litigant argued that he did not have to register
his dog, Connor, under the
Dog Control Act 1996
James explained that Connor did not need to be registered with the Council
because he is ‘a Legal Person, entitled to all the
Protection and
Privileges afforded a Person under
This process
was purportedly effected by a public proclamation that James had placed in a
local Whanganui newspaper.
According to James, Connor had been transformed into a legal person via
‘the same mechanism that the Whanganui River was made
Whanganui River was given the legal rights of a person by legislation as part of
a settlement between the Whanganui iwi
and the New Zealand government aimed at
redressing violations of the
Treaty of Waitangi
appreciated.
Having witnessed
the apparent power of Indigenous peoples’ law and culture on state law,
and without appreciating this process
was the result of decades of Indigenous
advocacy and negotiation, James misappropriated and distorted Indigenous rights
for his own
purpose – to unsuccessfully avoid a NZD50 dog registration
This is not only an antipodean problem. As noted earlier, a faction of
African American sovereign citizen pseudolaw adherents whom
call themselves the
Washitaw Nation claim to be a sovereign Native American
Canadian scholar
Darryl Leroux has tracked a number of French-speaking non-Indigenous people who
claim status as ‘Eastern Métis’
employing sovereign citizen
rhetoric and ideology in Ontario and Quebec
In 2021, for instance, self-styled Grand Chief Wabiska Mukwa of the Anishinabek
Solutrean Metis Indigenous Nation (‘ASMIN’)
sought to prevent Farm
Credit Canada from enforcing their mortgage over the property of two of his
followers on the basis that the
land properly belongs to the Kinakwii
The Ontario Supreme
Court noted that ‘[n]either Canada nor Ontario recognizes either Grand
Chief Mukwa or the Kinakwii Nation
as a legitimate aboriginal or indigenous
nation under Canada’s constitutional
arrangements’.
not hard to see why. On their website, the ASMIN encourages new members, noting
that ‘[a]pplication for acceptance into
the Nation is not limited to
Native People; We do not
discriminate’.
All that is required is a CAD255 initial fee and a CAD2 monthly
Members become free
and sovereign under ‘Universal Natural Law’ given that the ASMIN
‘has not signed any treaties
with the Corporate Government of
Similar claims
have been dismissed.
False claims of Indigeneity are not new. There is a long history in colonial
societies of non-Indigenous settlers and colonists ‘playing
Aotearoa New Zealand, for example, pākehā men joined Savage Clubs to
role-play as white natives, using ‘Māori
language and objects in mock
native ceremonies’.
borrowing, recuperating and distorting Indigenous motifs, designs and symbols,
native-born white men sought ‘to express
... difference – and
accordingly ... independence – from the mother
motifs were reappropriated to create the image of a new normative system that
grounded foundational authority. Sovereign
citizens claiming status as a member
of an Indigenous nation or community are a modern manifestation of this same
phenomenon, with
the added ‘benefit’ of avoiding state law.
Similar challenges are occurring outside courtrooms. The sovereign citizen
movement in Aotearoa New Zealand has ‘expressly drawn
upon the language,
strategies and symbols of Indigenous
sovereignty’.
prominent example of this intersection occurred in November 2021, when
anti-vaccine mandate protestors occupied the area
outside the New Zealand
Parliament in Wellington. Some protestors were inspired by QAnon and expressed
their belief that ‘new
Nuremberg trials were
Others, including some of whom were Māori, adopted the language of
Māori activists in ways that distorted
. In February 2022,
protestors invaded a marae (meeting house) claiming they had authority over the
The following month,
protestors lit fires outside Parliament and clashed with police in riot
Māori leaders
urged them to go home and reprimanded them for ‘flagrantly dishonouring
reply, protestors declared that Māori leaders were ‘sell outs and
paid puppets’.
Those protests drew inspiration from the January 6 Capitol Hill insurrection
So too did a
sovereign citizen-inspired protest in Canberra. In mid-December 2021, a group of
Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians
led by members of the Original
Sovereign Tribal Federation (‘Original Sovereigns’) sought to take
over Old Parliament
House near the Aboriginal Tent
Blending and borrowing from the sovereign citizen and Indigenous sovereignty
the group illustrates the complex (and concerning) intertwining of legal
theories. Demonstrating the importance of nostalgia to sovereign
pseudolaw, the Original Sovereigns chose Old Parliament House as the site of
their protest because they believed it was the
last place Australia had a
legitimate government before an illegitimate corporation took
Jack Latimore
They believe the quasi-mystical locus of power in Australia is vested in the
‘seat’ of the Old Parliament because that
is the address listed on
the ABN registrations of the Commonwealth’s economy and trade departments.
The new Parliament House,
the seat of federal government since 1988, is
‘pretend,’ they say, and the government’s jurisdiction
Protestors believed they could infiltrate the government, but they were also
infiltrating Aboriginal identity. Aboriginal men ‘were
of the camp and
demanded police ‘prove their jurisdiction’ with ‘deeds and
As Madi Day
and Bronwyn Carlson note, however, ‘[f]ocusing on the actions of a handful
of Aboriginal men detracts from the
behaviour of white settler conspiritualists
who populated the camp, and many who were performing Indigeneity free from
accountability
to Indigenous families and
communities’.
The Original Sovereigns sought credibility from association with Indigenous
sovereignty while using it to assert their own views on
governmental authority
and jurisdiction. Of course, the ‘Indigenous custodians of the Canberra
region have rejected any connection
to the Original Sovereigns, embarrassed and
upset by what they see as a lack of
The referendum on a Voice to Parliament became a flashpoint for many of these
intersections. In one video viewed thousands of times,
an Indigenous woman
claimed that if Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples are recognised in
Constitution
, ‘we will lose ... our rights over our tribal
lands’, because Indigenous sovereignty will be ceded to a
‘corporation’.
similar post on Facebook argued that the referendum would lead to Indigenous
peoples becoming Australian citizens and losing their
sovereignty.
As mentioned in
the introduction, some videos suggested that Australia has two Constitutions: a
lawful 1901
Constitution
which ‘guarantees all your rights and freedoms as
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE’ and a ‘REVISED Corporate Fake
Constitution
registered in the US.
viral claim reproduced in posts across social media contended that recognising
Indigenous Australians in the
Constitution
would create a ‘contract’
between the government and Indigenous people, and – somehow – allow
Nations (‘UN’) ‘to seize property and declare a
totalitarian republic’.
In its most generous reading, people sharing these posts are unfamiliar with
Australian law as it exists and demonstrate a concern
for protecting Indigenous
rights and recognising Indigenous sovereignty. Yet, these examples also reflect
the influence of sovereign
citizen pseudolaw.
It is hard to know how to respond to these claims. While they rely on basic
misunderstandings of Australia’s legal system –
Constitution
largely does not protect human rights, for example –
civics education programs are unlikely to prove effective counters. These
spread because they reflect the genuine and understandable distrust that many
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
have in the Australian government.
But they are amplified by non-Indigenous Australians who seek to leverage
Indigenous peoples in
their own campaigns against the government and the state.
For that reason, it appears the more fanciful the claim, the broader its
An analysis of over 246,000 tweets on the Voice referendum sent by 32,453 unique
accounts between March and May 2023 found
that the second and third ‘most
viewed conspiratorial tweet[s]’ belonged to Warrimay lawyer Josephine
In both posts,
Cashman asserted that the Voice to Parliament was part of the UN’s Agenda
to ‘Steal Australian Land &
Assets’ on behalf of the
Corporatocracy.
Australians may have legitimate concerns about the state and the Voice
referendum.
Many people might
be concerned about the role and influence of corporations or businesses on
government. However, dressing those
concerns in the language and rhetoric of
pseudolaw – of an entirely different (illegal) legal order – may
generate more
views but will not generate legitimacy.
The examples discussed thus far highlight the concerning intersection of
sovereign citizen pseudolaw and Indigenous sovereignty arguments
in litigation,
public protests and national debates, but conflation is also occurring in less
public ways through the influence of
For instance,
combining Māori
-style advocacy (Māori king movement)
with pseudolaw rhetoric and strawman theory, real-estate agent and developer
Jenny Robins
styles herself as
‘:Lady-Crown-Turikatuku-III©™:’ and leader of the Mauri
[sic] Nation.
collaborates with another pseudolaw guru, Janine Arabella, who has declared that
‘all Crown and corporate assets are
now under the stewardship of Janine of
the house of Arabella, are now held in trust for Mauri [sic] and Tauiwi, the
guardians of
resources’.
Australia, a well-known pseudolegal organisation called ‘My Place’
has a website filled with run-of-the-mill pseudolegal
resources on the strawman
theory, birth certificate ‘frauds’, and
It also borrows from
and supports Indigenous activism that has mingled with pseudolaw. It links to
and popularises Grandmother Mulara’s
website, ‘Grandmother
Wisdom’. Grandmother Mulara describes herself as an ‘Aboriginal
Senior Lore Women who also
holds a Juris Doctor in colonial
Her web page
explains why there are two Australian Constitutions and why people should vote
against the Voice Referendum.
It is unclear how widespread this less public intersection is. We do know that
some Indigenous communities have warned about this
indicating that
the effects are broad. However, a detailed understanding of the effects on and
within Indigenous communities remains
largely unexamined.
IV CONCLUDING REFLECTIONS
Courts and judicial officers are routinely confronted by submissions with
little prospect of success. Sometimes, those submissions
might simply reflect
the challenging brief provided to counsel. In other cases, it could be a
function of an alternative legal order
seeking recognition and enforcement in
state law. In this article, we have used a pluralistic perspective on law to
shift attention
from the familiar legal order of the state to non-state and
illegal legal orders. We have considered two examples: Indigenous peoples’
laws and customs, and the sovereign citizen pseudolaw that emerged from the US
militia movement and has travelled globally. Although
these two legal orders
have very different origins and normative bases, they are increasingly conflated
by litigants, protestors,
and ordinary people: sovereign citizen pseudolaw is
impacting and influencing arguments drawn from Indigenous legal orders. It is
sowing confusion, distorting Indigenous law and
and damaging the
credibility of Indigenous claims.
When Indigenous peoples adopt sovereign citizen arguments, they undermine the
political, moral and legal basis for their claims. They
make Indigenous
sovereignty arguments easier to dismiss or disregard by state actors. This is
not merely because sovereign citizen
arguments are
‘spurious’.
Rather, it is chiefly because these arguments are based within an ideological
heterodox community that is highly individualistic
and preoccupied with the
protection of ‘natural’ rights to autonomy and
This same legal
order never existed and seeks to undermine and replace our own legal system.
Given this, it attracts support from
people with little interest in upholding
Indigenous laws and customs and respecting reciprocal obligations.
Non-Indigenous pseudolaw adherents who appropriate Indigenous motifs and
legalities also harm Indigenous peoples. As Day and Carlson
note in relation to
the attempted takeover of Old Parliament House by the Original Sovereigns, white
people ‘“playing
Aboriginal” to actualise settler narratives
of warriorhood against a corrupting, external evil that has infiltrated the
government, is denying Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
sovereignty. It is not enacting
They do not act
with solidarity or alliance when they do not shoulder the obligations and
responsibilities inherent within Indigenous
legal orders.
A pluralistic view is valuable because it enables lawyers, politicians, state
actors and others to appreciate the varieties of non-state
legality. More
specifically, it clarifies that even if Indigenous claims of and for sovereignty
are unlikely to succeed in litigation
within the state, Indigenous legal orders
are fundamentally distinct from sovereign citizen pseudolaw. A pluralistic view
reveal that sovereign citizen pseudolaw is infiltrating Indigenous
legal orders. We should appreciate the differences between these
non-state legal
orders. As Te Aho and Tolmie succinctly state, it is ‘important that the
are not placed in the same category as the
claims of the sovereign citizen movement and hastily
dismissed’.
reflect fundamentally different traditions, arguments and perspectives. Failing
to attend to this pluralism turns a blind eye
to a growing problem.
Associate Professor, Faculty of Law, University of Otago.
Associate Professor, Faculty of Law and Justice, University of
New South Wales. This article was written as part of an Australian
Council grant entitled &#82
A Made in Australia
Model for Indigenous–State Treaty-Making’ (DE240100454). We thank
Fleur Te Aho and Donald Netolitzky
for comments on an earlier draft.
David Lazer et al, ‘The
Science of Fake News’ (2018) 359(6380)
<https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aao2998>.
Pat McGrath, Kevin Nguyen and
Michael Workman, ‘Voice to Parliament Referendum “Prime
Target” for Foreign Interference
on Elon Musk’s X, Former Executive
(online, 30 September 2023)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-09-30/voice-to-parliament-misinformation-elon-musk-x/102912548>.
‘The Voice: Conspiracies
and Australia’s Referendum’,
(BBC World Service, 21
October 2023) <https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/w3ct5d9b>.
Ibid; Cam Wilson,
‘TikTok Is Rife with Viral Voice to Parliament Misinformation’,
(online, 30 June 2023)
<https://www.crikey.com.au/2023/06/30/voice-to-parliament-tiktok-misinformation/>.
David Williams, ‘Two
Constitutions Claim Is Sovereign Citizen Silliness’,
Indigenous Times
(online, 26 September 2023)
<https://nit.com.au/26-09-2023/7827/two-constitutions-claim-is-sovereign-citizen-silliness>,
Gary J Matthews (Facebook, 2 September 2023, 5:04pm)
<https://www.facebook.com/Astroboy2001/posts/pfbid02ETRDfXeHzFLYDCwpM4iDGbTdqdXokm8hTub5zsxHquZb49ap4pNp7jfDsPUhTRkdl>.
Eiddwen Jeffrey,
‘Indigenous Australians Will Not Cede Sovereignty under the Voice Due to
1973 “Change” to
Constitution
RMIT Australia
19 May 2023)
<https://www.rmit.edu.au/news/factlab-meta/voice-will-not-be-impacted>,
quoting Grandmother Mulara, ‘My
Thoughts on the Voice’ (YouTube, 10
April 2023) 00:04:02–00:04:06
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DAhkmFzqugI>.
For a concise overview, see
Dylan Lino, ‘Why a First Nations Voice Will Not Extinguish Indigenous
Sovereignty’
(2023) 34(2)
Public Law Review
Referendum Working Group,
‘Summary of Second Tranche of Advice: Constitutional Expert
(Advice Summary, 2 February 2023)
<https://ministers.pmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/media/referendum-working-group-advice-from-the-constitutional-expert-group.pdf>;
Hannah McGlade, ‘Voice Will Empower Us, Not Undermine Sovereignty’,
National Indigenous Times
(online, 16 January 2023)
<https://nit.com.au/16-01-2023/4736/voice-will-empower-us-not-undermine-sovereignty>.
See Lisa Visentin and Paul
Sakkal, ‘Lidia Thorpe Splits from Greens on Voice to Parliament’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 6 February 2023)
<https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/thorpe-to-split-from-party-on-voice-20230206-p5ci5y.html>.
Blak Sovereign Movement,
‘Detailed Outline of the Blak Sovereign Movement’s Position on the
Referendum’ (Statement,
18 July 2023)
<https://blaksovereignmovement.files.wordpress.com/2023/07/blak-sovereign-movement-detailed-position-on-the-referendum-1.pdf>.
Jennifer Jerit and Yangzi
Zhao define misinformation as ‘incorrect, but confidently held, political
beliefs’: Jennifer
Jerit and Yangzi Zhao, ‘Political
Misinformation’ (2020) 23
Annual Review of Political Science
<https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-polisci-050718-032814>. The claim that
the government has been secretly replaced by
a corporation is a common sovereign
citizen trope: see, eg, ‘The UCC Connection: How to Free Yourself from
Legal Tyranny’
(Amended Seminar Transcript, 22 September 1991).
See, eg, Renee Davidson,
‘No, the Voice Referendum Will Not End Private Land Ownership in
Australia’,
RMIT Australia
(online, 20 June 2023)
<https://www.rmit.edu.au/news/factlab-meta/voice-referendum-will-not-end-private-land-ownership>.
also Timothy Graham, ‘Understanding Misinformation and Media
Manipulation on Twitter during the Voice to Parliament Referendum’
(Preprint, 8 September 2023) <https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/qu2fb>.
Madi Day and Bronwyn
Carlson, ‘So-Called Sovereign Settlers: Settler Conspirituality and
Nativism in the Australian Anti-vax
Movement’ (2023) 12(5)
112 <https://doi.org/10.3390/h12050112>; Pascale Taplin, Claire
Holland and Lorelei Billing, ‘The Sovereign Citizen Superconspiracy:
Contemporary Issues in Native Title Anthropology’ (2023) 34(2)
Australian Journal of Anthropology
<https://doi.org/10.1111/taja.12480>.
Colin McRoberts,
‘Tinfoil Hats and Powdered Wigs: Thoughts on Pseudolaw’
(2019) 58(3)
Washburn Law Journal
, 637–44. See also Donald J Netolitzky,
‘The History of the Organized Pseudolegal Commercial Argument Phenomenon
(2016) 53(3)
Alberta Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.29173/alr422> (‘History of the Organized
Pseudolegal Commercial Argument’).
Harry Hobbs, Stephen Young
and Joe McIntyre, ‘The Internationalisation of Pseudolaw: The Growth of
Sovereign Citizen Arguments
in Australia and Aotearoa New Zealand’
[2024] UNSWLawJl 11
University of New South Wales Law Journal
<https://doi.org/10.53637/YBCN5467> (‘The Internationalisation of
Pseudolaw’).
Donald J Netolitzky,
‘A Rebellion of Furious Paper: Pseudolaw as a Revolutionary System’
(Conference Paper, Sovereign
Citizens in Canada Symposium, Centre
d’expertise et de formation sur les intégrismes religieux et la
radicalisation,
3 May 2018) 1 <https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3177484>
(‘A Rebellion of Furious Paper’).
See also Hobbs, Young and
McIntyre, ‘The Internationalisation of Pseudolaw’ (n
); Stephen Young, Harry Hobbs and Joe
McIntyre, ‘The Growth of Pseudolaw and Sovereign Citizens in Aotearoa New
Zealand Courts’
[2023] (February)
New Zealand Law Journal
(‘The Growth of Pseudolaw’); Taplin, Holland, and Billing (n
); Day and Carlson (n
See the discussion by David
Harvey, a retired New Zealand District Court Judge: David Harvey,
‘Pseudolaw:
A Halfling’s View
(Blog Post, 4
September 2023) <https://djhdcj.substack.com/p/pseudolaw-part-1>. See also
the academic claim that the pseudolaw
groups and movements in New Zealand are
‘[l]eft-wing, Indigenous rights, anti-authority’: Donald J
Netolitzky, ‘The
Dead Sleep Quiet: History of the Organized Pseudolegal
Commercial Argument Phenomenon in Canada’
(2023) 60(3)
Alberta Law
, 801 <https://doi.org/10.29173/alr2737> (‘The Dead
Sleep Quiet’). See also a paper prepared for the New South Wales
(‘NSW’) Local Courts by Sharon Freund, the Deputy Chief Magistrate
for NSW, which identifies ‘[c]laiming Indigenous
sovereignty’ as a
sovereign citizen argument: Sharon Freund, ‘Sovereign Citizens: Common
Arguments, Rebuttals and Caselaw’
(Internal Guide) 10 (copy on file with
authors). Cf Bruce Baer Arnold and Erina Mikus Fletcher, ‘Whose
Constitution
: Sovereign Citizenship, Rights Talk, and Rhetorics of
Constitutionalism in Australia’
(2023) 14(1)
Jindal Global Law Review
, 104 n 30 <https://doi.org/10.1007/s41020-023-00189-w>, noting that
their article on sovereign citizen pseudolaw ‘does
not address statements
by Australia’s Indigenous people that their sovereignty has never been
surrendered or extinguished’.
The concept of pseudolaw has been used in
various ways to describe arguments or orders that are quasi-law but not law. In
this article,
we are interested in this phenomenon that is called
‘pseudolaw’ that derives from the sovereign citizen movement and
spread internationally.
See Sovereign Yidindji
Government, ‘Public Notice: Sovereign Citizen Pseudolaw’ (Statement,
3 November 2024) (copy on
file with authors). See also ‘Public Notice
Issued by the Williams Treaties First Nations’,
Hiawatha First Nation
<https://www.hiawathafirstnation.com/public-notice-issues-by-the-williams-treaties-first-nations/>
Treaties First Nations Public Notice’).
William Twining,
Jurisprudence: Understanding Law from a Global Perspective
University Press, 2009) <https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511807374>
General Jurisprudence
’). For other views on pluralism, see
Brian Z Tamanaha, ‘Understanding Legal Pluralism: Past to Present, Local
[2008] SydLawRw 20
(2008) 30(3)
Sydney Law Review
Jurisprudence
Twining, ‘Normative and Legal Pluralism: A Global Perspective’
(2010) 20(3)
Duke Journal of Comparative and International Law
(‘Normative and Legal Pluralism’).
R v Legault
[2024] BCPC 29
, [90]–[97] (Judge Patterson) for a false claim of
Métis status to benefit from a different sentencing regime. We thank
Donald Netolitzky for drawing our attention to this case.
Jurisprudence
); Twining,
‘Normative and Legal Pluralism’ (n
); William Twining, ‘Legal
Pluralism 101’ in Brian Z Tamanaha, Caroline Sage and Michael Woolcock
Legal Pluralism and Development: Scholars and Practitioners in
(Cambridge University Press, 2012) 112
<https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139094597> (‘Legal Pluralism
This may be changing
slowly. See below
Part II(C)(3).
See also, eg, Justice Joseph Williams,
‘Lex Aotearoa: An Heroic Attempt to Map the Māori Dimension in Modern
New Zealand
[2013] WkoLawRw 2
Waikato Law Review
; Maria Salvatrice
Constitutionalism of Australian First Nations: A Comparative Study
(Routledge, 2023) <https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003303008>.
Twining, ‘Normative
and Legal Pluralism’ (n
489–502; Twining,
General Jurisprudence
Jurisprudence
(n 21) 285; Twining, ‘Legal Pluralism 101’ (n 24)
Twining, ‘Legal
Pluralism 101’ (n
Ibid 114–15 (emphasis
in original). For more on Twining’s jurisprudential commitments,
particularly on HLA Hart, Brian
Tamanaha and Karl Llewellyn, see Twining,
General Jurisprudence
Twining, ‘Legal
Pluralism 101’ (n
We note, however, that
historically the state declared or acted as if Indigenous legal orders were
illegal. These legal orders were
never entirely subordinated.
Hans Kelsen, ‘The
Concept of the Legal Order’, tr Stanley Paulson
Journal of Jurisprudence
, 64 <https://doi.org/10.1093/ajj/27.1.64>.
Daniel Baldino and Mark
Balnaves, ‘Sticky Ideologies and Non-violent Heterodox Politics’ in
Elisa Orofino and William
Allchorn (eds),
Routledge Handbook of Non-violent
Extremism: Groups, Perspectives and New Debates
(Routledge, 2023) 15.
See Jonathan Crowe,
‘Pseudolaw, Folk Law and Natural Law: How to Tell the Difference’ in
Harry Hobbs, Stephen Young
and Joe McIntyre (eds),
Pseudolaw and Sovereign
(Hart Publishing, 2025) 23, 23–4
<https://doi.org/10.5040/9781509978946>. We thank an anonymous reviewer
for prompting
this clarification.
Twining, ‘Normative
and Legal Pluralism’ (n
discussing Boaventura de Sousa Santos,
Toward a New Common Sense: Law,
Globalization, and Emancipation
(Butterworths, 2
ed, 2002) ch
Twining, ‘Normative
and Legal Pluralism’ (n 22) 493, citing Santos (n 36) 99.
Twining, ‘Normative
and Legal Pluralism’ (n
Susan P Koniak, ‘When
Law Risks Madness’
(1996) 8(1)
Cardozo Studies in Law and Literature
<https://doi.org/10.2307/743460>; Susan P Koniak, ‘The Chosen
People in Our Wilderness’
(1997) 95(6)
Michigan Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.2307/1290025> (‘The Chosen People’).
Twining, ‘Normative
and Legal Pluralism’ (n
See also Stephen Young, Harry Hobbs and Rachel Goldwasser, ‘The Rise of
Sovereign Citizen Pseudolaw in the United States
of America’ in Harry
Hobbs, Stephen Young and Joe McIntyre (eds),
Pseudolaw and Sovereign Citizens
(Hart Publishing, 2025) 95, 96.
See generally James
Bitter Harvest: Gordon Kahl and the Posse Comitatus
1990) 26–7; Daniel Levitas,
The Terrorist Next Door: The Militia
Movement and the Radical Right
(Thomas Dunne Books, 2002) chs
Levitas (n 41) 3.
Michael Barkun,
and the Racist Right: The Origins of the Christian Identity Movement
(University of North Carolina Press, rev ed, 1997) 222.
See Evelyn A Schlatter,
Aryan Cowboys: White Supremacists and the Search for a New Frontier
(University of Texas Press, 2006) ch 4
<https://doi.org/10.7560/714212>.
Leonard Zeskind,
and Politics: The History of the White Nationalist Movement from the Margins to
the Mainstream
(Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2009) 73. See also Mark
Pitcavage, ‘Common Law and Uncommon Courts: An Overview of the Common Law
Court Movement’,
Militia Watchdog
(Online Special Report, 25 July
<https://web.archive.org/web/20100111150018/http://www.adl.org/mwd/common.asp>.
Daniel Lessard Levin and
Michael W Mitchell, ‘A Law unto Themselves: The Ideology of the Common Law
Court Movement’
(1999) 44(1)
South Dakota Law Review
See Sovereignty Education
and Defense Ministry, ‘Path to Freedom’ (Form No 09.015, 8 May 2024)
2–6 <https://sedm.org/Forms/09-Procs/PathToFreedom.pdf>.
See Levin and Mitchell (n
46) 19, where the authors discuss how ‘[c]ommon-law supporters use two
major theories to explain
the federal government’s usurpation of state and
individual sovereignty’.
[1938] USSC 94
Freedom’ (n 47) 78–9.
Ibid 79–80.
Koniak, ‘When Law
Risks Madness’ (n 39) 67.
Ibid 89. See generally
Sovereignty Education and Defense Ministry, ‘Government Instituted Slavery
Using Franchises’
(Form No 05.030, 3 February 2021)
<https://sedm.org/Forms/05-MemLaw/Franchises.pdf> (‘Government
Instituted Slavery’).
Koniak, ‘When Law
Risks Madness’ (n 39) 89. See generally Sovereignty Education and Defense
Ministry, ‘Defending
Your Right to Travel’ (Form No 06.010, 24
October 2023)
<https://sedm.org/ItemInfo/Ebooks/DefYourRightToTravel/DefYourRightToTravel.htm>.
Koniak, ‘The Chosen
People’ (n 39) 1769. Note that while adherents claim to be willing to
submit to county authority,
their primary aim is the protection of individual
rights to autonomy and property.
Bradley v The Queen
[2020] QCA 252 (Sofronoff
Deputy Commissioner of
Taxation v Casley
[2017] WASC 161
, [15] (Le Miere J).
Caesar Kalinowski IV,
‘A Legal Response to the Sovereign Citizen Movement’
(2019) 80(2)
Montana Law Review
Harry Hobbs and George
Micronations and the Search for Sovereignty
University Press, 2022) 69 <https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009150132>.
Netolitzky, ‘A
Rebellion of Furious Paper’ (n
) 4; Koniak, ‘When Law Risks
Madness’ (n 39) 87–9, 106; Donald J Netolitzky, ‘After the
Hammer: Six Years
Meads v Meads
(2019) 56(4)
Alberta Law
, 1184 <https://doi.org/10.29173/alr2548>.
McRoberts (n
Koniak, ‘When Law
Risks Madness’ (n 39) 67.
Jurisprudence
Netolitzky, ‘A
Rebellion of Furious Paper’ (n
Netolitzky describes the
strawman argument as having spread ‘nation to nation, community to
community’: ibid. See also
Security Education and Defense Ministry,
‘Proof that There Is a “Straw Man”’(Form No 05.042, 23
2017) <https://sedm.org/Forms/05-MemLaw/StrawMan.pdf>
(‘Straw Man Proof’).
James Erickson Evans,
‘The Flesh and Blood Defense’
(2012) 53(4)
William and Mary Law
, 1365 citing Kevin Carey, ‘Too Weird for the Wire: How
Black Baltimore Drug Dealers Are Using White Supremacist Legal Theories
Confound the Feds’ [2008] (May)
Washington Monthly
Proof’ (n 68) 189.
Ibid 363–74.
See the discussion of name
Meads v Meads
[2012] ABQB 571
, [206]–[213] (Rooke ACJ)
’). Cf ‘Straw Man Proof’ (n 68)
359–61, clarifying that writing your name in all capital letters does not
On the historical and
religious aspect of these groups see Spencer Dew,
The Aliites: Race and Law
in the Religions of Noble Drew Ali
(University of Chicago Press, 2019).
Mellie Ligon, ‘The
Sovereign Citizen Movement: A Comparative Analysis with Similar Foreign
Movements and Takeaways for the
United States Judicial System’
Emory International Law Review
, 303, 303 n 37.
Mark Pitcavage, ‘The
Washitaw Nation and Moorish Sovereign Citizens: What You Need to Know’,
Anti-Defamation League
(Blog Post, 18 July 2016)
<https://www.adl.org/resources/blog/washitaw-nation-and-moorish-sovereign-citizens-what-you-need-know>
(‘The Washitaw Nation and Moorish Sovereign Citizens’).
Ngola Mbandi v Pangea
Cir, No 22-3254, 12 July 2023);
Mbandi v Pangea
Ventures LLC
(SD Ind, No 1:22-cv-01274-JRS-TAB, 18 November 2022).
Christine Sarteschi,
‘The Law Doesn’t Apply to Me: The Spread of the Sovereign Citizen
Movement around the World’,
International Center for the Study of
Violent Extremism
(Online Research Report, 19 April 2022)
<https://web.archive.org/web/20241114021042/https://icsve.org/this-law-doesnt-apply-to-me/>;
Stephen Kent, ‘Freemen, Sovereign Citizens, and the Challenge to Public
Order in British Heritage Countries’ (2015) 6
International Journal of
Cultic Studies
Karoline Marko,
‘“The Rulebook – Our
Constitution
”: A Study of the
“Austrian Commonwealth’s” Language Use and the Creation of
Identity through Ideological
In- and Out-Group Presentation and
Legitimation’ (2021) 18(5)
Critical Discourse Studies
<https://doi.org/10.1080/17405904.2020.1779765>.
See Netolitzky, ‘The
History of the Organized Pseudolegal Commercial Argument’ (n 14)
613–18. See also Florian
Buchmayr, ‘Denying the Geopolitical
Reality: The Case of the German “Reich Citizens”’ in Andreas
and André Krouwel (eds),
Europe: Continent of
Conspiracies
(Routledge, 2021) 97, 105.
Pitcavage, ‘The
Washitaw Nation and Moorish Sovereign Citizens’ (n 77).
Hobbs, Young and McIntyre,
‘The Internationalisation of Pseudolaw’ (n
(n 74) [197]
(Rooke ACJ).
As we note below, however,
while the legal universe priorities individualism, the schemes employed by
pseudolaw adherents are markedly
Young, Hobbs, and
Goldwasser (n 40) 118.
MBNA Canada Bank v
[2011] ONSC 6347
, [3] (Brown J).
Ibid [7]–[8].
Larsen v New Zealand
[2020] NZHC 2520.
Ibid [1] (Cull
Anne Löbbert,
‘“Germanite is a Rare Mineral”: Sovereignism in Germany’
in Harry Hobbs, Stephen Young
and Joe McIntyre (eds),
Pseudolaw and Sovereign
(Hart Publishing, 2025) 203, 220
<https://doi.org/10.5040/9781509978946.ch-010>.
Ibid 221–2.
Donald Netolitzky,
‘The Sun Only Shines on YouTube: The Marginal Presence of Pseudolaw in
Canada’ in Harry Hobbs, Stephen
Young and Joe McIntyre (eds),
and Sovereign Citizens
(Hart Publishing, 2025) 121, 129
<https://doi.org/10.5040/9781509978946.ch-007> (‘The Sun Only Shines
on YouTube’).
See Crowe (n 35).
Rooke ACJ claimed that these litigants are motivated by some sort of stress
(foreclosure, bankruptcy, child support disputes,
deportation, or debt), are
trying to scam others, or believe they are ‘students of the law’: at
[161]–[164].
Likening pseudolaw to a
pathogen, Donald Netoltizky argues that it does not need to be successful, it
just needs to spread: see
Donald Netolitzky, ‘A Pathogen astride the Minds
of Men: The Epidemiological History of Pseudolaw’ (Conference Paper,
Sovereign Citizens in Canada Symposium, Centre d’expertise et de formation
sur les intégrismes religieux et la radicalisation,
3 May 2018)
17–18 <https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3177472>.
Kent (n 79)
‘“Living People”: Who Are the Sovereign Citizens, or SovCits,
and Why Do They Believe They Have Immunity
from the Law?’,
Conversation
(online, 28 July 2020)
<https://theconversation.com/living-people-who-are-the-sovereign-citizens-or-sovcits-and-why-do-they-believe-they-have-immunity-from-the-law-143438>.
This did not occur in Canada, however: Netolitzky, ‘The Sun Only Shines on
YouTube’ (n 98).
Ambelin Kwaymullina and
Blaze Kwaymullina, ‘Learning to Read the Signs: Law in an Indigenous
Reality’ (2010) 34(2)
Journal of Australian Studies
202–3 <https://doi.org/10.1080/14443051003721189>.
Henrietta Marrie,
‘Indigenous Sovereignty Rights: International Law and the Protection of
Traditional Ecological Knowledge’
in Aileen Morton Robinson (ed),
Sovereign Subjects: Indigenous Sovereignty Matters
(Allen & Unwin,
2007) 47, 48–9 <https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003117353-5>.
Irene Watson,
Aboriginal Peoples, Colonialism and International Law: Raw Law
(Routledge, 2015) 12 <https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315858999>.
Blaze Kwaymullina and
Ambelin Kwaymullina, ‘Indigenous Holistic Logic: Aspects, Consequences and
Applications’
(2014) 17(2)
Journal of Australian Indigenous Issues
The Land is
the Source of the Law: A Dialogic Encounter with Indigenous Jurisprudence
(Routledge, 2011) 5 <https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203844380>.
Ambelin Kwaymullina,
‘Seeing the Light: Aboriginal Law, Learning and Sustainable Living in
[2005] IndigLawB 27
(2005) 6(11)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
Danial Kelly,
‘Foundational Sources and Purposes of Authority in Madayin’ (2014)
Victoria University Law and Justice Journal
<https://doi.org/10.15209/vulj.v4i1.40>.
James Gurrwanngu
Gaykamangu, ‘Ngarra Law: Aboriginal Customary Law from Arnhem Land’
Northern Territory Law Journal
See generally Marcia
Langton and Aaron Corn,
Law: The Way of the Ancestors
Hudson, 2023).
Carwyn Jones,
Treaty, New Tradition: Reconciling New Zealand and Māori Law
Press, 2016) 23. See also Justice Joseph Williams (n
) 3, quoting Hirini Moko Mead,
‘The Nature of Tikanga’ (Conference Paper, Mai I te Ata Hāpara
Conference, 11–13
August 2000) 11–13.
Waitangi Tribunal,
Aotearoa Tēnei: A Report into Claims Concerning New Zealand Law and Policy
Affecting Māori Culture and Identity
(Waitangi Tribunal Report, 2011)
5, quoted in Justice Joseph Williams (n
ET Durie, ‘Will
the Settlers Settle? Cultural Conciliation and Law’
[1996] OtaLawRw 1
(1996) 8(4)
Justice Joseph Williams
See, for instance, the
criminalisation of the Potlach festival among Indigenous peoples of the Pacific
Northwest in Canada:
An Act Further to Amend ‘The Indian Act,
SC 1884, c C-27, s 3; Douglas Cole and Ira Chaikin,
‘“A Worse than Useless Custom”: The Potlatch Law and Indian
Resistance’
(1992) 5(2)
Western Legal History
Robert M Cover,
‘Violence and the Word’
(1986) 95(8)
Yale Law Journal
1610 <https://doi.org/10.2307/796468>; Robert M Cover, ‘Foreword:
and Narrative’
(1983) 97(1)
Harvard Law Review
Cover, ‘Violence
and the Word’ (n 122) 1610.
Stuart Banner,
Possessing the Pacific: Land, Settlers, and Indigenous Peoples from Australia
(Harvard University Press, 2007) 27
<https://doi.org/10.4159/9780674020528>.
Inga Clendinnen,
Dancing with Strangers: Europeans and Australians at First Contact
(Cambridge University Press, 2005) 272.
The quote itself
is from the notes for judgment by Burton J before his Honour heard and decided
R v Murrell
(1836) 1 Legge 72 but is not in the reported judgment itself:
Justice Burton, ‘Arguments and Notes for Judgment in the Case
Congo Murrell. February 1836’ (Original Documents on Aborigines and Law
1797–1840 No 48, Centre for Comparative
Law, History and Governance,
Macquarie University) 239
<https://webarchive.nla.gov.au/awa/20220303202126/https:/www.law.mq.edu.au/research/colonial_case_law/nsw/other_features/correspondence/documents/document_48/>.
Cooper v Stuart
[1889] UKLawRpAC 7
(1889) 14 App Cas 286.
New South Wales v
Commonwealth
[1975] HCA 58
(1975) 135 CLR 337
, 388 (Gibbs J);
Mabo v Queensland [No
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
, 31 (Brennan J) (‘
Coe v Commonwealth
[1993] HCA 42
(1993) 118 ALR 193
, 199–200 (Mason CJ);
Love v Commonwealth
(2020) 270 CLR 152
, 278–9 [356]–[357] (Gordon J)
Rawina Higgins,
‘“Ko te mana tuatoru, ko te mana Motuhake”’ in Mark
Hickford and Carwyn Jones (eds),
Indigenous Peoples and the State:
International Perspectives on the Treaty of Waitangi
(Routledge, 2019) 129
<https://doi.org/10.4324/9781351240376-8>.
Waitangi Tribunal,
Whakaputanga me te Tiriti: The Declaration and the Treaty
(Waitangi Tribunal
Report, 2014) 526–7. On recent scholarship interrogating inconsistencies
between the te reo and English language
versions, see Ned Fletcher,
English Text of the Treaty of Waitangi
(Bridget Williams Books, 2022).
Justice Joseph Williams
Stuart Banner,
‘Conquest by Contract: Wealth Transfer and Land Market Structure in
Colonial New Zealand’
(2000) 34(1)
Law and Society Review
55–8 <https://doi.org/10.2307/3115116> (‘Conquest by
Contract’).
R v Symonds
[1847] NZPCC 387;
Native Lands Act 1862
Native Land Act
[1877] NZJurRp 183
(1877) 3 NZ Jur
, 78 (Supreme Court of New Zealand).
[1901] NZPCC 371 which established that the Courts have jurisdiction
to inquire into whether, as a matter of fact, the land in dispute
ceded. But see
Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Amendment Act 1901
Land Titles Protection Act
Claims Adjustment and
Law Amendment Act
(NZ) which limited the
rights of Māori to scrutinise the validity of Crown land purchases in
Courts. See
Tamihana Koroka v Solicitor-General
[1912] NZGazLawRp 230
[1912] 32 NZLR 321 (Court
of Appeal of New Zealand);
Re Ninety-Mile Beach
[1963] NZLR 461 (Court
Appeal of New Zealand).
‘The Treaty
(Web Page, 7 July 2014)
<https://nzhistory.govt.nz/politics/treaty/the-treaty-in-practice/the-treaty-debated>.
Treaty of Waitangi
(NZ) s 5(1)(a), sch 1;
Treaty of Waitangi Amendment Act 1985
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 31 August 2016, 163
(Linda Burney).
(1988) 2(33)
Aboriginal Law Bulletin
Referendum Council,
‘Uluru Statement from the Heart’ (Statement, First Nations National
Constitutional Convention, 26
<https://ulurustatement.org/the-statement/view-the-statement/>.
Natassia Chrysanthos,
‘“Overwhelming Support”: How the Uluru Statement Came Together
on Canvas’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 27 May 2019)
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/how-the-uluru-statement-came-together-on-canvas-and-what-it-means-20190521-p51pq3.html>,
quoting Rene Kulitja, who was the lead artist for the Uluru Statement.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
(Report No 31, 1986)
[103]. See further Harry Hobbs,
Indigenous Aspirations and Structural Reform
in Australia
(Hart Publishing, 2021) 19.
(n 127) 57,
69 (Brennan J, Mason CJ agreeing at 15, McHugh J agreeing at 15), 100–1
(Deane and Gaudron JJ), 184 (Toohey J).
Commonwealth v
[2001] HCA 56
(2001) 208 CLR 1
, 37 [10] (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne
JJ), quoting
Fejo v Northern Territory
[1998] HCA 58
(1998) 195 CLR 96
(Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ).
Commonwealth
[1979] HCA 68
(1979) 24 ALR 118 (Gibbs
This was explicitly
confirmed by Gordon J:
(n 128) 279.
Justice Joseph Williams
Matthew SR Palmer,
‘Indigenous Rights, Judges and Judicial Review in New Zealand’ in
Jason NE Varuhas and Shona Wilson
Stark (eds),
The Frontiers of Public Law
(Hart Publishing, 2020) 123, 128
<https://doi.org/10.5040/9781509930401.ch-006>.
Takamore v Clarke
[2012] NZSC 116
[2013] 2 NZLR 733
, 770 [94]–[95] (Elias CJ) (Supreme Court of New
Ngāti Whātua Ōrākei Trust v A-G (NZ) [No 4]
[2022] NZHC 843
[2022] 3 NZLR 601
, 708 [329] (Palmer J) (High Court of New Zealand);
Ellis v The Queen (Continuance)
[2022] NZSC 114
[2022] 1 NZLR 239
(Glazebrook J) (Supreme Court of New Zealand).
Joel Maxwell, ‘No
Doubt Now that Anti-Māori Sentiment Powered the Election Result’,
(online, 28 November 2023)
<https://www.stuff.co.nz/pou-tiaki/301015744/no-doubt-now-that-antimori-sentiment-powered-the-election-result>.
See also Treaty Principles Bill 2024 (NZ).
Cover, ‘Violence
and the Word’ (n 122) 1610.
Twining, ‘Legal
Pluralism 101’ (n 24) 126–7.
Berkett v Tauranga
District Court
[1992] NZHC 1278
[1992] 3 NZLR 206
, 208 (Fisher J) (High Court of New Zealand)
R v Pairama
[1995] NZHC 2087
(1995) 13 CRNZ 496
R v Fuimaono
(New Zealand Court of Appeal,
Thomas, Tompkins and Heron JJ, 24 October 1996);
R v Knowles
(New Zealand
Court of Appeal, Keith, Tipping, McGechan JJ, 12 October 1998);
(New Zealand Court of Appeal, Richardson P, Gault and Tipping JJ,
4 December 1999).
Some commentators may
recognise these differences as ‘pseudo-law’ and not
‘pseudolaw’, as if to distinguish
non-state legal orders from the
perpetuates a relatively
state-centric view of law as it inelegantly groups
together two very different legal orders.
Fleur Te Aho and Julia
Tolmie, ‘Māori Rejections of the State’s Criminal Jurisdiction
over Māori in Aotearoa
New Zealand’s Courts’
(2023) 30(3)
New Zealand Universities Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4924987>.
In Aotearoa New Zealand,
this has also arisen in discussions over ‘co-governance’, as well as
in documents like He Puapua
and the Matike Mai Report: Michaela Ryan-Lentini,
‘Co-governance in Aotearoa New Zealand: Controversy and
Cooperation’,
Equal Justice Project
(Web Page, 30 June 2022)
<https://www.equaljusticeproject.co.nz/articles/co-governance-in-aotearoa-new-zealand-controversy-and-cooperation2022>;
Claire Charters et al,
He Puapua: Report of the Working Group on a Plan to
Realise the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in Aotearoa/New
(Report, 1 November 2019); Independent Working Group on
Constitutional Transformation,
He Whakaaro Here Whakaumu Mō
The Report of Matike Mai Aotearoa
(Report, 2024).
We thank Donald
Netolitzky for particularly valuable comments on this section.
Robert Black,
‘“Constitutionalism”: The White Man’s Ghost Dance’
(1998) 31(2)
John Marshall Law Review
Netolitzky, ‘The
Dead Sleep Quiet’ (n
803–4, discussing Ruth Braunstein, ‘The “Right” History:
Religion, Race, and Nostalgic Stories of Christian
America’ (2021) 12(2)
95 <https://doi.org/10.3390/rel12020095>; Amy B Cooter,
‘Americanness, Masculinity, and Whiteness: How Michigan Militia
Navigate Evolving Social Norms’ (PhD Dissertation, University of Michigan,
2013); Amy Cooter, ‘Citizen Militias in
the US Are Moving toward More
Violent Extremism’,
Scientific American
(online, 1 January 2022)
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/citizen-militias-in-the-u-s-are-moving-toward-more-violent-extremism/>.
Wilson Huhn,
‘Political Alienation in America and the Legal Premises of the Patriot
Movement’ (1998–99) 34(3)
Gonzaga Law Review
417, 426. Huhn
argues that their claims are ‘self-defeating’.
See Sovereignty
Education and Defense Ministry, ‘Lawfully Avoiding Government
Obligations’ (Form No 12.040, 10 August
2018) 12–13, 17–22,
27–9 <https://sedm.org/LibertyU/AvoidGovernmentObligations.pdf>.
Crowe (n 35).
(n 74) [54]
(Rooke ACJ).
Taplin, Holland and
Larissa Behrendt,
Achieving Social Justice: Indigenous Rights and
Australia’s Future
(Federation Press, 2003) 102 (emphasis in
original). See also Aileen Moreton-Robinson,
The White Possessive: Property,
Power, and Indigenous Sovereignty
(University of Minnesota Press, 2015).
Behrendt (n 173)
Taplin, Holland and
Justice Joseph Williams
Reference re An Act
Respecting First Nations, Inuit and Métis Children, Youth and
[2024] SCC 5
, [7] (Wagner CJ, Karakatsanis, Côté,
Brown, Rowe, Martin, Kasirer, Jamal and O’Bonsawin JJ), quoting Gordon
‘Indigenous Legal Orders, Canadian Law and UNDRIP’ in
Centre for International Governance Innovation,
UNDRIP Implementation:
Braiding International, Domestic and Indigenous Laws
(Special Report, 2017)
Harry Hobbs and George
Williams, ‘The Noongar Settlement: Australia’s First Treaty’
[2018] SydLawRw 1
(2018) 40(1)
Sydney Law Review
‘Government
Instituted Slavery’ (n 55).
Magistrate Freund
[2008] NSWSC 944
Farm Credit
Canada v 1047535 Ontario Limited
[2021] ONSC 2541.
Ibid [29]–[30]
(Sweeny J);
(n 181) [16] (Hidden J).
See Hobbs, Young and
McIntyre, ‘The Internationalisation of Pseudolaw’ (n
Natasha Wallace,
‘“Messiah-like Figure” is Doing Own Harvesting’,
Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 15 January 2011)
<https://www.smh.com.au/world/messiahlike-figure-is-doing-own-harvesting-20110114-19r9v.html>;
Glazov, ‘Freemen Movement Targets Indigenous Australia’,
The Saturday Paper
(online, 6 September 2014)
<https://www.thesaturdaypaper.com.au/news/indigenous-affairs/2014/09/06/freemen-movement-targets-indigenous-australia/1409925600962>.
Rangitaawa v Chief
Executive of the Department of Corrections
[2013] NZCA 2
(O’Regan P) (‘
Te Aho and Tolmie (n
186) [6] (O’Regan P).
Warren v Chief
Executive of the Department of Corrections
[2017] NZSC 20
(Young, Glazebrook and France JJ) (‘
Ibid [4]. For several
earlier applications, see
Warren v Chief Executive of Department of
Corrections
[2017] NZHC 12
W v The Queen
[2016] NZSC 156
[2016] NZHC 1728.
[7]. See also
Te Tangata Whenua v Chief Executive of the Department of
Corrections
[2017] NZSC 189
, [3] (Elias CJ, Young and O’Regan JJ)
Te Tangata Whenua
Te Tangata Whenua
(n 192) [2] (Elias CJ, Young and O’Regan JJ).
Cole v Rigby
[2023] NTSC 20
, [2] (Grant CJ).
Richard Baker,
‘Alt-right Seeks Indigenous Help for Fight with “Illegal”
Government’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 16 February 2021)
<https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/alt-right-seeks-indigenous-help-for-fight-with-illegal-government-20210212-p571w1.html>;
Matt Garrick, ‘Prominent Norther Territory Anti-vaxxer David Cole Arrested
and Charged in East Arnhem Land over COVID-19 Breach’,
(online, 17 February 2022)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2022-02-17/nt-police-yirrkala-david-cole-vaccine/100839994>.
Garrick (n 197).
While those called
‘sovereign citizens’ inhabit a normative world, it is debateable
whether that normative world is
consistent enough to be considered law: see
Crowe (n 35).
Garrick (n 197).
Cole’s son has
also adopted similar arguments in confrontations with state authorities: see
Zizi Averill, ‘“Conspiracy”
Claims from Anti-vaxxers in
(online, 1 February 2022)
<https://www.ntnews.com.au/truecrimeaustralia/police-courts-nt/nt-antivaxxer-david-cole-and-son-claim-sovereign-citizen-status/news-story/e35ff70bd1142fd515aa726467a6c4fc>.
Taplin, Holland and
Stephen Young,
‘Native Title as Displaced Mediator’
[2021] UNSWLawJl 57
(2021) 44(4)
University of
New South Wales Law Journal
<https://doi.org/10.53637/WPHS1787>.
Banner, ‘Conquest
by Contract’ (n 132) 47.
Te Ture Whenua
Māori Act 1993
See, eg, Pascale Taplin,
‘Contextualizing Belief in Conspiracy Theories: A Case Study in Native
Title’ (2023) 2(1)
Dispute Resolution Review
[2022] NZHC 2196
(Gwyn J) (‘
Te Awa Tupua
(Whanganui River Claims Settlement) Act 2017
Pitcavage, ‘The
Washitaw Nation and Moorish Sovereign Citizens’ (n 77).
Darryl Leroux,
Distorted Descent: White Claims to Indigenous Identity
(University of
Manitoba Press, 2019). See further Donald J Netolitzky, ‘New Hosts for an
Old Disease: History of the Organized
Pseudolegal Commercial Argument Phenomenon
(2023) 60(4)
Alberta Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.29173/alr2744> (‘New Hosts for an Old
Mukwa v Farm Credit
2021 ONSC 1156
, [1]–[3] (Meyers J).
Farm Credit Canada
[2021] ONSC 1632
The ASMIN outlines these
views in the ‘IMPORTANT FAQ’s on JOINING THE ASMIN of the Boreal
Forest NATION’ of its
website: ‘Home’,
ASMIN of the Boreal
(Web Page, 15 September 2022)
https://web.archive.org/web/20220915203849/https://www.asminoftheborealforest.com/
(‘ASMIN Web
Page’). Note that an internal schism within the group
has led to the collapse of ASMIN of the Boreal Forest and the rise of
successor organisations: see Kawartha Lee, ‘Anishinabek Solutrean
Indigenous Nation’,
Pants on Fire
(Web Page, 18 August 2024)
<https://pantsaflame.blogspot.com/2024/08/anishnabek-solutrean-indigenous-nation.html>.
Page’ (n 218);
Mukwa Decision
(n 217) [19] (Akbarali J).
Page’ (n 218).
Montréal v Bogue
[2023] QCCQ 3429
Barreau de Montréal v
[2021] QCCQ 17269
Cardin v The Queen
[2020] QCCA 98
v The Queen
[2019] QCCA 1354.
See also Netolitzky, ‘New Hosts for an
Old Disease’ (n 215) for a comprehensive overview, though see additional
World Energy GH2 Inc v Ryan
[2023] NLSC 109;
Glen Patrick Bogue
(aka Spirit Warrior) v Law Society of Ontario
[2023] ONSC 3654.
Donald Netolitzky for drawing our attention to these new cases.
Philip J Deloria,
Playing Indian
(Yale University Press, 1998). See also Day and Carlson (n
) 2; Elizabeth Schumacher, ‘Why
Germany Can’t Quit Its Racist Native American Problem’,
(online, 26 February 2020)
<https://www.dw.com/en/why-germany-cant-quit-its-racist-native-american-problem/a-52546068>.
Conal McCarthy,
‘“Our Works of Ancient Times”: History, Colonization, and
Agency at the 1906–7 New Zealand
International Exhibition’ (2009)
Museum History Journal
<https://doi.org/10.1179/mhj.2009.2.2.119>. Note that these clubs
originally formed in London and were named after
the poet and murderer Richard
Patrick Wolfe,
‘Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the Native’
(2006) 8(4)
Journal of Genocide Research
, 389. See also Kim TallBear,
‘Indigenous Genocide and Reanimation, Settler Apocalypse and Hope’
(2023) 10(2)
Aboriginal Policy Studies
<https://doi.org/10.5663/aps.v10i2.29425>.
Te Aho and Tolmie (n
163) 421, citing Young, Hobbs and McIntyre, ‘The Growth of
Pseudolaw’ (n
) 3. While we
call the manifestation of sovereign citizen pseudolaw in Aotearoa New Zealand a
movement, adherents would not identify
themselves in that way.
Toby Manhire, ‘The
Protest That Revealed a New, Ugly, Dangerous Side to Our Country’,
(online, 10 November 2021)
<https://thespinoff.co.nz/society/10-11-2021/protest-covid-vaccine-wellington>.
Glenn McConnell,
‘Iwi Take Unprecedented Stand against “Abusive” Protesters Who
Invaded Marae’,
(online, 28 February 2022)
<https://www.stuff.co.nz/pou-tiaki/127904988/iwi-take-unprecedented-stand-against-abusive-protesters-who-invaded-marae>.
Eva Corlett,
‘Fires and Clashes Break Out at New Zealand Parliament as Police Move in
to Clear Protest’,
The Guardian
(online, 2 March 2022)
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/mar/02/police-move-to-clear-new-zealand-protests-as-maori-king-calls-for-end-to-occupation>.
Manhire (n 226).
Toni Hassan, ‘Who
Are the “Original Sovereigns” Who Were Camped Out at Old Parliament
House and What Are Their
The Conversation
(online, 17
January 2022)
<https://theconversation.com/who-are-the-original-sovereigns-who-were-camped-out-at-old-parliament-house-and-what-are-their-aims-174694>.
Josh Roose, ‘How
“Freedom Rally” Protestors and Populist Right-Wing Politics May Play
a Role in the Federal Election’,
The Conversation
(online, 15
February 2022)
<https://theconversation.com/how-freedom-rally-protesters-and-populist-right-wing-politics-may-play-a-role-in-the-federal-election-176533>,
citing @tassiekaz (X, 3 February 2022, 1:35pm AEST)
<https://x.com/tassiekaz/status/1489064857882091522>.
Jack Latimore,
‘“Blackfishing”: Alt-right Pushes to Co-opt Aboriginal Tent
Embassy to Cause’,
(online, 8 January 2022)
<https://www.theage.com.au/national/blackfishing-alt-right-pushes-to-co-opt-aboriginal-tent-embassy-to-cause-20220105-p59lzj.html>.
Day and Carlson (n
Latimore (n 235).
Day and Carlson (n
Hassan (n 232).
Mikele Syron,
‘Viral Video Sows Land Rights Misinformation’,
Indigenous Times
(online, 23 June 2020)
<https://nit.com.au/23-06-2023/6482/viral-video-sows-land-rights-misinformation>.
Blair Simpson-Wise,
‘Motley List of Voice Misinformation Goes Viral’,
(online, 21 September 2023)
<https://www.aap.com.au/factcheck/motley-list-of-voice-misinformation-goes-viral/>,
citing Lisa
Collins (Facebook, 11 September 2023, 7:27am)
<https://archive.li/1DslX>.
See above n
and accompanying text.
David Campbell,
‘Kim Beazley Dismisses Claim He Foreshadowed “Totalitarian
Republic” via Voice Referendum as “Rubbish”’,
(online, 31 March 2023)
<https://www.rmit.edu.au/news/factlab-meta/beazley-dismisses-claim-he-foreshadowed-totalitarian-republic>.
Graham (n 12).
Ibid 14. See also Emma
Brancatisano, ‘“Extremely Politicised”: How “Very
Worrying” Voice Misinformation
Spreads Online’,
(online, 8 October 2023)
<https://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/extremely-politicised-and-very-worrying-how-misinformation-about-the-voice-spread/w9sl4pzba>.
See, eg, Amy McQuire,
‘Voting on “The Voice”: Will It Fight Racist Violence’,
Black Justice Journalism
(Blog Post, 5 January 2023)
<https://amymcquire.substack.com/p/voting-on-the-voice-will-it-fight>.
See Stephen Young and
Harry Hobbs, ‘The Impact of Pseudolaw on Local Government’ (2025)
Public Law Review
(forthcoming) 7, 12, 20.
‘:Lady-Crown-Turikatuku-III©™:’ (Web Page)
<https://rangihouthetruthrevealed.weebly.com/lady-crown-turikatuku-iii.html>.
‘Janine Speaks
with Lady-Crown: Turikatuku III from the Mauri Nation’,
Public Notices
<https://publicnoticesnz.com/janine-speaks-with-lady-crown-turikatuku-iii-crown-of-the-mauri-nation/>.
‘Law-Lore’,
My Place Australia
<https://web.myplaceaustralia.org/law-lore/>.
‘Grandmother
Mulara: An Expression of Divine Healing Energy in an Ancient
Tradition’,
Grandmother Wisdom
<https://grandmotherwisdom.com/>.
Constitution
Grandmother Wisdom
<https://grandmotherwisdom.com/1973-constitution-change/>.
See Sovereign Yidindji
Government (n
); ‘Williams
Treaties First Nations Public Notice’ (n
See, eg, Charmayne
Allison, ‘Two NSW Men Found Guilty of Using Oily Handprints to Damage
Sacred Uluru Cave Art’,
(online, 12 October 2023)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-10-12/nt-court-convicts-nsw-men-for-uluru-cave-art-damage-handprints/102968566>.
Donald J Netolitzky,
‘Lawyers and Court Representation of Organized Pseudolegal Commercial
Argument [OPCA] Litigants in Canada’
(2018) 51(2)
University of British
Columbia Law Review
Baldino and Balnaves (n
Day and Carlson (n
Te Aho and Tolmie (n
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (281 KB)
PDF format (416 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter