URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WALawTRw/2025/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Brown, Natalie --- "Transferable Skills from Teaching Primary Literacy and Numeracy: Using Silence as a Teaching Tool" [2025] WALawTRw 9; (2025) 3 The Western Australian Law Teachers' Review 112
TRANSFERABLE SKILLS FROM
TEACHING PRIMARY LITERACY AND NUMERACY: USING SILENCE AS A TEACHING TOOL
NATALIE BROWN
This piece is published as a
‘teaching note’
rather than a scholarly article. WALTR publishes teaching notes to provide
space for reflective, practice-based contributions that
sit outside the scope of
traditional peer-reviewed articles but are nonetheless of value to the community
of legal educators. They
may include reflections on teaching and assessment,
contextualised lesson plans (including for secondary legal studies), or opinion
and commentary on broader issues in legal education.
I INTRODUCTION
This teaching note is about how my experience
teaching literacy and numeracy to primary and middle school students transferred
my tertiary teaching. My teaching pedagogy developed organically, more
bluntly, by trial and error – if it works keep it, if
it does not,
discard. It is only later, such as when I decide to write a teaching note, that
go to the research to discover why
what I am doing works. In this teaching note
I discuss creating verbal ‘white space’ – or, if you prefer a
technical description, incorporating silence as part of information
delivery to allow for optimal cognitive processing.
Culturally I identify as European, and as such I am not naturally comfortable
with silence in conversation or discussion. My natural
tendency is to fill the
space with words. I may perceive silence as boredom or disinterest. So, I follow
up with a question or more
interesting information to elicit a response from my
listener. However, it may equally be the case that my listener needs time to
think before responding. Just as we become comfortable with silence in a close
friendship, we can also develop our teaching relationship
and become comfortable
with silence when we teach.
In many other cultures, silence is an important part of discussion and
conversation.
It demonstrates that
the receiver respects the speaker because they are taking time to consider their
response. Speakers who try
to elicit a response by following-up or prompting
commit a social faux-pas. Often it results in the listener providing the answer
they think the speaker wants (such as agreement), rather than processing the
information to develop their own conclusion or opinion.
When teaching literacy and numeracy in primary education it was difficult to
resist the temptation (and my cultural tendency to fill
silence with words) to
‘help’ the student by prompting. When I resisted assisting, I
allowed the student to process in
their own time. It was a valuable insight to
learn that filling the space with prompts, questions, further explanation,
or paraphrasing all interfered with the student’s cognitive
process because I was not providing enough ‘thinking time’.
II USING SILENCE FOR COGNITIVE PROCESSING WHEN TEACHING
In primary education, creating a comfortable silent teaching space was key to
students’ literacy success. When teaching literacy,
the silent processing
time can be quite long – minutes, not seconds. When you break down the
complexity of reading you have
a better understanding of why long silent spaces
assist cognitive processing.
For example, teachers of literacy use flash cards to teach the vowel sounds.
Imagine a card with an image of dog for the vowel sound
represented by the letter ‘o’. The flash card will have the image
and the word with the vowel underlined
g’. The prompt
question may be ‘what is the middle (or underlined) sound in this
word?’. A simple task for a literate
person but let us consider the
process from the point of view of a non-reader. The student knows the word is
dog because of the image.
But the question ‘what is the middle
sound?’ requires deep processing. They can see there are three symbols,
there are three sounds. The next step is to break down the word into
three sounds ‘Der’, ‘oh’, and ‘ger’.
the three sounds need to be matched with the three symbols, ‘Der’ =
‘d’, ‘oh’ = ‘o’
and ‘ger’ =
‘g’. Therefore, the middle symbol ‘o’ must make the
sound ‘oh’. That
process takes time and the more complex the word
the more complex the process becomes.
So, not allowing silence for thinking or deep processing will create
confusion (from the interference with the thought process) and
anxiety (because
the student may feel they are not completing the task quickly enough). In my
experience, student results improved
when they were not prompted, did not feel
rushed and had been provided with lots of time to think.
The reading experience is an individual cognitive process, no two students
learn in the same way. A teacher can help, but cracking
the code and developing
the associations between sounds and symbols is their own journey. Whether
learning to read or learning law,
you can help with clear instruction, building
confidence, patience, and giving students some silent time to process the
information
in their own way.
III USING SILENCE IN TERTIARY TEACHING:
UM, AH AND OTHER INVADERS
When compared to primary teaching, tertiary teaching is a completely
different ballgame: because the student body typically has a
well-developed
skillset, minutes of silence are not necessary. However, a few or more seconds
of silence play an important role in
my lecture and tutorial delivery.
As a student I found fast delivery with lots of ‘ums’ or
‘ahs’ affected my understanding. In retrospect, it
was because this
style delivers the information in one long continuous sentence with no
segmentation (or processing time). When I
became a lecturer, I tried to cut out
the ‘ums’ and ‘ahs’. It was not easy, because I was
using um and ah
to collect my thoughts and formulate the next sentence. No
sooner did extract um and ah than I noticed I had replaced them with
which subsequently got replaced with ‘now’ or
‘like’ or ‘really’ – all filler words to
silence. Heaven forbid that students should notice I needed to think! The
filler words – um, ah, now, and so –
were all just tools to allow me
to formulate my next thought. Why not look at my notes, take a sip of water or a
deep breath, or
just silently think for a few seconds? And importantly, give my
students a few seconds to think as well.
Essentially what my fear of silence was doing was removing all the full stops
from my carefully prepared lecture notes. Just as we
do not enjoy reading an
essay or article that has long convoluted sentences because it is confusing and
tiring for our brains, it
is not easy to listen to either.
Once I became more comfortable with silence, I found I now had time for other
things. I could connect with my audience by making eye
room and pick up on the body language and facial expressions. Is the information
landing or is it confusing,
is my audience bored or engaged, or tired? After
delivering a difficult or important concept, pause, wait, and watch until your
it ready. Has the typing died down, are the heads coming up, am I
receiving eye-contact, is now the right time to provide an example
or follow-up
information?
Silence is also a useful tool for correcting mistakes. Immediately and
hastily correcting yourself in the same sentence as the incorrect
information
was delivered is confusing. Instead, pause for a moment and make a statement
such as, ‘that was incorrect –
scratch my last statement’.
Give the listeners time to remove the incorrect information from their notes,
and importantly from
their minds, before you deliver the corrected statement.
Silence is more powerful than speech for controlling large groups, and for
drawing attention when you wish to speak. If my lecture
or tutorial is being
disturbed, I stop speaking and wait. The group listening will join you, and
those who are the reason for your
silence will soon give you their attention. To
take control of a room that is chatting, a gesture such as a raised hand and
eye contact will do the job quicker than a call to order. Do not be
afraid to wait. Students will get used to the method and respond
to a signal. It
is a ‘lead by example’ technique. If you are calling order (making
noise) your audience will also feel
they can continue to make noise, at least
finish their sentence or – at worst – their conversation. But if you
are silent,
the expectation is clear, and nobody wants to be the last one
speaking when the rest of the audience has already caught the cue to
Let the silence speak for you.
IV WHAT DOES THE RESEARCH SAY?
When I researched the topic, I discovered many new terms. While I did not
discover anything specifically on my idea of ‘verbal
whitespace’ or
the incorporation of silence, the concept falls more or less into the topic of
clarity. The germane finding
being that the clarity of the instruction can
affect the students’ cognitive function and capacity for deeper
processing.
Cognitive load theory (‘CLT’) posits that that instructors should
consider that humans have a limited working memory
Therefore, instruction that overloads the student’s working memory impedes
the student’s ability to transfer and retain
the information in their
long-term memory.
There are three types of cognitive load: germane load that links the
information to pre-existing knowledge in the long-term memory
(essential to
learning); intrinsic load, which relates to how complex the material is; and
extraneous load, which relates to the
complexity of the
The instructor does not
want to reduce germane load because it is useful, cannot reduce intrinsic load
because it is fixed, but they
control extraneous load by providing
good structure and clear delivery.
Clear teaching can enable students to take better notes, become more emotionally
and cognitively invested in the course, and have
better recall and retention of
information.
Reducing extraneous load may reduce receiver apprehension and facilitate
deeper processing.
Overloading a
student with information can lead to receiver
apprehension.
Deeper processing is described as a student’s capacity to analyse and
reflect on the information during the
Receiver apprehension can
manifest as anxiety about misinterpreting or making sense of the information; or
it may be an emotional
response to receiving complex
information.
receiver’s level of apprehension can correlate to a backlog of
unassimilated information.
the theory is to reduce the extraneous cognitive load to reduce the receiver
apprehension.
Reducing extraneous load may also reduce the student’s perception of
intrinsic load.
A recent study
indicates that the higher the intrinsic load, the less effectively teacher
clarity reduced receiver
apprehension.
Researchers
described this as a tapering process, as the material becomes intrinsically more
difficult, clear teaching has less impact
because as more working memory is
required it is more difficult to influence receiver
apprehension.
In short, students
benefitted more from teacher clarity when receiving easier information than more
difficult information.
other hand, when intrinsic load is high, clarity may preserve what little
resources students have left for
To my mind, any
reduction is valuable, as a receiver of information, when I later review my
notes I will more easily process a difficult
concept if the instruction was
delivered clearly (and I had time to record the information accurately). It
would be interesting to
see a study on how teacher clarity effects students
later, when they are reviewing material for examination and have the time and
the need to deeply process the difficult information in their notes or by
reviewing the lecture online.
Clarity has five main factors, disfluency, working memory overload,
interaction, coherence, and
In my opinion, the
use of silence as a teaching tool falls into disfluency and working memory
overload. Disfluency refers to the
capacity to explain in a simple manner or use
appropriate examples, and working memory overload relates to when the
instruction out-paces
the student’s capacity to process the
information.
So how does the incorporation of silence fit into that framework more
specifically? In my opinion, an element of disfluency is
segmenting.
recognising a full stop in your speech, which includes removing the ums and
other silence fillers.
Disfluency could also include
but using silence as a
teaching tool is not really pacing – that refers more to the speed of
Silence falls into the
working memory overload factor, because its purpose is to let students
‘catch-up’ with the information
and/or process the information. The
verbal whitespace concept also fits into a subgroup of clarity research that
researchers have
termed ‘non-verbal immediacy’. That concept
includes pausing before or after important points, gestures, and
However, the non-verbal
immediacy study cited here did not produce highly significant results in
relating immediacy to cognitive
function – the authors of that study noted
the efficacy of the study may have been limited by the delivery via video rather
than live lectures.
I suggest alleviating both intrinsic and extraneous load by utilising silence
a few times in your delivery, so as to allow the student’s
processing or germane cognitive load. Practice the pause – short pauses
and long pauses, pause for emphasis, pause because
the information just
delivered was complex, pause for a full stop, pause to engage your audience.
V CONCLUSION
I am by no means perfect in my performance. The ums and ahs slip in every now
again, but a lot less often since I started consciously
working to include a
pause for a full stop. I avoid ‘um’, I try to keep ‘so’
for when I mean therefore, ‘like’
for when I mean similar, and
‘now’ for when I mean the present. I am now more comfortable with
silence, and I use it
confidently. I am not discombobulated if I lose my train
of thought, I just take moment to recalibrate. I am comfortable with lengthy
pauses, up to 5–10 seconds, after delivering after new complex information
to allow the deeper processing. Silence is useful
to you, but more importantly
it is useful to your audience. A few seconds to gather your thoughts and
formulate your next sentence
also gives your audience relief and time to process
the information. My message is: embrace the pause, enjoy the silence, your
will enjoy it too.
* Natalie Brown is a Lecturer at the UWA Law School, The University of
Western Australia.
See generally Diana Eades,
‘Telling and Retelling Your Story in Court: Questions, Assumptions and
Intercultural Implications’
(2008) 20(2)
Current Issues in Criminal
Nick Serki and San Bolkan,
‘The Effect of Clarity on Learning: Impacting Motivation Through Cognitive
Load’ (2024) 73(1)
Communication Education
29, 29–30; San
Bolkan and Alan K Goodboy, ‘Conditional Indirect Effects of Clarity on
Students’ Information Processing:
Disentangling Sources of Cognitive
Load’ (2024) 73(3)
Communication Education
247, 248–9, 251.
San Bolkan, ‘The
Importance of Instructor Clarity and Its Effect on Student Learning:
Facilitating Elaboration by Reducing
Cognitive Load’ (2016) 29(3)
Communication Education
Serki and Bolkan (n 2)
30–1; Bolkan (n 3) 154.
Serki and Bolkan (n 2) 31.
Bolkan and Goodboy (n 2)
Serki and Bolkan (n 2) 31.
Bolkan (n 3) 153–4;
Bolkan and Goodboy (n 2) 259.
Joseph L Chesebro,
‘Effects of Teacher Clarity and Nonverbal Immediacy on Student Learning,
Receiver Apprehension, and Affect’
(2003) 52(2)
Communication Education
135, 138; Bolkan (n 3) 156; Bolkan and Goodboy (n 2) 255.
Bolkan and Goodboy (n 2)
Chesebro (n 9) 138.
Bolkan (n 3) 156.
Ibid 159–60.
Bolkan and Goodboy (n 2)
Ibid 250–1.
Bolkan (n 3) 155.
Chesebro (n 9) 140.
Ibid 137; Bolkan (n 3)
Chesebro (n 9) 136.
Ibid 145–6.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (79.6 KB)
PDF format (441 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter