URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2018/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:49:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
George, Emma; Tsourtos, George; McNaughton, Darlene --- "It's Just About the Crime, Not the Victim': Critical Insights from Australian Service Providers Working with People Who Have Been Trafficked" [2018] CICrimJust 8; (2018) 30(1) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 1
‘It’s Just about the Crime, Not the Victim’: Critical
Insights from Australian Service Providers Working with People
Been Trafficked
Emma George,
and Darlene
Human trafficking is a global public health issue, prevalent in Australia.
Our study aimed to gain in-depth understanding of human
trafficking and related
service provision from a range of sectors, from the perspective of service
providers. Adopting a qualitative
descriptive approach, in-depth semi-structured
interviews were undertaken with 13 service providers from a range of
organisations
across three Australian states. Service providers emphasised the
challenges posed by Australia’s predominately criminal justice
approach to
trafficking, in both policy and service provision, with some suggesting the
current process is re-traumatising. Results
support refocusing policy and
services away from a criminal justice response to a more comprehensive and
holistic response that includes
greater recognition of the social determinants
of health and the provision of tailored services. This requires increased
collaboration
between service providers, some of whom have very different
agendas. The findings provide support for recommendations with the Australian
government inquiry into modern-day slavery and therefore have important
implications for policy and health services nationally to
become more holistic
in responding to human trafficking.
human trafficking – modern slavery – government
inquiry –criminal justice – service provision – Australia
Introduction
Human trafficking has been described as a crime against humanity with
potentially devastating health consequences of global magnitude
(Richards 2014;
Zimmerman & Kiss 2017). Over the last two decades, the issue of human
trafficking has gained attention from activists,
policy-makers and services
providers internationally, and in Australia, as human trafficking is thought to
be one of the fastest-growing
areas of criminal activity (Gozdziak &
MacDonnell 2007; O’Brien 2011; Weitzer 2014). This research is timely in
of the Australian Government’s inquiry into establishing a Modern
Slavery Act in Australia (Commonwealth of Australia 2017).
This parliamentary
inquiry received 223 submissions and hosted 10 public hearings. The Committee
found that, while significant work
has already begun to address modern slavery,
more can be done to combat this crime and support people who have been
trafficked. In
this article, we provide an overview of human trafficking and the
Australian context. We outline the aim, methods and results of
the research
exploring service providers’ perspective on human trafficking, and then
discuss the findings in light of the recommendations
from the inquiry into the
Modern Slavery Act in Australia.
Overview of human trafficking
The most recent global estimates of trafficking, slavery and forced labour
outline that, on any given day in 2016, 40.3 million people
were exploited in
modern slavery (International Labour Organization; Walk Free Foundation et al.
2017). Some global reports on trafficking
argued that the actual number of
trafficked people is much higher than reported in the documented statistics
(Walk Free Foundation
2016). However, Goodey (2008) noted that accurate data on
the extent of trafficking is difficult to obtain, a common challenge in
justice in areas of serious and organised crime, which is ‘under-reported,
under-detected and therefore, under-prosecuted’
(p. 425). Inflated
statistics on human trafficking have been criticised by Weitzer (2014) because
of the lack of evidence cited to
support the figures. The ambiguity
surrounding estimates of the human trafficking problem reflects the challenges
in measuring clandestine
crimes, as well as complex definitions applied to
trafficking, slavery and slavery-like practice (O’Brien 2011). Despite the
contested statistics in human trafficking, Zimmerman and Kiss (2017) reported
there is ‘growing evidence on the wide-ranging
health consequences of
human trafficking’ (p. 2).
Previous research has gained insights into the experience and impact of
trafficking (Juodo Larson & Renshaw 2012), much of which
is focused on
physical, mental and emotional health (Tsutsumi et al. 2008; Zimmerman et al.
2008; Oram et al. 2012; Hom & Woods
2013; Oram et al. 2016; Ottisova et al.
2016; Stanley et al. 2016; Bick et al. 2017; Borschmann et al. 2017; Zimmerman
2017); the complexity and severity of trauma and violence
(Gajic-Veljanoski & Stewart 2007; Zimmerman et al. 2009); the lives
roles of the traffickers (Molland 2010; Kamazima et al. 2011; Simmons et al.
2013); and policy (George 2012; George et al. 2017).
A study by Oram et al.
(2016) argued that survivors of trafficking need support to ‘address the
chronic and multiple traumatic
events they have experienced along with careful
risk assessments and safety planning, particularly if they are returning to
countries of origin’ (p. 1076). Research by Bick et al. (2017)
argued specifically for access to maternal health services as
an important point
of contact for identification of people who have been trafficked, and as well as
caring for their health needs.
A recent study by Irwin (2017) explored police
officer understanding and awareness of human trafficking in Australia. Two key
from this research was the need for relevant training and clear policy
direction for frontline workers, and that barriers exist between
providers limiting an effective response to this issue. This study indicates the
important perspective of service providers
and highlights the gap in knowledge
from multiple sectors, including health professionals.
Australian research on human trafficking has mostly focused on policy and law
(Carson & Edwards 2011; Schloenhardt & Klug
2011; Cameron &
Schloenhardt 2012; Davy 2017) and trafficking in the sex industry (Flynn et al.
2012). Research from the Australian
Institute of Criminology has emphasised the
complex nature of human trafficking and slavery in its different forms (David
2007; Juodo
Larson & Renshaw 2012; Lyneham & Joudo Larsen 2013; Lyneham
& Richards 2014; Richards & Lyneham 2014), and analysed
offenders in Australian cases (Simmons et al. 2013). Research by Davy (2015) and
Langhorn (2018) showed that, in Australia,
people who have been trafficked do
not fit the stereotypical image of a victim who has been enslaved in bounds and
shackles, or kidnapped.
Instead, she argued that trafficking in Australia is
enacted through more subtle coercion through debt contracts. Both studies
that people who are trafficked in Australia cannot pay off their
inflated debt, and their personal documents are confiscated, which
renders them
powerless to escape exploitation for fear of arrest or deportation.
Internationally, human trafficking is now understood as a public health issue
(US Department of State 2017), even though there has
been little
population-based prevalence data on morbidity and mortality as a result of human
trafficking, because it is accepted
that the probability of significant health
burdens from exploitation cannot be discounted (Zimmerman & Kiss 2017). From
health perspective, human trafficking can be explored as an issue of
both criminal justice and health. Several scholars have sought
to critique the
theory that a criminal justice approach to trafficking serves to reduce the
prevalence of trafficking, aid people
who have been trafficked, and has positive
health consequences (Gallagher 2011; Simmons & Burn 2011; George 2012;
Macias-Konstantopoulos
et al. 2013; Burn 2017). By focusing research on the
individual’s experiences, this critique has helped scholars, advocates,
and public health actors to better understand how the criminal justice system
may adversely affect people who have been trafficked.
Therefore, we draw on and
extend this literature by exploring the service providers’ perspectives on
human trafficking. Gaining
the service providers’ perspectives is
important because service providers from a variety of sectors who work with
risk of exploitation are well positioned to observe problems and
limitations of services, as well as identify opportunities for improved
solutions, including the prevention of human trafficking (DiStefano &
Cavetano 2011; Letourneau et al. 2011).
In policy and much of the relevant literature, people who have been
trafficked are referred to as ‘victims’. This has
become a source of
controversy within the anti-trafficking sector (US Department of State
2013). In some cases, ‘victim’
is used to suggest a lack of power or
agency within a situation, or to frame people or policy problems in a certain
way (Weitzer
2013; O’Brien 2016; Wilson & O’Brien 2016).
Therefore, in this article, we refer to people who are trafficked, or
but when the term ‘victim’ is used, it reflects the literature cited
or the direct use of this terminology
by service providers.
The Australian context
The Australian Government’s ‘National Action Plan to Combat Human
Trafficking and Slavery 2015–2019’ (Commonwealth
of Australia 2014a)
positions Australia predominately as a destination country for people who have
been trafficking. Similarly to
other destination countries, people who are
trafficked in Australia are exploited in the sex industry, domestic work,
hospitality,
construction, and within relationships. National government
statistics show that between 2004 and 2015 there were 588 investigations
trafficking in Australia, resulting in the identification of 273 people who have
been trafficked (Commonwealth of Australia 2015).
The most recent inquiry into
human trafficking at a state level by the New South Wales (‘NSW’)
Parliament (2017) recorded
that, since 2004, ‘there have been more than
750 human trafficking and trafficking-related referrals to Australian
authorities’
(p. 7). Although the total number of investigations could be
considered low by comparison to other destination countries, it is concerning
that the number of investigations and identification of people who have been
trafficked is increasing every year. In Australia, the
majority of people who
have been trafficked are women, and have similar background, culture, language
and socio-economic circumstances
to the people who recruited them (NSW
Parliament 2017). Most people who have been trafficked into Australia have
arrived with legitimate
visas. However, the visas may have been obtained
fraudulently (Commonwealth of Australia 2014a).
In Australia, the ‘Support for Trafficked People Program’
(‘STPP’) provides services for people who have been
trafficked. This
is described by the Australian Government as a victim-centred approach with
individualised case management and support
(Commonwealth of Australia 2014a).
There are four streams of assessment within the STPP: assessment, extended
assessment, the justice
support stream, and the temporary trial support stream.
The ‘National Action Plan for 2015–2019’ clearly states
the assessment streams are accessible to all people who have been identified by
the Australian Federal Police (‘AFP’),
but long-term support remains
conditional upon willingness to participate in the criminal justice system
(Commonwealth of Australia
2014a). Many support programs worldwide require
people who have been trafficked to participate in criminal investigations
the traffickers. This conditional support has been described as
disempowering and counterproductive to healing, and one of the largest
impediments to effective service provision, including health services (George
A criminal justice-focused response to human trafficking has prevailed in
public policy in Australia and around the world (Segrave
& Milivojevic 2010;
Schofield et al. 2011). It is a priority in destination countries like Australia
that traffickers should
be identified, prosecuted, and punished and that
stronger international border control is implemented in order to prevent
trafficking
into the country (Gallagher & Holmes 2008). Farrer (2011)
explained that an
anti-immigration sentiment and public fear about border protection provide a
foundation for Australian border control policies, a
strong feature of Prime
Minister Howard’s Federal Government from 1996 to 2007, and again in the
Abbott and Turnbull-led Governments
from 2013 to present. Devetak (2007)
described a moral panic over people movement consistent with Australia’s
history of racial
anxieties. The perceived need for border protection and
subsequent criminalisation of trafficking feeds into Australians’
historically
embedded fears of the unknown, which have been fuelled and
exploited for political gain. A criminal justice response to human trafficking
that is built upon border protection policies, and hidden fears of migrant or
illegal arrivals, also overlooks the complexity of
trafficking in Australia,
which includes the exploitation of citizens and people who have been trafficked
on spousal or work visas
(George et al. 2017).
In addition, O’Brien (2011) reported moral panic in Australia over a
perceived causal relationship between sex work human trafficking.
She explained,
‘Abolitionists might argue that legalising prostitution cements social
norms that sanction the purchase of women
for sex, leading to
exploitation.’ However, on the other hand, advocates for the
decriminalisation of sex work ‘would
argue that the illegal nature of the
industry allows for the establishment of norms where sex workers are subject to
exploitation
and violence’ (p. 559). The moral panic and misunderstandings
on causal relationships between sex work and exploitation has
fostered division
between service providers in anti-trafficking and created barriers for them to
collaborative respond to the needs
to survivors.
Aim and objectives
The aim of this research was to explore and gain an in-depth understanding
from a range of different service providers’ perspectives
trafficking policy and service provision in Australia, including health
services. The following objectives were investigated:
• Objective 1: Gain insight into service providers’ understanding
of the barriers to current practices, approaches, and
support services for
people who have been trafficked.
• Objective 2: Identify service provider recommendations for improving
current practice, policy and services for people who
have been trafficked.
Qualitative descriptive methodology
We chose a qualitative descriptive methodology (Sandelowski 2010) and used
in-depth semi-structured interviews to address the exploratory
nature of the
project and its aims. This approach allows participants to consider and describe
their views, raise new issues and
take the interview in directions that are
meaningful to them.
Sampling frame
Recruitment targeted service providers working with people who have been
trafficked in Australia, from a range of sectors. Twenty-two
organisations were
identified through government policy documents and reports, and all were invited
to participate in the study.
We also used snowball sampling, which allowed
participants to identify other organisations or key individuals that currently
services to people who have been trafficked (Liamputtong 2013). A media
strategy (Phillips 2014) was also used to seek participants
who have previously
worked in the field of anti-trafficking or service provision.
The sample included 13 individuals from nine organisations, across three
Australian states (the Australian Capital Territory, NSW
and South Australia).
Participants included a lawyer who works with people who have been trafficked,
two representatives from the
sex industry, three anti-trafficking advocates,
three community health service providers, two human trafficking researchers, a
representative
from federal law enforcement, and another from federal government
who works in the criminal justice sector.
In-depth interviews
Semi-structured interviews with open-ended questions were chosen for their
capacity to allow participants to reflect on the questions,
or take the
interview in new and unexpected directions, while prompts were used to encourage
further elaboration (Liamputtong 2013).
An interview schedule was developed and
pilot tested with a service provider who was not a participant in the study. The
interview schedule was reviewed and revised in an iterative process of
analysing data, as it was collected (Pope et al. 2007). Key
questions invited
commentary on: the causes of human trafficking; the barriers to current service
provision practice; the impact
of human trafficking on health; and
recommendations regarding solutions.
Interviews were conducted from August to November 2014, with interviews
lasting approximately 50 minutes. Three interviews were undertaken
with pairs of
respondents at the request of participants who were colleagues, and seven
interviews were conducted with individuals.
Interviews were conducted in
suitable offices and meeting rooms at organisations, in cafes and, in one case,
in the home of a participant
at the person’s request. Three interviews
were conducted via phone. The different locations and modality for interviews
the preferences of the participants.
All interviews were audio recorded and transcribed verbatim. Jottings were
made during the interviews and written up as field notes
after each interview
(Liamputtong 2013). The accuracy of all transcripts was confirmed by
participants and only one participant requested
comments be edited for use in
publications.
Data analysis
Thematic analysis was adopted to identify and report patterns of meaning,
themes, positioning, and differences within the data (Braun
& Clarke 2006).
The process of analysis involved coding the data into layers of abstraction and
interpretation. Comparisons were
made within and between transcripts. The voice
of participants was at the forefront of analysis of data content and meaning.
investigators triangulated the data and themes were identified by
Ethical consideration
The Social Behavioural Research Ethics Committee (number 6350) at Flinders
University gave ethics approval and participants gave informed
written consent.
To protect the anonymity of participants who are members of a very small network
of organisations, the names of
these groups have not been included. We have
provided general descriptors about gender and area of specialisation when
quoting respondents.
As an exploratory study into the issue of human trafficking, the research
team made an ethical decision not to recruit participants
who have been
trafficked, to avoid potential traumatisation in the retelling of their story
and sharing experience.
Trafficking in Australia was frequently described as a ‘complicated
landscape’. Participants reported trafficking as a
hidden issue where
people do not understand that these kinds of exploitation are in fact occurring
around them. But it, ‘actually
happens, in the backstreets of Sydney, the
backstreets of Melbourne’ as one female advocate expressed it.
Participants all
mentioned new Australian legislation that distinguishes
trafficking from slavery and slavery-like practices (Commonwealth of Australia
2015). However, for all of those interviewed, it was the presence of some form
of exploitation, and the needs of survivors of trafficking
that was emphasised,
rather than any particular definition or legislation. Insights from participants
on service provision for people
who have been trafficked aligned to the
following four themes.
Theme 1: The criminal justice approach to service provision
All the participants in this study had a detailed and accurate understanding
of Australia’s policy response to trafficking and
the STPP, in which
long-term support is only provided when people are willing to participate in the
criminal justice system. Notably,
all participants from non-government
organisations (‘NGOs’) expressed criticism of this condition because
participation
in investigations and prosecutions can ‘re-traumatise
victims’. As one male participant explained, ‘[T]here’s
constant reminding of the disempowerment you’ve undergone and the
treatment you’ve gone through. The fact that you’ve
been forced into
doing something against your will.’ The link between support services and
the criminal justice system was
described by an advocate as
‘inappropriate’ because ‘people should be able to receive
support if they’ve
been through such a horrible experience without being
forced to participate in a criminal investigation’. A female lawyer
‘It’s horrid. I think it’s just about the crime,
it’s not about the victim if you like.’ In addition,
the length of
time required for investigations was identified as a problem for people who have
been trafficked because it was perceived
as adversely impacting on their health,
work, and family life. One female advocate stated, ‘By going through a
lengthy trial
process which can take months, are you able to work? How is your
health and well-being? How are your kids? How’s everything
back home? I
think that’s a huge risk for them.’
During the interviews, participants were asked to identify the benefits (as
well as the limitations) for people who have been trafficked
of participating in
investigation and prosecution. Only participants from government organisations
could report benefits that were
specific to people who have been trafficked. The
first benefit identified is a need for ‘closure’, which was
essential in recovery, highlighting an emphasis on psychological
health. As one male participant from the criminal justice system
‘Some people want closure in terms of seeking that person to be held
responsible, and you know, brought to justice
as such.’ Second, the
process of participation in the criminal justice system was also considered to
be important because ‘having
someone take down what you say and have
somebody investigate what you’ve said and actually take you seriously, and
some credibility is incredibly empowering as well’. A third
benefit for people who have been trafficked, identified by government
was achieving a sense of justice. One female respondent reported that:
having your day in court, seeing justice delivered, can’t be
underestimated in terms of the restorative benefits for the individual
actually have that sense of right restored in their life ... and to be found to
be justified in what they’ve complained
to the police is incredibly
empowering.
Although these benefits for people who have been trafficked to participate in
the criminal justice system were reported, it is important
to note that the
overwhelming response from all participants was that involvement in the criminal
justice system in order to receive
long-term support in the STPP put people at
risk of re-traumatisation and further exploitation.
Theme 2: The impact of human trafficking on
All participants recognised the long-term health impacts of trauma for people
who have been trafficked, and supported the argument
that, with regards to
health, ‘the most harm would come to the mental health of a person
who’s been trafficked’
(male advocate). Reporting about the
long-term trauma of human trafficking, a female outreach worker explained
‘an assault
only lasts for so long, but this sort of exploitation can go
on for years and years and years’.
Respondents described a type of ‘depression’ that can ‘set
in deeply’ (male government representative). A
female community support
worker clarified that this influences: ‘[A]ll the dimensions that are in a
lifestyle, it affects their
eating, their sleeping, it affects their ability to
relate, and all of those things have the ability to affect you emotionally,
psychologically
and spiritually.’
In addition, a female government worker stated the ‘type of
depression’ seen with many people who have been trafficked
was connected
to a ‘real sense of hopelessness’, which was also an outcome of
dealing with the deception and coercion
involved in trafficking. As one senior
male government worker explained: ‘I think it’s the psychological
damage that
kind of comes through their situation; people are deceived, and
it’s hard to get over that I think.’
Participants supported individualised health
services to effectively respond to different needs of people who have been
trafficked.
For example, a female community support worker explained,
‘It’s not a one size fits all, and you have to be flexible
kind of people that are using the service, and know that it doesn’t always
match them.’ Participants also reported
service provision needs to vary
according to the type of exploitation experienced, as well as the severity and
duration of trauma.
Theme 3: The challenge of collaboration among service
All participants identified the importance of working together across sectors
to provide services for people who have been trafficked.
The important role of
the AFP in identifying victims and connecting with service providers was vital.
An outreach worker explained
that the complexity of trafficking means that
‘the AFP response isn’t necessarily a traditional police response,
are certainly sensitised to the needs of trafficked people and to the
issues that they may have ... and they do have specialist training
issue’. Participants from government organisations strongly emphasised
that the AFP depends upon maintaining good relationships
within the rest of the
anti-trafficking sector.
However, participants identified significant barriers to collaboration
between service providers, especially when working with people
who have been
trafficked in the sex industry. It was reported by one of the female advocates
that some service providers ‘with
a more conservative ethos’ were
more likely to object to sex work as a profession on political, moral or
religious grounds.
A male advocate explained that some ‘people use
anti-trafficking to advance another agenda which is anti-sex work’. This
was described as a major barrier to collaboration across domestic and
international organisations because one group viewed the work
of another as
‘inherently bad’. Most participants agreed that some organisations,
usually connected to a religious group
or a feminist position, considered that
‘any form of sex work is a form of exploitation in and of itself’
(female support
worker). A female outreach worker described the hidden agendas
in anti-trafficking and sex work when she explained: ‘I don’t
people have the same agendas if we were talking about trafficking to the
construction industry or the fruit picking industry
... There’s no
argument that those industries shouldn’t exist.’ This participant
went on to explain that the sex
industry has a strong position against
exploitation, but the hidden agendas against sex work can limit collaboration
with other services
working with people who have been trafficked. Other examples
of the lack of collaboration were provided by service providers from
female participant explained that on entering the anti-trafficking sector,
‘I got talked down to ... the sector didn’t
welcome us.’
Another female participant from an NGO suggested that different organisations
‘hate each other’.
Despite the perceived conflict between service providers, there was strong
support in principle across the sectors for collaboration.
‘We believe if
you’re going to stop trafficking, stop slavery, it’s going to happen
when we’re working together.’
All participants, despite the
challenges they face in working together, echoed this commitment to partnership
for the prevention
of human trafficking.
Theme 4: Addressing a lack of awareness of human
trafficking
Respondents commonly stated that the wider community (schools, churches,
community groups, students, co-workers, friends and neighbours)
should have
their ‘eyes opened’ to human trafficking. The following quote from a
female community support worker suggests
one reason why raising awareness is
It is likely that someone in the community is going to be the first point of
that they’ll go
straight to the police, or to immigration, or to a victim support service place.
They’re going to seek
For ‘front-line workers’ (police, migrant services, domestic
violence services, refugee services, shelters, healthcare
workers, doctors, and
teachers), it was reported that education programs to date have prioritised
identifying people who have been
trafficked. One male participant from the
government sector stated that ‘front-line workers’ need to
the indicators are, know what’s affected, and know what
to do if there’s someone there’. However, as several participants
pointed out, there can be an overlap between domestic violence and exploitation
in forced marriage, making identification and subsequent
support for people who
have been trafficked difficult.
Participants also identified the need for greater awareness among people who
have been trafficked themselves. One female participant
explained that the visa
system and immigration laws for were ‘difficult to navigate’.
Several participants identified
international students as a group at risk for
exploitation. It was suggested that students don’t know their rights and,
their need to find employment to help cover the cost of their education in
Australia, they are at risk of exploitation. Several interviewees
providing information to students and other migrant workers in their own
languages was essential in increasing awareness
of what exploitation entails,
and what their rights are. One female outreach worker explained that:
‘Migrant workers might
be particularly vulnerable when coming to Australia
because they don’t necessarily know the workplace laws ... for example,
they’re a sex worker ... we can help, they’re not going to get into
trouble for seeking help.’
The findings from this study support many of the recommendations within the
Australian Government’s inquiry into modern-day
slavery (Commonwealth
2017). The inquiry clearly states that Australia is committed to addressing
human trafficking and providing
better support to survivors.
The Committee acknowledges the significant work that the Australian
Government has undertaken to address modern slavery through the
Action Plan to Combat Human Trafficking and Slavery 2015–19
Nevertheless, evidence to the inquiry suggests that more can be done to combat
these crimes and to better support victims (Commonwealth
2017, p. x).
The results from this study provide evidence on the gaps in service provision
and frustrations expressed by service providers. For
example, participants
considered the STPP is not victim centred, even though it claims to be.
Participants explained that the criminal
justice approach to service provision
does offer some beneficial outcomes for people who have been trafficked,
however, as a sole
approach it is problematic and potentially re-traumatising
for people. Participants in the study argued that this type of approach
reorient services to focus on the crime, rather than the person. This concern
was supported by the NSW Parliament (2017)
when it recognised that support for
people who have been trafficked should be provided without being tied to
involvement in the criminal
justice system. For many people who have been
trafficked, even though they engage in the criminal justice system, their
traffickers
may never be able to be prosecuted. The majority of suspected
traffickers are not prosecuted, and therefore we suggest that people
been trafficked may not experience closure or justice as a benefit of the
system. The NSW Parliament (2017) stated that
the ‘current prosecutorial
approach is not working, given that there have only been 20 trafficking
convictions in 13 years’
(p. 84). The ‘National Action Plan for
2015–2019’ (Commonwealth of Australia 2014a) documents that those
not willing to participate in the criminal justice system are not
eligible for the associated long-term government health support
services in the
STPP. Little is known about what happens to them — whether they are sent
Australian residents or citizens that remain
in Australia without access to specialised services. These findings that
challenge the
prioritisation of a criminal justice response to human trafficking
support recommendation 21 in the Australian Government’s
inquiry into
modern-day slavery. ‘The Committee recommends that the Australian
Government de-links access to the Support for
Trafficked People Program and the
Human Trafficking Visa Framework ... from compliance with criminal
investigations’ (Commonwealth
of Australia 2017, p. 159).
A key insight from service providers was a preference for a more
comprehensive and holistic response that is not heavily dependent
on involvement
in the criminal justice system, with an emphasis on human rights and social
determinants of health. This is consistent
with Zimmerman and Kiss (2017), who
argued for ‘initiatives to tackle modern slavery, forced labor, and human
trafficking need
to make the links between human trafficking and health by
working more closely with the health sector’ (p. 8). Many international
studies regarding service provision for people who have been trafficked call for
a more comprehensive, intersectoral, multidisciplinary
approach, but specialised
to meet the severe and unique needs of survivors (Miller et al. 2007; Shigekane
2007; Zimmerman et al.
2008; Potocky 2010). Initial practical support would
ideally include provision of clothing, food, transport, appropriate housing,
childcare (Potocky 2010). Beyond crisis intervention, the extant literature has
described support services as being prioritised
according to safety, security,
social support, forensics, counselling, and medical interventions (Shigekane
2007; Zimmerman et al.
2008). Studies have reported that a holistic approach to
healthcare is essential, but it must be flexible enough to accommodate perpetual
crisis and instability, especially considering that survivors experience
setbacks in recovery (Miller et al. 2007; Zimmerman et al.
2009; Potocky 2010).
An enhanced understanding of the social determinants of health in the context of
human trafficking could support
tailored individualised case management (Miller
et al. 2007; Shigekane 2007; Zimmerman et al. 2008; Potocky 2010) to help meet
specific needs of survivors of human trafficking with regards to their
health, and with other sectors, including housing and employment.
Provision of
training and employment were identified by participants as important long-term
issues that are overlooked for people
who have been trafficked. There are only a
few new Australian services emerging in the NGO sector, to support employment
who have been trafficked in response to this gap in services (Irwin
2017), but access to these services is unclear and lacks a systematic
Research by Limoncelli (2016) showed that NGOs around the world can offer a wide
variety of important services in the anti-trafficking
sector. Further research
is required to establish not only the needs of people who have been trafficked,
but also a salutogenesis
or assets-based approach (Morgan & Ziglio 2007)
that recognises the individual’s strengths and assets.
A more comprehensive approach to supporting survivors of trafficking would
require more than 45 days or 90 days of support currently
provided through the
STPP. Recommendation 21 in the inquiry into modern-day slavery states:
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider extending
the 45 day ‘reflection and recovery’ period
to 90 days ... [and]
consider extending the 45 day period of initial support available under the
Support for Trafficked People Program
to a minimum of 90 days, with multiple
options for extension (Commonwealth of Australia 2017, p. 159).
The findings from this study indicate that collaboration is one of the
largest challenges facing service providers and their respective
organisations.
The inquiry by the NSW Parliament (2017) noted that ‘a lack of
coordination can impact the progression of human
trafficking cases, the
collection of data to identify and understand trends, and the ability to respond
quickly to cases’ (p.
21). Participants in this study reflected on the
significant diversity within the anti-trafficking sector and tension between
service providers stems from emotive and divisive responses to trafficking
(and sex work in particular), ultimately isolating organisations
and inhibiting
collaboration. Based on this insight from service providers, we propose that
fostering unity among stakeholders, and
building an intersectoral response in
Australia and internationally, is a key component of a comprehensive approach to
human trafficking.
This finding supports recommendation 26 of the inquiry into
modern-day slavery:
The Committee recommends that member agencies of the Interdepartmental
Committee on Human Trafficking and slavery strengthen their
coordination and
engagement with each other, and that frontline Commonwealth agencies strengthen
existing relationships with state
and territory frontline agencies. This should
include establishing multi-disciplinary taskforces that bring together relevant
Commonwealth,
state and territory agencies and civil society NGOs (Commonwealth
of Australia 2017, p. 196).
A more comprehensive approach to support people who have been trafficked
should build upon a commitment to intersectoral collaboration
by policy-makers
and service providers. Collaboration could support referrals across different
sectors, including social determinants
of health such as housing and employment.
In addition, stronger partnerships could strengthen support for people who are
fall through the gaps in the system when avoiding police, or not be
eligible for the government’s support program (Project
Respect 2016). To
date, the AFP has been responsible for identifying people who have been
trafficked and referring them to the STPP.
Changes to this process were included
in the inquiry into modern-day slavery in recommendation 21: ‘The
Committee recommends
that the Australian Government extent the ability to refer
potential victims to the Support for Trafficked People Program ... beyond
Australian Federal Police to other approved entities’ (Commonwealth of
Australia 2017, p. 159).
There remains concern for people who have been trafficked who are fearful of
police, but this is a concern of all the service providers
interviewed,
including law enforcement. Numerous other studies argued that services for
people who have been trafficked must take
into account this fear that can trap
people in a cycle of exploitation and result in difficulty developing trust with
others, including
service providers (George 2012; Macias-Konstantopoulos et al.
2013; Dewan 2014). In response, opportunities to enhance teamwork across
education, employment, law enforcement, immigration, housing, and the sex
industry would provide a more comprehensive response,
which participants in our
study have reported as essential to diminishing survivors’ fears and
enhancing trust. Sandhu et al.
(2012) emphasised that building trusting
relationships at the provider level and promoting greater inclusion at the
systems level
would help to develop trust and reduce marginalisation of people
who have been trafficked. They argued that stronger collaboration
could decrease
isolation and eventually allow people who have been trafficked to direct their
own recovery journey. In doing so,
individual experiences of trauma can be
considered and responded to appropriately. This specialised, personalised
comprehensive service
provision resists the criminalisation of human
trafficking. Instead, it focuses more holistically on human rights, on the
and his or her familial group, while keeping the lens on gross global
inequities and human rights violations, in addition to addressing
justice issues (Miller et al. 2007; Shigekane 2007; Schofield et al. 2011). The
service providers who participated in this
study all reported that partnerships
do exist in Australia between sectors and service providers, but there are
opportunities for
significant improvement. It is essential that government and
non-government service providers are funded to support survivors of
trafficking. Recommendation 24 of the inquiry into modern-day
slavery states:
‘The Committee recommends that the Australian Government continue to fund
NGOs and civil society to support
victims of modern slavery, and increase this
funding where deemed appropriate’ (Commonwealth of Australia 2017, p.
The participants in this study argued for the need for greater awareness of
human trafficking among the community, front-line workers
and people who have
been trafficked. This was echoed in the inquiry into modern-day slavery in
recommendation 26 of the inquiry into
modern day slavery: ‘The Committee
recommends that the Australian Government increase public awareness in Australia
the region, particularly for new migrants’ (Commonwealth of
Australia 2017, p. 196). Anti-Slavery Australia, utilising Australian
funding, has launched an online training course that is available for front-line
workers, lawyers, students and educators
(Anti-Slavery Australia 2014). Since
2014, more than 48,000 lessons have been completed with over 90 per cent of
participants surveyed
indicating that they would recommend the course (NSW
Parliament 2017). However, the inquiry into human trafficking in NSW revealed
that despite important education provided by Anti-Slavery Australia, further
awareness raising was required across all front-line
workers, as well as in the
community. The inquiry into modern-day slavery further highlighted the
importance of awareness through
training in recommendation 26:
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government: expand training for
frontline staff employed by the Australian Federal Police,
the Department of
Immigration, and Border Protection and the fair Work Ombudsman, as well as other
frontline agencies including Centrelink
and Medicare ... and ensure that this
training includes references to non-government organisations working on human
trafficking,
modern slavery and slavery-like practices so that they can refer
victims for support and assistance offered through non-government
organisations
(Commonwealth of Australia 2017, p. 195).
The findings from this study highlight the need for a more comprehensive and
holistic approach to human trafficking, with a stronger
emphasis on people who
have been trafficked themselves, currently missing from policy and service
provision. Collaboration between
sectors and service providers, together with a
more comprehensive approach, can enhance a survivor-centred response, consistent
the many recommendations with the Australian Government’s inquiry
into modern-day slavery (Commonwealth of Australia 2017).
Limitations of the study
Although the participants in this study represent service providers from a
range of sectors, not every organisation working with people
who have been
trafficked in Australia participated in the research. Therefore, we cannot say
that the research captured the insight
from every sector. We recommend more
research that could capture the perspectives of organisations that are not
included in our data.
According to participants in this research, survivors of trafficking in
Australia continue to be disempowered through conditional
long-term support in
what is predominately a criminal justice approach. Service providers reported
that this situation is likely
to increase isolation, limit their ability to find
work, prevent them from seeking support for health issues, and may result in
re-traumatisation.
Without a more holistic approach, the criminal justice
approach is in danger of inadvertently harming many of the people it is trying
to help. Our study has highlighted some of the limitations of a criminal justice
approach from the perspective of service providers,
and the need for policy and
practice that can address complex issues and direct services towards a more
comprehensive and holistic
response to human trafficking. In addition, the
service providers highlighted that stronger partnerships between health,
immigration
and law enforcement can help to identify potential people at risk of
human trafficking, and support early intervention. Working together
regions and sectors poses a considerable challenge; however, participants in
this study reported a strong commitment towards
collaboration. We argue that in
order to address these gaps and barriers in service provision, the Australian
Government must implement
the recommendations of the parliamentary inquiry into
modern day slavery. The findings from this study support many of the
recommendations
made by the committee, some of which are highlighted within this
Anti-Slavery Australia 2014, ‘Anti-slavery e-learning’, viewed 10
July 2018, http://www.antislavery.
org.au/e-learning.html.
Bick, D, Howard, LM, Oram, S & Zimmerman, C 2017, ‘Maternity care
for trafficked women: survivor experiences and clinican’s
perspectives in
the United Kingdom’s national health service’,
vol. 12, no. 11, p. e0187856.
Borschmann, R, Oram, S, Kinner, SA, Dutta, R, Zimmerman, C & Howard, LM
2017, ‘Self-harm among adult victims of human trafficking
who accessed
secondary mental health services in England’,
Psychiatric Services
vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 207–10.
Braun, V & Clarke, V 2006, ‘Using thematic analysis in
psychology’,
Qualitative Research in Psychology
, vol. 3, pp.
Burn, J 2017, ‘Legal narratives, human trafficking and slavery in
Australia’,
History Compass
, vol. 15, no. 5, p. e12368.
Cameron, M & Schloenhardt, A 2012, ‘Punishing trafficking in
persons: international standards and Australian experiences’,
, vol. 24, no. 1.
Carson, L & Edwards, K 2011, ‘Prostitution and Sex trafficking:
what are the problems represented to be? A discursive anlaysis
of law and policy
in Sweden and Victoria, Australia’,
The Australian Feminist Law
, vol. 34, pp. 63–87.
Commonwealth of Australia 2014, ‘National Action Plan to Combat Human
Trafficking and Slavery 2015–2019’, viewed
28 June 2018,
http://www.ag.gov.au/CrimeAndCorruption/HumanTrafficking/
Documents/Trafficking-NationalActionPlanToCombatHumanTraffickingAndSlavery2015-19.pdf.
Commonwealth of Australia 2015, ‘Trafficking in persons: the Australian
government reponse 1 July 2014–30 June 2015, The
seventh report of the
Interdepartment Committee on Human Trafficking and Slavery’, viewed 28
June 2018, http://www.ag.gov.au/CrimeAndCorruption/HumanTrafficking/
Documents/Report-Interdepartmental-Committee-Human-Trafficking-Slavery-July-2014-June-2015.pdf.
Commonwealth of Australia 2017, ‘“Hidden in plain sight”:
An inquiry into establishing a Modern Slavery Act in Australia’,
June 2018, http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/
download/committees/reportjnt/024102/toc_pdf/HiddeninPlainSight.pdf;fileType=application%2Fpdf.
David, F 2007, ‘Law enforcement responses to trafficking in persons:
challenges and emerging good practice’,
Trends and Issues in Crime and
Criminal Justice
, no. 347, Australian Institute of Criminology,
Davy, D 2016, ‘Human trafficking and slavery in Australia: pathways,
tactics, and subtle elements of enslavement’,
Women and Criminal
, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 180–98.
Davy, D 2017, ‘Justice for victims of human trafficking in Australia?
Issues associated with Australia’s criminal justice
response to
trafficking in persons’,
Contemporary Justice Review
, vol. 20, no.
pp. 115–31.
Devetak, R 2007, ‘In fear of refugees: the politics of border
protection in Australia’,
The International Journal of Human
, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 101–9.
Dewan, SE 2014, ‘Patterns of service utilization among pre-certified
victims of human trafficking’,
International Social Work
no. 1, pp. 64–74.
DiStefano, A & Cavetano, R 2011, ‘Health care and social service
providers’ observations on the intersection of HIV/AIDS
and violence among
their clients and patients’,
Qualitative Health Research
no. 7, pp. 884–9.
Farrer, M 2011, ‘Good operations and bad government policy —
Australia’s border protection’,
Asia-Pacific Defense Reporter
, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 10–13.
Flynn, C, Alston, M & Mason, R 2012, ‘Trafficking in women for
sexual exploitation: building Australian knowledge’,
International
Social Work
, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 27–38.
Gajic-Veljanoski, O & Stewart, DE 2007, ‘Women trafficked into
prostitution: determinants, human rights and health needs’,
Transcultural Psychiatry
, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 338–58.
Gallagher, AT 2011, ‘Improving the effectiveness of the international
law of human trafficking: a vision for the future of the
US trafficking in
persons reports’,
Human Rights Review
, vol. 12, pp.
Gallagher, AT & Holmes, P 2008, ‘Developing an effective criminal
justice response to human trafficking: lessons from the
front line’,
International Criminal Justice Review
, vol. 18, no. 3, pp.
George, E, McNaughton, D & Tsourtos, G 2017, ‘An interpretive
analysis of Australia’s approach to human trafficking
and its focus on
criminal justice over public health’,
Journal of Human Trafficking
vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 81–92.
George, S 2012, ‘The strong arm of the law is weak: how the trafficking
victims protection act fails to assist effectively victims
Creighton Law Review
, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 563–80.
Goodey, J 2008, ‘Human trafficking: sketchy data and policy
responses’,
Criminology and Criminal Justice
, vol. 8, no. 4, pp.
Gozdziak, E & MacDonnell, M 2007, ‘Closing the gaps: the need to
improve identification and services to child victims of
trafficking’,
Human Organization
, vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 171–84.
Hom, KA & Woods, SJ 2013, ‘Trauma and its aftermath for
commercially sexually exploited women as told by front-line service
providers’,
Issues in Mental Health Nursing
, vol. 34, no. 2, pp.
International Labour Organization, Walk Free Foundation & International
Organization for Migration 2017,
Global estimates of modern slavery: forced
labour and forced marriage
, International Labour Organization, Geneva.
Irwin, N 2017, ‘Police officer understandings of human trafficking and
awareness of anti-trafficking measures’,
Policing: An International
Journal of Police Strategies and Management
, vol. 40, no. 2,
pp. 291–305.
Irwin, S 2017, ‘The Freedom Hub’, viewed 28 June 2018,
https://www.thefreedomhub.org.
Juodo Larson, J & Renshaw, L 2012, ‘People trafficking in
Australia’,
Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice
411, Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, pp. 1–6.
Kamazima, SR, Kazaura, MR, Ezekiel, MJ & Fimbo, B 2011, ‘Reported
human traffickers’ profiles: a key step in the prevention
of trafficking
in persons through HIV and AIDS interventions in Tanzania’,
African Journal of Public Health
, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 77–81.
Langhorn, M 2018, ‘Human trafficking and sexual servitude: organised
crime’s involvement in Australia’,
Salus Journal
, vol. 6, no.
1, pp. 1–25.
Letourneau, N, Young, C, Secco, L, Stewart, M, Hughes, J & Critchley, K
2011, ‘Supporting mothering: service providers’
perspectives on
mothers and yound children affected by intimate partner violence’,
Research in Nursing and Health
, vol. 34, pp. 192–203.
Liamputtong, P 2013,
Research methods in health: foundations for
evidence-based practice
(2nd ed.), Oxford University Press, Victoria.
Limoncelli, SA 2016, ‘What in the world are anti-trafficking NGOs
doing? Findings from a global study’,
Journal of Human Trafficking
vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 17–22.
Lyneham, S & Joudo Larsen, J 2013, ‘Exploitation of Indonesian
trafficked men, women and children and implications for support’,
Australian Institute of Criminology
, Canberra.
Lyneham, S & Richards, K 2014, ‘Human trafficking involving
marriage and partner migration to Australia’, AIC Reports:
Research and
Public Policy Series, no. 124, Australian Institute of Criminology,
Macias-Konstantopoulos, W, Ahn, R, Alpert, EJ, Cafferty, E, McGahan, A,
Williams, TP, Castor, JP, Wolferstan, N, Purcell, G &
Burke, TF 2013,
‘An international comparative public health analysis of sex trafficking of
women and girls in eight cities:
achieving a more effective health sector
Journal of Urban Health
, vol. 90, no. 6, pp.
Miller, E, Decker, MR, Silverman, JG & Raj, A 2007, ‘Migration,
sexual exploitation, and women’s health — a
case report from a
community health center’,
Violence against Women
, vol. 13, no. 5,
pp. 486–97.
Molland, S 2010, ‘“The perfect business”: human trafficking
and Lao-Thai cross-border migration’,
Development and Change
41, no. 5, pp. 831–55.
Morgan, A & Ziglio, E 2007, ‘Revitalising the evidence base for
public health: an assets model’,
Global Health Promotion
no. 4, pp. 17–22.
New South Wales Parliament 2017, ‘Human trafficking in New South
Wales’, Select Committee on Human Trafficking in New
South Wales,
Legislative Council, New South Wales Parliamentary Library.
Novick, G 2008, ‘Is there a bias against telephone interviews in
qualitative research?’,
Research in Nursing and Health
O’Brien, E 2011, ‘Fuelling traffic’,
Crime, Law and
Social Change
, vol. 56, pp. 547–65.
O’Brien, E 2016, ‘Human trafficking: heroes and villains:
representing the problem in anti-trafficking awareness campaigns’,
Social and Legal Studies
, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 205–24.
Oram, S, Abas, M, Bick, D, Boyle, A, French, R, Jakobowitz, S, Khondoker, M,
Stanley, N, Trevillion, K, Howard, L & Zimmerman,
C 2016, ‘Human
trafficking and health: a survey of male and female survivors in England’,
American Journal of Public Health
, vol. 106, no. 6, pp. 1073–8.
Oram, S, Ostrovschi, NV, Gorceag, VI, Hotineanu, MA, Gorceag, L, Trgub, G
& Abas, M 2012, ‘Physical health symptoms reported
by trafficked women
receiving post-trafficking support in Moldova: prevalence, severity and
associated factors’,
BMC Women’s Health
, vol. 12, no. 20.
Ottisova, L, Hemmings, S, Howard, LM, Zimmerman, C & Oram, S 2016,
‘Prevalence and risk of violence and the mental, physical
health problems associated with human trafficking: an updated systematic
Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences
, vol. 25, no. 4, pp.
Phillips, C 2014, ‘Flinders University student commences a research
project into the support provided to victims of human trafficking
Australia’, viewed 1 July 2018,
http://blogs.flinders.edu.au/public-health/2014/07/02/flinders-university-student-commences-a-research-project-into-the-support-providedh-to-victims-of-human-trafficking-in-australia/.
Pope, C, Mays, N & Popay, J 2007,
Synthesizing qualitative and
quantitative health evidence: a guide to methods
, Open University Press,
McGraw Hill Education, Maidenhead.
Potocky M 2010, ‘Effectiveness of services for victims of international
human trafficking: an exploratory evaluation’,
Journal of Immigrant and
Refugee Studies
, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 359–85.
Project Respect 2016, ‘Annual Report 2016’.
Richards, KM & Lyneham, S 2014, ‘Help-seeking strategies of
victims/survivors of human trafficking involving partner migration’,
Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra.
Richards, TA 2014, ‘Health implications of human trafficking’,
Nursing for Women’s Health
, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 155–62.
Sandelowski, M 2010, ‘What’s in a name? Qualitative descriptive
revisited’,
Research in Nursing and Health
, vol. 33, pp.
Sandhu, S, Bjerre, NV, Dauvrin, M, Dias, S, Gaddini, A, Greacen, T,
Ioannidis, E, Kluge, U, Jensen, NK, Lamkaddem, M, Riera, RPi,
Kosa, Z, Wihlman,
U, Stankunas, M, Straßmayr, C, Wahlbeck, K, Welbel M & Priebe, S 2012,
‘Experiences with treating
immigrants: a qualitative study in mental
health services across 16 European countries’,
Social Psychiatry and
Psychiatric Epidemiology
, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 105–16.
Schloenhardt, A & Klug, B 2011, ‘Trafficking in persons and victim
health in Australia’,
Journal of Law & Medicine
, vol. 19, no.
2, pp. 397–414.
Schofield, T, Hepworth, J, Jones, M & Schofield, E 2011, ‘Health
and community services for trafficked women: an exploratory
study of policy and
Australian Journal of Social Issues
, vol. 46, no. 4, pp.
Segrave, M & Milivojevic, S 2010, ‘Auditing the Australian response
to trafficking’,
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
, vol. 22, no.
1, pp. 63–80.
Shigekane, R 2007, ‘Rehabilitation and community integration of
trafficking survivors in the United States’,
Human Rights
, vol. 29, no. 1, 112–36.
Simmons, F & Burn, J 2011, ‘The criminal justice response to
slavery and people trafficking; reparation; and vulnerable
protection’, Anti-Slavery Project Submission, UTS, Sydney.
Simmons, F, O’Brien, B, David, F & Beacroft, L 2013, ‘Human
trafficking and slavery offenders in Australia’,
Trends and Issues in
Crime and Criminal Justice
, no. 464, Australian Institute of Criminology,
Canberra, pp. 1–13.
Stanley, M 2015, ‘Qualitative descriptive: a very good place to
start’ in S Nayar and M Stanley (eds.),
Qualitative Research
Methodologies for Occupational Science and Therapy
, Routledge, Abingdon,
Stanley, N, Oram, S, Jakobowitz, S, Westwood, J, Borschmann, R, Zimmerman, C
& Howard, LM 2016, ‘The health needs and healthcare
experiences of
young people trafficked into the UK’,
Child Abuse and Neglect
59, pp. 100–10.
Tsutsumi, A, Izutsu, T, Poudyal, AK, Kato, S & Marui, E 2008,
‘Mental health of female survivors of human trafficking in
Social Science & Medicine
, vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 1841–7.
US Department of State 2013,
Trafficking in persons report
Department of State.
US Department of State 2017,
Trafficking in persons report 2017
Department of State, viewed 1 July 2018,
https://www.state.gov/j/tip/rls/tiprpt/2017/.
Walk Free Foundation 2016, ‘Global slavery index’, viewed 1 July
2018, https://www.
globalslaveryindex.org.
Weitzer, R 2013, ‘Rethinking human trafficking’,
Dialectical
Anthropology
, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 309–12.
Weitzer, R 2014, ‘New directions in research on human
trafficking’,
ANNALS of the American Academy of Political Science
vol. 653, no. 1, pp. 6–24.
Wilson, M & O’Brien, E 2016, ‘Constructing the ideal victim
in the United States of America’s annual trafficking
Crime, Law and Social Change
, vol. 65, pp.
Zimmerman, C, Hossain, M, Yun, K, Gajdadziev, V, Guzun, N, Tchomarova, M,
Ciarrocchi, RA, Johansson, A, Kefurtova, A, Scodanibbio,
S, Motus, MN, Roche, B,
Morison L & Watts, C 2008, ‘The health of trafficked women: a survey
of women entering posttrafficking
services in Europe’,
American Journal
of Public Health
, vol. 98, no. 1, pp. 55–9.
Zimmerman, C & Kiss, L 2017, ‘Human trafficking and exploitation: a
global health concern’,
PLos Medicine
, vol. 14, no. 11, p.
Zimmerman, C, Kiss, L, Hossain, M & Watts, C 2009, ‘Trafficking in
persons: a health concern?’,
Ciência & Saúde
, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1029–35.
Zimmerman, C, Oram, S, Borland, R & Watts, C 2009, ‘Meeting the
health needs of trafficked persons’,
British Medical Journal
339, pp. 642–3.
Lecturer, College of Nursing
and Health Science, Flinders University, GPO Box 2100, Adelaide SA 5001,
Australia. Email: emma.george@flinders.edu.au.
Senior Lecturer, College
of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders University, GPO Box 2100, Adelaide SA
5001, Australia. Email: george.tsourtos@flinders.edu.au.
Senior Lecturer, College
of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders University, GPO Box 2100, Adelaide SA
5001, Australia. Email:
../customXml/item1.xml
darlene.mcnaughton@flinders.edu.au.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (156 KB)
PDF format (425 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter