URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlSSWC/2010/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:04:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dupper, Ockert --- "The Human Rights of (Irregular) Migrants: An International, Regional and South African Perspective (Part 1)" [2010] IntJlSSWC 6; (2010) 2(1) International Journal of Social Security and Workers Compensation 61
I INTRODUCTION
II INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS AND IRREGULAR MIGRANTS
III REGIONAL FRAMEWORKS
IV CONCLUDING REMARKS
THE HUMAN RIGHTS OF (IRREGULAR) MIGRANTS
AN INTERNATIONAL, REGIONAL AND SOUTH AFRICAN PERSPECTIVE
Around the world, irregular migrants are often excluded from basic social
rights. While few would go so far as to argue that irregular
migrants should
enjoy the full range of socio-economic rights extended to regular migrants, or
that there should be no distinctions
drawn between these two groups of migrants,
developments at the international and the regional level, as well as legal and
developments in a number of individual countries around the world,
indicate that there may be a movement away from an approach that
exclusively on the security aspects of irregular migration (i.e. on measures to
combat irregular migration) to a more nuanced
approach that also places
significant emphasis on the human rights of irregular migrants. Consensus is
beginning to emerge that irregular
migrants are entitled to certain minimum
rights in the migrant receiving country. In this paper, the position of
irregular migrants
in South Africa will be explored, in particular their
entitlement to certain fundamental rights. The paper is divided into two parts:
Part 1 explores the protection afforded to irregular migrants in international
law. In addition, the specific legal and other instruments
adopted at a regional
level are also examined in order to determine the extent to which they
complement and strengthen international
norms. In part 2 of this paper
(forthcoming (2011) 3(1)
International Journal of Social Security and Workers
Compensation
), I will turn to a discussion of the minimum rights that I
believe should be extended to irregular migrants in South Africa. Under
heading, the international, regional and comparative framework(s) discussed
earlier will be used as the baseline from which
to examine the specific South
African position (both
I INTRODUCTION
Irregular migration is nothing new and appears to be wide-spread and on the
increase around the world, although the exact numbers
of irregular migrants are
a subject of constant debate and conflicting
It is estimated that there
are over 200 million migrants around the world
Of these, around 15 per cent
are believed to have an irregular
Today, this would amount to
around 20-30 million irregular migrants, without considering regional and
country variations.
It is estimated
that between 2-4.5 million migrants cross international borders without
authorization each year.
For some countries, the estimates are as much as twice the official
emigration or immigration levels.
All regions are variously affected by irregular migration, and, depending on
factors such as geography, labour market structures,
and level of national
development, differences in trends and impacts can vary
Irregular migration
affects both developed and developing countries. In 2000, in Europe and the
United States alone, there were an
estimated 11 million irregular
In Argentina, for
example, it was estimated in 2004 that there were 800 000 irregular migrants,
mainly from the bordering
Many parts of Asia,
Africa and Latin America have long and porous borders that people commonly cross
without going through immigration
posts, as with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in Africa and the border between Myanmar and Thailand. Indeed, in many of
regions, most of the migratory flows might better be considered as
informal, since the authorities are frequently aware of them but
tolerate them
– either because they do not have the capacity to police borders
adequately or because they recognize that immigrants
serve a useful purpose for
certain interest groups and
communities.
As is the case with respect to migration generally, migration within the
Southern African Development Community
is driven mainly by both
political and economic factors. Both these factors have contributed to making
South Africa the main migrant
receiving country in the
Even though reliable
data on the extent and volume of migration within and to SADC is hard to obtain,
it would appear that clandestine
and irregular (ie undocumented) migration, as
well as cross-border human trafficking within and to the region is on the
, while regular migration is
worrying trend, and may be placed at the door of restrictive and complex
immigration policies – a subject that will
be addressed in more detail in
part 2. Despite the increase in irregular migration, some commentators have
warned against the use
of overtly emotive language to describe the phenomenon,
pointing out that clandestine border crossing in Southern Africa is nothing
While official data on irregular migrants is difficult to obtain, a recent
study estimates that there are at least 500 000 irregular
migrants in South
The primary means of
enforcement related to migration in the region is to identify and deport
violators with the minimum of due
Since 1990, South
Africa has deported over one million people, with the vast majority of deportees
(upwards of 80 per cent) sent
In 2007 alone, more
than 300 000 (irregular) migrants were deported from South Africa, up from
approximately 250 000 in
Despite the fact that some convergence seems to be emerging on the use of
‘irregular migration’ as the most appropriate
term to refer to
migrants whose status does not conform to the legal norms of the country in
which they reside,
African Immigration Act 2002
(South Africa) (Immigration Act) persists in
its use of the term ‘illegal’ to refer to such migrants. The
Immigration
Act defines any individual who is neither a citizen nor a resident
in the Republic of South Africa, and who is in contravention of
the Act as an
‘illegal foreigner’.
Vigneswaran writes that ‘irregular’ migrants contravene South
Africa’s immigration laws in one of three main ways:
First, they enter the
Republic clandestinely by crossing the border at a place other than a recognized
port or post; second, after
entering South Africa legally, some migrants
contravene the terms of their residence permit, by staying beyond the allowed
failing to renew, or by working, trading, studying or receiving
government services in defiance of their permit; and third and finally,
may acquire fraudulent documents prior to coming, or during their
It is submitted that the South African government is struggling with the
problem of irregular migration. Irregular migrants are perceived
significant risk for the nation and its ambitious agendas of political
transformation, economic development and broadly
speaking, modernization
Undocumented
migrants are often perceived as competing with citizens for jobs, and as
frustrating state efforts to regulate health,
education and housing sectors. As
a result, the South African public discourse is dominated by a set of
tenuous beliefs about what is termed ‘illegal migration’.
Despite the prevalence of evidence to the
contrary, the majority of South
Africans believe that the country is suffering from an
immigration crisis
of tremendous proportions and gravity. While many South Africans believe that 25
per cent of the population is
foreign, the figure is probably closer to 3-5 per
Popular and official
estimates contrast sharply with census data. These ‘myths’ guide and
constrain the immigration enforcement
regime, limiting the scope for reform, and
licensing exploitative arrest and detention practices. Vigneswaran points out
continued abuse of citizen and foreigner rights is not the only a cause
for concern: ‘The harsh methods South Africa uses to
manage this perceived
immigration crisis, are generating risks for South African development and
democracy.’
In this paper, the position of irregular migrants in South Africa will be
explored, in particular their entitlement to certain fundamental
rights. The
paper will be divided into two parts: In part 1, the protection afforded to
irregular migrants in international law will
be explored. In addition, the
specific legal and other instruments adopted at a regional level will also be
examined in order to
determine the extent to which they complement and
strengthen international norms. Here the focus will be on developments in the
of Europe, the European Union, as well as the Southern African
Development Community (SADC).
Part 2 of the paper
(forthcoming)
will investigate
the de facto and de lege position of irregular migrants in South Africa with
specific reference to their access
to social security- and labour rights as well
as a number of socio-economic rights, including health care and education. In
the position of cross-border traders as well as unaccompanied foreign
children will be considered.
II INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS AND IRREGULAR MIGRANTS
There is an important body of international legal instruments that protect
the human rights of non-citizens, including irregular
The general principle
contained in international human rights instruments pertaining to non-citizens
is that all persons, by virtue
of their essential humanity, should enjoy all
human rights unless exceptional distinctions, for example, between citizens and
non-citizens,
serve a legitimate state objective and are proportional to the
achievement of that objective.
In its General Comment 15 the United Nations Human Rights Committee explained
the rights set forth in the Covenant [on Civil and Political Rights] apply to
everyone, irrespective of reciprocity, and irrespective
of his or her
nationality or statelessness . . .. The general rule is that each one of the
rights of the Covenant must be guaranteed
without discrimination between
citizens and
United Nations human rights instruments, treaties and conventions, such as the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights
International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights
Convention on the Rights of the
International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of
Racial Discrimination
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
confer protection
on migrants as well. These instruments are of significant importance for the
debate in South Africa on the position
of non-nationals generally and in social
security specifically, as all of these (except for the
International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
) have been ratified by South
The same applies to the
provisions of the
African Charter of Human and Peoples’ Rights
which was ratified by South Africa in
International Labour Organization (ILO) Conventions and Recommendations
protect the rights of all workers irrespective of
citizenship.
significant of these are the rights contained in the
ILO Declaration on
Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work, 1998
. These relate to the topics
of freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to
collective bargaining, the elimination
of forced or compulsory labour, the
abolition of child labour and the elimination of discrimination in respect of
employment and
occupation.
These conventions also apply to migrant workers, including those in an
irregular situation.
While South Africa has ratified all eight of these fundamental conventions,
its record in respect of the instruments relating to social
security and
migrants is less stellar. There are a plethora of ILO Conventions and
Recommendations dealing with social security
as well as with the
specific problems facing migrant
To date, however, South
Africa has only ratified one of the Conventions dealing with social security,
Equality of Treatment (Accident Compensation) Convention
1925 (No 19)
and none of the Conventions dealing with migrant
What is important to note is that the relevant ILO social security
instruments and those dealing with migrants are generally silent
regarding the
protection of irregular migrant workers. However, there are at least two
exceptions. The first can be found in the
Migrant Workers (Supplementary
Provisions) Convention, 1975 (No. 143)
, which stipulates that irregular
migrant workers shall have the same rights as regular migrant workers concerning
social security
rights arising out of past
employment.
This provision
particularly must be understood for the purpose of acquiring rights to long-term
benefits. Within this context, it
appears that the wording ‘past
employment’ refers to past periods of legal as well as illegal
employment.
importance in this regard is
Recommendation No. 151
, which accompanies
Convention No. 143
, and which recommends that migrant workers,
irrespective of their status, who leave the country of employment, should be
to employment injury
The second exception can be found in the
ILO Multilateral Framework on
Labour Migration: Non-binding Principles and Guidelines for a Rights-based
Approach to Labour Migration
, adopted by a Tripartite Committee of Experts
of the ILO in November
As the title indicates, the
comprises non-binding
principles and guidelines for labour migration, and is meant to supplement and
not replace any of the existing
instruments.
Despite its
non-binding nature, one notable feature of the Framework is that it explicitly
recognises the rights of migrant workers
in an irregular situation. It
encourages states parties to enter into bilateral, regional or multilateral
agreements to provide social
security coverage and benefits, as well as
portability of social security entitlements, to regular migrant workers and,
appropriate, to migrant workers in an irregular
situation’.
Apart from these exceptions, none of the other ILO instruments address the
situation of irregular migrants. In this regard, the
United Nations Migrant
Workers Convention
new ground by expressly recognising the plight of irregular migrants. As with
the ILO Conventions dealing with migrants, South
Africa has regretfully neither
signed nor ratified this
is applicable to all migrant workers, regardless of
reciprocity
and irrespective of
their status.
In this regard, it has been hailed as the ‘most ambitious statement to
date of international concern for the problematic condition
of undocumented
preamble, the
recognises that ‘workers who are
non-documented or in an irregular situation are frequently employed under less
conditions of work than other workers’, and that ‘the
human problems involved in migration are even more serious in the
irregular migration’.
However, despite acknowledging the precarious situation of non-documented
migrants, the
nevertheless differentiates between regular and
irregular migrant workers by providing the former with additional rights. Part
extends certain rights to
workers and their families, while Part IV provides additional rights only to
those workers and their families who are documented
or in a regular situation.
It thus creates, in effect, two classes of human rights protection. For example,
states parties are entitled
to discriminate against undocumented migrants with
respect to rights to family unity, liberty of movement, participation in the
affairs of the state of employment, equality of treatment with nationals
as regards the receipt of various social services, equality
of treatment for
family members, freedom from double taxation, and further employment protections
and trade union rights, among others.
This differentiation between regular and irregular migrants must be viewed
against the background of the persistent tension that the
entire field of human
rights suffers from, namely between the principles of universal human rights and
those of state sovereignty.
In the migration context, human rights and
territorial principles meet and compete in two different regulatory
In the first, namely
that governing matters concerning the admission and expulsion of aliens into and
from a national territory,
the tension ‘has largely been resolved in
favour of the State’.
second domain concerns the states’ general, non-immigration-related
treatment of aliens who are present within their territory.
Here, Bosniak points
out that ‘the interplay between the principles of States’
territorial powers and their human rights
obligations is more
speaking, in this internal domain, all human beings are viewed as theoretically
entitled to internationally-guaranteed
standards of treatment with respect to
fundamental rights. Yet no state is required to treat aliens, including legal
resident aliens,
identically with citizens. Restrictions for aliens are written
into various human rights instruments, but even in the absence of
such explicit
restrictions, states themselves limit a variety of rights to nationals, and such
action is generally treated as legitimate
under international
Just how much and to what
extent states may limit rights granted to aliens is a matter of ongoing
controversy. However, it is clear
that ‘[t]he discrimination permitted
against undocumented aliens exceed, by far, the discrimination permitted against
other classes of
For a variety of reasons,
international law treats the power of states to discriminate as both greater and
more vital with respect to irregular
immigrants.
This is also
reflected in the
UN Migrant Workers Convention,
which, despite extending
substantial human rights protections to undocumented migrants, also makes it
clear that their irregular status
makes these migrants less entitled to
international protection than other
However, as far as
social security is concerned, the
UN Convention
extends this right to all
migrants, irrespective of
Article 27 reads as
1. With respect to social security, migrant workers and members of their
families shall enjoy in the State of employment the same
treatment granted to
nationals in so far as they fulfil the requirements provided for by the
applicable legislation of that State
and the applicable bilateral and
multilateral treaties. The competent authorities of the State of origin and the
State of employment
can at any time establish the necessary arrangements to
determine the modalities of application of this norm.
2. Where the applicable legislation does not allow migrant workers and members
of their families a benefit, the States concerned
shall examine the possibility
of reimbursing interested persons the amount of contributions made by them with
respect to that benefit
on the basis of the treatment granted to nationals who
are in similar circumstances.
Article 27(1) is a framework
provision and not self-executing. The reason is that it refers not only to the
applicable legislation,
but also to the terms of bilateral and multilateral
agreements that have to be fulfilled. By virtue of these provisos, states
can adopt provisions that would, for example, differentiate between
regular and irregular migrants, thereby negating the protection
that the article
is meant to confer on all migrants, irrespective of their status. The article
does not require reciprocity for social
security provisions to take effect, and
therefore applies to migrant workers who are nationals of states that have not
ratified the
. Article 27(2) applies to migrant workers’
rights in the course of acquisition. This refers to migrant workers who have
their employment in the country in which they are not nationals, have
acquired rights in that state, but not the right to receive
benefits abroad. The
protection that article 27(2) provides is rather weak, urging states to
‘examine the possibility’
of reimbursing the contributions of
migrant workers and their families in cases where the applicable legislation
does not permit
them to receive
This is in contrast to
more strongly worded protection offered by the relevant ILO
instruments.
It must also be
noted that the lack of definition of ‘social security’ raises doubts
whether the term includes non-contributory
benefits, from which migrant workers
are often excluded.
article 27 is a statement of general principle and therefore does not define the
scope of social security. However, at least
two branches of social security are
covered by other Convention provisions. Article 25 refers to equality of
treatment between nationals
and migrant workers in respect of remuneration and
other conditions of work, and arguably covers the right to employment injury
Article 28 covers
emergency medical care. It provides that
[m]igrant workers and their families shall have the right to receive any
medical care that is urgently required for the preservation
of their life or the
avoidance of irreparable harm to their life on the basis of equality of
treatment with nationals of the state
concerned … [and] … [s]uch
emergency care shall not be refused them by reason of any irregularity with
regard to stay
and employment.
The extension of protection to undocumented migrants by the
Workers Convention
represents a watershed or, as one commentator has argued,
‘a political and jurisprudential
achievement’.
exceptions,
instruments regarding migrant workers have provided protection to documented or
regular migrants only. The question that
remains is to what extent the
incorporation of undocumented migrants has been successful, especially when
viewed from the perspective
of the human rights of the undocumented migrant.
On the face of it, the
extends significant rights to
undocumented migrant workers and family members. Apart from the right to social
security, it also includes
the right to due process, equal protection, access to
the courts, rights to free expression, and so forth. This in itself is
significant,
and if properly enforced, could improve the status and situation of
these workers considerably. On the other hand, the
states to afford lesser protections to undocumented migrant workers than to
documented migrants, confirming the view that
the extension of benefits to
irregular migrants is done ‘in the context of an overall disapproval of
the phenomenon of irregular
migration’.
For example,
under the terms of the
, the undocumented migrants do not have
guaranteed rights to family unity, certain trade union freedoms, liberty of
movement, participation
in the public affairs in the state of employment,
equality of treatment with nationals with regard to certain government benefit
programs including housing, educational and health-related services, and further
employment protections.
However, as Bosniak
out, the real problem with the
, and one which will seriously
limit its efficacy as a human rights instrument for undocumented migrants, is
that its provisions protecting
states’ sovereign prerogatives to control
immigration will often effectively undermine or defeat the rights it provides to
those migrants. As a practical matter, efforts to exercise the rights prescribed
may well expose the migrants to expulsion and
punishment for immigration-related violations. This continued vulnerability to
prosecution
for immigration violations will not only limit their ability but
also their willingness to exercise the rights guaranteed to them
under Part III
. For example, upon applying for social assistance
benefits or upon presenting themselves for emergency medical care, undocumented
migrants would almost certainly be required to display identification, or in
some other way reveal the particulars of their status,
‘which could lead
to questions and to unwanted contact with immigration
officials’.
nothing in the
that would protect an undocumented migrant who
finds him- or herself in such a situation. Article 79 expressly provides that
in the present Convention shall affect the right of each state
party to establish the criteria governing admission of migrant workers
In addition, the powers of states to enforce their immigration policies may
undermine one of the most significant rights extended
to undocumented migrants,
namely the right to enforce their rights against an employer irrespective of
their unauthorised status.
Bosniak argues, even if an employer has violated this right by contacting
immigration officials and notifying them of the migrants’
undocumented
status, ‘a State is unlikely to forego prosecuting an immigrant for
violations of its immigration laws simply
because his or her employer will also
be subject to prosecution’.
Finally in this regard, the protection afforded to undocumented migrants may
be limited in another respect. Even though a state cannot
while at the same time excluding the application of any part
, it may ratify with reservations as to specific
It is therefore
possible that many states will ratify the
, if at all, with a
variety of reservations as to specific articles which benefit undocumented
III REGIONAL FRAMEWORKS
A Council of
In general, Council of Europe instruments have been limited in their
application to irregular migrants. For instance, while the
Convention on the Legal Status of Migrant Workers
European Social Charter
Revised Social Charter
(1996) (the
protect the rights
of migrants and their families, they appear to be limited to migrants who are
lawfully resident, and only those
of contracting
Nonetheless, the
European Committee on Social Rights, which monitors the application of the
Revised Charter
and administers the Collective
Complaints Protocol,
held that legislation or practice which denies entitlement to medical assistance
to foreign nationals within the territory
of a state party, even if they are
there illegally, is contrary to the
The Committee
reasoned that it was necessary to interpret limitations on rights restrictively
in order to preserve the essence of
the right and to achieve the overall purpose
. The restriction in this case
went to the very
dignity of the human being and adversely impacted children who were exposed to
the risk of having no medical treatment.
In the opinion of the Committee, given
that medical care is a prerequisite to the preservation of human dignity, any
legislation
or practice denying such treatment to foreign nationals within the
territory of a state party, even if those foreign nationals are
present there, cannot be justified under the
The Committee
thus extended the protection of the
to migrants in an irregular
situation, in particular through Articles 13 (right to social and medical
assistance) and 17 (right of
children to protection).
In contrast to the
European Convention on the Legal Status of Migrant
European Social Charter
European Convention
on Human Rights
applies to everyone within the jurisdiction of the contracting parties (Article
1). However, the ECHR is primarily concerned with
protection of civil and
political rights, although it does explicitly provide for two rights which are
of an economic and social
character, namely the right to property (Article 1 of
Protocol 1 to the ECHR, which has also been found to encompass social security
and the right to
education (Article 2 of Protocol 1 to the
As far as the latter is concerned, the first sentence of Article 2 of the
First Protocol to the ECHR stipulates unequivocally that
‘[n]o person
shall be denied the right to education’. When read in conjunction with
Article 14 ECHR (the non-discrimination
clause), this provision clearly applies
on a non-discriminatory basis to both nationals and non-nationals who are within
the territory
of a contracting party unless there is an objective and reasonable
justification for the differential
This in effect means
that no children of non-nationals present within the jurisdiction of Council of
Europe member states, which
have ratified this protocol, may be denied their
right to receive an education, even if their parents are unlawfully resident in
the country.
Article 2 of the
First Protocol has been interpreted, both by the European Court of Human Rights
and by the majority of Council of
Europe member states to encompass
primary and secondary education.
However, it has been held that should a parent be expelled from a country under
immigration laws, the fact that the child (due to
his or her age) will be
obliged to accompany the parent will not amount to a violation of Protocol 1,
Nonetheless, the
implementation of a removal decision may amount to a violation of the Convention
when the timing of such removal
would have an adverse effect on the completion
of a particular stage of a child’s education and there was no imperative
for this expulsion to
An important
consideration in the decision whether to deport an undocumented minor is whether
the child would be able to obtain secondary
education in the country to which
she and her parents were being
One obstacle that
children of irregular migrants often face, relates to the recognition of the
education that they receive. In a
recent report it was noted that some member
states fail to issue certificates to irregular migrant children demonstrating
have completed their education, which cause tremendous difficulties
for such children upon their return to their countries of
Finally in this regard,
there seems to be consensus that teachers should not be under an obligation to
report the children of irregular
migrants to the
authorities.
An exemplary
approach was adopted in Belgium, where both the Flemish and Walloon governments
have issued circulars underlining the
right of irregular migrant children to
attend school and to receive certificates and clarifying that headmasters and
teachers are
not required to report the status of such children to the
authorities.
This approach is in
keeping with the general approach adopted in this paper, namely to ensure that
irregular migrants can enjoy the
rights that have been extended to them in law
and practice without fear of immediate detection and expulsion.
While the legally binding instruments of the Council of Europe referred to
above have provided limited protection to migrants in an
irregular situation,
numerous non-binding standards have been adopted that call upon member states to
extend certain minimum rights
to irregular
In January 2000, the
Committee of Ministers adopted
Recommendation No. R (2000) 3 on the Right
to the Satisfaction of Basic Material Needs of Persons in Situations of
Extreme Hardship
, urging member state governments to put the following five
principles into practice:
1. Member states should recognise, in their law and practice, a right to the
satisfaction of basic material needs of any person in
a situation of extreme
2. The right to the satisfaction of basic human material needs should
contain as a minimum the right to food, clothing, shelter and
basic medical
3. The right to the satisfaction of basic human material needs should be
enforceable, every person in a situation of extreme hardship
being able to
invoke it directly before the authorities and, if need be, before the
The exercise of this right should be open to all citizens and
foreigners, whatever the latters’ position under national rules
status of foreigners,
and in the manner determined by national
authorities.
5. The member states should ensure that the information available on the
existence of this right is
sufficient.
These principles identify a minimum threshold of treatment below which
provisions should not fall and which clearly cannot be denied
to anyone for
reason of their nationality or legal status.
More recently, a report of the Committee on Migration, Refugees and
Population of the Council of Europe directly addressed the issue
of the human
rights of irregular migrants.
The recommendations of the report were adopted as Resolution 1509
While recognising the
right of each Council of Europe member state to regulate the entry of foreign
nationals and to return irregular
migrants to their country of origin in
accordance with international human rights law, the report nevertheless
acknowledges that
‘a number of minimum civil and political and economic
and social and economic rights [should] be applied by member states of
Council of Europe in favour of irregular
Particularly
instructive are the following minimum economic and social rights:
1. Adequate housing and shelter guaranteeing human dignity
this right is so closely interlinked with other civil, political and economic
rights, irregular migrants should have at
least a minimum right to housing and
shelter guaranteeing a minimum level of
Emergency health care
: As a minimum, irregular migrants should have
the right to emergency health care clearly recognised in domestic law so as to
that there are no practical obstacles to the enjoyment of the right. This
should encompass preventive, curative and palliative health
services as well as
more holistic care for vulnerable groups such as children, disabled persons,
pregnant women and the
Social protection through social security
: Irregular migrants who have
made social insurance contributions should be entitled to benefit from those
payments or at least be
repaid the sums contributed, for example if expelled
from the country. In addition, social security in the form of social assistance
should not be denied where necessary to alleviate poverty and preserve human
dignity. This may include access to non-pecuniary social
assistance benefits in
kind, such as food, clothing and housing. Children are in a particularly
vulnerable position and should be
put on the same footing as national children
in respect of the enjoyment of social and other protection. Finally, irregular
in work should receive equal protection to that of nationals, including
in respect of compensation for work
Conditions of employment
: Irregular migrants must enjoy certain basic
rights so as not to be exploited and to ensure that they enjoy certain rights
to fair conditions of employment. These include the right to fair wages,
reasonable working conditions, compensation for accidents,
access to the courts
to defend their rights and also freedom to join a trade
Access to education
: Children should have access to education at both
primary and secondary school level where such schooling is compulsory. They
also be entitled to official certification of the standards
: Particular protection should be provided to children and
other vulnerable groups such as the elderly, single mothers and more generally
single girls and women.
B European Union
As the largest and most developed free-movement regime in the world, the
European Union (EU) has since the early 1970s afforded generous
economic and
social rights to citizens of member states who move to another member state and
take up employment there.
EU-citizens therefore enjoy full and equal protection in the field of social
security and may under no circumstance be treated less
favourably than national
citizens. This is a consequence of the right of freedom of movement and the
general non-discrimination rule
which lies at the heart of the
establishing the European Community
This regime has also
benefited the third-country national (or non-EU national) family members of such
EU citizens.
To date, the EU has adopted two directives concerning the rights of
third-country nationals. The first identifies a heavily qualified
family reunification
for certain limited groups of third-country
resident in EU member states, while the second
provides for a secure residence status to third-country nationals who have
resided in an EU member state for more than five years as well
as limited rights to move to another EU member state to take up
employment.
In addition, in
October 2007, the European Commission proposed a General Framework Directive on
the socio-economic rights of third-country
nationals resident and employed in
member states who are not yet eligible for long-term resident
However, this
measure, like the others, is directed only at those migrants who are lawfully
resident in the territory of member states.
There is presently no instrument at the EU level specifically focusing on the
protection of irregular
It has been noted
that the EU has consistently failed to adopt positive measures in the field of
irregular migration, particularly
such that address the pressing need to
safeguard the fundamental rights of irregular migrants at all stages of the
migration process.
the focus has been on security and control, prioritising either regularisation
or repatriation for those who are apprehended
without the necessary
documentation.
Instructive in
this regard is the recent European Commission Communication on ‘Policy
priorities in the fight against illegal
immigration of third-country
nationals.’
This communication seems to view regularisation as a measure of last resort
because of the perceived negative repercussions on the
EU as a whole if and when
newly regularised migrants move to other member states. This is in contrast with
the earlier approach,
initiated in the 1970s and still evident in the mid 1990s,
where the protection of human rights occupied a more prominent place in
policy, even though more in the breach than in the
realisation.
Nonetheless, the
communication does recognise the importance of assessing legislative initiatives
with a view to evaluating their
impact on the fundamental rights of irregular
Fundamental rights must be protected and promoted. Irregular migrants must be
offered a humane and dignified treatment particularly
as they are often victims
of traffickers' networks and exploited by employers. Any legislative initiative
in this field therefore
should be subject to an assessment to evaluate its
impact on fundamental
poverty of specific measures adopted at EU level to protect the rights of
irregular migrant workers means that one has to turn
to developments at the
national level of the individual states in order to extract best practice
guidelines. This will be done in
part 2, forthcoming, where access to minimum
rights will be discussed.
Unlike the EU, which is a supra-national institution, the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) is a regional organisation
aimed at developmental,
economic and regional
integration.
of Fundamental Social Rights in SADC
important provisions relating to both labour law and social protection. In
respect of labour rights, it requires of member
states to observe the basic
rights enshrined in the
Social Charter
, relating to freedom of
association and collective bargaining, equal treatment for men and women, and
the protection of children
and young people, as well as persons with
disabilities. It also requires the improvement and harmonisation of working and
conditions, and the creation of an enabling environment for purposes of
the protection of health, safety and environment, information,
consultation and
participation of workers, employment and remuneration, and education and
training of workers.
In respect of social protection, the
Social Charter
provisions relating to the protection of both workers and those who are not
employed – and regulates the position
of workers (in terms of social
protection) more comprehensively than the position of those who do not work.
Article 10 is the most
significant article in this regard, and provides as
SADC Member States shall create an enabling environment such that every worker
in the SADC Region shall have a right to adequate
social protection and shall,
regardless of status and the type of employment, enjoy adequate social security
benefits. Persons who
have been unable to either enter or re-enter the labour
market and have no means of subsistence shall be able to receive sufficient
resources and social assistance.
What is immediately clear from
this article is that no distinction is drawn between citizens and non-citizens.
According to Olivier,
such a distinction is also not contemplated, given the
emphasis on regional
integration and
focus on harmonisation of social security
Even more explicit
are the provisions of the Code on Social Security in SADC, which encourage
member states to ensure that all lawfully
employed immigrants as well as
self-employed migrants are protected through the promotion of certain core
principles.
In terms of two
of these principles migrant workers should, firstly, be able to participate in
the social security schemes of the
host country and, secondly, enjoy equal
treatment alongside citizens within the social security system of the host
Even though the distinction between citizens and non-citizens is of no import
in this regard, it is apparent that the protection referred
to above only
applies to ‘lawfully employed immigrants’. Nonetheless, migrant
workers in an irregular situation are not
without protection. Article 17.3 of
the Code on Social Security in the SADC provides that illegal residents and
undocumented migrants
should be provided with
basic minimum protection
and should enjoy coverage according to the laws of the host country. While
‘basic minimum protection’ is not defined,
it is submitted that this
would include core social assistance. This does not necessarily imply monetary
support, but at a minimum
that certain basic amenities are made available. In
this regard, much can be gleaned from developments within the Council of Europe
referred to above.
IV CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this part of the paper, I have illustrated that developments at the
international and the regional level, as well as legal and
policy developments
in a number of individual countries around the world, indicate that we may begin
to see a movement away from
an approach that focuses exclusively on the security
aspects of irregular migration (i.e. on measures to combat irregular migration)
to a more nuanced approach that also places significant emphasis on the human
rights of irregular migrants. Consensus is beginning
to emerge that irregular
migrants are entitled to certain minimum rights in the migrant receiving
country. In part 2 of this
I will turn to a
discussion of the minimum rights that I believe should be extended to irregular
migrants in South Africa. Under
each heading, the international, regional and
comparative framework(s) discussed earlier will be used as the baseline from
to examine the specific South African position (both de lege and de
BA (Stellenbosch) LLB (Cape Town)
LLM SJD (Harvard). Professor, Faculty of Law, University of Stellenbosch. I
would like to thank
the two anonymous reviewers for their very helpful comments.
I also acknowledge a special debt to Marius Olivier – conversations
him have shaped much of this paper.
Official figures on the number of
migrants worldwide do not include irregular migrants. See Wim Franssen,
‘The role of social
security in protecting migrant workers’ (Paper
presented at the ISSA Regional Conference for Asia and the Pacific, New Delhi,
India, 21-23 November 2006) 2. See also Marius Olivier, ‘Regional Overview
of Social Protection for Non-Citizens in the Southern
African Development
Community (SADC)’
(Report commissioned by the World Bank, 2009) 16.
International Organization for Migration,
World Migration Report 2008
See International Labour Organization,
Fair Deal for Migrant Workers
However, given that the vast majority of
irregular migrants either enter countries through unofficial channels or take up
unauthorized
residence and employment or lapse into irregularity after regular
entry, this figure is impossible to verify on the strength of currently
available official data. See ibid 9.
Global Commission on International
Migration at a Glance
http://www.gcim.org/attachements/Migration%20at%20a%20glance.pdf
Managing Migration and Minimizing the
Negative Impacts of Irregular Migration
(Working paper prepared for the
meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and Development, Manila, Philippines,
27-30 October 2008)
See ILO, above n 3, 11.
The Southern African Development
Community (SADC) consists of 15 member states: Angola, Botswana, Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC),
Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique,
Namibia, Seychelles, South Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
Political migration has largely been
the result of instability in countries such as the DRC and, earlier, Angola and
Mozambique.
Economic migration, which worldwide appears to be the most important
driver of migration, has within SADC resulted in the flow of
migrants to
countries with better economies and skills shortages, namely Botswana, Namibia
and especially South Africa. See Olivier,
above n 1, 10 and the studies referred
to there. It has also been noted that the employment opportunities created by
the 2010 World
Cup soccer tournament hosted by South Africa and attendant labour
requirements – particularly in the construction industry
further increased the flow of migrants to South Africa. See Southern Africa
Trust, ‘Crossing the Threshold of
Regionalism: Can We Meet the Social Cost
of Integration in Southern Africa?’ (Policy Brief No 3, September 2008) 5.
study of migration within Southern Africa revealed that 86 per cent of
the total number of migrants from Lesotho, Botswana, Southern
Mozambique,
Swaziland, and Zimbabwe work in South Africa. See Wade C Pendleton et al,
Migration, Remittances and Development in Southern Africa
African Migration Project, 2006) (Migration Policy Series No. 44) 3.
See Olivier, above n 1, 10; Godfrey
Kanyenze, ‘African Migrant Labour Situation in Southern Africa’
(Paper presented at the ICFTU-AFRO Conference on ‘Migrant
Labour’, Nairobi, 15-17 March 2004) 1-2.
Jonathan Crush, Vincent Williams and
Sally Peberdy, ‘Migration in Southern Africa’
(Paper prepared
for the Policy Analysis and Research Programme of the Global Commission on
International Migration, 2005) 12. The
authors refer specifically to the use of
‘aquatic imagery’ such as ‘floods’ or ‘tidal
that is generally applied to the phenomenon of irregular migration.
Also see Darshan Vigneswaran, ‘Undocumented migration:
risks and myths
(1998-2005)’ in Wa Kabwe-Segatti et al (eds),
Migration in
post-apartheid South Africa: Challenges and questions to policy-makers
(Agence Française de Développement, 2008) 142.
Crush, Williams and Peberdy, above n
14, 12-13. See also International Federation of Human Rights (FIDH),
‘Surplus People?
Undocumented and other vulnerable migrants in South
(Report, 2008) 5.
Crush, Williams and Peberdy, above n
Consortium for Refugees and Migrants
in South Africa (CoRMSA), ‘Protecting Refugees, Asylum Seekers and
Immigrants in South
Africa’ (Report, 2008) 17.
See discussion in Ockert Dupper,
‘Migrant Workers and the Right to Social Security: An International
Perspective’
Stellenbosch Law Review
South African Immigration Act
(South Africa) s 32.
Vigneswaran, above n 14, 137-138.
Crush, Williams and Peberdy, above n
14, 12-13. The Consortium for Refugees and Migrants in South Africa (CoRMSA) put
at 3.4 per cent. See CoRMSA, ‘Protecting Refugees, Asylum
Seekers and Immigrants in South Africa’ (Report, 2009) 29.
Vigneswaran, above n 14, 136.
Forthcoming (2011) 3(1)
International Journal of Social Security and Workers Compensation
It is worth pointing out that there is
no single international instrument which deals with the rights of irregular
migrants, which
has led to a ‘web of uncertainty as to the minimum rights
to be applied to irregular migrants’, see Committee on Migration,
and Population: Council of Europe,
Human rights of irregular migrants
(Doc 10924, 4 May 2006) at para 17 of the Explanatory Memorandum.
United Nations Special Rapporteur on
the rights of non-citizens,
Final report on the rights of non-citizens
U.N. Doc. E/CN.4/Sub.2/2003/23 (2003), Executive summary. See also Olivier,
See Human Rights Committee,
Comment No 15: The Position of Aliens under the Covenant
(27th session,
1986) paras 1, 2.
FIDH, above n 15, 22.
African [Banjul] Charter on Human and
Peoples' Rights, adopted 27 June
1981, 21 ILM 58
(entered into force 21 October
1986) OAU Doc CAB/LEG/67/3 rev. 5,. South Africa is thereby bound to respect
every individual’s
right to life and physical integrity (art 4),
dignity and freedom from torture, exploitation and degrading treatments (art 5),
and personal security (art 6), fair trial (art 7), freedom of conscience
and religion (art 8), right of information (art 9) and to
free association (art
10) in the limits set by law, right to property (art 14), right to work under
equitable and satisfactory conditions
(art 15), right to enjoy the best
attainable state of physical and mental health (art 16), right to education (art
17), and right
to family life (art 18). These rights largely correspond to those
conferred by the UN human rights treaties. They constitute binding
obligations
for the South African state. Ibid. See also Olivier, above n 1,
Dupper, above n 19, 226.
The eight ILO fundamental conventions
Forced Labour Convention (No. 29),
Freedom of Association
and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention (No. 87),
Organise and Collective Bargaining Convention (No. 98),
Remuneration Convention (No. 100),
Abolition of Forced Labour
Convention (No. 105),
Discrimination (Employment and Occupation)
Convention (No. 111),
Minimum Age Convention (No. 138),
Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention (No. 182)
http://www.ilo.org/public/english/standards/norm/introduction/what.htm
FIDH, above n 15, 23.
In this regard, four Conventions and
two Recommendations have been adopted, namely
the Equality of Treatment
(Accident Compensation) Convention, 1925 (No 19)
and Recommendation, 1925
Maintenance of Migrants’ Pension Rights Convention,
1935 (No 48)
Equality of Treatment (Social Security) Convention,
1962 (No 118)
Maintenance of Social Security Rights Convention,
1982 (No 157) and Recommendation, 1983 (No 167).
These are the
Migration for
Employment Convention (Revised) (No 97)
and Recommendation (Revised) (No
both adopted in 1949, and the
Migrant Workers (Supplementary
Provisions) Convention (No 143)
(whose longer title is ‘
in Abusive Conditions and the Promotion of Equality of Opportunity and Treatment
of Migrant Workers, 1975’
Migrant Workers Recommendation
both adopted in 1975 to supplement the 1949 instruments.
Ratified on 30 March 1926,
http://www.workinfo.com/free/sub_for_legres/ILO/index.htm
At least one trade union has blamed
the recent spate of xenophobic attacks in South Africa to the failure of the
government to ratify
Migrations in Abusive Conditions and the Promotion of
Equality of Opportunity and Treatment of Migrant Workers, 1975 (No 143).
Ironically, Solidarity did not base their argument on the failure of the
government to ensure better treatment of what they refer
to as ‘illegal
migrants’, but on their failure to ‘gather(…) information on
migrating workers in order to
prevent unsuited workers from staying in the
country illegally’, See ‘Solidarity wants ILO convention
Independent Online,
8 July 2008.
Article 9(1).
See Ursula Kulke, ‘The role of
social security in protecting migrant workers: The ILO approach’ (Paper
presented to
the ISSA Regional Conference for Asia and the Pacific, New Delhi,
India, 21-23 November 2006) 4.
Paragraph 34(1)(b).
http://www.ilo.org/public/english/standards/relm/gb/docs/gb295/pdf/tmmflm-1.pdf
Ibid introduction [4].
Ibid [9.9].
The full title is:
International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families.,
It was adopted by General Assembly resolution 45/158 of 18
1990, 30 ILM 1521
(entered into force on 1 July 2003).
It is important to note that the
countries that have signed and/or ratified the Convention consist only of
so-called ‘sending
states’. None of the major
‘labour-receiving’ countries, that is states which primarily attract
migrant labour,
have to date either signed or ratified the Convention. See
Dupper, above n 19, 227.
This principle (of non-reciprocity) is
also enshrined in
ILO Conventions 97
. This means that so
long as the country of employment has ratified the Convention in question, the
social security rights of migrants
are to be respected, irrespective of whether
the migrant worker’s home country has ratified the instrument. However,
negotiations on the drafting of the
UN Migrant Workers Convention
the German representative, joined by others, had argued unsuccessfully for
inclusion of a reciprocity clause that would have permitted
a state to limit its
obligations under the
to nationals of other states parties.
Such a reciprocity clause would have avoided the asymmetry of requiring a state
the rights of particular nationals without a positive assurance that
the state’s own nationals would enjoy protection in the
territory of the
other state – ie, in the state of the protected nationals. It has been
pointed out that the absence of such
a clause may inhibit ratification and
accession to the Convention. See James A R Nafziger and Barry C Bartel,
‘'The Migrant
Workers Convention: its place in human rights law'(1991) 25
International Migration Review
786. This may be one of the reasons for
the fact that the Convention has been ratified only by so-called ‘migrant
For the sake of completeness is must
be mentioned that the recent
ILO Multilateral Framework on Labour
(2005) [para 9.9] proposes that ‘where appropriate’,
social security coverage and portability of benefits should be extended
‘migrant workers in an irregular situation’,
http://www.ilo.org/public/english/standards/relm/gb/docs/gb295/pdf/tmmflm-1.pdf
Linda S Bosniak, ‘Human Rights,
State Sovereignty and the Protection of Undocumented Migrants under the
International Migrant
Workers Convention’ (1991) 25
International
Migration Review
740. The extension of certain rights to irregular migrants
did not occur without significant opposition. During the drafting process,
countries argued that extending rights to these workers would encourage and even
reward someone for violating a country’s
borders. Many of those in favour
of extending rights to irregular migrants in the end used instrumental as
opposed to normative reasoning
to support their position. They argued that
extending rights to migrants in an irregular situation ‘would discourage
from hiring such workers and improve conditions for national
workers’. See Ryszard Cholewinski,
Migrant Workers in International
Human Rights Law
(1997) 187.
See Bosniak, above n 48, 753.
States mainly view the presence of
irregular migrants both as a violation of their sovereign exclusionary powers
and as a breach
of the social contract which binds the nation. See ibid 755.
The hope is that the carrot of
additional benefits and protections for migrants in a regular situation may
encourage undocumented
migrants to seek to regularise their status. See Nafziger
and Bartel, above n 46, 784.
Cholewinski,
Migrant Workers
above n 48,
165-166, points out that it is not entirely clear from the
drafting history of the Convention whether art 27 applies to irregular
to the same extent as it does to regular migrants. A clause in the draft text
explicitly limited the application of the
equality principle in respect of
irregular migrants to those social security benefits to which they had
contributed. However, this
clause was removed during the second reading of the
text. Cholewinski nevertheless concedes that the presence of art 27 in Part IV,
which applies to all migrants, irrespective of status, removes any doubt that it
was intended to apply to both regular and irregular
migrants. It must be noted
that extending social security rights to all workers, irrespective of status,
reflects the position adopted
in other human rights instruments. See
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
arts 22 and 25(1);
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
International Covenant on the Elimination of all forms of Racial
Discrimination
, art 5(e); and
European Social Charter
It is arguable that a mere
reimbursement of contributions is not sufficient to properly reimburse migrants
for the rights they have
acquired. This does not, for example, take into account
the contributions that employers have made on behalf of migrants, nor the
of contributions that migrants need in order to qualify for old-age pensions
elsewhere. This is particularly true in ‘defined
benefit’ systems.
Making benefits portable would be a more appropriate solution. I am extremely
grateful to one of the anonymous
reviewers for bringing this point to my
Eg, art 9(1) of
Convention 143
protects the social security rights of migrant workers arising out of
‘past employment’, and
Recommendation 151
stipulates in para
34(1)(c)(ii) that all migrant workers who leave the country of employment should
be entitled to ‘reimbursement
of any social security contributions which
have not given and will not give rise to rights under national laws or
regulations or
international arrangements’.
See discussion in n 67, below.
See Cholewinski,
above n 48,
See Bosniak, above n 48, 758.
Convention 97
confines protection to any person ‘regularly admitted as a migrant for
employment’, art 9(1) of
Convention 143
does extend rights
‘arising out of past employment as regards remuneration, social security
and other benefits’ to undocumented
or irregular migrants. The objective
of this part of the Convention is to extend to undocumented migrant workers some
rights that
derive from their having been employed. Eg, the fact that an
undocumented migrant does not have a work permit should not deprive
from receiving remuneration for work that he or she has performed. Para 34 of
Recommendation 151
elaborates further on this right, and provides that
‘a migrant worker who leaves the country of employment, irrespective of
the legality of his stay therein to any remuneration for work performed,
including severance payments normally due; to benefits which
may be due in
respect of any employment injury suffered; and in accordance with national
practice to compensation in lieu of any
holiday entitlement acquired but not
used; (and)
to reimbursement of any social security contributions which have
not given and will not give rise to rights under national laws or
regulations or
international agreements
’ (emphasis added). While it is clear that
only social security benefits that derive from past employment are covered, it
equally clear that these benefits are extended to both documented and
undocumented migrants.
Paul Schoukens and Danny Pieters,
‘Exploratory Report on the access to social protection for illegal labour
(Council of Europe, 2004) 8.
Part IV. See also
Bosniak, above n 48, 741.
Bosniak, above n 48, 759.
Ibid 760. This is not mere
speculation. In Denmark, eg, entitlement to social assistance is reserved for
people who have lived in
the country for the previous three years. Social
assistance for people who have lived in Denmark for a shorter period of time is
decided by local authorities acting under guidance laid down by the Ministry of
Social Affairs. However, if a claim for social assistance
is made by a person
who has lived in Denmark for less than three years, he or she may be deported.
See Simon Roberts et al,
Migration and Social Security Handbook
Bosniak, above n 48, 761. In terms of
art 68(2), states must impose sanctions against employers who employ irregular
migrants in
order to ‘eliminate the employment in their territory of
migrant workers in an irregular situation’.
Art 88. In drafting this provision,
state representatives deliberately capitalised the ‘p’ in
clarify its reference to entire sections of the Convention
rather than to individual provisions. See Nafziger and Bartel, above n
The Council of Europe was established
to promote democracy, the rule of law and human rights as well as co-operation
among its member
states. It currently has 47 member states. See Simon Tonelli,
‘Irregular Migration and Human Rights: A Council of Europe
Perspective’
in Barbara Bogusz et al (eds)
Irregular Migration and
Human Rights: Theoretical, European and International Perspectives
European Convention on the Legal
Status of Migrant Workers
, opened for signature on 24 November 1977, 14 ETS
93 (entered into force on 1 May 1983).
European Social Charter
for signature on 18 October
1961, 529 UNTS 89
(entered into force on 26 February
Revised European Social
, opened for signature on 3 May 1996, ETS 163 (entered into force on
1 July 1999).
Additional Protocol to the European
Social Charter Providing for a System of Collective Complaints
(9 November
1995) ETS No 158. Under this Protocol, certain trade unions and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) can bring complaints
against those Contracting Parties
accepting the Protocol's procedure. See Ryszard Cholewinski, ‘The Human
and Labor Rights
of Migrants: Visions of Equality’
Immigration Law Journal
IFHR (International Federation of
Human Rights) v. France,
European Committee on Social Rights, Complaint
No.14/2003, 8 September 2004) [32].
Ibid [29]-[32].
European Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
, opened for signature on
1950, 213 UNTS 222
(entered into force on 3 September 1953).
Gaygusuz v Austria
[1996] ECHR 36
23 EHRR 364.
Ryszard Cholewinski,
migrants: access to minimum social rights
(Council of Europe, 2005) 30.
This is due to compulsory schooling
requirements in most member states. See Cholewinski,
Irregular migrants
above n 81, 35.
Sorabjee v United Kingdom
(Application No 23938/94, 23 October 1995) (unreported);
Jaramillo v United
(Application No 24865/94, 23 October 1995) (unreported);
United Kingdom
(Application No 28627/95, 17 January 1997) (unreported); and
Ajayi and others v United Kingdom
(Application No 27663/95, 22 June 1999)
(unreported).
Vikulov and others v Latvia
(Application No 16870/03, 25 March 2004) (unreported), where the removal of the
family was delayed until the completion of a child’s
school year. This was
held not to amount to a violation of Protocol 1, Article 2. See also Jeremy
McBride, ‘Irregular Migrants
and the European Convention on Human
Rights’, 21, [114] (memorandum drafted for the Committee on Migration,
Refugees and Population,
AS/Mig/Inf, 14 November 2005).
Vikulov and others v Latvia
(Application No 16870/03, 25 March 2004) (unreported), the fact that the child
was able to obtain secondary education in the country
to which he and his
parents were being deported was an important consideration taken into account by
the ECHR. See McBride, above
n 86, [114] and Cholewinski,
, above n 81, 38.
Cholewinski,
, above n 81, 37.
Ibid and the examples cited there.
Cholewinski, ‘The Human and
Labor Rights of Migrants’, above n 76, 211. For a chronological report on
the activities
of the Council of Europe on irregular migrants, see Cholewinski,
Irregular migrants
, above n 81, 7-10.
Council of Europe, Committee of
Recommendation No R (2000) 3 (19 January 2000) to member states on
the Right to the Satisfaction of Basic Material Needs of Persons
in Situations
of Extreme Hardship
. (Emphasis added).
Council of Europe,
Human rights of
irregular migrants,
above n 26.
The text was adopted by the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe as Resolution 1509 (2006) Human
rights of irregular
migrants on 27 June 2006 (18th Sitting).
Council of Europe,
Human rights of
irregular migrants,
above n 26, [11].
Ibid [60]-[61].
Ibid [62]-[70]. Also see
‘conditions of employment’.
Ibid [77]-[81].
Resolution 1509 (2006) para 13. I
will return to these rights under the separate headings in part 2, forthcoming,
above n 25.
Cholewinski, ‘Human and Labor
Rights of Migrants’, above n 76, 191.
M Olivier and G Vonk (eds),
‘Comparative review of the position of non-citizen migrants in social
security’ (Report for
the South African Treasury, 2004) 52.
Council Regulation
1612/68/EEC
On Freedom of Movement for Workers Within the Community
[1968] OJ Sp Ed L 257/ 475.
Council Directive 2003/86/EC
On the Right to Family Reunification
[2003] OJ L 251/12;
Directive 2003/109/EC Concerning the Status of Third-Country Nationals who Are
Long-Term Residents
[2004] OJ L 16/ 44.
See European Commission,
for a Council Directive on a single application procedure for a single permit
for third-country nationals to reside and work
in the territory of a Member
State and on a common set of rights for third-country workers legally residing
in a Member State
, COM (2007) 638 final (23 October 2007).
Cholewinski, ‘Human and Labor
Rights of Migrants’, above n 76, 192.
Cholewinski,
Migrant Workers,
above n 48, 162-163.
See Ryszard Cholewinski ‘The
Acquis on Irregular Migration: Reinforcing Security at the Expense of
Rights’ (2000) 2
European Journal of Migration and Law
Released on 19 July 2006, COM (2006)
http://eurlex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/site/en/com/2006/com2006_0402en01.pdf
The document adopts ‘siege mentality’ language as if the problem is
wholly external to the EU and not linked to
any economic forces operating within
the territory of the member states. See Cholewinski,
Migrant Workers,
above n 48, 176.
Cholewinski,
Migrant Workers,
above n 48, 163.
Communication from the Commission
on Policy Priorities in the Fight Against Illegal Immigration of Third-Country
, COM (2006) 402 final (July 19, 2006) [3].
Olivier and Vonk, above n 103,
Charter of Fundamental Social
Rights in SADC
, signed and entered into force on 26 August 2003.
Olivier, above n 1, 65.
Treaty establishing the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) of 17 August 1992.
Article 17 of the Code.
Forthcoming, see above n 25.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (307 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter