URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UTSLRS/2019/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:50:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Goldblatt, Beth --- "Violence against women and social and economic rights: deepening the connections" [2019] UTSLRS 5; (2019) Research Handbook on Feminist Engagement with International Law 359
Chapter 21.  Violence against women and social and economic rights:
deepening the connections
(in S Harris-Rimmer and K Ogg (eds) Research
Handbook on Feminist Engagement with International Law, 2019, Edward Elgar)
Beth Goldblatt
I. INTRODUCTION
Violence against women is a complex phenomenon that takes many
It has been defined by the
United Nations Human Rights Council as ‘any act of gender-based violence
that results in, or is
likely to result in, physical, sexual or psychological
harm or suffering to women and girls of any age, including threats of such
coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in
private life’.
It includes
domestic and intimate partner violence, sexual harassment at work, violence on
the streets, in schools and communities,
and sexual violence during war and
other political and economic
It is multi-causal,
systemic and fundamental to the ongoing oppression of women in every society of
It is evident throughout
history and across societies and cultures and is persistent and difficult to
challenge despite significant
efforts over recent decades to understand and
eliminate it. It is indiscriminate in affecting women at every age and stage of
ability, colour, ethnicity and religion.
Violence against women cuts across class, touching both rich and poor.
It is clear, however, that poverty and unequal access
to resources contribute to
the conditions that make women vulnerable to
For example, unsafe
transport and lack of street lighting open women to attack. Precarious
employment means that women are less able
to resist harassment. Inadequate
sanitation and water expose women and girls to violence in informal settlements
and in fields. Lack
of affordable housing makes it difficult for women to break
ties of dependency with abusive men.
Violence generates and deepens poverty by keeping girls out of school
and work, by forcing women from their homes and by requiring
them to expend
resources protecting themselves and avoiding harm. Thus violence may compound
pre-existing inequalities in access
to resources and opportunities by women. And
gender inequality may worsen women’s poverty and exposure to
In addition to the
economic burden of violence carried by women themselves, there is a large social
cost attached to missed schooling
and to restrictions on women’s
employment and their capacity to participate fully in their communities and
The cost implications of
responding to violence are also significant where these require additional and
specific medical, security,
housing and social services
The global loss of
workplace productivity due to domestic violence is estimated at between 1 and 2
per cent of gross domestic product.
The current global economic context poses a range of new challenges for
vulnerable women and girls since some states in developed
and developing
countries are cutting benefits and services, employment is increasingly crossing
borders and becoming less open to
regulation, and financial crises are deepening
poverty in many communities.
Much of the focus of legal and human rights responses to violence
against women has concerned criminal justice measures against
perpetrators or
has involved efforts to sanction violence in the home and
These initiatives
have primarily drawn on civil and political rights to equality, dignity,
autonomy and bodily integrity to frame
legal responses. While these and other
civil and political rights are centrally implicated, the focus on social and
economic rights
in addressing violence against women has been more
These rights have
arisen, at times, in relation to the right to health for victims of
or in relation to
housing rights for women escaping
Social and economic
rights have also been considered in relation to reparations for women victims of
violence in post-conflict
The issue of violence
against women is less commonly considered as it relates to rights to social
security, food and basic services
such as water and sanitation, although recent
efforts to think about these linkages are a welcome
development.
This indicates a
growing awareness of the links between poverty and violence against women in the
human rights arena. Women’s
workplace safety has been a long-standing
focus of feminists but the changing nature of work requires new thinking around
protecting women from violence via their economic
While recent writing (both by scholars and human rights bodies) has
linked violence against women to social and economic rights,
this area is
somewhat under-developed in international
This may be related to the
historical undervaluing of social and economic rights. This second-class status
has led to more limited
engagement with and interpretation of these rights in
general and from a women’s rights
perspective.
This chapter
suggests the need for a closer understanding of how violence acts as a barrier
to women’s exercise of and access
to their social and economic rights and
how these rights might support efforts to address violence against
Social and economic
rights have potential value in contributing to the prevention of violence,
rather than just responding to it.
Together with substantive approaches to
equality, social and economic rights might be marshalled to achieve
transformative changes
to society, by altering some of the structural
underpinnings of poverty and inequality that contribute to violence against
For example, these rights might be used to require governments to employ
women in public works programmes that improve their status
and economic power in
their communities and reduce their vulnerability to violence. This is not to
suggest that civil and political
rights as well as cultural rights are less
central to efforts to address violence against women. The complexity of this
issue demands
a holistic engagement of the full spectrum of rights, premised on
the understanding that substantive realisation of all rights may
resource allocation and redistribution.
The chapter begins by outlining some of the concerns raised by
critical feminist scholars in relation to feminist engagements
international law, particularly where they deal with violence against women
within international human rights law (Section II).
The chapter argues that a
focus on social and economic rights might overcome some of these concerns in
using human rights to address
violence against women. It explores ways in which
the conceptual connections between violence against women and social and
rights might be deepened in international human rights law (Section
III). The chapter then discusses the current approach to the
relationship
between violence against women and social and economic rights by key human
rights treaty bodies and independent mandate
holders (Section
This leads to a
consideration of a recent process to update General Recommendation 19 on
violence against women by the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women. This process is examined through the lens of social and economic
rights, which
is also used to assess the new General Recommendation 35. Further
action and research to improve the international legal framework
on violence
against women and social and economic rights is suggested at the end of this
discussion.
<a>II. CRITICAL CONCERNS WITH FEMINIST APPROACHES TO VIOLENCE
AGAINST WOMEN IN INTERNATIONAL LAW
There are a number of critical concerns with the way feminists have engaged
with violence against women in international human rights
law. These should
inform the project of integrating a focus on violence against women into the
development of social and economic
rights. The first concern is that by arguing
for the inclusion of women’s experiences into existing legal rights, women
seen as deviant and exceptional, and thus not fully human, and are required
to conform to a male norm.
invisibility of women’s experience of violence and how it impacts on their
social and economic rights requires contextual,
evidence-based engagement with
prior understandings of the content and purpose of social and economic rights.
This does involve strategies
of inclusion that carry the paradoxical danger of
treating the male subject as the ordinary holder of social and economic rights.
However, rights do not have fixed meanings and require ongoing reinterpretation
as society undergoes change. For example, the changing
nature of work under
globalisation presents challenges to rethink labour rights for men and women.
These changes present opportunities
to develop the meaning and content of social
and economic rights in altered contexts and also offer opportunities to consider
violence against women might influence these new meanings.
A second concern relates to the feminist framing of women as victims
of violence, rendering them passive objects deserving
protection rather than
full legal subjects claiming
Claiming social and
economic rights for
of violence, not just protection of women,
is one way of shifting the emphasis but the concern is still a valid one in
engaging in
this project. The International Covenant on Economic Social and
Cultural Rights (ICESCR), while stressing the equal rights of men
uses the male pronoun
(Article 11(1)) and talks of special protection for mothers (Article
Thus protective
approaches to women are embedded in a Covenant designed with men in mind,
despite the entrenchment of gender equality.
Since protection against violence
informs women’s social and economic rights as well as rights-based
responses to their status
as victims of violence, any feminist development of
the links between these issues should carefully avoid portraying women as
objects of the law.
A third critique of feminist engagement with violence against women in
international law comes from ‘Third World’
scholars who accuse
western feminists of ‘othering’ women in the developing
This leads to the
treatment of women as victims but also reinforces ‘gender and cultural
essentialism’.
results in the attribution of blame to culture rather than the economic forces
of colonial and neo-colonial
development.
Linking social and
economic rights to violence against women is a way of avoiding this concern
since it focuses attention on the
economic and social dimensions of violence and
requires a deeper understanding of the complex causes of violence at the
international
and domestic level. It shifts focus from the purely
ideological/cultural to the material causes of violence. However, a ‘first
world’-oriented approach could continue to entrench differences between
women in developed and developing countries unless
it engages with the global
economic forces of neoliberalism and the way they shape a range of conditions
and experiences across the
world. A political economy approach to violence
against women that informs a human rights response would avoid missing the
dimensions of this violence. Thus, Yakin Ertürk, the former
Special Rapporteur on violence against women noted that such an
‘makes explicit
the interconnections between the economic, social and political realms,
demonstrating that power operates not
only through coercion but also through the
structured relations of production and reproduction that govern the distribution
of resources, benefits, privileges and authority within the home and
society at large’.
A fourth critique of feminist work in international law dealing with
sexual violence is that it leads to a ‘sexual security
regime’ that
polices women’s bodies, restricts their freedoms and extends its
surveillance capacities towards state interests
in supporting the
This critique accords
with the concern already expressed in this chapter about the criminal justice
focus of many human rights and
legal responses to violence against women. A
deeper understanding of the structural dimensions of gender inequality and the
relations implicated in violence against women would enable a more
far-reaching response. A focus on social and economic rights rather
more usual emphasis on civil and political rights would encourage such a
response. It also offers a more balanced approach
to human rights by integrating
these two sets of rights. Attention to prevention by addressing the material
causes of women’s
vulnerability to violence using social and economic
rights shifts the emphasis away from protection and the consequent dangers of
state control.
<a>III. VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC RIGHTS
– CONCEPTUAL CONNECTIONS
With these concerns in mind, the chapter now distils and develops the
conceptual relationship between violence against women and social
and economic
rights. In so doing, it aims to contribute to deepening these connections in
international human rights law.
As noted, violence against women has strong links to poverty. The
following are features of this interrelation. First, violence
against women can
render women poorer by forcing them out of their homes or workplaces, requiring
them to spend more on accommodation,
health and transport and reducing their
livelihoods.
Second, violence
against women and fear of such violence can prevent women from accessing health
care, education and other services,
leading to reduced life
Third, violence against
women can take the form of control of women’s access to finances and
resources (‘economic violence’
as a form of domestic
Fourth, violence
against women can lead to mental and physical ill-health and disability, which
can impact on women’s access
to employment, income and other forms of
participation in society.
poverty can prevent women from escaping violent situations in the home or in the
Sixth, poverty can
push women into unsafe work environments and public
Seventh, the reduction
or removal of services, such as cut-backs to welfare or public housing, can
expose women to violence.
Poverty is often causally linked to economic inequality, which is
itself shaped by gender.
aspects of poverty are common to men and women, for example where there is
inadequate housing and lack of basic services such
as electricity and
sanitation. This form of poverty, though apparently equal in its reach, is
experienced differently by men and
women, resulting in gendered
disadvantage.
Thus, for example,
women may have greater responsibilities for collecting water and gathering fuel
than men due to sexual divisions
of labour, cultural expectations and
stereotypes. Economic inequality may be more overtly gendered where women are
prevented from
owning and inheriting property, occupying certain jobs or
accessing education. The response to violence against women therefore needs
address poverty and the structural basis of economic inequality in its general
manifestation as well as the causes of gendered
poverty and unequal access to
resources and opportunities.
Addressing gendered poverty and disadvantage using social and economic
rights requires a substantive approach to equality to
inform the operation of
these rights.
Substantive
equality has been defined by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women as ensuring
<quotation>... women be given an equal start and that they be empowered
by an enabling environment to achieve equality of results.
It is not enough to
guarantee women treatment that is identical to that of men. Rather, biological
as well as socially and culturally
constructed differences between women and men
must be taken into account. Under certain circumstances, non-identical treatment
women and men will be required in order to address such differences. Pursuit
of the goal of substantive equality also calls for an
effective strategy aimed
at overcoming underrepresentation of women and a redistribution of resources and
power between men and women.
</quotation>
A substantive equality approach has also been adopted by other treaty bodies,
including the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
This approach requires
attention to the material dimensions of inequality alongside the recognition
dimensions of status-based
It involves
transformative approaches to the structures that perpetuate inequalities and
requires attention to the participation
of those affected by
inequality.
Violence against
women, in its origins and effects, can be understood using a gender inequality
lens in terms of these four dimensions:
first, it has material impacts and
causes since disadvantage exposes women to violence and violence leads to
disadvantage. Second,
it is rooted in and excused by culture, religion and value
systems that entrench harm to women. Third, it impedes women’s
participation
in communities, representative structures and society as a whole
by reducing their agency and voice through silencing and fear. Finally,
resistant to change through responses that are inadequately structural and far
reaching. Violence against women cannot be addressed
at the individual level or
within a criminalising frame alone.
Gender inequality, violence and poverty also generate specific forms
of discrimination, often borne out of stereotyping and
Thus, women who have
experienced domestic violence, for example, may risk losing tenancies from
disapproving landlords. Women who
complain of harassment in the workplace may be
penalised by unsympathetic employers, facing job loss or demotion. School girls
report abuse from teachers or fellow students may be judged harshly or
punished. In cases such as these, violence and discrimination
contribute to
poverty and deepen inequality for such women and their children. This can be
responded to with capacious understandings
of grounds of
discrimination,
or with the
inclusion of specific prohibitions against discrimination on the basis of a
person’s status as a victim of gender-based
In addition,
discrimination against people because they are poor can further disadvantage
women and push them into unsafe living
or working arrangements. Prohibitions
against discrimination on the basis of social class or socio-economic status may
also assist
women and girls to avoid violence.
Social and economic rights require close interaction with substantive
approaches to equality to address gender inequality,
linked to poverty and
disadvantage that are intimately tied to violence against women. Close attention
should be given by states
and non-state actors to the preventative measures
needed to address what Manjoo calls ‘pre-existing patterns of
cross-cutting
structural subordination, gender hierarchies, systemic
marginalization and structural inequalities that may be at the root cause
violence that women
experience’.
lighting and safe transport campaigns, improved workplace laws that assist women
to avoid encounters with stalking or harassing
partners, and school programmes
to educate children about violence are some of the measures that could channel
resources and innovative
initiatives towards violence
prevention.
Public works
programmes could reserve places for women who have experienced domestic violence
and could be used to make neighbourhoods
safer. Each of the social and economic
rights promised by the ICESCR, the International Labour Organization Conventions
human rights treaties requires detailed and creative re-examination
and development to find ways of addressing violence against women
through these
commitments.
<a>IV. DEVELOPMENTS ON VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN IN HUMAN RIGHTS LAW
– OPPORTUNITIES FOR A DEEPER FOCUS ON SOCIAL AND
ECONOMIC RIGHTS
The chapter now analyses, in brief, the ways in which violence against women
and social and economic rights have been considered within
international human
rights law, particularly by the committees responsible for the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and the ICESCR
and certain independent mandate holders. Thereafter it considers the process
the redrafting of the CEDAW Committee’s General Recommendation 19 on
Violence against Women leading to General Recommendation
35 and the opportunity
this has provided to deepen the focus on social and economic rights in framing
human rights responses to violence
against women. Finally, it discusses other
developments that might impact on international law and some suggestions for
further research.
<b>Violence Against Women and Social and Economic Rights in
International Law
Violence against women has been identified as a human rights violation within
international human rights law since the early
Although CEDAW did not
include reference to violence against women, the CEDAW Committee soon took steps
to address this glaring omission
by asking states parties to report on the
In 1992 the CEDAW
Committee adopted the more comprehensive General Recommendation No. 19 (GR 19)
on Violence against Women.
defined violence against women and located it clearly within the definition of
discrimination:
<quotation>The Convention in article 1 defines discrimination against
women. The definition of discrimination includes gender-based
violence, that is,
violence that is directed against a woman because she is a woman or that affects
women disproportionately. It
includes acts that inflict physical, mental or
sexual harm or suffering, threats of such acts, coercion and other deprivations
liberty. Gender-based violence may breach specific provisions of the
Convention, regardless of whether those provisions expressly
mention violence.
</quotation>
The General Recommendation noted that violence against women affected
women’s social and economic rights and specifically mentioned
to health and to work.
recognised the social and economic implications of traditional attitudes and
practices towards women, including those involving
violence, as they affected
women and girls’ education and employment
opportunities.
It saw poverty as
pushing women into prostitution and trafficking, forced labour and arranged
marriages, exposing them to
While it referred to
the specific vulnerabilities of rural women it did not elaborate on how these
might relate to their social and
economic rights, which are set out in Article
14 of CEDAW. This Article makes reference to social security, housing, water,
electricity
and sanitation, which are curiously absent from the Convention in
relation to urban women. The General Recommendation also failed
to specifically
mention Article 13 of CEDAW regarding discrimination against women in economic
and social life in considering the
link with violence against women in these
spheres. Importantly, the Committee recommended that states parties take a range
of preventative,
protective and rehabilitative measures in addressing
gender-based violence,
it did not relate these directly to social and economic rights.
There have been numerous references to violence against women by UN
human rights bodies since 1992,
some concerning social and economic
The CEDAW Committee has
referred to violence against women and social and economic rights in many of its
proceedings although it
has not conducted a systematic consideration of this
interrelationship. A previous Special Rapporteur on violence against women,
causes and consequences, Yakin Ertürk, undertook the first detailed
analysis of the political economy of violence against
This approach suggested
that the underpinnings of violence are structural and linked to the sexual
division of labour, neoliberalism
and globalisation, and conflict and
militarisation.
The Special
Rapporteur spelled out the links between violence against women and a range of
social and economic rights with a focus
on the global economic context. She
recommended that the ‘promotion and protection of women’s economic
and social entitlements
to prevent and protect them from violence must be
pursued transnationally’.
The report is significant for its analytical depth and critical emphasis as well
as for its attention to the international environment.
The current Special
Rapporteur’s most recent report concerns states parties’ obligations
to provide adequate shelters
for women and children seeking protection from
violence, although it does not focus on the right to housing or other social and
rights in terms of prevention of
Another Human Rights
Council special procedures mandate holder, the Working Group on the issue of
discrimination against women in
law and in practice, considered the connection
between violence against women and discrimination against women in economic and
life in 2014.
consider the role of social and economic rights in any depth but made strong
arguments about the links between forms of
violence against women and the
economic dimensions of this.
The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights has shown a deep
awareness of women’s specific needs and rights
in several of its General
Comments. Most notable are General Comment 16 (GC
on the equal rights of men
and women and General Comment 20 (GC 20) on
non-discrimination.
However, the
understanding of violence against women as closely related to the enjoyment of
women’s social and economic rights
is less well developed. In GC 20 there
is no mention of violence against women as a form of discrimination, even where
sex discrimination
is specifically
In GC 16 there is no
reference to violence against women in any of the discussion of gender equality
or state obligations. Violence
is first mentioned in relation to the specific
example of housing rights aimed ‘to provide victims of domestic violence,
are primarily female, with access to safe housing, remedies and redress of
physical, mental and emotional
The same housing
example refers to coerced marriage and, somewhat out of context, also states
<quotation>[g]ender based violence is a form of discrimination that
inhibits the ability to enjoy rights and freedoms, including
economic, social
and cultural rights, on a basis of equality. States parties must take
appropriate measures to eliminate violence
against men and women and act with
due diligence to prevent, investigate, mediate, punish and redress acts of
violence against them
by private actors. </quotation>
The example of the right to health mentions female genital
and the paragraph on
education talks of ‘favourable conditions to ensure the safety of
children, in particular girls, on their
way to and from
There is no
reference in this General Comment to violence in relation to other rights such
as food, social security, land or work.
GC 16 reflects the common approach to
mentioning violence against women in relation to housing following domestic
violence and safety
of girls on their way to (but not at) school. Sexual
harassment at work and health services following violence against women are
often included in such examples but are absent from this General Comment. The
sentences on violence against women found in the housing
example, while
important, would have been better placed as a general statement and should not
have been limited to private actors
since violence against women by state
officials such as teachers is all too
The gender neutrality of
these sentences, while potentially problematic, is offset by the earlier
reference to domestic violence,
which more accurately reflects the reality of
gender-based violence as a phenomenon that is imbalanced in relation to
Outside of the treaty body system, a group of experts drew up the
‘Montreal Principles on Women’s Economic, Social
and Cultural
Rights’ in 2002 ‘to guide the interpretation and implementation of
guarantees of non-discrimination and
equal exercise and enjoyment of economic,
social, and cultural rights, in order to ensure that women can enjoy these
rights fully
and equally’.
The references to violence in the Principles are limited although some important
links were made by the authors. The first was in
the context of globalisation
and neoliberalism where it was noted that poverty linked to job insecurity and
cuts to services can
lead to women’s vulnerability to trafficking and
It was further stated
that ‘economic and political insecurity provoke private and public
backlash against women’s rights
that may be expressed through violence and
articulated in the form of defending cultures and
traditions’.
In defining
women’s social, economic and cultural rights, the Principles mention
violence in reference to sexual harassment
trafficking.
The Principles
state that ‘sexual harassment of women and violence against women must be
understood as forms of sex
discrimination’.
no mention of violence, however, in the discussion of the impediments to
women’s exercise of their economic, social
and cultural
a notable omission. The
relationship between poverty, gender inequality and violence is not fully
developed in the Principles as
they do not link exposure to violence with
limitations on women’s access to their social and economic rights, nor do
they explain
how violence generates the need for social and economic rights, and
how such rights might prevent violence. Violence against women
should have been
included in the list of principles of gender equality as well as in the
enumerated impediments to women’s
enjoyment of their economic, social and
cultural rights.
<b>CEDAW Committee Update of General Recommendation 19
In March 2015 the CEDAW Committee decided to update GR 19 on violence against
women and in July 2016 it adopted a new draft General
Recommendation (Draft GR
which it published for
public consultation until end September
The draft Recommendation
saw what it terms ‘gender-based violence against women’ (GBVAW) as
‘the fundamental social,
political and economic mechanism by which the
subordinate position of women with respect to men and their stereotyped roles
are perpetuated’.
CEDAW Committee reiterated that GBVAW is a form of discrimination against women
and is, as a result, an obligation requiring
immediate response. This is
significant since social and economic rights which are realised progressively
may take time to achieve
where resources are limited, but measures to end
violence, as a form of discrimination, must be realised immediately.
The CEDAW Committee, in its Draft GR 19, called on states to take
actions in relation to prevention, protection and redress,
data collection and
monitoring, and international cooperation. In relation to prevention the
Committee recommended measures that
‘address the underlying causes of
gender-based violence against women, including the denial of their civil,
cultural, economic,
political and social
significant acknowledgement of the relationship between social and economic
rights and the prevention of GBVAW and goes
beyond the earlier version. The
Draft GR recognised the differing exposure to and impact of violence based on
intersecting discrimination
and listed as examples the categories of
‘urban/rural’ and ‘ownership of property’ as factors
alongside colour,
indigenous status, marital status and so
The failure to mention
poverty or class is notable given their key role in deepening women’s
vulnerability to violence.
The Draft GR 19 set out preventative measures, which importantly
include education against attitudes leading to violence in
schools at all levels
and in society as a whole. This includes awareness-raising and education of
state and non-state actors. It
also includes programmes targeted at
‘education, health, social services and law enforcement
and mandatory
‘capacity-building, education and training for the judiciary, lawyers and
law enforcement officers, including
forensic medical personnel, legislators,
health-care, education and social
personnel’.
notable acknowledgements of the need for sensitive personnel providing some of
the social services that women require in
response to violence and to prevent
its occurrence. However, the Draft GR 19 failed to mention the direct role that
social and economic
rights can have in preventing violence such as through
provision of adequate housing and work opportunities, basic services provided
a safe manner, appropriate transport and so on. The draft, while listing a wide
range of state obligations, is relatively silent
on the provision of services
and benefits by state and private bodies that might prevent violence against
women. There is reference
to the role of businesses and transnational
corporations in providing internal complaint mechanisms and supports for victims
of violence;
however, there is
no requirement that such groups provide more substantive preventative measures
to their workers, customers and
communities through, for example, safer working
environments, worker accommodation and so on.
The protection and redress measures set out in the Draft GR 19 make
some reference to social and economic issues. These include
financial and legal
aid; medical and counselling services; training and employment opportunities for
victims; helplines, crisis centres
The reparatory
measures are quite far reaching and include ‘monetary compensation and the
provision of legal, social and health
While these are
important efforts to respond to the costs of violence, they do not address all
the social and economic rights implicated
such as housing, education, food and
basic services.
A large number of submissions on the Draft GR 19 were provided by
non-government organisations and other
stakeholders.
Many of these
addressed the gaps in relation to social and economic rights, particularly
through linking violence against women and
the right to
Two that provided more
comprehensive and analytical consideration of the social and economic rights of
women facing violence are
specifically considered here. The first, from the
Global Initiative for Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, pointed out that
, the new Draft GR failed to note that poverty prevents
women from leaving abusers. It argued that poverty has an additional role
exposing women to violence where, for example, women risk unsafe transport or
precarious work situations.
suggested that the new GR require states to address ‘structural
discrimination in the area of economic and social rights
which entrenches
women’s poverty’.
The submission focused on the issues of housing and land, arguing that violence
against women was a key cause of homelessness and
that property ownership
protected women from violence. It suggested that the new GR should include a
requirement that states allow
evictions of perpetrators of violence from the
family home regardless of who is the owner or
leaseholder.
It also referred to
other social and economic rights, such as social security, social protection
floors to ensure adequate livelihood,
transportation, child care and various
measures within the workplace for domestic violence victims. Lastly, it
suggested that the
GR include a prohibition against discrimination of women who
have experienced domestic violence in relation to land, housing, education
employment in particular.
suggestions offer to strengthen the new GR both in deepening the links between
violence against women, equality, and economic
and social rights at a broad
level; and in terms of specific requirements relating to these rights that
emerge in the final version.
The second submission that raised valuable points on economic and
social rights in the Draft GR was provided by International
Women’s Rights
Action Watch Asia Pacific (IWRAW-AP) representing a range of organisations and
individuals. The submission saw
the Draft GR as an opportunity to update and
locate violence against women within the social and economic context of
neoliberal economic
globalisation and current growth and development
It noted that this
context has led to unsafe, abusive and unaccountable work environments; a
roll-back of social provision; and privatisation
and deregulation of services
such as shelters and health care for women affected by
It argued that
growth and development models chosen by states should not ‘exacerbate the
prevalence of GBVAW or serve as a
barrier to addressing it ... The updated GR
should also highlight the impact of poverty on marginalised groups and its
relation to
submission stressed the need for the new GR to consider the impact of growing
economic migration in relation to violence against
IWRAW-AP also noted
the new forms of violence that the GR will need to take into account, including
violence in relation to sexual
and reproductive health and economic violence. It
noted that while the term ‘economic violence’ has been used by the
CEDAW Committee it has not been adequately defined and this should occur within
The strength of this
submission is its strong contextual framing of the issue of violence in the
current, global economic context
and the emphasis on new forms of harm facing
women in the workplace and as a result of poverty.
Both submissions, and a number of others, pointed to the need for
greater attention to economic and social rights in the new
GR. In July 2017 the
CEDAW Committee released General Recommendation 35 which updates GR
GR 35 both updates and is
complementary to GR 19 so the two should be read together in guiding states
parties on their obligations
in relation to violence against women. GR 35 is
similar to the draft version but there are some notable additions that suggest
some of the submissions on social and economic rights were heeded. For
example, the draft discussed intersectional discrimination
but failed to mention
class as a category. GR 35 includes ‘socioeconomic status and/or
caste’ as one of the factors affecting
The new version also
includes more contextual references to global economic factors such as supply
chains, extractive and off-shoring
industries and economic
The GR also refers to
the indivisibility of rights such as the right to life and health in relation to
women’s right to be
The GR specifically
mentions migrant domestic workers in discussing the obligations on states
parties to repeal immigration laws
that prevent this group from reporting
In relation to
prevention measures, the GR now refers to public safety measures such as
adequate physical infrastructure including
Importantly, it
also places the obligation on states parties to encourage the private sector to
take efforts to prevent violence
in the workplace or that affects women
The GR includes
reference to affordable housing and land alongside access to financial aid,
legal, medical and social services, education
and childcare for violence
victims/survivors.
Unfortunately, these types of services and the goods emanating from social and
economic rights are not discussed in relation to prevention
in the GR. In
addition, the GR does not refer to ‘economic violence’, nor does it
discuss the impact of poverty or structural
economic discrimination on
women’s exposure to violence as suggested in the two submissions
considered above. These understandings
remain to be spelled out more clearly
within the international framework. GR 35 is, however, an improvement on the
Draft GR in its
attentiveness to social and economic factors and rights in
relation to violence against women.
<b>Other Developments in International Law and Areas for Further
The CEDAW redrafting of the General Recommendation on Violence against Women
is only one of the notable efforts to improve the international
legal responses
to this global issue. Some suggest that this may not be enough. In particular,
the former Special Rapporteur on violence
against women, Rashida Manjoo, has
called for an inquiry into the ‘normative gap’ in international
human rights law on
the issue of violence against
The current Special
Rapporteur, Dubravka Šimonović, has taken this debate forward by
calling for submissions from stakeholders
on the adequacy of the international
legal framework.
Whatever the
outcome of this debate and the forms of the legal mechanisms that may or may not
emerge from it, now is an important
moment to consider whether the overall
approach to violence against women as a human rights violation takes adequate
account of social
and economic rights.
Additional areas to improve the international human rights framework
could involve updating some of the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural
Rights (CESCR) General Comments dealing with discrimination, gender equality and
specific social and economic
rights. Other treaty body committees might also
look to reorient responses to violence against women away from purely criminal
approaches towards more preventative approaches involving social and
economic rights. Some of the creative law and jurisprudence
emerging from
regional and domestic jurisdictions might also inform the international law.
Domestic examples include an Indian decision
ordering municipalities to provide
public toilets for women following incidents of sexual
and South African
litigation that challenges the temporary housing conditions of women who have
been evicted and are exposed to
Research on
domestic litigation strategies and jurisprudence on violence against women
engaging social and economic rights would
Other areas for
research should consider the role of social and economic rights in addressing
violence against women where transnational
actors are involved.
<a>V. CONCLUSION
The chapter has argued that violence against women is strongly linked to
poverty and that social and economic rights should be more
fully understood,
developed and used in responding to this violence. It has suggested that
relating violence against women to social
and economic rights addresses some of
the critical concerns that feminists have articulated about the way that
violence against women
is approached in international law. It has synthesised
existing understandings and formulated a set of conceptual connections between
violence against women, social and economic rights, and substantive equality to
advance scholarship and legal development in this
area. Lastly, it has analysed
the way in which violence against women and social and economic rights have been
dealt with in international
human rights law and discussed recent developments
that might lead to a deeper consideration of the interconnections. It has also
suggested areas for further development of the law and research to inform this.
While there are valid concerns about the lack of
implementation of international
law, some of its problematic approaches to women, and broader concerns with the
limits of law in
tackling violence against women, the need to develop the
fullest and most effective human rights framework integrating social and
economic rights in response to violence against women is a necessary
The chapter consciously employs
the terminology of ‘violence against women’ rather than
‘gender-based violence
against women’ as a shorthand. Gender-based
violence also affects men and boys. Men are subject to sexual and gender-based
violence in a range of situations, including in prisons and during wars, while
boys experience domestic violence and bullying in
schools and other
institutions. In addition, violence against women is not only a heterosexual
phenomenon. However, the existence
of violence against women by men, which
occurs on a large scale across societies, has systemic features that mean it is
the subject of specific inquiry and targeted response. Such analysis
and response must of course be mindful of the nuanced nature
of this violence
and of the groups and identity categories implicated in any discussion of it.
For a consideration of the complexities
involved in framing gender/sex in
international human rights law, see Dianne Otto, ‘International Human
Rights Law: Towards
Rethinking Sex/Gender Dualism’ in Margaret Davies and
Vanessa E. Munro (eds),
A Research Companion to Feminist Legal Theory
(Ashgate, 2013) 197.
Human Rights Council,
‘Accelerating efforts to eliminate violence against women: preventing and
responding to violence against
women and girls, including indigenous women and
girls’, Resolution adopted on 1 July 2016, A/HRC/RES/32/19.
Note the arguments by feminist
scholars of transitional justice for the recognition in international law of
‘socio-economic
violence’, discussed in Diana Sankey,
‘Gendered Experiences of Subsistence Harms: A Possible Contribution to
Discourse on Gendered Harm?’
(2015) 24(1)
Social & Legal
The World Health Organization
estimates that it affects 1 in 3 women during their lifetimes: WHO,
Responding to Intimate Partner Violence and Sexual Violence against Women
– WHO Clinical and Policy Guidelines
Jacqui True,
The Political
Economy of Violence Against Women
(Oxford University Press, 2012); Special
Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences,
‘Political economy
of women’s human rights’, Reported to the
Human Rights Council on 18 May 2009, A/HRC/11/6.
Sandra Fredman and Beth
Gender Equality and Human Rights
, for Progress of the
World’s Women 2015–2016, Discussion Paper No. 4, pp. 1–65 (UN
Women, 2015).
Working Group on the issue of
discrimination against women in law and practice, ‘Thematic Analysis:
Eliminating Discrimination
against Women in Economic and Social Life with a
Focus on Economic Crisis’, report presented to the 26th session of the
Rights Council, see A/HRC/26/39, 1 April 2014.
United Nations Department of
Economic and Social Affairs,
The World’s Women 2015
Nations, 2015) 141.
Working Group on the issue
of discrimination against women in law and practice, above n 7.
In 2015, at least 119
countries had legislation on domestic violence, 125 had laws on sexual
harassment and 52 had laws on marital
rape: United Nations Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, above n 8, at 160.
The absence of social and
economic rights in relation to violence against women is a gap in both the
violence against women literature
and in the social and economic rights
literature. For consideration of the issues in the African context, see Sheila
Dauer and Mayra
Gomez, ‘Violence against Women and Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights in Africa’
(2006) 7(2)
Human Rights Review
Elsje Bonthuys, ‘Domestic Violence and Gendered Socio-Economic Rights: An
Agenda for Research and Activism?’
South African Journal on
Human Rights
For example, ‘Report
of the Special Rapporteur on the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the
highest attainable standard
of physical and mental health’,
E/CN.4/2004/49, 16 February 2004.
For example, ‘Report
of the Special Rapporteur on the right to housing, as a component of the right
to a standard of living,
and on the right to non-discrimi‑nation in this
context, A/ HRC/19/53, 26 December 2011.
‘Report of the Special
Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences, Rashida
Manjoo’ report presented
to the fourteenth session of the Human Rights
Council, A/HRC/14/22, 23 April 2010; Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination
against Women, ‘General recommendation No. 30 on women in
conflict prevention, conflict and post-conflict situations’,
CEDAW/C/GC/30, 1 November 2013.
For example, the recent
reports of UN Human Rights Council mandate holders have discussed violence
against women in relation to water
and sanitation, and food: Report of the
Special Rapporteur on the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation,
Human Rights
Council, Thirty-third session, 27 July 2016, A/HRC/33/49, at
9–10; Report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to food, Human
Council, 31st Session, 14 December 2015, A/HRC/31/51 at 5.
Jane Pillinger,
and Harassment Against Women and Men in the World of Work: Trade Union
Perspectives and Action
(International Labour Office, Bureau for
Workers’ Activities (ACTRAV), 2017).
For a discussion of
women’s social and economic rights in international law, see Larking in
this volume; Christine Chinkin,
‘Gender and Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights’ in Eibe Reidel, Gilles Giacca and Christophe Golay (eds),
Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights in International Law
University Press, 2014) 134; Sandra Fredman, ‘Engendering Social and
Economic Rights’ in Beth Goldblatt and Kirsty
McLean (eds),
Women’s Social and Economic Rights: Developments in South Africa
(Juta, 2011) 4; Dianne Otto, ‘Gender Comment: Why Does the UN Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Need a General
Comment on Women?’
(2002) 14(1)
Canadian Journal of Women and the Law
For a consideration
of gender and social and economic rights in comparative constitutional law, see
Beth Goldblatt, ‘Constitutional
Approaches to Gender and Social and
Economic Rights’ in Helen Irving (ed),
Constitutions and Gender
(Edward Elgar Publishing, 2017) 482–500.
True, above n 5, at 26,
calls for a ‘greater integration of the human rights framework and its
application to the systemic
violence that women experience’.
The chapter does not give
specific attention to violence against women and gendered poverty in the context
of conflict and post-conflict
reconstruction or disasters. Note, however, the
view that violence against women in peacetime should be seen as a ‘war
women’: Catherine A. MacKinnon,
Are Women Human? And Other
International Dialogues
(Harvard University Press, 2006). See, in response,
Dianne Otto, ‘Remapping Crisis through a Feminist Lens’ in Sari
and Zoe Pearson (eds),
Feminist Perspectives on Contemporary
International Law
(Hart, 2011) 75, at 90–92.
The focus of the chapter is
on international law but some of the responses of regional human rights bodies
as well as domestic human
rights approaches to the issue of violence against
women offer important guidance on the role of social and economic rights. Key
regional examples include: Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence
(The Istanbul Convention)
adopted by the Council of Europe on 11 May 2011, CETS No. 210, entered into
force on 1 August 2014; Inter-American
Convention on the Prevention, Punishment
and Eradication of Violence Against Women, ‘Convention of Belem do
Para’, adopted
on 9 June 1994, OAS/Ser.L.V/11.92/doc.31, entered into
force on 5 March 1995; Protocol to the African Charter on Human and
Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, adopted by the 2nd
Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the African Union, Maputo, 11 July
entered into force on 25 November 2005, Articles 4 and 5.
Alice Edwards,
against Women under International Human Rights Law
(Cambridge University
Press, 2011) 305.
Ibid, at 306, citing Karen
Engle, ‘Female Subjects of Public International Law: Human Rights and the
Exotic Other Female’
New England Law Review
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(adopted 16 December 1966, entered
into force 23 March
1976) 993 UNTS 3.
Dianne Otto,
‘Women’s Rights’ in Daniel Moeckli, Sangeeta Shah and Sandesh
Sivakumaran (eds),
International Human Rights Law
(Oxford University
Press, 2010) 345, at 351.
Ratna Kapur, ‘The
Tragedy of Victimization Rhetoric: Resurrecting the “Native” Subject
in International/Post-Colonial
Feminist Legal Politics’
Harvard Human Rights Journal
Ibid, at 2.
Ratna Kapur, ‘Gender,
Sovereignty and the Rise of a Sexual Security Regime in International Law and
Postcolonial India’
(2013) 14(2)
Melbourne Journal of International
–345, at 14.
Special Rapporteur on
violence against women, its causes and consequences, ‘Political economy of
women’s human rights’,
reported to the Human Rights Council on 18
May 2009, A/HRC/11/6, at 10.
Kapur, above n 28, at 16.
Also see Prabha Kotiswaran, ‘Beyond Sexual Humanitarianism: A Postcolonial
Approach to Anti-Trafficking
Law’ (2014) 4
UC Irvine Law Review
In relation to homelessness,
see: FEANTSA,
The Links between Violence against Women and Homelessness
(Brussels: European Federation of National Organisations working with the
http://www.feantsa.org/download/vaw_background_paper_final507550159640577037.pdf
In relation to education,
see Khadijah Fancy,
Because I am a Girl
The State of the
World’s Girls 2012
(Plan International, UK) 53–54.
See for example, J. Kutin,
R. Russell and M. Reid, ‘Economic Abuse Between Intimate Partners in
Australia: Prevalence, Health
Status, Disability and Financial Stress’
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health
1–6. Also note the concept of subsistence harms as discussed by Sankey,
On the health impacts of
violence against women, see WHO,
Global and Regional Estimates of Violence
Against Women: Prevalence and Health Effects of Intimate Partner Violence and
Sexual Violence
Sreeparna Ghosh, ‘The
Political Economy of Domestic Violence in a Mumbai Slum: An Ethnographic
Analysis’ (2015) 27(2)
Journal of Interdisciplinary Economics
Frances Raday and Shai
Oksenberg, ‘The Impact of Violence against Women on Women’s Economic
and Social Life’, Background
paper for the Working Group on the issue of
discrimination against women in law and in practice to inform the thematic
‘Discrimination against women in economic and social life, with
a focus on economic crisis’, A/HRC/26/39, Human Rights
Council 26th
Session, 1 April 2014,
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Women/WGWomen/Pages/ESL.aspx
Rein Sander-McDonagh, Lucy
Neville and Sevasti-Melissa Nolas, ‘From Pillar to Post: Understanding the
Victimisation of Women
and Children Who Experience Domestic Violence in an Age
of Austerity’
Feminist Review
Sylvia Chant and Gwendolyn
Beetham (eds),
Gender, Poverty, and Development – Critical Concepts in
Development Studies
(Routledge, 2014).
See Sandra Fredman,
‘Women and Poverty – A Human Rights Approach’
(2016) 24(4)
African Journal of International and Comparative Law
See Bina Agarwal and Pradeep
Panda, ‘Toward Freedom from Domestic Violence: The Neglected
Obvious’ (2007) 8
Journal of Human Development
Sandra Fredman,
‘Engendering Social and Economic Rights’ in Beth Goldblatt and
Kirsty McLean (eds),
Women’s Social and Economic Rights: Developments
in South Africa
(Juta, 2011) 4.
Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women (2004) General Recommendation No 25, on article
4, paragraph 1, of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, on temporary special measures UN Doc A/59/38,
CESCR ‘General Comment
No 16: Article 3: the equal right of men and women to the enjoyment of all
economic, social and cultural
rights’ (2005) 34th Session 2005, E/C
12/2005/4; CESCR ‘General Comment No 20: Non-discrimination in economic,
and cultural rights (art. 2, para. 2, of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights)’ (2009) 42nd Session
12/GC/20. Also see Fredman and Goldblatt, above n 6.
Sandra Fredman,
Discrimination Law
(2nd edn) (Oxford University Press, 2011).
Gwen Brodsky and Shelagh
Day, ‘Denial of the Means of Subsistence as an Equality Violation’
Acta Juridica
, note, at 162: ‘Poverty exacerbates and
deepens the inequality of members of already disadvantaged groups. Poor women
inequality writ large. ... [P]overty forces women to accept sexual
commodification and subordination to men in order to survive.
They engage in
prostitution or “survival sex” to get by. They lose autonomy to
choose freely with whom and when they
will have sex, and even whether and when
they will have children. They are more vulnerable to rape, assault and sexual
because they live in unsafe places, and they are not free to walk
away from workplaces that are poisoned. They are not free to leave
relationships when destitution is the alternative. Poverty perpetuates
women’s under-representation in governments
and in decision-making and
their lack of political influence.’
Gwen Brodsky and Shelagh
Day, ‘Beyond the Social and Economic Rights Debate: Substantive Equality
Speaks to Poverty’
(2002) 14(1)
Canadian Journal of Women and the
The inclusion of a ground of
discrimination on the basis of violence against women within Australia’s
Sex Discrimination Act
1984 (Cth) was (unsuccessfully) argued for in relation to
proposed reforms to this legislation in 2011. See Andrea Durbach,
Violence Discrimination and the Consolidation of Commonwealth
Anti-Discrimination Laws
(Speech, 5 December 2011)
<https://www.humanrights.gov.au/news/speeches/domestic-violence-discrimination-and-consolidation-commonwealth-anti-discrimination>.
‘Report of the Special
Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences, Rashida
Manjoo’, Report to
the Human Rights Council 23rd Session, 14 May 2013,
A/HRC/23/49, at 21.
Raday and Oksenberg, above n
See, for example, an
exploration of the relationship between violence against women and the right to
food, Anne C. Bellows and Anna
Jenderedjian, ‘Violence and Women’s
Participation in the Right to Adequate Food and Nutrition’ in Anne C.
Flavio L.S. Valente, Stefanie Lemke and María Daniela
Núñez Burbano de Lara (eds),
Gender, Nutrition, and the Human
Right to Adequate Food
(Routledge, 2016)
For a brief history of
earlier references to forms of violence against women in international law
during the twentieth century see,
Edwards, above n 22, at 7–8.
Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination Against Women, ‘General Recommendation No. 12: Violence
against women’,
Eighth session (1989).
Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination Against Women, ‘General Recommendation No. 19: Violence
against women’,
Eleventh session (1992), contained in A/47/38, para 2.
Ibid, at para 6.
Ibid, at para 7. There was
also specific reference to Articles 11 (employment) and 12 (health) paras 17 and
18, and 19 and 20 respectively.
Ibid, at para 11.
Ibid, at paras
Ibid, at para 24.
For a history of the
appearance of violence against women in international law, see UN Women,
‘Timeline of policy commitments
and international agreements’ at
http://www.endvawnow.org/en/articles/302-timeline-of-policy-commitments-and-international-agreements-.html
Also see, ‘Report of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its
causes and consequences, Rashida Manjoo’,
Report to the Human Rights
Council, Twenty-Sixth Session, 28 May 2014, A/HRC/26/38.
Chinkin, above n 18, at
Ibid, at 10–12.
Ibid, at 28.
Report of the Special
Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences’,
Dubravka Šimonović, Report
to the Human Rights Council, Thirty-Fifth
Session, 6–23 June 2017, A/HRC/35/30.
Above n 5, at
CESCR ‘General Comment
No 16’, above n 34.
CESCR ‘General Comment
No 20: Non-discrimination in economic, social and cultural rights (art. 2, para.
2, of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights)’
(2009) 42nd Session 2009, E/C 12/GC/20.
Ibid, at para 20. Strangely,
all three examples provided in this paragraph relate to sex discrimination in
the workplace.
CESCR ‘General Comment
No 16’, above n 34, at para 27.
Ibid, at para 29.
Ibid, at para 30.
Fancy, above n 32, at
53–54; Faranaaz Veriava, ‘Gender Equality and Education in South
Africa’ in Beth Goldblatt
and Kirsty McLean (eds),
Women’s Social
and Economic Rights: Developments in South Africa
(Juta, 2011) 224.
‘Montreal Principles on Women’s Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights’
Human Rights Quarterly
Ibid, at 763.
Ibid, at 765.
Ibid, at 766.
Ibid, at 768.
Ibid, at 769–770.
Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women, ‘General Recommendation No. 19: Violence
against women. Addendum
– Draft General Recommendation No. 19 (1992):
accelerating elimination of gender-based violence against women’, 28 July
2016, CEDAW/C/GC/19/Add.1, para 10.
For the list of submissions
in response to the draft GR, see
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/CEDAW/Pages/DraftUpdateGR19.aspx
Above n 83, at para 10.
Ibid, at para 15(a).
Ibid, at para 11.
Ibid, at para 15,
prevention: (b)(ii).
Ibid, at para 15,
prevention: (d).
Ibid, at para 15,
prevention: (e).
Ibid, at para 15, protection
and redress: (a)(iii).
Ibid, at para 15, protection
and redress: (c).
Above n 84.
For example: The Center for
Reproductive Rights, submission to CEDAW Committee on draft GR 19, undated 2016,
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/CEDAW/GR19/Center%20for%20Reproductive%20Rights.pdf
Platform for International Cooperation on Undocumented Migrants (PICUM),
‘Comments on Draft General Recommendation No.
19: Violence against
Women’, 30 September 2016,
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/CEDAW/GR19/PICUM.pdf
International Women’s Health Coalition, ‘Comments on the Draft
update of General Recommendation No. 19 on Violence
Against Women by Committee
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW)’,
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/CEDAW/GR19/International%20Women%27s%20Health%20Coalition%20.pdf
Global Initiative for
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, submission to CEDAW Committee on draft GR
19, undated 2016,
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/CEDAW/GR19/GlobalInitiativeESCR.pdf
Ibid, at 1.
Ibid, at 4.
Ibid, at 5.
IWRAW-Asia Pacific,
‘Partner Feedback to the Update on General Recommendation No. 19 on
Violence Against Women by Committee
on Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW)’, undated 2016,
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/CEDAW/GR19/IWRAW_AsiaPacific.pdf
Ibid, at 5.
Ibid, at 7.
Ibid, at 8.
Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women ‘General Recommendation No. 35
on gender-based violence against
women, updating General Recommendation No.
19’, 26 July 2017, CEDAW/C/GC/35.
Ibid, at para 12.
Ibid, at para 14.
Ibid, at para 15.
Ibid, at para 31(c).
Ibid, at para 36.
Ibid, at para 39.
Ibid, at para 40(c).
Above n 60.
Special Rapporteur on
violence against women, its causes and consequences, ‘Call for submissions
on the adequacy of the international
legal framework’
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Women/SRWomen/Pages/InternationalLegalFramework.aspx
Submissions were due by 1 November 2016.
Milun Saryajani
Through Editor Geetali Vinayak Mandakini v Pune Municipal Commissioner, Pune And
, High Court at Bombay, 23 December 2015. For a discussion of the case
and the violence leading to it, see Karuna Maharaj, ‘Bombay
makes Right to Clean Toilets a Fundamental Right for Women in India’
(OxHRH Blog, 8 Feburary 2016)
http://ohrh.law.ox.ac.uk/bombay-high-court-makes-right-to-clean-toilets-a-fundamental-right-for-women-in-india/
Dladla and others v
City of Johannesburg and others
[2017] ZACC 42
2018 (2) SA 327 (CC)
The author of this
chapter is currently engaged in a research project on litigation strategies
concerning social and economic rights
and violence against women in South
Africa. Also see: Ana María Sánchez Rodríguez,
‘Contesting Neoliberalism:
Bringing in Economic and Social Rights to End
Violence against Women in Mexico’ in Gillian MacNaughton and Diane F.
Economic and Social Rights in a Neoliberal World
University Press, 2010), 173.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (242 KB)
PDF format (5.34 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter