URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MarStudies/2008/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kraska, James; Wilson, Brian --- "Commentary: Maritime Diplomacy and Piracy in the Horn of Africa" [2008] MarStudies 23; (2008) 161 Maritime Studies 13
COMMENTARY: Maritime Diplomacy and Piracy in the Horn of Africa
Regional approach
International law and piracy
COMMENTARY: Maritime
Diplomacy and
Piracy in the Horn of Africa
James Kraska and Brian
Maritime piracy gangs operating from Somalia grabbed worldwide attention in
2008 by attacking around one hundred vessels, hijacking
ships and seizing crew
as hostages. The Gulf of Aden, which lies between Yemen and Somalia, sits
astride the southern entrance to
the Strait of Bab-el-Mandeb and feeds into the
Red Sea and the Suez Canal. One of the most important shipping corridors in the
260 ships pass through the area each day, including oil tankers laden
with 3.3 million barrels of crude oil. Reminiscent of the Barbary
pirates who
terrorised the Mediterranean Sea during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
Somali pirates are holding 300 seafarers
from 25 different nations and dozens of
ships near Haradhere, Somalia, awaiting payment of ransom that would prompt
their release.
Warships are thwarting some of the attacks, but a lasting
solution to the piracy problem requires reestablishment of stable government
the rule of law ashore. In the meantime piracy can best be deterred through a
regional maritime security agreement, enhanced
capabilities for East African
states to police their area and bilateral commitments to support prosecution
efforts. The recently
executed United Kingdom-Kenyan agreement to facilitate
piracy criminal prosecutions is promising, and it reminds us that both countries
have shown leadership in recognising that maritime piracy puts at grave risk the
community interest in protecting freedom of the
seas. This is the basis for the
facilitation of international trade and shared economic prosperity.
Among the vessels seized by pirates just in the month of November 2008 were
the Liberian-flagged M/V
(a chemical tanker with dozens of
Indian crew that was boarded in the Gulf of Aden) and the Ukrainian-flagged
(which was transporting 33 Russian tanks and related supplies to
the nascent democratic Sudan People’s Liberation Army). Also
month, the Saudi-owned 1,000-foot supertanker
Sirius Star
was hijacked
nearly 500 miles East of Kenya. It was carrying USD$100 million in oil and was
bound for the United States (US). That
audacious seizure stunned Admiral Michael
Mullen, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Warships from the North Atlantic
Organization and the European Union, as well as countries including
India, Russia and Pakistan, are patrolling the waters. China
has also sent two
warships, and Japan is considering doing so as well. Because of the enormous
size of the operating area (2.5 million
square miles) and enticing incentives to
conduct piracy, warships have been unable to slow the pace of attacks. Admiral
Gortney, commander of the US Fifth fleet in Bahrain, encouraged
merchant vessels to employ resistance tactics such as complicated
movements and speed adjustments to foil the attacks.
Between 1,400 and 2,000 Somali pirates are operating in the Gulf of Aden and
western Indian Ocean, and the wealth to be made is attracting
more people into
the business. One attack can bring in USD$10,000, a fantastic sum in an area
crushed with poverty. ‘All you
need is three guys and a little
boat,’ a former captain in the Somali navy commented, ‘and the next
millionaires.’ The other key factor is that Somalia has
lacked an effective government since 1992. Noel Choong of the International
Maritime Bureau’s Piracy Reporting Centre attributed the high incidence of
piracy in the Gulf of Aden to the lawlessness permeating
‘That’s why the pirates there can keep enjoying their loot. In Asia
the pirates will be caught and jailed.’
Reestablishing law and order on the ground is the long-term solution, but
until then, more concrete political and diplomatic commitments
can be effective.
Suppressing piracy requires more than just thwarting attacks and returning the
pirates to Somalia, as Denmark and
other countries have done. Developing greater
regional collaboration is the key. Secondly, states should support a
recommendation
made by the Republic of Korea at a recent meeting of the
International Maritime Organization (IMO) that suggested that the major
powers and shipping nations should help build maritime security capacity in the
states in the Horn of Africa. Doing so would
enable the regional states to
implement the United Nations (UN) Security Council resolutions on piracy and
reduce the need for foreign
warships to patrol the area.
On the high seas or in any other place outside the jurisdiction of a state
warships from any nation may take action against piracy.
Pirated ships may be
boarded, the pirates can be detained and the property on board the vessel can be
seized and submitted to admiralty
courts. A regional agreement among several
states is absolutely essential to implement these obligations. However,
determining which
state should prosecute pirates that are seized at sea is
particularly vexing. Typically a ship victimised by pirates is registered
state, such as Greece, owned by a corporation located in another state, such as
Japan, and operated by a crew comprised of
nationals of several additional
states, such as the Philippines and Pakistan. Furthermore, the vessel is likely
to be transporting
cargoes owned by companies in yet another country. On-scene
warships coming to the rescue most likely are from yet another state.
any state may assert jurisdiction in the case of a universal crime, each of
these countries has a special interest in the
outcome of the prosecution.
Regional approach
A regional approach to global maritime security is already unfolding,
knitting states together in collaborative partnerships to promote
the rule of
law at sea. In the US, this approach is being implemented under a new maritime
strategy that emphasises cooperative approaches
to maritime security and through
developing the concept of a networked global maritime partnership. The US is
focusing on international
outreach and coordination with overseas maritime
security to develop a figurative ‘navy of navies’ to protect the
environment. In Asia, Japan led 16 nations to create the Regional
Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery (ReCAAP), the first
dedicated solely to combating piracy. Members of ReCAAP work together to deter
and suppress piracy by sharing information
and building capacity. The
organisation operates a 24-hour tactical command centre in Singapore that
facilitates closer coordination
among the members. The results from ReCAAP have
been extraordinary: piracy against merchant shipping in East Asia has plummeted
it was introduced in 2004.
The model that may be most promising for the Gulf of Aden is one that could
be borrowed from the other side of Africa: the Gulf of
Guinea. The IMO has been
instrumental in helping the 25 nations of the Maritime Organization of West and
Central Africa (MOWCA) cooperate
more effectively to improve safety, security
and environmental protection.
Since its inception in 1975, MOWCA has served as a forum for limited objectives
in the maritime domain such as port management, but
it was hampered by lack of
capacity, political instability and protectionist policies. In the last few
years, however, the organisation
is experiencing a renaissance. It is the only
sub-regional body in Africa dedicated to maritime security. The 2006 MOWCA
in Dakar led to the development of a functional memorandum of
understanding on the establishment of a Sub-regional Coastguard Network
West and Central African region in July 2008. The comprehensive agreement
establishes an institutional framework for closer
cooperation on suppression of
piracy and armed robbery at sea, countering terrorism at sea, illegal,
unregulated and unreported (IUU)
fishing, drug trafficking, fuel theft and
smuggling and pipeline security and maritime accident response. The sub-region
into four coast guard zones comprised of five states each. Each zone
has a coast guard centre, with two principal coordinating centres
Angola and Accra, Ghana. The agreement also provides guidelines for enhancing
coastal surveillance, maintaining a maritime
presence in the exclusive economic
zone, and enforcement of international treaties.
Seeking to replicate the success of ReCAAP, the IMO also sponsored meetings
in Tanzania and Djibouti to help the states of the Horn
of Africa reach
agreement on a treaty to address the problem of maritime piracy in the Indian
Ocean and the Gulf of Aden. The agreement
would commit states in the region to
share information, respond to time-sensitive requests for assistance and
support, and introduce
a more collaborative process for determining venues for
criminal prosecution of pirates. A regional agreement is essential, but the
MOWCA model is better than ReCAAP for the Horn of Africa because MOWCA is a
broader agreement, covering not just piracy but embodying
all aspects of
maritime security. Once the urgent business of signing a regional agreement is
completed, states within the region
should galvanise their capabilities toward
implementing the global mandate of the UN Security Council.
International law and piracy
The English jurist Blackstone wrote, ‘[p]iracy consists of the common
law, of those acts of depradation and robbery committed
on the high seas, which
if committed upon the land, would amount to felony
Maritime piracy
is a violation of international law and a universal crime. The UN Convention on
the Law of the Sea (LOSC) defines
(in Article 101) piracy as an illegal act of
violence or detention, or any act of depredation, committed for private ends by
crew or the passengers of a private ship or aircraft on the high seas or in
any other place outside the jurisdiction of a state.
This could include an
ungoverned area like Somalia’s territorial sea. All nations can take
action against piracy. Customary
international law provides that any nation may
assert jurisdiction over piracy, including the state of registry or flag of the
vessel, the nationality of any of the victims and in some cases coastal
and port states. This long-standing norm is reflected in
LOSC, and Article 100
requires states to cooperate in the repression of piracy outside of any
state’s territorial seas.
Developing the modern legal capacity and partnerships in international law
necessary to defeat piracy began and continues at the IMO.
In 1986 the Maritime
Safety Committee at IMO adopted Circular 443, concerning measures to prevent
unlawful acts against passengers
and crew on board
The circular applied to
passenger ships on voyages of 24 hours or more, and the port facilities that
service those vessels. A few
years later, in 1991, the IMO requested governments
to report promptly and in detail all incidents of
After a surge in piracy in
the early 1990s, two circulars were issued by
document contains detailed recommendations to governments for preventing and
suppressing piracy, and the second document
focuses on providing guidance to the
maritime commercial sector. In 1999 both circulars were
The revision
to MSC/622 recommended that states work with seafarers and shipowners as part of
the process of crafting action plans
for preventing piracy and responding to
piracy attacks. The document also set forth investigative protocols for use
after a pirate
Finally, the circular contains a draft regional agreement on cooperation for
preventing and suppressing acts of piracy and armed
robbery against ships.
Provisions of the draft agreement include procedures for each country to conduct
boarding and search of suspect
vessels, and provisions for criminal enforcement
and determining choice of jurisdiction among coastal and flag
In November 2007 the IMO
adopted a resolution which called on regional states in East Africa to conclude
such an agreement to deter
piracy off the coast of Somalia. Delegates met in
Tanzania and Djibouti to negotiate a text. The second revised circular,
MSC/623.rev.1,
provides guidance on measures for the shipping industry to reduce
vulnerability to piracy, such as enhanced lighting and detection,
and it sets
forth additional steps that states can take during and after an attack, such as
enhanced alarm procedures and
2008 Denmark’s delegation at the IMO proposed that both MSC/622 and 623
circulars should be reviewed and updated. States
should support this process in
order to update the circulars, including reporting the recent experiences of
mariners in the Gulf
of Aden. Among the lessons learned: faster vessels with
high freeboard are at less risk from boarding. Lights, firehoses and even
concertina razor wire ringing the lifelines have provided some deterrence.
Finally, sharp rudder movements and higher speeds can
create an uninviting wake
that can slow pirate fast boats.
In 2008, at the prompting of the IMO, the UN Security Council turned its
attention toward combating piracy. It adopted Resolution
1816. Acting under
chapter VII of the UN Charter, the Security Council called on states to repress
piracy and armed robbery inside
Somalia’s territorial seas, consistent
with actions that would be lawful if taken on the high seas. In doing so, the
Council authorised flag, port and coastal states, as well as the
nations of the victims and perpetrators of maritime piracy, to use
necessary means’ in countering piracy off the coast of Somalia. In
particular, states should cooperate in determining
investigation and prosecution of pirates. It is especially important that once a
piracy attack is disrupted
at sea that states coordinate to provide real-time
disposition and logistics assistance with respect to the suspected pirates,
and witnesses. The Security Council resolution does not compel a state
to accept suspected pirates, victims or witnesses; rather
the Security Council
offers a reservoir of political legitimacy that helps states increase their
participation in collective action.
Resolution 1816 also solved one of the most
difficult issues associated with counter-piracy in the Horn of Africa by
recognising
a mechanism whereby naval forces could enter Somalia’s
territorial seas in order to pursue pirates who hijack vessels and flee
shallow water to evade capture.
Resolution 1816 also encourages states to increase and coordinate their
efforts to deter acts of piracy in conjunction with the Somali
Transitional
Federal Government (TFG), Somalia’s new ruling authority. In order to
develop a long-term solution, the resolution
seeks to bring together individual
nations, the IMO and other international organizations to build partnership
capacity along the
East coast of Africa to develop regional capabilities that
can ensure coastal and maritime security in the region. Finally, the
provided a six-month window in which states were authorised to enter the
territorial seas of Somalia for the purpose of
repressing piracy and armed
robbery at sea. The Somali TFG must provide notification to the UN Secretary
General regarding states
that exercise the authority.
More recently, the Security Council adopted Resolution 1838 in which it
expressed the sense that it was, ‘gravely concerned’
increased frequency and audacity of acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea
against vessels off the coast of Somalia. Maritime
piracy was recognised as a
threat to the prompt, safe and effective delivery of humanitarian aid to Somalia
by vessels under contract
with the World Food Program, as well as to freedom of
navigation and commercial shipping and fishing activities more generally.
Reiterating
the authorisation under chapter VII of the UN Charter, Resolution
1838 condemned acts of piracy in the region and called upon states
participate in fighting piracy by deploying naval vessels and aircraft to the
region. The Security Council also reaffirmed that
the laws reflected in LOSC
embody the rule set applicable to countering piracy and armed robbery at
A report issued by the Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General to
Somalia in November 2008 considered whether the 1988
Convention on the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation (SUA) was
an appropriate instrument for
weeks later, in Resolution 1846, the UN Security Council declared that in cases
in which piracy is accompanied by vessel hijacking
the 1988 SUA convention would
Commandant of the US Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen heralded the application of
the SUA convention in a blog post at
iCommandant
, a web journal of the
Commandant of the Coast Guard. The SUA convention, Admiral Allen noted,
‘applies to nearly all of the
attacks occurring in the Gulf of
Aden’, and it obligates state parties to criminalise attacks against
vessels and establish
According to Admiral
Thad H Allen, ‘Leveraging states’ SUA obligations in conjunction
with existing international law
against piracy provides an effective legal
framework to deliver an
“endgame”.’
Applying the SUA treaty to piracy off the coast of Somalia, however, will not
obviate the challenges associated with disposition of
persons under control, as
there will be difficult disposition and logistics issues that inevitably arise
when foreign suspects, witnesses
or victims and vessels from several states are
involved. The coordination provisions of Resolution 1816 emphasises the
of additional cooperation in repressing piracy through routine
patrols to deter the crime, as well as action to bring pirates to
justice after
they are caught. In the past, coordination on Somali piracy disposition and
logistics issues was ad hoc, but that could
begin to change with the declaration
from the Security Council that strengthens multilateral expectations. Finally,
on 16 December
2008, the UN Security Council authorised states to enter the land
territory of Somalia in order to take action against piracy sanctuaries
Striking targets in Somalia, however, is rife with the risk of military
entanglement in the country and poses the possibility
of an uncomfortable level
of collateral damage.
Collaboration in the maritime domain is also particularly vital because most
of the ocean’s surface is not under state jurisdiction.
No single nation
has the naval capability to effectively patrol the vast areas affected by
piracy. Although the UN and the IMO have
taken steps to recalibrate
international legal authorities available to suppress maritime piracy, much more
can be done. The next
step requires a smarter approach to counter-piracy
operations, logistics and the legal endgame by signing quickly a regional
that would empower collaborative real-time operational coordination
and deliberative planning for dealing with captured persons suspected
The agreement should include naval powers and major shipping nations outside the
region that have a major stake in the
security of the sea lines of communication
running through the Gulf of Aden and along the East coast of Somalia.
Ironically, foreign naval forces will become even bolder in enforcement
action if the regional states embark on the political and
legal commitments and
develop the capacity to prosecute pirates nabbed at sea. Regional action will
challenges in repression efforts: putting the
pirates in jail. While piracy is a universal crime, states generally require
implementing
legislation to enable prosecutions. The Nairobi report noted,
For many states, criminal law does not apply beyond the edge of the territorial
sea – only 12 miles from the beach.
States need to have the
flexibility to prosecute pirates captured beyond the territorial sea, which will
require broadening their
criminal law jurisdiction to cover offences committed
on the high seas. As the Nairobi report suggests,
If they wish to pursue pirates into another state’s territorial sea with a
view to prosecuting them in their domestic courts,
then the law will need to
apply there too.
In order to support the regional states in
taking the lead in maintaining maritime security in their neighbourhood, the IMO
focus on increased capacity building. States that lack vessels and
aircraft, communications systems and training to patrol their
coastal zone, or
that have underdeveloped legal infrastructure to bring pirates to justice, are
unable to play a constructive role
in solving the crisis.
On a broader note, states are acknowledging the importance of partnering and
regional cooperation. The Indian Chief of Naval Staff
Admiral Sureesh Mehta,
remarked on 13 August 2008, that,
Globalisation imperatives have given impetus for concerted and cooperative
effort of maritime forces in securing the maritime highways
increasing number of navies around the world, including the Indian Navy views
‘Constructive Engagement’ as
the answer to maritime
challenges.
Similarly, Admiral Gary Roughead, the US chief of
naval operations, issued guidance to the fleet in 2008 that stated,
We must evolve and establish international relationships to increase security
and achieve common interests in the maritime domain.
collaboration will solve the piracy problem. In Asia ReCAAP has resulted in a
dramatic reduction in the incidence of piracy.
West Africa has surged ahead of
East Africa in developing mechanisms for cooperation. MOWCA has been reenergised
after decades of
under-achievement, and the new coast guard network for West
Africa is the most promising framework to be transplanted to the Horn
The IMO has initiated negotiations among East African states to finalise an
international agreement to facilitate regional
cooperation on boarding and
disposition logistics for persons under control, but that agreement is too
modest – the draft under
consideration is not a legally binding
instrument, it is not as comprehensive as MOWCA and it does not include all of
the essential
naval powers and shipping nations from outside the region that are
essential to support local capacity building.
Maritime nations should support a broader regional East African agreement,
making maritime operational and legal capacity building
in the area a priority.
If nations in East Africa develop the legal architecture to deal with piracy,
including the lawyers, courtrooms
and confinement facilities, they will be more
willing and better able to enforce the maritime rule of law in the
neighbourhood. Recent
piracy repression efforts have shown promise, but much
more must be done. As ransom demands become a daily routine, concerted
international
and regional action is the most effective next step to eradicating
this threat to maritime security.
The authors are senior US Navy lawyers.
James Kraska is a guest investigator at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, a
the faculty of the International Law Department at the Naval War
College and previously served as Oceans Policy Adviser in the Joint
Staff in the Pentagon. Brian Wilson commands a Navy legal office in Washington,
D.C and previously served as Oceans Policy
Adviser in the Office of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy. The views expressed are those of the authors
and do not reflect
the official policy or position of the Navy or the Department
of Defense.
MOWCA consists of the
coastal states of Angloa, Benin, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Republic of the Congo,
Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Cote d’Ivoire, Gabon, The Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Equatorial Guinea, Liberia, Mauritania, Nigeria, Sao Tome
Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Togo, and the land-locked states of
Burkino Faso, Central African Republic, Mali, Niger and
William Blackstone,
Commentaries on the Laws of England
Vol 4, (1840) 4, 499.
IMO Doc. MSC/Circ.443
Measures to prevent unlawful acts against passengers and crew on board ships,
September 26, 1986 [3.3].
IMO Doc. Res. A.638.17,
Prevention and suppression of piracy and armed robbery against ships, November
IMO Doc. MSC/Circ.
622, Recommendations to Government for preventing and suppressing piracy and
armed robbery against ships and MSC/Circ.
623, Guidance to shipowners and ship
operators, shipmasters and crews on preventing and suppressing acts of piracy
armed robbery
against ships.
IMO Doc. MSC/Circ.
622/Rev. 1, 16 June 1999 and MSC/Circ. 623/Rev. 1.MSC/622./Rev.1 were revised
based upon recommendations that
came out of regional seminars in Brazil and
Singapore in 1998.
MSC/Circ. 622/Rev.
1, 16 June 1999 (protective measures at paras. 3-15 and investigative protocols
at paras. 16-20).
IMO Doc. Appendix 5,
MSC/Circ. 622/Rev. 1, 16 June 1999.
MSC/Circ. 623/Rev. 1, 29 June 1999. The Circular has undergone Revision 2 (6
October 2001) and Revision 3 (7 October 2001).
Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah,
Piracy off the Somali Coast
, Report of the
Workshop Commissioned by the Special Representative of the Secretary General of
the UN to Somalia, Nairobi 10-21 November
2008, 26, n 10.
UN Security
Council Resolution
1846, SC 9514
, 2 December 2008.
Admiral Thad H Allen,
‘Dealing with piracy: What’s your endgame?’ (2008)
iCommandant: Web Journal of Admiral Thad Allen
, 3 December,
http://www.uscg.mil/comdt/blog/2008/12/dealing-with-piracywhats-your-endgame.asp
at 17 December 2008.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter