URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbJlIntLaw/2023/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Oude Elferink, Alex G --- "Judging the Law of the Sea: Judicial Contributions to the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea" [2023] MelbJlIntLaw 14; (2023) 24(2) Melbourne Journal of International Law 333
BOOK REVIEW
Book Reviews
Judging the Law of the Sea: Judicial Contributions to the UN Convention on
the Law of the Sea
by Natalie Klein and Kate Parlett (Oxford University
Press, 2022) xl + 424 pages. Price GBP 95 (Hardback) ISBN 9780198853350
United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea
has been hailed as ‘a constitution for the
Although for law of the sea experts this may be a worn epithet, to a wider
audience it brings home the fundamental importance of
ocean governance. Ambassador Tommy Koh actually introduced this qualification of
in a question, namely whether with its conclusion in 1982,
the international community had achieved the ‘fundamental objective
producing a comprehensive constitution for the oceans which will stand the test
Perhaps not altogether
unsurprisingly, Ambassador Koh answered his question in the
affirmative.
In doing so, he listed eight
reasons, one of those being that
[t]he world community’s interest in the peaceful settlement of disputes
and the prevention of use of force in the settlement
of disputes between States
have been advanced by the mandatory system of dispute settlement in the
In the meantime, more than 40 years have passed since the adoption of the
, and its provisions started to figure in the judicial
settlement of disputes even prior to its entry into
Although the case law under the
is limited as compared to some other international treaties,
as Natalie Klein and Kate Parlett also note in
Judging the Law of the Sea:
Judicial Contributions to the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea
Judging the Law of the
their analysis attests to the fact that there is ample material to test
Ambassador Koh’s assertion about the
Convention’s
compulsory dispute settlement.
Achieving the acceptance of compulsory dispute settlement as a feature of the
was the result of a hard-fought compromise, which is included
in pt XV of the
. Section 1 of pt XV, containing general
provisions on dispute settlement, comprises procedural limitations and
exclusions to the
recourse to compulsory disputes
settlement.
For instance, art 283(1) contains
an obligation to exchange views ‘[w]hen a dispute arises between States
Parties concerning
the interpretation or application of [the]
Articles 281 and 282
both, in different ways, limit the recourse to compulsory dispute settlement
where the parties have agreed on other means of
dispute settlement.
Section 2 of pt XV
allows states parties to unilaterally submit any dispute concerning the
interpretation or application of the
to judicial settlement,
provided that no settlement has been reached under s 1 and subject to pt XV s
The latter section through art 297
contains a number of limitations to s 2 that have to do with the exercise of
sovereign rights
and jurisdiction by coastal states. Article 298 of s 3 allows
states parties to except a number of specific issues from compulsory
settlement.
This set-up of pt XV has
implied that the case law under the
, apart from dealing with
substantive issues, in significant part has been concerned with the implications
of ss 1 and 3 for the jurisdiction
of courts and tribunals under s 2 of pt
As Klein and Parlett indicate in their final concluding remarks,
the Law of the Sea
‘[i]n some respects ... provides simply a snapshot
of the current state of [the
jurisprudence’.
In some respects,
this may be somewhat of an understatement.
Judging the Law of the Sea
provides a quite detailed overview of all aspects of that jurisprudence.
Obviously, in providing a comprehensive overview it is not
possible to do
justice to all intricacies of the individual case and all viewpoints that have
been advanced in the literature. However,
if one wants to put a label on
Judging the Law of the Sea
, referring to it as providing a ‘tour
d’horizon’ does more justice than a ‘snapshot’. The
latter term
refers to ‘a casual photograph’ or ‘an impression
or view of something brief or
transitory’.
On the other hand, a
tour d’horizon has been described as a ‘circuit of the horizon:
Judging the Law of the Sea
does exactly that; it does not simply record
the current status of the jurisprudence, but assesses how that jurisprudence on
issues has developed over time, identifying commonalities and
divergencies.
Judging the Law of the Sea
starts its tour d’horizon of the case
law under the
in Chapter 1, with a general introduction to the
, its dispute settlement procedures and reflections on the role
of dispute settlement under the
. This introductory chapter is
exemplary of the approach of its authors. Although
Judging the Law of the
deals with complex and specialised issues, its methodical approach makes
the book accessible to a broad audience interested in the
wider issue of the
role of dispute settlement mechanisms in international law and international
Admittedly, having been involved
in dealing with the law of the sea for some time, this reviewer may not be the
best person to make
a final call in that respect.
The remainder of
Judging the Law of the Sea
is set up as follows.
Chapter 2 reviews the roles of judges in international law generally and under
. Chapters 3 and 4 explore the issues of jurisdiction that
have arisen in cases that have been brought under the
from questions concerning the impact of ss 1 and 3 of pt XV on the availability
of compulsory dispute settlement under its
section 2, this also concerns subject
matter jurisdiction. As was noted above, courts and tribunals under s 2 are
competent to deal
with disputes concerning the interpretation and application of
. At the same time, art 293(1) contains an applicable law
provision that requires courts and tribunals to also apply ‘other
international law not incompatible with [the]
As is detailed in
Chapter 4 of
Judging the Law of the Sea
, the case law has advanced
different approaches to the implications of this provision and the related issue
as to whether courts
and tribunals under the
have jurisdiction
to decide on matters that are not concerned with the interpretation or
application of the
, without which a dispute under the
cannot be (fully) resolved.
Chapters 5 to 9 of
Judging the Law of the Sea
deal with a number of
substantive issue areas that have been addressed by the judiciary under the
. This concerns respectively different aspects concerning the
limits of maritime zones (Chapter 5), bilateral boundary delimitation
6), navigation (Chapter 7), fisheries (Chapter 8) and the marine environment
(Chapter 9). Chapter 10 presents key findings
and revisits the role of the judge as discussed in Chapter 2
and further developed in relation to the
by analysing the case
law in Chapters 3 to 9. Going into detail into the content of each of these
individual chapters would not fit
the length of the current review, but a number
of general remarks are in place. In line with the earlier observation concerning
accessibility of
Judging the Law of the Sea
, it may be noted that
each chapter succinctly explains the provisions of the
are being discussed in the chapter at hand. The chapters not only discuss the
majority decisions, but also consider the impact
of individual opinions to those
decisions. In this analysis, the authors also engage with the assessments of the
case law that have
been made in the academic literature. Although Chapters 3 to
9 have a common format, the elaboration is not completely even across
For instance, Chapter 6 on maritime boundary delimitation, much more than other
chapters, provides a somewhat long-winding
discussion of the individual cases.
The conclusion of Chapter 6, that ‘[t]he consistency of the case law is
perhaps also is somewhat
questionable. In that respect, the authors mostly seem to rely on the analysis
of Massimo Lando in his book
Maritime Delimitation as Judicial
However, other literature
argues that although the case law has adopted a common approach to maritime
delimitation, in its application
that approach is riddled with
inconsistencies.
Another example where, in this reviewer’s opinion, a more nuanced
approach would have been welcome, particularly so in light
of the highly
sensitive nature of the case involved (the
South China Sea
arbitration
between the Philippines and China), is the discussion of art 298(1)(a) of the
in Chapter 4 on subject matter jurisdiction. As was also
mentioned above, art 298 allows states to opt out from compulsory dispute
settlement for specific issues. Paragraph 1(a) allows a state to do so in
relation to ‘disputes concerning the interpretation
or application of
articles 15, 74 and 83’.
Parlett take the arbitral tribunal in
South China Sea
to task for
separating the issue of entitlements to maritime zones of land features from the
issue of maritime boundary delimitation,
which implied that China’s art 298 declaration did not prevent the
Tribunal from interpreting and applying art 121 of the
deals with the regime of islands. Klein and Parlett hold that ‘[a] better
view is that something that will “commonly
be one of the first matters to
be addressed in the delimitation of a maritime boundary” should be
excluded from jurisdiction
under Article
But that completely
misconstrues the issue. Indeed, for a delimitation to be possible, there have to
be overlapping entitlements.
However, the determination of the existence of an
entitlement to maritime zones is a matter of applying other provisions of the
that are in no way intrinsically linked to arts 15, 74 and
A dispute over the entitlement of a
feature to maritime zones may also be submitted to a court or tribunal without
subsequently asking
that court or tribunal to delimit a maritime
Klein and Parlett further argue
that the Tribunal recognised the interconnectedness between entitlement and
delimitation in its decision
However, as they also
recognise, the Tribunal was only indicating that to deal with certain claims of
the Philippines, it had to
determine whether or not China might have an
entitlement to specific maritime areas or
This required an interpretation of art
. In the case of a negative answer to this question
of entitlements, the issue of maritime boundary delimitation and the application
of arts 74 and 83 would not arise, as there would not be any overlapping
entitlements of continental shelf and exclusive economic
zone in the area
concerned. Klein and Parlett conclude their argument on this point by observing
that the decision of the Tribunal
begs the question as to what other parts of the maritime delimitation process
will be segregated in the same manner. Could we arrive
at the point that the
‘delimitation’ is considered to be the actual drawing of the line
and a court or tribunal may otherwise
undertake all steps leading up to that
point, including the articulation of the principles to be utilised in the
delimitation as
occurred in the
North Sea Continental Shelf
Perhaps this question most of all begs the question: Why pose it? Why the
hyperbole? There is nothing in the reasoning of the Tribunal
arbitration that even hints at the idea that a court or tribunal
could take the approach that is suggested by Klein and Parlett where
parties has excepted arts 15, 74 and 83 from compulsory dispute settlement in
accordance with art 298(1)(a) of the
Apart from systematically analysing the case law under the
Judging the Law of the Sea
also has a broader ambition, namely assessing
how judges ‘have contributed to the good order of the oceans in resolving
immediate dispute and have potentially contributed to the future conduct of
a larger set of stakeholders’.
parameters for making this assessment are set out in Chapter 2 of
Judging the
Law of the Sea
, which identifies the different roles of judges in performing
their functions
and then asks the question
what the roles of judges should be in the broader framework of dispute
settlement under the
Klein and Parlett identify two
possible ways of looking at the role of dispute settlement: the Westphalian
model, which ‘stresses
State sovereignty and emphasises restrictions on
compulsory dispute settlement under [the
objectivist approach, which accords ‘greater emphasis ... to dispute
settlement under [the
] as integral to the international legal
order established in the
Judging the Law of the Sea
recognises the significance of the latter
approach, it is also cognisant of the lasting importance of the Westphalian
model for states.
Next, the authors offer two specific frameworks for assessing
the performance of judges under the
. First, they indicate they
will apply stakeholder identification
In applying this theory, which
‘seeks to answer the question of who and what counts for managers in their
decisions’,
they equate judges to
At the same time, it is argued
that in order to assess the contribution of the judiciary to the development of
the law of the sea
‘we need to consider to what extent the decisions are
contributing to the overall good order of the
These are interesting
perspectives for assessing the case law, although the question of how the
interest of stakeholders and the
overall good order of the ocean correlate is
not clearly answered. The law of the sea offers clear examples where the
interests of
stakeholders and the overall good order of the ocean are not
aligned. Similarly, what is implied in the concept of ‘good order
ocean’ remains somewhat nebulous.
Perhaps not altogether surprisingly, in light of the complexity of the
Judging the Law of the Sea
does not really deliver on the promise
implied in its reliance on stakeholder identification theory. Assessments are
broad in nature
and it is unclear how the reliance on stakeholder identification
theory actually contributes to greater analytical depth. A typical
this respect is contained in the conclusion of Chapter 8 dealing with fisheries,
which observes:
Such elaboration [of the
] should, though, still pay close
attention to the other legal regimes that have bearing on this activity and how
best to meet the
interests of key stakeholders. A close assessment of the
interests of coastal States and the rights and responsibilities of flag
as was undertaken in the
SRFC Advisory Opinion
South China Sea
arbitration, will remain critical in contributing to the future conduct of
all stakeholders in the public order of the
On balance Klein and Parlett assess the contribution of the case law to the
good order of the oceans positively. While they stress
the likelihood that this
will continue to be the case on the basis of their analysis, at the same time
they caution on putting too
much emphasis on the significance of compulsory
dispute settlement and instead argue that it is complementary to other modes of
settlement.
In that sense,
Judging the Law of the Sea
confirms Ambassador Koh’s assessment on
the significance of compulsory dispute settlement under the
advancing ‘[t]he world community’s interest in the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the prevention of use of force
in the settlement of
disputes between States’,
quoted at the outset of this review.
Judging the Law of the Sea
offers a well-informed overview of the case
law under the
to date. It is somewhat less convincing in its
application of stakeholder identification theory to assess that case law. That
may require a much more detailed analysis of individual cases, which is
beyond the scope of a book such as the present one.
Alex G Oude Elferink
United Nations Convention on the Law
opened for signature 10 December
1982, 1833 UNTS 3
(entered into force 16 November 1994) (‘
The phrase was first coined by Ambassador
Tommy Koh, President of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the
adopted the
: Tommy TB Koh, ‘“A
Constitution
for the Oceans”: Remarks by Tommy TB Koh, of Singapore,
President of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the
The Law of the Sea: Official Text of the United Nations Convention on the Law
(St Martin’s Press, 1983) xxxiii, xxxiii <
https://www.un.org/Depts/los/convention_agreements/texts/koh_english.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/4APK-64TP
Continental Shelf
parties had requested the International Court of Justice to take its decision
according to, among others, ‘new accepted
trends in the Third Conference
on the Law of the Sea’:
Continental Shelf (Tunisia v Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya) (Judgment)
[1982] ICJ Rep
18, 29 [15]
so, the Court took into account arts 76 and 83 of the draft
which also are included in the
as adopted: at 48 [47].
Natalie Klein and Kate Parlett,
Judging the Law of the Sea: Judicial Contributions to the UN Convention on
the Law of the Sea
(Oxford University Press, 2022) 380.
) pt XV s 1.
Ibid art 283(1).
Ibid arts 281, 282.
See ibid pt XV ss 2, 3.
Ibid art 298.
Klein and Parlett (n
Merriam-Webster Dictionary
(online at 27 September 2023) ‘snapshot’ (def 2).
Merriam-Webster Dictionary
(online at 27 September 2023) ‘tour d’horizon’.
Perhaps one minor point of criticism
in this respect is the extensive and integral quotations of specific articles of
. This concerns among others page-long or longer quotations
of arts 61, 62, 111 and 194: Klein and Parlett (n
) 292–3, 309–10 and
344–5. It remains somewhat unclear what function the full quotation of
these articles has in
light of the discussion in which they are placed.
) art 293(1).
Klein and Parlett (n
Ibid 242–3.
See, eg, Alex G Oude Elferink, Tore
Henriksen and Signe Veierud Busch (eds),
Maritime Delimitation: The Case
(Cambridge University Press, 2018).
) art 298(1)(a).
Klein and Parlett (n
) arts 3–4, 57, 76, which deal with
the breadth and determination of the territorial sea, exclusive economic zone
and continental
shelf. See also at art 121, which deals with the regime of
islands. The interpretation and application of these provisions do not
recourse to art 15, 74 and 83. Only after the application of arts 3, 4, 57, 76
and 121 will it become apparent whether or
not there is an overlap between the
maritime zones of two or more coastal states which requires their
delimitation.
‘A court or tribunal referred to
in article 287 shall have jurisdiction over any dispute concerning the
interpretation or application
which is submitted to it
in accordance with [Part XV]’: ibid art 288(1). Article 298 creates an
optional exception to this
concerning the interpretation or application of articles 15, 74 and 83 relating
sea boundary delimitations’: at art 298(1)(a)(i). It may be noted that
this exception does not include a reference to arts
3, 4, 57, 76 or 121 of the
Perhaps the most telling illustration of the relationship between the two
sets of provisions is provided by art 121(3) of the
dispute over the interpretation and application of that provision in relation to
a specific feature is submitted to a court
or tribunal and it is found that a
feature falls under the scope of application of that paragraph, the question of
the delimitation
of the exclusive economic zone and continental shelf with other
states does not even arise. In other cases where a court or tribunal
interpreted arts 3, 4, 57, 76 and 121 of the
and there is a
resulting overlap of maritime zones, delimitation would be required. A court or
tribunal would only not have jurisdiction
to deal with that matter if one of the
states concerned has made a pertinent declaration under art 298 of the
Klein and Parlett (n
South China Sea Arbitration
(Philippines v China)
(Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility)
(Permanent Court of Arbitration, Case No 2013-19, 29 October 2015).
Klein and Parlett (n
Ibid 22–36.
Ibid 37, citing Natalie Klein,
‘Stakeholders in Dispute Settlement under the UN Convention on the Law of
the Sea’ in
Marta Chantal Ribeiro, Fernando Loureiro Bastos and Tore
Henrikson (eds),
Global Challenges and the Law of the Sea
2020) 239, 245–8.
Klein and Parlett (n
Ibid 380–1.
* Alex Oude Elferink is the Director of the Netherlands Institute for the
Law of the Sea and an associate of the Utrecht Centre for
Oceans, Water and
Sustainability Law, School of Law, Utrecht University, the Netherlands. He is
the author of
The Delimitation of the Continental Shelf between Denmark,
Germany and the Netherlands: Arguing Law, Practicing Politics?
University Press, 2013); and is the co-editor of
The Oxford Handbook of the
Law of the Sea
(Oxford University Press, 2015) and
Maritime Boundary
Delimitation: The Case Law: Is It Consistent and Predictable?
University Press, 2018). He has advised governments on various law of the sea
issues and has been acting as counsel for
Nicaragua in a number of cases before
the International Court of Justice.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (59.2 KB)
PDF format (206 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter