URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2016/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
White, Steven --- "Standards and Standard-Setting in Companion Animal Protection" [2016] SydLawRw 21; (2016) 38(4) Sydney Law Review 463
I Introduction
II Justifications for Regulatory Intervention to Protect Companion Animals
III Legislative Standards for Companion Animal Protection
A The Prohibition against Cruelty
B Duty of Care
C Other Prohibitions and Restrictions
D Criminalising Breaches of Broadly Expressed Animal Protection Standards
IV Conclusion
Standards and Standard-Setting in Companion Animal Protection
Steven White
Legal scholarship addressing the protection of animals, including companion
animals, is a vibrant and growing field in Australia and
beyond. However,
limited scholarly attention has so far been directed to the regulatory studies
literature and the insights it may
provide about standards, standard-setting,
compliance monitoring and enforcement for animal protection. I explore how the
legal forms
of the prevailing governing norm of humaneness function as
regulatory standards in a companion animal context. Given the intrinsic
worth of companion animals, values such as social justice and paternalism,
derived from political versions of public interest
theory, are most relevant to
understanding why the State is justified in restricting the rights that may be
exercised by companion
animal owners over their ‘property’. The key
legislative standards are a prohibition of cruelty and an obligation to
basic welfare needs of an animal. These provisions operate as principle-based
standards, describing duties to be performed,
but not specifying how they are to
be achieved. I argue that the standards, as criminal provisions, perform an
important censoring
role. However, their content requires some elucidation, the
most productive avenue being guidelines developed through an inclusive,
pluralistic, delegated standard-setting process.
I Introduction
The prevailing ethic in animal protection is one of humaneness. This ethic
recognises that sentient creatures have intrinsic moral
significance and are,
therefore, deserving of some protection against harm. This commitment, though,
is qualified by the primacy
granted to human interests where these may conflict
with animal interests.
An ethic of
humaneness underpinned the first animal protection legislation in the United
Kingdom (‘UK’)
similar model was transplanted to the Australian
Early legislation was
focused on the protection of working animals. However, the idea that animals
were worthy of some moral consideration
was, at least in part, influenced by the
acceptance of companion animals into households, becoming ‘a normal
feature of the
middle-class household’ through the 16
companion animals are regarded by most households as ‘members of the
Their presence in
our everyday life is significant, with an estimated 5 million households in
Australia having a companion animal,
including 4.2 million dogs and 3.3 million
The keeping of companion
animals is economically significant, generating an estimated $8 billion in
spending annually.
Legal scholarship addressing the protection of animals, including companion
animals, is a vibrant and growing field in
However, limited
scholarly attention has so far been directed to the regulatory studies
literature and the insights it may provide
compliance monitoring and enforcement for animal
protection.
In this article, I
explore how the legal forms of the prevailing governing norm of humaneness
function as regulatory standards in
a companion animal
While principally
concerned with standards and standard-setting, some consideration is given to
compliance monitoring and enforcement,
since ‘all regulatory techniques
must be given flesh through the enforcement process if they are to achieve their
determining the style of compliance monitoring and
enforcement adopted, as the
analysis in this article confirms.
The jurisdictional focus of this article is on Queensland, where the
regulatory approach is broadly typical of that taken in other
legislative standards are a prohibition of
and an obligation to
meet the basic welfare needs of an
These standards,
determined through a process of political deliberation, operate as
principle-based standards, describing duties
to be performed, but not specifying
how they are to be achieved.
argue that the standards, as criminal provisions, perform an important censoring
role. However, their content requires some elucidation,
whether through
prosecuting authorities exercising enforcement powers, judicial interpretation
and/or transparent and accessible
guidelines readily available to the general
To ground my argument, I first examine the justifications for regulatory
intervention in a companion animal context, arguing that
non-economic
conceptions of regulation are most relevant here. In particular, I apply what
Morgan and Yeung refer to as ‘political
versions’ of public interest
theory, which suggest an understanding of regulation encompassing broader values
than those of
traditional welfare
The State, through legislation, is the formal standard-setter. However, in
Queensland, as in some other jurisdictions, responsibility
for compliance
monitoring and enforcement of the legislation has largely been outsourced. This
is achieved, in part, through a Memorandum
of Understanding (‘MOU’),
under which the State Department of Agriculture and Fisheries (‘DAF
primarily responsible for compliance monitoring and enforcement
for farm animal protection, and RSPCA Queensland for companion animal
protection.
Some other agencies
may also have a role in companion animal protection, including the Queensland
Police Service (‘QPS’)
under relevant
legislation,
and nongovernment
organisations such as the Animal Welfare League Queensland (‘AWLQ’),
to the extent it engages in humane
education initiatives. Other institutions may
also be significant in broader matters of companion animal welfare, including
governments addressing matters such as identification, registration,
desexing, and dangerous or menacing dog
declarations.
RSPCA Queensland
and AWLQ also engage in humane education initiatives through their shelter
operations. Although these animal management
matters should also be regarded as
significant aspects of animal protection, this article is more narrowly focused
on animal protection
A companion animal code of practice has not yet been developed to expand on
the statutory commands in ss 17 and 18 of the
(Qld). The scope of
the standards is, therefore, left to be shaped principally by two institutions:
RSPCA Queensland, as the key
agency enforcing the standards, and the courts, by
interpreting and applying the legislation. This article examines the strengths
and weaknesses of this set of arrangements. The role of the courts in
interpreting the statutory standards is extremely limited,
non-indictable status of offences under the
and the generally cautious
approach to prosecution pursued by RSPCA Queensland. Most matters that are
appealed to a higher court
concern matters of sentencing, rather than
conviction, resulting in a paucity of authoritative judgments addressing the
the standards. Despite this, I argue that the criminalisation of
animal protection breaches is defensible, even if steps should be
address the level of transparency, accessibility and congruence embodied in the
protection standards.
II Justifications for Regulatory Intervention to
Protect Companion Animals
Animal protection legislation represents an attempt to reconcile the
intrinsic moral worth of animals with their legal status as objects
of property,
typically through provisions that prohibit unnecessary, unjustifiable or
unreasonable pain or suffering.
Significantly, the intervention is to protect the property itself from harm.
This contrasts with regulatory intervention affecting
other forms of personal
property, which will most often be concerned to set the market rules for trade
in the property with little
concern for how that property may be treated by the
owner. Liability rules may be in place allowing for damages for harm to personal
property, including companion animals, but these rules are focused on addressing
the economic harm experienced by the owner of that
property due to the
wrongdoing of another, not the ‘well-being’ of the property per
Despite the property status of companion animals, the conception of animal
protection regulation advanced in this article is at odds
with the conventional,
neoclassical economic understanding of regulation as being only concerned with
the shaping of markets or,
even more narrowly, as a necessary response to
instances of market failure. As Prosser points out:
Particularly in political debate, the meaning of regulation has often been
simplistic and taken for granted; it is treated in a deceptively
simple manner
as imposing a burden, as the opposite of free markets. ... Regulation is thus an
always regrettable means of correcting
market failures. This concept of
regulation is, by implication, a narrow one; regulation is part of economic
management.
Other conceptions have focused narrowly on regulation as ‘a type of
legal instrument’, or as ‘something done by
These standard,
early definitions of regulation have given way to accounts that extend beyond
economics and the market, beyond legal
rules, and beyond only government actors.
Black argues for a ‘decentred’ understanding of regulation, defining
as ‘the sustained and focused attempt to alter the behaviour of
others according to defined standards or purposes with the
intention of
producing a broadly identified outcome or outcomes, which may involve mechanisms
of standard-setting, information-gathering
behaviour-modification’.
Regulation, according to this definition, is ‘an activity that extends
beyond the state, thus regulation may on the basis of
such a conceptualisation
embrace a variety of forms of relationship between state, law and
This broader
understanding of regulation is important in a context where economic rationales
for regulation remain
Regulation of companion animal protection can best be understood from a
public interest perspective that emphasises values other than
those embodied in
the idea of market efficiency. This is a ‘political version’ of
public interest theory, according to
which ‘values such as social justice,
redistribution or paternalism may also figure in the critical assessment of what
regulation’.
the interests of companion animals count for something ethically, then their
protection against harm provides a ‘non-economic,
substantive’
justification for regulatory
intervention.
This justification
is summarised by Sunstein:
The idea here is that animals, species as such, and perhaps even natural
objects warrant respect for their own sake, and quite apart
interactions with human beings. Sometimes such arguments posit general rights
held by living creatures (and natural objects)
against human depredations. In
especially powerful forms, these arguments are utilitarian in character,
stressing the often extreme
and unnecessary suffering of animals who are hurt or
killed. [Animal protection legislation] reflects these
If there is a sound, non-instrumental justification for regulatory
intervention to protect companion animals, as argued above, does
it matter that
they are designated as personal property? The significance of the property
status of animals is a keenly contested
matter, sometimes a proxy for the debate
between those advancing animal welfare goals and those advancing animal rights
Sunstein rejects the idea
that property matters in any substantive sense, arguing that those who
‘have bought their dog do
not think that they own a “thing”.
Payment does not make people believe that the animal with whom they live is a
commodity. The real problem here is the mistreatment of animals, not the
mere fact of sale.’
However, issues such as companion animal overpopulation, puppy farming, and
perverse breeding standards underscore the significance
of the property status
ascribed to companion animals.
Importantly, Sunstein acknowledges that the rhetorical idea of property, if not
the concept itself, is nonetheless important. He
states that ‘the idea
that animals are mere “property” is an anachronism, inconsistent
with our considered judgments
animals; we should abandon the metaphor of
“property”’.
Sunstein’s observation about the anachronistic nature of the language of
property is compelling — including in a companion
animal context, where
animals are very often regarded, in a meaningful sense, as members of the
family. In a farming context, there
is a straightforward commodification of
animals. In a companion animal context, though, ‘our relationship ... has
become particularly
complex, since [companion animals] have been rendered
simultaneously more akin to family members and more
commodified’.
In summary, intervention by the State to protect companion animals through
restricting the rights of owners can be justified on a
public interest ground
that acknowledges the ethical claims of these animals. However, the prevailing
property status of companion
animals, while consistent with a governing norm of
humaneness, remains problematic, especially given the effects of commodification
in the breeding, selling and relinquishing of animals. Having identified these
normative constraints for standard-setting to protect
companion animals, Part
III of this article shifts the focus to a consideration of the standards that
are currently in place in Queensland.
III Legislative Standards for Companion Animal
If there is a sound, non-instrumental justification for regulatory
intervention to protect the interests of companion animals, how
intervention expressed in Queensland? This Part explores the key legislative
provisions governing companion animal protection.
The significance of
criminalising animal cruelty is discussed, as well as the potential limitations
of this approach. No codes of
practice for companion animal protection have been
developed or adopted in Queensland. This means that the statutory safeguards
at least in formal terms, the key standard-setting text. There is a
similar absence of a code addressing companion animal protection
Animal Welfare Act 2006
(UK). Corr speculates that the ‘lack of
specific legislation may reflect a belief that companion animals are kept for
and therefore the majority will be well looked
Corr argues there
is a need to see through such complacency, and a similar argument is advanced
through this article in a Queensland
The Prohibition against
Section 18(1) of the
(Qld) provides that ‘[a] person
must not be cruel to an animal’. This standard is very generally
expressed, operating
as a principle-based standard. It establishes a duty, but
‘without specifying the means of achieving that outcome, leaving
other bodies to interpret the meaning of the principle in a particular
penalty of 2 000 penalty
or three years’
imprisonment applies for breaching the provision. Section 18(2) sets out a
non-exclusive list of acts that
may amount to cruelty to an animal, providing
some limited guidance on the scope of the prohibition:
(a) causes it pain
the circumstances, is unjustifiable, unnecessary or unreasonable;
(b) beats it so as to cause the animal pain;
(c) abuses, terrifies, torments or worries it;
(d) overdrives, overrides or overworks it;
(e) uses on the animal an electrical device prescribed under a
regulation;
(f) confines or transports it—
(i) without appropriate preparation, including, for example, appropriate
food, rest, shelter or water; or
(ii) when it is unfit for the confinement or transport; or
(iii) in a way that is inappropriate for the animal’s welfare; or
(iv) in an unsuitable container or vehicle;
(g) kills it in a way that—
(i) is inhumane; or
(ii) causes it not to die quickly; or
(iii) causes it to die in unreasonable pain;
(h) unjustifiably, unnecessarily or unreasonably—
(i) injures or wounds it; or
(ii) overcrowds or overloads it.
There are a number of important points to note about the regulatory standard
imposed by s 18: the liability status of the offence;
the lack of significant
case law addressing the meaning of cruelty and, in particular, the ‘no
unnecessary suffering’
qualification reflected in s 18(2)(a); the
significant increase in penalties imposed under the provision since 2001; and
the introduction
of a new aggravated cruelty offence. Collectively, these
characteristics of the cruelty prohibition reflect a lack of judicial or
interpretation of the scope of the prohibition and a policy focus on penalty
escalation.
Liability Status of the Offence under
ACP Act (Qld)
The liability status of the offence under s 18 of the
ACP Act (Qld)
not clear on the face of the statute. There are no reported Queensland cases on
this point, either under the
(Qld), or previous legislation.
Pearson v Janlin Circuses Pty Ltd
, a Supreme Court of New South Wales
(‘NSW’) case on the equivalent NSW provision, suggests that mens rea
would not be
authority turns on an understanding of the distinction between ‘strict
liability’ and ‘absolute liability’,
where strict liability
offences are ‘those offences for which a person may be convicted without
proof of intention, recklessness
or knowledge’, while absolute liability
offences ‘are more draconian in that they do not permit a claim of honest
reasonable mistake of
The NSW authority suggests that while liability for the offence of animal
cruelty is not absolute, the legislative intent of such
provisions should be
read as not requiring proof of mens
live export case,
the Magistrate
considered the issue of knowledge on the part of the accused in establishing the
cruelty offence under
Animal Welfare Act 2002
Magistrate observed that Western Australia (like Queensland) is a code
Criminal Code
(WA) provides a defence where
there is a finding of honest and reasonable but mistaken belief in a state of
case, although noting
did not further
examine the issue of mens rea, so that the NSW approach remains
persuasive.
Cruelty and the Ambiguity of ‘No Unnecessary
A second important point about s 18 is the lack of any significant case law
on the meaning of ‘cruelty’. In characterising
the meaning of
‘cruelty’, the use of the qualifying phrase ‘unjustifiable,
unnecessary or unreasonable’ in
some of the examples of cruelty provided
in s 18(2) is notable. Such a qualification has been a staple of animal
protection legislation
almost since its
The qualification
suggests a need to balance any harm inflicted on an animal with considerations
of what might be justifiable, necessary
or reasonable. This is a legislative
expression of the governing norm of humaneness, extending protection to animals,
but only so
far as this does not conflict with any overriding human interests.
In an early and still influential English case,
Lord Coleridge held
It is further lawful to inflict [pain] if it is reasonably necessary; a
phrase vague, no doubt, but with which in many branches of
the law every lawyer
is familiar. This involves the consideration of what ‘necessary’,
and ‘necessity’ mean
in this regard. It is difficult to define these
words from the positive side, but we may perhaps approach a definition from the
... Abuse of the animal means substantial pain inflicted upon it, and
unnecessary means that it is inflicted without necessity, and
under the word
‘necessity’ ... . I should include adequate and reasonable
The UK adopted a form of this judicial characterisation of the ‘no
unnecessary suffering’ standard in the
Animal Welfare Act 2006
(UK). A number of considerations relevant to determining whether
‘unnecessary suffering’ is made out are listed in s
4(3) of that
statute, including ‘whether the conduct which caused the suffering was for
a legitimate purpose’.
The exercise of balancing pain inflicted on an animal with a reasonable
object has been characterised as making an important contribution
improved treatment of animals:
The concept of unnecessary suffering, which has been developed by the courts
and widely adopted by the legislature, has two very considerable
merits. First,
it may be applied to a multitude of different situations. Secondly, it can be
constantly reinterpreted by the courts
in the light of greater understanding
treatment of animals.
Radford argues, by reference to English and Scottish decisions concerning the
cruel treatment of farm animals, that the courts have,
in some circumstances,
shown a willingness to place the interests of animals ahead of those of
In Australia, the
Magistrates Court in the
case found that it was not necessary
for a proportion of sheep in a live export shipment — those which were
adult fat sheep
— to be shipped during summer months. The Court in
Ford v Wiley
to state that ‘necessity requires
proportion between the object and the
The Magistrate
stated that the object of commercial gain had to be weighed against the
likelihood of harm to the sheep if transported
in the hot part of the year, and
concluded that ‘I am satisfied and find that any harm suffered to fat
adult sheep was
unnecessary’.
There has been no higher court consideration of how the balancing test should
be applied in Australia, including in Queensland. When
was introduced in 2001, the Queensland branch of the Australian Veterinary
Association noted the need for further clarification
of the meaning of the
cruelty provision clauses in s 18, suggesting any ambiguity should be tested in
court, rather than legislation
being overly
prescriptive.
There are at least two important reasons why the scope of s 18 has not been
tested in court. For one thing, although the ‘no
unnecessary pain’
standard nominally applies to the treatment of companion animals in Queensland,
it generally does not apply
to the treatment of most other categories of animal,
due to the application of offence exemptions for compliance with codes of
These exemptions
significantly limit the potential pool of cases in which the scope of the
provision might be tested.
While the cruelty standard (and duty of care standard) might nominally apply
in a companion animal context, a range of structural
factors render them largely
irrelevant. The annual number of prosecutions brought for animal cruelty or
breach of duty offences is
very low. Table 1 below summarises cases brought by
RSPCA Queensland since 1999.
DAF (Qld) has brought some prosecutions concerning companion animals,
although these have been comparatively few and focused on puppy
Summary of Complaints and Prosecutions Conducted by RSPCA
Queensland 1999–2015
Prosecutions
Outcome: Successful/Convictions/Pending
All completed prosecutions successful,
with 36 further prosecutions pending.
One matter did not proceed, all other prosecutions successful or
One matter did not proceed, 11 successful prosecutions, with 10 further
cases pending.
All prosecutions successful, with four further cases pending.
10 successful prosecutions, with 16 pending.
18 convictions, with 14 cases pending.
20 convictions, with three cases pending.
50 convictions, with three cases pending.
32 convictions, with nine cases pending.
51 convictions.
34 convictions, with 11 cases pending.
32 convictions, with 11 cases pending.
No figures available on convictions,
with 16 cases pending.
56 convictions, with 10 cases pending.
61 convictions, with 25 cases pending.
65 convictions, with 5 cases pending.
Further, where cases are brought, they tend to be the most extreme incidents
of cruelty or breach of duty, consistent with a strategy
of general deterrence
and with ensuring that the regulator’s legitimacy is not undermined by
unsuccessful prosecutions. The
strict liability status of the cruelty offence,
combined with the policy of prosecuting only the worst examples of breach,
that most offenders plead guilty. In practice, the only substantive
arguments concern the appropriate penalty. This means that ‘very
case law is generated to assist in future interpretation of the
A rare example of higher court consideration of a ‘no unnecessary
pain’ standard is the Québec Court of Appeal
judgment in
Notably, however,
this case interprets the ‘no unnecessary pain’ standard in a way
that is consistent with a limited
ethic of humaneness. Sankoff argues that the
case dilutes the test of necessity to one of legitimacy, and that on this
approach only
three purposes will clearly fall outside the scope of legitimacy:
sadistic cruelty or cruelty imposed for no reason at all; cruelty
amounting to a
waste of economic capital (that is, harm to an animal without any corresponding
economic gain); and cruelty caused
by laziness or poor management by animal
In a companion animal
context, this test will be more easily met than for animals in primarily
commercial contexts. For example,
Francione points that out imposition of
‘unnecessary pain’ will be permissible where this is ‘part of
an institutionalized
or accepted exploitation of
farming. However, there will be cases, including that of the
‘family’ companion animal owner, where the imposition
of harm will
not bring any corresponding gain. In these cases, the ‘property owner must
not inflict gratuitous pain on the
animal, since this would generate no social
benefit and would decrease overall social
Penalties and Enforcement for Breach
A third important feature of the cruelty prohibition in s 18 is the
significant increase in the maximum penalty since 2001 and the
introduction of
(Qld). Prior to the passage of this Act, the maximum penalty
for cruelty was $1500 (20 penalty units) or imprisonment for six
The new legislation
increased the penalty to $75 000 (1000 penalty units) or two years’
imprisonment. A specific increase in
2013, as well as general increases in the
value of a penalty unit, mean that as from 1 July 2016 the maximum penalty
stands at $243
800 (2000 penalty units) or three years’ imprisonment.
In a context where, since 2001, there has not been significant structural
change in animal protection regulation, penalty increases
for cruelty — a
form of general and specific deterrence — can be characterised as the main
vehicle of reform. Deterrence,
as a feature of criminal law, has a clear
regulatory objective, aiming ‘to change the behaviour of offenders or
potential offenders’,
so that acts are avoided for fear of the
consequences.
In the language of
deterrence theory, recent Queensland animal protection reform has, in part,
implemented marginal deterrence ‘where
existing laws are better enforced
where penalties are
Freiberg suggests that deterrence involves a calculus where the perceived
benefit of offending must be outweighed by the sum of multiplying
the perceived
severity of the sanction and the perceived likelihood of detection and
punishment.
Importantly,
Freiberg points out that ‘[t]hough the certainty (of detection) effect is
stronger than the severity effect, it
is much easier for policy makers and
legislators to boost maximum penalties (severity) in order to be seen to be
doing something
This observation
is borne out with respect to the significant penalty increase under s 18,
implemented in 2013, which involved a
doubling of the maximum fine and an
increase in potential imprisonment from two years to three
The increase was
introduced as part of a newly elected conservative government’s broader
commitment to a ‘crackdown’
The Minister, in his
Explanatory Speech on the Bill, stated that the ‘amendment is in response
to concerns from the public
and animal welfare organisations over the relatively
low level of penalties applied by the courts to those who perpetrate animal
cruelty’ and is ‘intended to signal to the community and the courts
that animal cruelty is a serious matter to which
serious penalties should
The initial significant increase in penalties in 2001 was similarly premised
on deterrence concerns and community expectations. The
Minister, in his Second
Reading Speech on the
Animal Care and Protection Bill 2001
, referred to the
conventional wisdom that the general community holds that deliberate cruelty
to animals is abhorrent and unacceptable, and expects
that, in other than
exceptional circumstances, the perpetrator must be punished severely, and
severely enough to deter
Aggravated Cruelty Offence
A fourth feature of the cruelty prohibition in s 18 of the
(Qld) is that it is no longer the only statutory standard specifically
prohibiting cruelty to animals. Consistent with a focus on
deterrence, the
Queensland Parliament enacted s 242 of the
Criminal Code
(Qld), a new
indictable offence of serious animal cruelty with a maximum penalty of seven
years’ imprisonment.
provision is explicit about the need for intent, providing that a ‘person
who, with the intention of inflicting severe
pain or suffering, unlawfully
kills, or causes serious injury or prolonged suffering to, an animal commits a
crime’. In introducing
the Bill containing the new offence, the
Attorney-General of Queensland stated:
The bill inserts a new offence into the
Criminal Code
animal cruelty. The new offence will target those persons who intentionally
inflict severe pain and suffering on animals
— in effect, their torture.
This type of offending is abhorrent and, to ensure offenders are appropriately
punished, the new
offence carries a maximum penalty of seven years imprisonment.
The government shares the community’s frustration when offenders
done terrible things to animals walk free without any jail time. This new
offence sends a clear message that animal cruelty
will not be tolerated in
Queensland. The bill also amends the
Animal Care and Protection Act 2001
to give animal welfare officers greater powers to investigate the new offence of
serious animal cruelty. These amendments will ensure
alleged offences can be
appropriately investigated and offenders are brought to
The Attorney-General did not refer specifically to companion animals.
However, this is an unstated assumption, since even quite serious
harms imposed,
for example, on farm animals or research animals, are not captured by this
provision so long as they are consistent
with relevant codes of
Section 242 creates an indictable
which, given the
substantial penalty, may mean a greater willingness on the part of accused
offenders to contest a charge or to appeal
conviction.
Importantly, the
introduction of the new offence was accompanied by an amendment to the
(Qld) providing that inspectors appointed under the
can ‘investigate and enforce compliance’ with ss 242 and 468 of the
Criminal Code
well as with the
(Qld). This, in effect, bestows authority on
RSPCA Queensland inspectors to enforce the new serious animal cruelty offence,
through the committal stage in the Magistrates
While this allows the
expertise and experience of RSPCA inspectors to be utilised in investigating and
prosecuting offences under
s 242, it may also undermine the significance of
s 18 of the
(Qld). There is a risk that in establishing parallel
offences in the
Criminal Code
(Qld) and the
offences in the
(Qld) will come to be seen as less clearly
‘criminal’ than the provision in Queensland’s key criminal
More broadly, the enactment of s 242 of the
Criminal Code
well as the penalty increases under s 18 of the
(Qld) discussed
above, reflect a resort to penalty escalation, arguably a blunt tool for
addressing harm to companion animals. This
approach, couched in the general
observation of Brown et al, ‘demonstrates the over-reliance we place on
the operations of
the criminal justice system as a protection against
research into crime statistics and the extent of crime, Brown et al recognise
that criminal justice agencies including
the police, courts and penal system are
important in responding to
However, they also point
out that ‘the criminal justice system is never going to substantially
of crime because crime is largely a function of
social, economic and cultural factors which remain for the most part unaffected
changes to the criminal justice
In a companion
animal context, relevant factors giving rise to abuse may include mental
illness, childhood abuse, and domestic
Duty of Care
The other major animal protection standard in Queensland is the duty of care
imposed on persons in charge of an animal. In 2001, the
introduced this significant new standard, with s 17(1) providing that a
‘person in charge of an animal owes a duty of
care to it’. Section
17(2) sets out a maximum penalty for breach of 300 penalty units or one
year’s imprisonment.
Section 17(1), like s 18(1), is very broadly expressed, taking the form of
a principle-based standard. However, while s 17(1) can
be characterised as a
general duty, its scope is constrained by s 17(3), making it narrower than
textbook examples of general duties
in other regulatory
Section 17(3)
incorporates the ‘Five Freedoms’ into the duty, providing that:
For subsection (2), a person breaches the duty only if the person does not
take reasonable steps to—
(a) provide the animal’s needs for the following in a way that is
appropriate—
(i) food and water;
(ii) accommodation or living conditions for the animal;
(iii) to display normal patterns of behaviour;
(iv) the treatment of disease or injury; or
(b) ensure any handling of the animal by the person, or caused by the
person, is appropriate.
Under s 17(4):
In deciding what is appropriate, regard must be had to—
(a) the species, environment and circumstances of the animal; and
(b) the steps a reasonable person in the circumstances of the person would
reasonably be expected to have taken.
The ‘Five Freedoms’ are freedom from hunger, thirst and
malnutrition; freedom from fear and distress; freedom from physical
and thermal
discomfort; freedom from pain, injury and disease; and freedom to express normal
patterns of behavior. The origin of
the Five Freedoms can be traced back to the
1960s Brambell Committee inquiry into the treatment of farm animals in Great
with their current
settled form established by the UK’s Farm Animal Welfare Council
(‘FAWC’) in
The introduction of a duty of care in Queensland in 2001 reflected the temper
of the times. Tasmania was the first Australian jurisdiction,
in 1993, to
introduce an explicit duty of
but this provision does
not define elements of the duty.
The UK introduced a duty of care for farm animals in
In 2006, as part of a
major revision of animal protection law, the UK included a broad duty of care
applying to all domesticated
Like the Queensland
provision, the UK duty essentially incorporates the Five Freedoms. In 2012, the
Northern Territory introduced
a duty of care provision, again incorporating the
Five Freedoms, but also including other elements explicitly allowing for the
and constraining of animals in ‘ways that are
appropriate’.
recently, in 2016, the Australian Capital Territory (‘ACT’)
introduced a duty of care provision substantially similar
to the Queensland
Two notable aspects of the duty of care standard and its application will be
addressed here. The first is whether the foundation on
which the duty standard
is built — the Five Freedoms — remains adequate. The second concerns
the increasing significance
of duty of care breaches for RSPCA Queensland
prosecutions, a vivid illustration of the point made at the outset of this
enforcement.
Grounding the Duty of Care Standard: The Five Freedoms
Concepts of animal welfare have advanced since the Five Freedoms were first
formulated in 1979, raising the issue of whether legislation
utilising the
Freedoms is keeping up with science. This might not matter if the Five Freedoms
are understood as ideals for animal
protection:
Ideals, strictly speaking, are ‘highest conceptions’,
‘perfect’, ‘existing only in idea’,
‘visionary’,
and ‘dependent on the mind’. In contrast to
this, the Five Freedoms could have been cast as non-ideal, i.e. real. The
formulation of the Five Freedoms as ideals leads to both advantages and
disadvantages as a framework for the analysis of animal welfare.
advantage is that the ideals are more likely to be complete and
comprehensive.
A criticism of the Five Freedoms, though, is that they are predominantly
negative in nature: ‘freedom from’ rather than
to’. Developed as a response to the already well-established
intensification of the raising of farm animals,
the Five Freedoms address
objectively poor animal welfare practices. Since the 1970s, however, there has
been a shift in animal welfare
science research towards consideration of animal
feelings, quality of life, a life worth living and
well-being.
Broom argues that
‘[t]he freedoms are not precise enough to be used as a basis for welfare
assessment. This is now an out-dated
approach that may still be useful as a
preliminary guideline but should not be used if scientific evidence about needs
is available.’
Freedoms remain highly significant given their influence on legislation, codes
of practice and other forms of regulation
in a number of jurisdictions,
including Queensland. This means that ‘individually, each of the freedoms
is a necessary component
of any comprehensive animal welfare
McCullough suggests that ‘due to the progressive nature of science,
whether the Five Freedoms really are sufficient
for the analysis of animal
welfare will, to some extent, be an open question and subject to
To some extent, the framing of the duty of care in s 17 of the
(Qld) could be interpreted as being consistent with this evolution in animal
welfare science, although this has not been judicially
tested and accepted.
Section 17 is explicitly qualified by an appeal to providing for an
‘animal’s needs’, and
re-frames the Five Freedoms as positive
obligations (for example, to provide for an animal’s needs for food and
water, rather
than to uphold a freedom from thirst or hunger). Even interpreted
this way, the difficulty remains that s 17, like the cruelty prohibition
18, is a principle-based standard, even if its scope is narrowed by the
requirements in s 17(3). This implies that the interpretation
of the meaning of
the standard is a matter for other
As has been addressed
already, there has been virtually no higher court consideration of the meaning
and scope of the cruelty provision
in Queensland, and the same is so for the
duty of care standard in s 17. This means that interpretation of the duty of
care provision
is, in practice,
a matter for institutions other than the courts.
Delegated standard-setting processes could be particularly significant in the
absence of judicial guidance. A general duty such as
that embodied in s 17(1) is
consistent with the idea of ‘responsive law’, a general social
theory of law that ‘suggests
that law should promulgate broad substantive
values across a range of self-regulating or semiautonomous social
Responsive law
also emphasises that identification and promulgation of values should occur in a
participatory way, with delegated
decision-making processes allowing for a range
of non-legal perspectives in setting more detailed
In the context of
(Qld), s 17(1) reflects the broadly expressed, substantive
value of ensuring that reasonable steps are taken to address the basic
needs of animals. However, consistent with a regulatory theory of responsive
law, if principle-based standards based on reasonableness
are to work
effectively they need ‘to be supplemented by other forms of regulation,
such as detailed regulations, incorporation
of standards, codes of practice,
evidentiary standards and provision of detailed
information’.
exception of a voluntary code of practice for pet
no codes of practice
have been prepared in Queensland addressing care of companion
Other jurisdictions have adopted a range of codes of practice, mostly
voluntary, focused on various aspects of companion animal management
care in particular settings (for example, for pet shops, boarding
establishments, keeping pets in cages
However, the ACT has
published two codes of practice — one for cats and one for dogs —
that focus specifically on companion
Some government
departments have published extensive guidance on choosing and caring for
companion animals,
DAF (Qld) has published only limited
information.
RSPCA Queensland
publishes limited advice on various aspects of companion animal
with more detailed
guides published by RSPCA
AWLQ, an animal
shelter organisation based in south-east Queensland, provides significant
educational resources addressing companion
There exists, then, a
plethora of sources of information on companion animal welfare, of varying
quality and depth. It is not clear,
though, how this could be used in an
enforcement context under a provision such as s 17 of the
The Companion Animal Working Group, part of the Australian Animal Welfare
recognised this gap in standard-setting and the need for supplementation in this
During phase 1 of the AAWS, this working group progressed a national standard
for non-production animals with the Council of Australian
Government’s
(COAG) decision-making process.
Work was undertaken to benchmark the companion animal sector. This identified
the need to have an animal population management system
that provides
information on euthanasia rates and where pets are sourced from. It also
revealed a need to continue to improve pet
wellbeing, conduct more animal
welfare research and develop consistent standards nationwide.
The priority in phase 2 will be to progress the development, consultation and
endorsement of national standards for cats and
With the cessation of the AAWS, there is no institutional commitment to
implementation of the second phase of the Companion Animal
Working Group
national standards development process.
Preponderance of Duty of Care Prosecutions vis-a-vis Cruelty
Prosecutions
A second notable aspect of the duty of care offence is the extent to which it
has become a significant tool in the enforcement armoury
of RSPCA Queensland.
This is so notwithstanding that the ideals underpinning the provision, the Five
Freedoms, were developed as
a response to concern about the intensification of
the rearing of farm animals. In recent years, the overwhelming majority of
prosecutions
in a companion animal context have been for breach of duty of care,
rather than cruelty. For example, in 2013–14, of the 15
prosecutions
listed by RSPCA Queensland in their annual report, three were identified as
cruelty prosecutions, one was not identified,
and 11 were identified as duty of
care offences.
2012–13, of the 17 prosecutions listed, 16 concerned duty of care
In 2011–12,
of the 20 prosecutions listed, four were cruelty prosecutions, one was an
unreasonable abandonment prosecution
and 15 were duty of care
This might suggest
that duty of care incidents are more common than incidents of cruelty, or at
least that a duty of care breach
is easier to establish than the narrower
standard of cruelty, especially in circumstances where there is a thin line
between neglect
on the one hand, and cruelty on the other.
Other Prohibitions and
Restrictions
In addition to the two key principle-based standards set out in ss 17 and 18
(Qld), the legislation includes a number of specific
prohibitions or requirements that are imposed on persons in charge of an animal.
These include penalties for: conducting prohibited events (such as cockfights
and dogfights);
captive animal to be injured or killed by a
releasing an animal for
injuring or killing by a dog;
using an animal as a kill or lure to race or train a coursing
using certain traps or
A number of
practices are prohibited unless considered reasonably necessary and performed by
a veterinary surgeon, including ear
cropping, tail docking, debarking and
Section 33(1) imposes a highly prescriptive duty on persons in charge of a
closely confined dog:
(1) A person in charge of a dog that is closely confined for a continuous
period of 24 hours must, unless the person has a reasonable
excuse, ensure the
dog is exercised or allowed to exercise itself for—
(a) the next 2 hours; or
(b) the next hour and for another hour in the next 24
Finally, the important offence of abandonment prohibits the abandonment or
release of an animal without reasonable excuse, with a
maximum penalty of
300 penalty units or one year’s
imprisonment.
Abandonment
needs to be distinguished from relinquishment. Relinquishment involves the
voluntary, consensual transfer of property
ownership by an animal owner to a
shelter or vet.
In order to
address a culture of ‘easy come, easy go’ in the acquisition and
relinquishment of companion animals, Rollin
and Rollin suggest a range of
possible reforms including, relevantly, that ‘humane societies and
veterinarians [be] positioned
to reject convenience euthanasia for morally
unacceptable reasons’, or at least that companion animal owners be
required to
post a bond, which ‘they would forfeit if they elect
convenience
euthanasia’.
Criminalising Breaches of Broadly
Expressed Animal Protection Standards
The prohibition against cruelty in the
non-specific, principle-based standard, as analysed above. The duty of care
standard incorporates some process aspects,
through incorporation of the Five
Freedoms, but is not prescriptive and is expressed at an abstract level. In
assessing the likely
success of standards generally, Scott draws on the work of
Diver to highlight three key criteria: transparency, accessibility and
congruence. Scott suggests that:
Transparency refers to the requisite that a rule should be comprehensible to
its audience, using words with ‘well‐defined
and universally
accepted meanings’. Accessibility refers to the ease of application of a
rule to its intended circumstances
and congruence to the relationship between
the rule and the underlying policy objective. A rule should apply to all the
circumstances
within the intent of the policy maker and to none that fall
outside that intent. Put more technically, it should be neither under‐
over‐inclusive.
Analogising from Scott’s analysis of the European Commission
Directive on General Product
the desired
output of the general cruelty prohibition and duty of care standards has
‘the merit of a high degree of congruence
with the overall objectives of
the regulatory regime’.
In an animal protection context, an overall objective of the regime is
preventing companion animals from suffering unnecessary harm
at the hands of
those in charge of them or third parties.
Advantages of the standards include their potential application to a wide
range of harms and the potential for flexible interpretation
of their meaning
over time. However, the lack of specificity in the scope of the standards
reduces their transparency, with concepts
such as ‘reasonableness’,
‘necessity’ and ‘justification’ requiring ‘further
elaboration
in order to know what is
Freiberg points
out that principle-based standards are ‘most often used in combination
with rule-based and prescriptive regulation,
As shown above,
further information on these standards is diffused among a diverse range of
sources, but varies widely in quality
and depth, impeding accessibility and
transparency.
Scott also points out that ‘vagueness may make enforcement (and even
compliance) more
observation may be relevant to animal protection in Queensland. Very few
prosecutions are undertaken by RSPCA Queensland, with
almost all involving
guilty pleas and arguments about sentence. Table 1 above shows a clear trend of
an increase in annual complaints
year-on-year, at the same time as the number of
prosecutions has been declining. This approach may also reflect a strategic
to focus on humane education and a concern to maintain regulatory
legitimacy, rather than being purely driven by resource constraints.
Queensland emphasises the fact that it is almost entirely reliant on public
donations to conduct its work, including compliance
monitoring and
enforcement.
However, the
organisation has not claimed that it lacks enforcement resources, particularly
in an era of significantly increased
pro bono legal representation coordinated
through the pro bono legal panel
One response to the limitations of principle-based standards would be to
shift to more prescriptive standards. However, Scott cautions
that recognising
the limitations of general standards does not necessarily imply that we should
abandon them. He argues that the
process of creating general standards through a
delegated process can both stimulate a productive relationship between
and representatives of those to be protected by the regulation, and
increase accountability.
viability of such a delegated dialogue in a companion animal protection context
is complicated by the difficulty in identifying
representative regulatees, and
the need to be clear about who is to be protected by regulation (that is,
companion animals who cannot
speak on their own
One possibility
might be to use non-government organisations as a proxy for the public,
including those organisations that would
claim to be acting in the interests of
companion animals — not only RSPCA Queensland, but also other
non-government organisations
with an animal protection raison
d’être. This process of ‘regulatory
stimulate unified and clearer guidance as to the way in which the standards in
ss 17 and 18 of the
(Qld) ought to be understood.
Another response to the broad nature of the standards in ss 17 and 18 is to
question their status as criminal sanctions. Breach of
the standards is a
criminal offence, consistent with the classical definition of a
command-and-control regime as involving ‘the
exercise of influence by
imposing standards backed by criminal
sanctions’.
Alternative
approaches suggest that criminal sanctions should be just one sanction, the most
stringent, among a range of other sanctions
that could more easily be
Sanctions falling
between criminal prosecution at one end of the scale, and administrative
sanctions (such as fines) at the other,
include court-ordered undertakings,
adverse publicity orders, remedial orders and enforceable
undertakings.
Criminal law, though, needs to continue to play a central role in animal
protection regulation. For one thing, there may be practical
limitations in
applying an elaborate, tiered sanction approach in a context of harm to
companion animals, where ‘there might
be insufficient repeat interactions
between regulator and regulated to allow a pyramidal strategy to be
For another, criminal sanctions are important in signalling the seriousness
with which harm to animals should be regarded. The ‘censuring
function’ of criminal
is as relevant for harm
committed against animals as for that committed against humans. Reducing cruelty
offences and duty of care
offences to the status of parking fines risks
exacerbating an enforcement system that already detracts from principles such as
‘proportionate
responses to
wrongdoing’.
A process of tiered enforcement is undermined when prosecution is only
pursued in the very worst cases of abuse or neglect. Further,
Coffee argues that
‘[p]redictions that the criminal law will “shrink” in the wake
of enhanced civil penalties ...
seem unrealistic in light of the bureaucratic
incentives to bring criminal
Coffee points
out that the criminal process brings with it publicity and public drama. This
can be very important for some organisations
essentially funded by public
donations and motivated by a ‘moral’ mission, including, I would
argue, RSPCA Queensland.
Coffee states:
Public attention is important to an agency for a variety of reasons. Public
visibility may help the agency communicate its self-image
as a tough,
‘no-nonsense’ enforcer. That image may in turn assist ... in
maintaining morale among its officials. In addition,
such an image may generate
greater general deterrence than a substantial number of low-visibility civil
penalties ... No agency believes
that violations of its rules are simple
regulatory offenses that lack inherent moral culpability ... it is a safe bet
that its staffers
believe that their agency’s rules protect vital public
interests. To communicate this view, the agency needs the public morality
that only the criminal law
Finally, it should be acknowledged that a limited, parallel sanctions
framework already exists in most jurisdictions, including in
Queensland.
Animal welfare
directions (‘AWDs’) can be issued by inspectors, in written or oral
form, instructing persons in charge
of an animal to take steps to address the
needs of an animal.
provide a formal mechanism for the exercise of discretion in enforcement. This
form of regulatory device can be characterised
as compliance regulation, with
the regulator engaging in a ‘conversation’ with the
It is a mid-level
sanction, able to be used as a spur, under threat of prosecution, to
compliance.
IV Conclusion
This article has focused on key standards in the regulation of companion
animal protection. The key governing norm underpinning companion
protection is humaneness. This ethic allows that animals have intrinsic worth,
and should be protected against harm, at least
to the extent that this does not
interfere with conflicting human interests, such as buying and selling animals
for profit, imposing
harmful breeding standards or freely relinquishing animals
when no longer wanted. I have argued that the continued commodification
companion animals — allowed by a governing principle of humaneness and
constraints in defining the scope of applicable standards
— mean that
their protection is less robust than it might otherwise be.
Justification for state intervention to protect the interests of companion
animals requires a broader conception of the role of regulation
traditional market model allows. Given the intrinsic moral worth of companion
animals, values such as social justice and
paternalism, derived from political
versions of public interest theory, are most relevant to understanding why the
State is justified
in restricting the rights that may be exercised by companion
animal owners over their ‘property’.
In Queensland, state intervention is effected through the key standards set
out in ss 17 and 18 of the
(Qld), establishing a duty of care
obligation and a prohibition against cruelty respectively. The standards
embodied in the legislation
are broad-based, principle-style standards. Detailed
information about care for companion animals is available in the public domain,
although it is piecemeal, with little obvious coordination between the different
agencies making this information available. No code
of practice supplementing
the legislative standards has been prepared in Queensland for care of companion
animals. Proposed development
of a code to be applied on a nationally consistent
basis has ground to a halt with the cessation of the AAWS.
Judicial interpretation of the legislative standards is limited given the
summary jurisdiction for offences under the
(Qld). The most
significant area of judicial oversight in this area assumes application of the
standard (generally through guilty
pleas on the part of offenders) and focuses
on sentencing. In Queensland, the response to perceived shortcomings in the
imposed on offenders has been to focus on penalty escalation. The
maximum sentence for breach of the cruelty prohibition has increased
significantly since the passage of the
(Qld) in 2001 and with the
introduction of a new aggravated cruelty offence under the
Criminal Code
Given the limited effectiveness of penalty escalation as a means of
addressing the drivers of cruelty, it appears important to implement
measures. One of these could be the development and dissemination of standards
and guidelines for the keeping of companion
animals. They could serve to unify
the disparate and uneven information currently available on good practice in the
keeping of companion
animals. Excellent models exist in other Australian
The potential exists
for a national approach to standard-setting in this area, as reflected in the
preliminary work of the now disbanded
AAWS Companion Animal Taskforce.
If a national approach to standard-setting for companion animal protection
was pursued, other actors could be enrolled, particularly
if national standards
were to address issues of animal management as well as animal protection. For
example, the AWLQ plays an important
role in educating individuals about the
responsibilities of companion animal ownership, as well as being expert in
addressing companion
animal overpopulation. The QPS may be increasingly
significant as a source of investigative expertise, financial resources and
given the recent introduction of the indictable offence of serious
animal cruelty in Queensland. Finally, researchers or research
institutions
could also be engaged, bringing expertise not only in animal welfare science,
but also in areas that can help to frame
approaches for addressing the
underlying causes of animal abuse, including sociology, social work, criminology
and companion animal
Overall, a more pluralistic, inclusive approach to standard-setting, drawing
on institutions, resources and expertise from around
the country, is likely to
result in more robust, transparent and accessible companion animal protection
standards for all Australian
states and territories, including Queensland.
Lecturer, Griffith Law
School, Griffith University, Nathan, Queensland, Australia. I would like to
thank the anonymous referees for
providing constructive feedback on this
For a concise consideration of
the ethic of humaneness and alternative conceptions of the obligations properly
owed to animals see
Robert Garner,
Animal Ethics
(Polity Press,
Cruel Treatment of Cattle
3 Geo IV, c 71 (‘
Martin’s Act
An Act to prevent the cruel and improper Treatment of
’). See Radford for an analysis of the humanitarian
underpinnings of this reform, one of a number cognate reforms across areas
as abolition of slavery, improved working conditions for factory workers and the
protection of children: Mike Radford,
Animal Welfare Law in Britain:
Regulation and Responsibility
(Oxford University Press, 2001) chs
Philip Jamieson, ‘Duty
and the Beast: The Movement in Reform of Animal Welfare Law’ (1991) 16(2)
University of Queensland Law Journa
Susan J Armstrong and Richard G
Botzler, ‘General Introduction – Animal Ethics: A Sketch of How It
Developed and Where
it is Now’ in Susan J Armstrong and Richard G Botzler
The Animal Ethics Reader
(Routledge, 2
2008) 1, 4.
See, eg, Adrian Franklin,
‘Human-Nonhuman Animal Relationships in Australia: An Overview of Results
from the First National
Survey and Follow-up Case Studies 2000–2004’
(2007) 15(1)
Society & Animals: Journal of Human-Animal Studies
Adrian Franklin,
Animal Nation: The True Story of Animals and Australia
(UNSW Press, 2006), especially 199–238; Bruce Headey,
National Pets and
People Survey 2006 — Socially Responsible Pet Ownership in Australia: A
Decade of Progress
(Petcare Information and Advisory Service Australia,
Animal Health Alliance,
Ownership in Australia: Summary 2013
For an overview, see, eg,
Steven White, ‘Animal Law in Australian Universities: Towards 2015’
Australian Animal Protection Law Journal
70; Steven White,
‘The Emergence of Animal Law in Australian Universities’
For a history of the
discipline from a predominantly United States perspective, see Joyce Tischler,
‘The History of Animal
Law, Part 1 (1972–1987)’
Stanford Journal of Animal Law and Policy
; Joyce Tischler, ‘A
Brief History of Animal Law, Part II (1985–2011)’
Stanford Journal of Animal Law and Policy
See also Bruce A Wagman,
‘Growing Up with Animal Law: From Courtrooms to Casebooks’
Journal of Legal Education
; Thomas G Kelch, ‘A Short
History of (Mostly) Western Animal Law: Part I’
(2012) 19(1)
; Thomas G Kelch, ‘A Short History of (Mostly) Western Animal
Law: Part II’
(2013) 19(2)
For a global perspective
on the teaching of animal law, see Peter Sankoff, ‘Growth of Animal Law in
Journal of Animal Law
See, eg, Jed Goodfellow,
‘Regulatory Capture and the Welfare of Farm Animals in Australia’ in
Deborah Cao and Steven
White (eds),
Animal Law and Welfare: International
Perspectives
(Springer International, 2016) 195; Jed Goodfellow,
‘Animal Welfare Law Enforcement: To Punish or Persuade?’ in Peter
Sankoff, Steven White and Celeste Black (eds),
Animal Law in Australasia:
Continuing the Dialogue
(Federation Press, 2
ed, 2013) 183. The
literature is well-developed in other, longer established fields, including
classic studies in environmental law
(see Keith Hawkins,
Environment and
Enforcement: Regulation and the Social Definition of Pollution
Press, 1984)) and workplace health and safety law (see Richard Johnstone,
Occupational Health and Safety, Courts and Crime: The Legal Construction of
Occupational Health and Safety Offences in Victoria
(Federation Press,
Scott suggests that
‘conceived of in the most general terms, standards are the norms, goals,
objectives, or rules around which
a regulatory regime is organised’: Colin
Scott, ‘Standard-Setting in Regulatory Regimes’ in Robert Baldwin,
Cave and Martin Lodge (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of Regulation
(Oxford University Press, 2010) 104, 104. Similarly, Freiberg defines standards
as ‘norms or criteria that are provided in
order to specify clearly what
is acceptable and what is unacceptable practice’: Arie Freiberg,
Tools of Regulation
(Federation Press, 2010) 189. This article addresses
standards and standard-setting for companion animal protection primarily in
household context.
Bronwen Morgan and Karen
An Introduction to Law and Regulation: Text and Materials
(Cambridge University Press, 2007) 151.
Legislative protection of
companion animals is largely addressed independently by the states and
territories. The same standard model
is used across jurisdictions: a prohibition
of cruelty and the imposition of obligations on companion animal owners to meet
the welfare
needs of their animals. This means that the Queensland experience is
relevant for other jurisdictions. However, it is also true that
sometimes subtle
differences in legislative standards, policy-setting and enforcement preclude a
straightforward application across
limited role in the area of companion animal protection, legislating to restrict
importation of certain breeds of dogs (see
Customs (Prohibited Imports)
Regulations 1956
(Cth) reg 3, sch 1) and the import or export of fur from
domestic cat and dog species (see
Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations
(Cth) reg 4W;
Customs (Prohibited Exports) Regulations 1958
(Cth) reg 9AB).
Animal Care and
Protection Act 2001
(Qld)’). In
other jurisdictions, see, eg,
Animal Welfare Act 1992
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1979
Animal Welfare
Animal Welfare Act 1985
Animal Welfare
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1986
Animal Welfare Act 2002
(duty of care). See also
Animal Welfare Act 1992
Welfare Act
(NT) ss 7, 8;
Animal Welfare Act 1993
require owners to take steps to address the
needs of their animals: see, eg,
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1979
Animal Welfare
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1986
Animal Welfare Act 2002
Freiberg, above n 11,
Morgan and Yeung, above n
Jim Varghese
(Director-General, Queensland Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries),
Submission No 203 to Senate Rural and
Regional Affairs and Transport Committee,
Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into the
National Animal Welfare Bill
, 15 February 2006, 4. The most recent MOU (or Activity Agreement)
between DAF (Qld) and RSPCA Queensland is for the period 1 July
2013 to 30 June
Police Powers and
Responsibilities Act 2000
(Qld) ch 6 (especially
Code Act 1899
(Qld) sch 1, ss 242 (serious animal cruelty), 468 (injuring
animals) (‘
Criminal Code
(Qld)’). DAF (Qld), RSPCA Queensland
and the QPS have entered into a draft MOU,
Draft Protocol for Dealing with
Animal Welfare Incidents
(2009). No final protocol has yet been produced,
and the draft states that the protocol is not intended to be legally
Animal Management
(Cats and Dogs) Act 2008
For a detailed discussion of
animal management issues, see Steven White, ‘Regulation of the Treatment
of Companion Animals’
in Deborah Cao,
Animal Law in Australia
(Thomson Reuters, 2
ed, 2015) ch 6. See also Alex Bruce,
Law in Australia: An Integrated Approach
(LexisNexis, 2012) ch 5.
(Qld) s 178
(‘An offence against this Act is a summary offence’). The offence of
serious animal cruelty (
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 242) commenced 15 August
2014 and is an indictable offence. The scope of this provision may well be
tested as a result of
numerous charges arising in 2015 from a joint RSPCA
Queensland and QPS investigation into live baiting in the Queensland greyhound
racing industry: RSPCA Queensland,
Annual Report 2014–2015
http://www.rspcaqld.org.au/who-we-are/annual-report
. The first
conviction under this new provision, arising from the live baiting
investigation, occurred in February 2016. The
defendant pleaded guilty: see Adam
Davies, ‘Disgraced Trainer to be Sentenced on Animal Cruelty
The Queensland Times
(online), 10 February 2016
http://www.qt.com.au/news/greyhound-trainer-pleads-guilty-animal-cruelty-cha/2927420/
The defendant was subsequently sentenced to a three-year sentence, wholly
suspended for five years: ‘Greyhound Live Baiting:
Former Trainer Tom
Noble Receives Suspended Jail Sentence’,
(online), 6
September 2016
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-09-06/live-baiting-former-greyhound-trainer-noble-suspended-sentence/7818260
For discussion of this new offence, see Part IIIA below.
In Queensland, see
(Qld) s 18(2)(a) (cruelty includes causing an animal ‘pain that,
in the circumstances, is unjustifiable, unnecessary or unreasonable’).
This is a utilitarian approach to animal welfare, which requires trade-offs to
be made between animal well-being on the one hand,
and human judgements about
what is necessary, reasonable or justifiable on the other: see further Bruce,
above n 21, 48–55.
The imprecise nature of this balancing exercise leads
to different outcomes for animals depending on their context (for example,
companion animal context versus a farm or research animal context): see Peter
Sankoff, ‘The Protection Paradigm: Making the
World a Better Place for
Animals?’ in Peter Sankoff, Steven White and Celeste Black (eds),
Animal Law in Australasia: Continuing the Dialogue
(Federation Press,
ed, 2013) 7.
Torts law in Australia
currently reflects a rigorous property paradigm in assessing damages for harm
to, or loss of, a companion
animal. As Bruce suggests ‘the negligent or
malicious loss or damage to a companion animal will result in damages that are
assessed on the fair market value of the animal’ and ‘it is unlikely
that in Australia a court would be prepared to award
damages for loss of
companionship or emotional distress on the death of a companion animal’:
above n 21, 134.
Geoff Prosser,
Regulatory Enterprise: Government, Regulation, and Legitimacy
University Press, 2010) 1.
Julia Black, ‘Critical
Reflections on Regulation’
Australian Journal of Legal
, 16–17. See also Julia Black, ‘Decentring
Regulation: Understanding the Role of Regulation and Self-Regulation in a
Regulatory” World’
(2001) 54(1)
Current Legal
Julia Black, ‘Critical
Reflections on Regulation’
Australian Journal of Legal
Mike Feintuck,
‘Regulatory Rationales beyond the Economic: In Search of the Public
Interest’ in Robert Baldwin, Martin
Cave and Martin Lodge (eds),
Oxford Handbook of Regulation
(Oxford University Press, 2010) 39, 41.
Feintuck points out that it ‘is impossible to deny the ongoing dominance
of [neoclassical]
economic approaches to public services in both governmental
and scholarly circles’: at 40.
Morgan and Yeung, above n
Cass R Sunstein,
the Rights Revolution: Reconceiving the Regulatory State
(Harvard University
Press, 1990) 69.
See Gary L Francione and
Robert Garner,
The Animal Rights Debate: Abolition or Regulation
(Columbia University Press, 2010).
Cass R Sunstein,
‘Slaughterhouse Jive’ (2001) 224(5)
New Republic
For a detailed account of
each of these aspects, see White, above n 21, 165–9.
Sunstein, above n 34, 45.
See also Cass R Sunstein, ‘Introduction: What are Animal Rights?’ in
Cass R Sunstein and Martha
C Nussbaum (eds),
Animal Rights: Current Debates
and New Directions
(Oxford University Press, 2004) 3, 11–12.
Marie Fox, ‘Veterinary
Ethics and Law’ in Christopher M Wathes et al (eds),
Veterinary &
Animal Ethics: Proceedings of the First International Conference on Veterinary
and Animal Ethics, September 2011
(Wiley-Blackwell, 2013) 245, 247.
Sandra A Corr,
‘Companion Animals’ in Christopher M Wathes et al (eds),
Veterinary & Animal Ethics: Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Veterinary and Animal Ethics, September 2011
(Wiley-Blackwell,
2013) 188, 189.
Freiberg, above n 11,
From 1 July 2016 this is
equivalent to a fine of $243 800:
Penalties and Sentences Act
; Queensland Government,
Sentencing Fines and Penalties for
(17 July 2015)
<https://www.qld.gov.au/law/crime-and-police/types-of-crime/sentencing-fines-and-penalties-for-offences/>.
Pain is defined to include
‘distress and mental or physical suffering’:
10, sch (Dictionary).
[2002] NSWSC 1118
November 2002) [7]–[9], citing
Bell v Gunter
(Unreported, Supreme
Court of New South Wales, Dowd J, 24 October 1997). The NSW provision states
that ‘[a] person shall not
commit an act of cruelty upon an animal’:
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1979
Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
suggests that ‘the basic cruelty
offence is one of strict liability and does not raise an issue of mens
rea’: LexisNexis,
Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
(at 7 June 2016) 20 Animals, ‘4 Protection of Animals from
Cruelty’ [20-530].
Mark Findlay, Stephen Odgers
and Stanley Yeo,
Australian Criminal Justice
(Oxford University Press,
ed, 2014) 25.
Pearson v Janlin Circuses
[2002] NSWSC 1118
(25 November 2002) [8] citing
Fleet v District
Court of NSW
[1999] NSWCA 363
(8 October 1999).
Department of Local
Government & Regional Development v Emanuel Exports Pty Ltd
(Unreported,
Magistrates Court of Western Australia, Magistrate C P Crawford, 8 February
2008) (also known as ‘the
Criminal Code Act
Compilation Act 1913
(WA) sch, s 24 (‘
Criminal Code
(WA)’). In Queensland, the equivalent provision is
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 24.
(Unreported, Supreme Court
of New South Wales, Dowd J, 24 October 1997).
Bell v Gunter
addressed the
relevance of the intention of the accused for an aggravated offence of cruelty.
Cao notes that where a statutory cruelty
provision refers to intention, an
objective test should be applied, consistent with the leading UK authority,
Ford v Wiley
[1889] UKLawRpKQB 92
(1889) 23 QBD 203:
Deborah Cao,
Animal Law in
(Thomson Reuters, 2
ed, 2015) 144. Cao argues that
this test means that ‘íf it can be established that the accused
intended or knew of the
animal suffering,
will have been
established’: at 144.
A more recent decision of
the Tasmanian Supreme Court endorses the NSW approach: see
[2014] TASSC 43
(18 August 2014).
See Radford, above n 2.
Ford v Wiley
[1889] UKLawRpKQB 92
23 QBD 203.
Ibid 209–10.
Radford, above n 2, 258. See
also Robert Garner,
A Theory of Justice for Animals: Animal Rights in a
Nonideal World
(Oxford University Press, 2013) 89. The emphasis on changing
social attitudes regarding the proper treatment of animals also points
legislation as a means of transforming what is accepted as ‘necessary
suffering’. For example, the
Agriculture (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
(UK) s 1 outlaws ‘unnecessary pain’ and ‘unnecessary
distress’ in relation to farm animals in the UK. Since
the introduction of
this broad statutory offence, more specific prohibitions have been introduced
through secondary legislation:
see Simon Brooman and Debbie Legge,
Relating to Animals
(Cavendish Publishing, 1997) 198–9. For Queensland
examples of specific prohibitions, see Part IIIC below.
Radford, above n 2,
Department of Local
Government & Regional Development v Emanuel Exports Pty Ltd
(Unreported,
Magistrates Court of Western Australia, Magistrate C P Crawford, 8 February
2008) [98].
Glenda Emmerson, ‘Duty
and the Beast:
Animal Care and Protection Bill 2001
’ (Research Brief No
2001/13, Queensland Parliamentary Library, 2001) 24.
See, eg, Katrina Sharman,
‘Farm Animals and Welfare Law: An Unhappy Union’ in Peter Sankoff,
Steven White and Celeste
Black (eds),
Animal Law in Australasia: Continuing
the Dialogue
(Federation Press, 2
ed, 2013) 61.
Letter from Anna Field
(Principal Project Officer, Right to Information Services, DAF (Qld)) to Steven
White, 13 July 2015, File
Data is drawn from RSPCA
Queensland,
Annual Report and AGM Notices
http://www.rspcaqld.org.au/who-we-are/annual-report
and RSPCA Australia,
Published Statistics
http://www.rspca.org.au/facts/annual-statistics/published-statistics
Reporting of statistics is not necessarily consistent across years (eg
categories may change) and there are minor discrepancies
between the figures
reported by each entity. Also, the prosecution results for one year may include
those commenced in a previous
year, but not finalised until the reporting year.
The results in Table 1 seek to synthesise the data, but may reflect some of this
lack of uniformity.
commenced 1 March 2002.
Emmerson notes that in the
1999–2000 reporting year, RSPCA Queensland ‘placed a record number
of 70 prosecutions before
the Queensland courts. ... However, the RSPCA claims
the cost of investigating animal cruelty is more than 1.1 million annually.
Queensland branch of the RSPCA has recently achieved two precedent-setting
victories. The first was a conviction for dog fighting,
the first in
Queensland’s history. In addition, the Court of Appeal upheld a conviction
against Afro-Ostrich Farms in relation
to providing food and shelter to
livestock animals, establishing a legal standard for animal husbandry’:
Emmerson, above n
56, 12 (citations omitted).
Sankoff, above n 23, 14.
CCC (2d) 458.
Sankoff, above n 23,
18–19. The last of these purposes is addressed separately in Queensland by
creation of the duty of care
offence, discussed in more detail below.
Gary L Francione,
Animals, Property, and the Law
(Temple University Press, 1995) 5.
Emmerson, above n 56,
Freiberg, above n 11,
Ibid (emphasis added).
Agriculture and Forestry
Legislation Amendment Act 2013
(Qld) s 26.
It should be noted that the
previous (Labor) Government had proposed very similar changes, the Bill lapsing
with the calling of an
election and the proroguing of Parliament: see
and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2011
Queensland,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 21 May 2013, 1564 (John McVeigh).
Queensland,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 31 July 2001, 1988 (Henry Palaszczuk).
As noted previously, the
provision commenced 15 August 2014.
Queensland,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 8 May 2014, 1465–6 (Jarrod
This is because any acts
authorised by the
(Qld) through an exemption process will not be
unlawful under s 242: see
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 242(2).
Criminal Code
It should also be
acknowledged that proceedings for indictable offences ‘may be lengthy,
expensive and resource intensive’,
which may persuade a prosecuting agency
(such as RSPCA Queensland or DAF (Qld)) to exercise a discretion to proceed
summarily rather
than on indictment: Freiberg, above n 11, 217–18.
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 468(1) provides that ‘[a]ny person
who wilfully and unlawfully kills, maims, or wounds, any animal capable of being
stolen is guilty of an indictable offence’. A maximum penalty of two
years’ imprisonment applies, or three years if the
offence occurs at
night: s 468(3). The Queensland Government argued that a new offence of serious
animal cruelty was required in
addition to s 18 of the
s 468 of the
Criminal Code
(Qld) since ‘[t]hese existing offences
both have limitations and do not adequately provide for the case where a person
intentionally
inflicts severe pain and suffering on an animal’: Office of
the Director-General, Department of Justice and Attorney-General,
Queensland,
‘Parliamentary Committee Briefing Note
for the Legal Affairs and
Community Safety Committee on the
Criminal Law Amendment Bill 2014
May 2014), 6 <http://www.parliament.qld.gov.au/documents/
committees/LACSC/2014/CLAB2014/cor-20May2014.pdf>.
The extent to which RSPCA
Queensland engages in enforcement activities is determined by the resources
available and strategic decisions
activities (ie humane education) and deterrence activities. The passage of s 242
Criminal Code
(Qld), and the likely increased calls on RSPCA
Queensland investigation and enforcement resources, was not addressed by the
(for example, through a commitment to fund RSPCA Queensland for
enforcement expenses under the new provision).
For an analogous argument in
an occupational health and safety context, see Kit Carson and Richard Johnstone,
‘The Dupes of
Hazard: Occupational Health and Safety and the Victorian
Sanctions Debate’ (1990) 26(1)
Australian and New Zealand Journal of
David Brown et al,
Criminal Laws: Materials and Commentary on Criminal Law and Process of New
South Wales
(Federation Press, 6
ed, 2015) 23.
Ibid (emphasis in
See Catherine Tiplady,
‘Why Some People are Cruel to Animals’ in Catherine Tiplady,
Animal Abuse: Helping People and Animals
(CABI, 2013) 17. In Queensland,
domestic violence is defined to include ‘causing or threatening to cause
the death of, or injury
to, an animal, whether or not the animal belongs to the
person to whom the behaviour is directed, so as to control, dominate or coerce
the person’:
Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 2012
ss 8(2)(g).
As from 1 July 2016, this
represents a fine of $36 570: see above n 40. By contrast, breach of a
health and safety duty in Queensland
that exposes an individual to risk of death
or serious injury or illness brings a maximum fine of $182 850 (1500
penalty units):
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
breach is reckless the penalty is up to $731 400 (6000 penalty units) or
five years’ imprisonment:
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
For specific examples
focused on work health and safety, see Freiberg, above n 11, 92–5.
F W Rogers Brambell et al,
Report of the Technical Committee to Enquire into the Welfare of Animals Kept
under Intensive Livestock Husbandry Systems
(A Report to the Secretary of
State for Scotland and the Great Britain Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food, 1965).
For an account of the
development of the Five Freedoms, see D J Mellor and J R Webster,
‘Development of Animal Welfare Understanding
Drives Change in Minimum
Welfare Standards’ (2014) 33(1)
Scientific and Technical Review
121; Clare McCausland, ‘The Five Freedoms of Animal Welfare are
Rights’ (2014) 27(4)
Journal of Agricultural and Environmental
649; Steven P McCulloch, ‘A Critique of FAWC’s Five
Freedoms as a Framework for the Analysis of Animal Welfare’
(2013) 26(5)
Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics
Animal Welfare Act
In debate on the Bill
introducing the duty of care, the Tasmanian Minister for Primary Industries and
Fisheries refers to the duty
as a ‘new feature’ and ‘indicator
of the philosophy behind the bill’, but otherwise the provision is not
addressed in his speech or those of other members speaking on the Bill: see
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Assembly, 7 September 1993
2657 (Robin Gray).
Welfare of Farmed Animals
(England) Regulations 2000
(UK) (now repealed, but with a 2007 version in
place), made under
Agriculture (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1968
Animal Welfare Act
(UK) s 9. For a discussion of various elements of the UK legislation,
see Oliver Bennett, ‘The Animal Welfare Bill’ (Research
Paper 05/87,
House of Commons Library, 7 December 2005)
http://www.parliament.uk/briefing-papers/RP05-87/animal-welfare-bill-bill-58-of-200506
Animal Welfare Act
(NT) ss 7, 8.
Animal Welfare Act
McCulloch, above n 91,
For an overview of this
shift, see Mellor and Webster, above n 91. Mellor and Webster suggest at 125
(citations omitted) that
[a]lthough the predominant initial purpose of science-based animal welfare
initiatives was to minimise or eliminate negative affects,
during the last 20
years the importance of positive experiences has become increasingly apparent.
Thus, the early, almost exclusive
focus on negative states may now be regarded
as minimalist ... .
See also FAWC,
Farm Animal Welfare in Great Britain: Past, Present and
(2009). An emphasis on welfare enhancement in addition to welfare
compromise underpins the notion of a life worth living as a way
characterising animal welfare, as well as the Five Domains Model developed by
Mellor: see David J Mellor, ‘Updating Animal
Welfare Thinking: Moving
beyond the “Five Freedoms” towards “A Life Worth
Living”’ (2016) 6(3)
Donald M Broom, ‘A
History of Animal Welfare Science’ (2011) 59(2)
Acta Biotheoretica
McCulloch, above n 91,
Freiberg, above n 11,
Christine Parker,
‘The Pluralization of Regulation’
(2008) 9(2)
Theoretical
Inquiries in Law
Ibid 356–7.
Freiberg, above n 11, 94
(citations omitted).
Pet Shop Code
<https://www.daf.qld.gov.au/animal-industries/welfare-and-ethics/animal-welfare/about-the-pet-shop-code>.
This code is under
It is notable that the
only relevant guidelines in place in Queensland are for a sector commercially
exploiting companion animals.
More prescriptive guidelines may be particularly
important in a context outside a household ‘pet’ scenario, where the
risk of harm to animals is accentuated by their instrumental use as tools of
profit. Although outside the scope of this article,
effective regulation of
breeders and pet shops may require regulatory responses that are distinct from
those for companion animals
in a household setting.
A comprehensive, if now
slightly dated, jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction inventory can be found in Harlock
Jackson Pty Ltd,
Australian Animal Welfare Strategy: Review of Existing
Animal Welfare Arrangements for the Companion Animals Working Group
13–22 <http://www.australiananimalwelfare.
com.au/app/webroot/files/upload/files/aaws_stocktake_companion.pdf>.
Animal Welfare
(Welfare of Cats in the ACT) Code of Practice 2007
Animal Welfare
(Welfare of Dogs in the ACT) Code of Practice 2010
(ACT)’): see
http://www.legislation.act.gov.au/a/1992-45/di.asp
The codes were developed by the ACT Animal Welfare Advisory Committee (ie not a
government department) and then tabled by the
Minister. The ACT has a small
population and is Australia’s best-educated and wealthiest jurisdiction.
The codes are premised
on the obligation created by choosing to keep
domesticated animals and a need to provide guidelines on proper care. For
(ACT) states that it has been prepared in order
‘to provide guidelines for the welfare of dogs, including minimum
of accommodation, management and care. Since humans can alter and
control an animal’s environment, animal welfare includes
the concept that
people have duties and responsibilities towards animals. The greater the level
of interference or control of an
animal’s environment, the greater our
responsibility’:
(ACT), 1 <http://www.legislation.
act.gov.au/di/2010-85/current/pdf/2010-85.pdf>.
See, eg, Agriculture
http://agriculture.vic.gov.au/pets
Information
for Pet Owners
<https://www.daf.qld.gov.au/animal-industries/welfare-and-ethics/animal-welfare/information-for-pet-owners>.
See, eg, RSPCA
Queensland,
Provide Animal Care Advice
http://www.rspcaqld.org.au/what-we-do/provide-animal-care-advice
RSPCA Australia,
Knowledgebase –
Caring for a New Pet
http://kb.rspca.org.au/29/
http://www.awlqld.com.au/education/
The Commonwealth
Government coordinated the AAWS until December 2013, when funding was withdrawn.
The AAWS was introduced in 2004
and was a collective, federal response to the
need for more coherent animal protection policymaking and implementation across
states and territories: see Australian Government Department of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Forestry,
Australian Animal Welfare Strategy and National
Implementation Plan 2010–2014
http://www.agriculture.gov.au/animal/welfare/aaws/australian-animal-welfare-strategy-aaws-and-national-implementation-plan-2010-14
A key goal of the AAWS was to achieve a nationally consistent approach to the
design, adoption and implementation of regulatory
standards and guidelines for
animal welfare.
http://www.australiananimalwelfare.com.au/content/pets-and-companion-animals/ca-s-early-work
RSPCA Queensland,
Annual Report 2013–14
http://www.rspcaqld.org.au/who-we-are/annual-report
RSPCA Queensland,
Annual Report 2012–13
http://www.rspcaqld.org.au/who-we-are/annual-report
RSPCA Queensland,
Annual Report 2011–12
http://www.rspcaqld.org.au/who-we-are/annual-report
Ibid s 32. This provision
will be particularly relevant in charges arising from a joint Animals Australia
and Animal Liberation Queensland
investigation that uncovered widespread live
baiting in the greyhound industry and that was followed up by relevant state
enforcement
authorities: Caro Meldrum-Hanna and Sam Clark, ‘Making a
Four Corners
(ABC Television, 16 February 2015)
http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/stories/2015/02/16/4178920.htm
Queensland stated that
RSPCA Queensland Inspectors and veterinarians last week raided the property
of a prominent greyhound trainer following information
provided by Animal
Liberation and Animals Australia. Last night the ABC’s
Four Corners
program aired disturbing footage that showed live animals being used to
“train” greyhounds. Live baiting uses live animals
encourage the dogs [to] chase the lure. These animals are subjected to extreme
stress before being mauled to death.
RSPCA Queensland, ‘Live Baiting in Greyhound Racing Industry’
(Media Statement, 17 February 2015)
http://www.rspcaqld.org.au/news-and-events/news/greyhound-industry
first conviction arising from the live baiting investigations, based on breach
of s 242 of the
Criminal Code
(Qld), occurred in February 2016: see above
Ibid ss 23–29.
Freiberg defines
prescriptive regulation as ‘a rule or statement that specifies in
relatively precise terms what is required
to be done’: above n 11, 89.
No specific definition of
‘closely confined’ is provided. Instead the
33(2) states that in ‘deciding whether a dog is closely confined for
subsection (1), regard must be had to the dog’s
age, physical condition
19. As at 1 July 2016 this represents a fine of $36 570: see Queensland
Government, above n 40.
Steven White,
‘Companion Animals: Members of the Family or Legally Discarded
[2009] UNSWLawJl 42
(2009) 32(3)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Bernard E Rollin and
Michael D H Rollin, ‘Dogmatisms and Catechisms — Ethics and
Companion Animals’ (2001) 14(1)
Scott, above n 11, 108
citing Colin S Diver, ‘The Optimal Precision of Administrative
(1983) 93(1)
Yale Law Journal
Directive 2001/95/EC
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 3 December 2001 on General
Product Safety
[2002] OJ L 11/5.
Scott, above n 11,
Ibid. Freiberg makes a
similar point, arguing that ‘[c]ompared with rule-based regulation, which
demands strict adherence to
detailed requirements, it is left to a court or some
other body to measure the regulated conduct against some broad criterion such
“reasonableness”’: Freiberg, above n 11, 92–3.
Scott, above n 11,
The organisation states
that it ‘requires $42 million annually to support our animal centres,
programs and services’
and that as ‘a non-government, community
based charity [RSPCA Qld] receives less than 1% of funding from the government
relies on donations, bequests and sponsorships from ordinary
Queenslanders’: RSPCA Queensland,
http://www.rspcaqld.org.au/who-we-are/about-rspca-qld
BLEATS (Brisbane Lawyers
Educating and Advocating for Tougher Sentences)
http://www.bleats.com.au/Home
. BLEATS was founded in 2007 and
‘comprises a panel of more than 300 lawyers (about 150 barristers
including three Queens
Counsel and about 150 solicitors) as well as 150 support
staff (including psychologists, psychiatrists, administrative staff and
university students)’: Michael Byrne and Tracy-Lynne Geysen,
‘Prosecuting Animal Cruelty and Neglect Matters’ in
Animal Abuse: Helping People and Animals
(Centre for Agriculture
and Biosciences International (CABI), 2013) 142, 144.
Scott, above n 11,
Goodfellow argues that
‘the sheer size of the regulated community precludes the development of
any genuine relationships between
regulators and regulatees’: Jed
Goodfellow, ‘Animal Welfare Law Enforcement: To Punish or Persuade?’
in Peter Sankoff,
Steven White and Celeste Black (eds),
Animal Law in
Australasia: Continuing the Dialogue
(Federation Press, 2
2013) 183, 189.
Julia Black,
‘Enrolling Actors in Regulatory Systems: Examples from UK Financial
Services Regulation’
Robert Baldwin, Martin
Cave and Martin Lodge,
Understanding Regulation: Theory, Strategy and
(Oxford University Press, 2
ed, 2011) 106.
See, eg, Geoff Bloom,
‘Regulating Animal Welfare to Promote and Protect Improved Animal Welfare
Outcomes under the Australian
Animal Welfare Strategy’ (Paper presented at
the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy International Animal Welfare Conference,
Gold Coast, 1 September 2008) 32–3
http://www.australiananimalwelfare.com.au/content/day-one
Sankoff, ‘Five Years of the “New” Animal Welfare Regime:
Lessons Learned from New Zealand’s Decision
to Modernize its Animal
Welfare Legislation’
For a summary of these
sorts of sanctions in a responsive regulation context, see Freiberg, above
n 11, 95–103.
Robert Baldwin and Julia
Black, ‘Really Responsive Regulation’
(2008) 71(1)
Andrew Ashworth,
‘Is the Criminal Law a Lost Cause?’
Law Quarterly
, 250. See also Baldwin and Black, ibid. Freiberg observes that
the ‘elevation of a social norm into legislation, or the desire
a social norm by an Act of Parliament, can send important moral signals’,
with law having an expressive function,
able to ‘channel and express
emotions by requiring the denunciation of certain forms of conduct’:
Freiberg, above n 11,
181 (citations omitted).
A detailed analysis of
sentencing outcomes in Australian and New Zealand animal cruelty cases suggests
that it is rare for custodial
sentences to be imposed and that, where they are
imposed, it is more likely to be in cases where there has been extreme animal
Even in those cases, though, sentences are low, dampening down upper
level sentences for less extreme, but still very serious offending:
Markham, ‘Animal Cruelty Sentencing in Australia and New Zealand’ in
Peter Sankoff, Steven White and Celeste
Animal Law in Australasia:
Continuing the Dialogue
(Federation Press, 2
ed, 2013) 208,
John C Coffee Jr,
‘Paradigms Lost: The Blurring of the Criminal and Civil Law Models —
and What Can be Done about It’
(1992) 101(8)
Yale Law Journal
Ibid 1888–9.
The ACT, for example, has
adopted regulations that allow for the imposition of infringement notices for a
range of offences, mostly
concerning confined animals (ie commercial farm
animals), but not for the generic cruelty or aggravated cruelty offences:
Magistrates Court (Animal Welfare Infringement Notices) Regulation 2014
6, pt 2, div 5.
See generally Julia
Black, ‘Talking about Regulation’
Welfare (Welfare of Cats in the ACT) Code of Practice 2007
Welfare (Welfare of Dogs in the ACT) Code of Practice 2010
http://www.legislation.act.gov.au/a/1992-45/di.asp
Animal Welfare (Dogs)
Code of Welfare 2010
Animal Welfare (Companion Cats) Code of
Welfare 2007
(NZ): New Zealand Ministry for Primary Industries,
<https://www.mpi.govt.nz/protection-and-response/animal-welfare/codes-of-welfare/>.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (621 KB)
PDF format (358 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter