URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlRRuralRLawP/2021/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:03:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ruddell, Rick --- "Rural American Jails: Rising Demands, Tight Money, and Limited Options" [2021] IntJlRRuralRLawP 2; (2021) 9(1) International Journal of Regional, Rural and Remote (RRR) Law & Policy, Article 2
International Journal of Regional, Rural and Remote (RRR)
Law and Policy
[ISSN: 1839-745X]
[Formerly known as International Journal of Rural Law and
Human Nature vs. Food System Transitions?
Lähteenmäki-Uutela
Evolutionary psychology explains the origins and operations of human
emotions, biases and behavioral tendencies. These species-specific
impact how consumers, citizens, business leaders, and politicians see food and
food systems. Today, a major transition towards
more sustainable food systems is
necessary: we need to change the way we are producing and consuming food. Some
of our evolved tendencies
may hinder sustainability transitions, however. Our
moral intuitions are not very well evolved to solve global environmental
or issues of intergenerational justice. Transparency is vital for any
moral emotions to function: we must see and feel food system
problems in order
to feel guilt, which is not always possible in modern food supply chains. Food
systems possess a specific challenge:
the survival motive may make the worst
food options taste the best.
Homo sapiens
is an omnivore, and new
nutrition sources make us curious and cautious at the same time. Disgust and
neophobia can be overcome by
exposure and example. Recognizing our evolutionary
tendencies may empower us at individual level and aid policy making at societal
level. Humans as legislators may act more morally than humans as consumers. This
is because law-making is a public, deliberated act
because those in
power tend to be angrier.
Introduction: Evolutionary Psychology and the Human Mind
Evolutionary psychology is a psychological metatheory and discipline
interested in the biological evolution of the human mind and
It investigates
humans as a species that has developed certain cognitive models and emotions
through Darwinian selection. The theory
can be it can be applied to all
phenomena related to human behavior. The difference between proximate and
ultimate explanations of
human behavior is central to evolutionary psychology.
Evolutionary psychology studies the ultimate
and explains why, at
species level, the human shows tendencies towards specific behaviors. Ultimate
motives can also be called fundamental
. Garcia and Saad list
survival, reproduction/mating, kin selection (taking care of family), and
reciprocity (being a valued member
of the tribe) as the four evolutionary
relevant domains.
Saad calls these
“the four basal Darwinian
Homo sapiens
is an omnivore with a large brain that needs a lot of
calories and a varied diet. Food choice is a task we face several times in
day: we must continuously make decisions on what to eat and what not to eat.
Currently, our ways of eating cannot be considered
sustainable: our food
production and consumption systems are major causes for biodiversity loss and
climate change. Human rights
are violated in food supply chains, and factory
farms grow bigger and bigger. Systemic transitions towards low-carbon circular
and alternatives to animal-based proteins are urgently
The presumption here is that our evolved psychological modules have an impact
on which foods we tend to see as preferable vs. unpreferable
or good vs. bad. In
addition to the obvious link between food choice and survival, the reciprocity
module is relevant as humans look
for a better social conscience and reputation
through food choice and broader food system governance. The ultimate human
shape our attitudes and behavior not only as consumers or voters but
also as social media influencers, business leaders, activists,
administrators,
and legislators. It is important to notice that some of our evolved tendencies
may work against or even hinder the
very necessary sustainability transitions.
Recognizing our evolutionary tendencies may empower us at individual level and
making at societal level. This paper seeks to answer the following
research question:
- how do the evolved structures of the human mind impact food system
transitions?
Chapter 2 is food system-specific, studying how the survival motive and
food-related emotions or tendencies shape
Homo sapiens
behavior. Chapter
3 discusses human morality and the role of moral emotions in solving food system
challenges. Chapter 3 applies
to any sustainability issue where humans must act
to take moral responsibility over global problems.
Survival and Food Choice
Cosmides and Tooby say at our hunter-gatherer ancestors were “on a
camping trip that lasted a
Camping life
involved food choices and moral choices, and food and morality also often
combined. Food for humans is about gathering,
hunting and eating together. The
obvious evolutionary motive for food choice is survival. Food, diets, and
metabolism form an important
part of our evolution. A crucial difference between
humans and other primates is our large brain. The energy demands of brain and
other neural tissues are extremely high. We have relatively small
gastrointestinal tracts and small muscles. This means we are adapted
high in energy and nutrients easy to
For survival, a human must avoid potentially dangerous objects. The emotion
evolved primarily to protect us from disease. Rotten food is
one of the most basic threats to survival. Taste, smell and texture
are relevant
in determining whether a food will be good for the
Spoiled foods smell, look
and feel disgusting. Disgust is an emotional reaction that activates the
parasympathetic nervous system,
generates feelings of nausea and a
characteristic facial expression, and results in the behavioral avoidance of a
It is believed that
disgust developed when humans encountered new survival pressures when their
diets became more omnivorous or when
they began living in dense
. We have a disgust memory
bias: we remember disgust-eliciting images even better than fear-eliciting
Obviously but regrettably,
humans have not evolved to detect microplastics, pesticide residues, growth
hormones or antibiotic residues
Females report higher disgust sensitivity than males, and disgust sensitivity
declines over the life course.
Due to double or even triple risk (for self and/or fetus and/or breastfed
on average more
risk-aversive
(neophobic) with
novel foods than men. For women, taking food risks may signal inferior parental
capacity in the arena of intrasexual
competition and be disadvantageous to the
genes of offspring.
Food choice
is thus also related to reproduction and kin selection motives, in addition to
survival. If women were willing to opt
for extra safety also as food
legislators, the share of women in parliament might impact food law content.
Young men are the most risk-seeking humans
. High levels of testosterone
drive males towards acts that may lead to an increase in status, which is vital
for reproductive success.
can signal immune system strength and adventurous character through courageous
food choices, thereby increasing their mating
value. As males become fathers,
their testosterone levels drop and their attitude towards risk changes, as their
offspring would
suffer from excessive
risk-taking.
Our brains combine cues from the physical and social environment with our
internal states and categorize nature into edible and inedible.
probability of pathogen presence is combined with a low expected value of
eating, a human will not eat. Humans are curious
of new foods, but they are
suspicious at the same time.
Short-term changes in nutritional state do not make humans ignore pathogen cues,
but hunger may increase the willingness to eat novel
Although food-based
disease avoidance is not a social goal as such, it is more effectively attained
in cooperation with others. According
to Veeck, the social setting mitigates the
neophobic and neophilic tendencies of
individuals.
A norm or habit is
a strong cue of edibility, and
witnessing others eat and survive has high
information value
as a reliable signal of the food being safe. The survival
motive favors doing what everyone else does, and how everything has been
before. Human prefer foods they consumed as children, producing
preferences
(if one survived through childhood, it is reliable evidence on
the benefits of the diet). When it comes to consumption of novel foods
individual level or regulation of novel foods at societal level,
is skeptical. Why take the risk of introducing new foods when we
have this assortment available and proven non-fatal? Not even traditional
consumption of food by some other tribes is enough evidence for the nonexistence
Because one cannot start to analyze the options for food choice from scratch
four-five times a day, we employ heuristics and cues
to simplify it. One central
heuristic is eating what one always eats. Copying others is another. Status quo
bias in general is an
important phenomenon in society: the human is afraid of
To overcome disgust,
fear and suspicion, we follow the majority, or we follow the opinion leader.
People’s brains are adapted
into selective social
Whenever we see a
person of high status doing something, it is a cue that this behavior could be
positive as regards our own reproductive
fitness. The same is true whenever we
see many people around us behaving in a certain manner (called bandwagoning in
behavioral economics).
Healthy eating is today difficult because of the human preference for
high-energy foods combined with their overwhelming availability
affordability. The good taste of high-calory foods has caused the obesity
epidemic, as current environments are too full of fast
and easy energy. Plenty
of high-energy food available is a positive cue for the human brain: it means
life is looking good. Eating
plenty of food makes a person feel good because it
adds survival chances. For
Homo sapiens
high-calory foods and variable diets. Humans tend to remember the locations of
the outlets of high-calory
Humans use color as a
signal of food energy content and prefer varied meals with several different
colors. For females in reproductive
age, food preferences vary across the
menstrual cycle.
Cues about the harshness of the environment make a human ingest more
People eat to relieve
negative feelings such as anger, loneliness, boredom, and
depression,
. The object of a food
craving is usually an energy-intensive
Eating the craved food
eases tension, improves mood, and adds
A food craving is
difficult to resist because of its importance to our ancestors’ survival.
It is counterintuitive for human
psychology to prohibit or restrict the
availability of high-energy foods.
Morality and Food System Transitions
Even though food and morality have always linked, food choice is a moral
choice today more than ever. In explaining morality, helping
and pro-social
behavior in evolutionary terms, the concepts of inclusive
and reciprocal
are often referred to.
Inclusive fitness is related to family, to sharing the same genes.
Hamilton’s idea of inclusive fitness
is defined as an organism’s aim
to deliver its genes to the next generation and maximizing the probability of
the next generation
to survive and
Maximizing gene
success may typically mean favoring one’s offspring before oneself. The
impacts of psychological features
produced by inclusive fitness extend to
siblings, nieces or nephews, grandchildren and even to cousins: the more genetic
similarity,
the more helping.
Trivers’ theory of reciprocal altruism explains why humans also help
non-relatives.
suggests that an organism’s best chance to improve its inclusive fitness
is often to act
reciprocally
towards others.
describes the fitness
advantage of reciprocal behavior as an “insurance policy against
starvation”: “I’ll
share my food with your family now, and
you’ll reciprocate at a future date when my family requires caloric
as good a collaborator as the next person is integral for a
social animal, being a punisher is a sign of being group-focused, and
unfairness is bad for reputation. The central contribution of evolutionary
theory on morality is that all unselfish behavior
is motivated by the ultimate
motive to improve one’s own inclusive fitness: people behave ethically
towards non-relatives because
that will benefit their genes. The ultimate human
motive need not be consciously recognized: the proximate motive for helping is
typically the affection and duty felt towards others.
A major issue for any sustainability transition is that sustainable,
resource-saving and moral behavior on a global scale is not adaptive
‘environment of evolutionary
adaptation’
different from our modern living environment. For most of our evolutionary
history we lived in tribes, each consisting of
individuals,
which shaped our
moral perceptions and made our sense of ethics very limited. In other words,
human nature has not adapted to feel
morally responsible for the whole globe and
its 8 billion people. Further, due to our tribal nature, we have a strong
tendency towards
bi-polar morality
: we distinguish between in-group and
out-group. In ancestral environments, it was not fitness-enhancing to feel the
pain of the competing
tribe, and it would have been particularly detrimental to
spend resources on helping distant people one will never meet. Exploiting
out-groups can make perfect evolutionary sense, while exploiting one’s
relatives and in-group typically does not. What is more,
environmental problems
as we know them did not exist in ancestral times. We have evolved a psychology
of reaping the natural resources
and then moving to another place, which is
highly incompatible with the current challenge of staying within the planetary
boundaries.
Our brain is not
adapted to think about long-term future. In an uncertain environment, hoarding
aided surviving the next winter.
The fitness benefits of harvesting and storing
more resources than the direct competitors are multiple: such a tendency can
mates, friends, and allies.
In responsible (food) consumption, i.e. efforts to help distant (food system)
actors or to protect the environment or the animals,
direct reciprocity rewards
are rare. The consumer cannot be paid back by pineapple farmers or fishermen
operating in the supply chains,
and neither can a politician who votes for
supply chain due diligence laws. From the evolutionary perspective, moral deeds
strangers are related to
reputation.
act morally and call for moral acts towards strangers, because
. The phenomenon is called
‘indirect reciprocity’: the reputation achieved through responsible
activities improves one’s
fitness, because as a reciprocal species, humans
favor fair and nice actors.
Pro-social actors increase in status inside the tribe. In the competition over
reputation and prestige, we compete over who can act
Humans are more moral
when someone is watching, and sustainable behavior is typically not
Griskevicius et
have suggested the term
conspicuous conservation
to illustrate that the ultimate motive for
environmental-friendly behavior is related to reputation. The objective goodness
of specific
acts is not relevant for reputation: the sociocultural setting will
determine whether a specific (food-related) behavior improves
reputation, e.g. whether organic food consumption is expected and rewarded or
What matters is to live up
to the expectations of important others and to show it to them. Benefactors
generally want to display
their self-sacrificing and status-enhancing acts
The difference between
saying (and believing) in one’s responsibility and acting responsibly is
studied by Janssen and Vanhamme
as the CSR consumer paradox: while most
consumers say they want to buy responsible products, this is not seen in
purchasing behavior.
explained by the lack of transparency in consumption decisions: in the
supermarket, no-one is watching. The gap is also
explained by the human sense of
justice being ‘slanted toward the
: believing we are
moral makes us more convincing in making others believe it too.
moral animal
, we must continuously justify our actions to self
and others. Tooby and Cosmides theorize that in the reciprocal social world,
are continuously balancing their welfare tradeoff ratios towards
Welfare tradeoff means
that people will sacrifice their own effort in order to benefit others. A person
has a specific tradeoff ratio
towards each other person, where ratios towards
relatives, friends, and high-status persons are typically highest (because of
fitness, reciprocal altruism and indirect reciprocity).
is the emotion that creates incentives in the target to treat others
The usefulness of anger
is related to one’s own bargaining position, which is set by the
individual’s relative ability
to inflict costs and to confer benefits.
Those in power are
Citizens as
regulators are in the position to inflict costs and to confer benefits, which
may make them angrier towards wrongdoers
than what they are as consumers.
appears when one learns that one should do more in a specific
reciprocal relationship. Guilt is emotion combined with value: it directs
action and is evoked only when one learns new factors, not when the information
flow stays the same.
somewhat cynically sees sensitive sympathy as ‘nuanced investment
advice’: we feel the most sympathetic towards
those that are in the most
desperate kind of distress.
is because performing acts that will provoke the most gratitude will improve
one’s fitness the most, as the grateful will
adjust their welfare tradeoff
ratios towards the benefactor.
Janssen and Vanhamme,
discuss denial,
over-optimism, blaming victims, blaming others, hypocrisy, bystander apathy,
dilution of responsibility, bandwagon
effect, loss aversion, and hyperbolic
discounting as parts of species-specific human psychology. All these tendencies
have their roots in the millions of years of
Homo sapiens
evolutionary history. Our tribal brain is always looking for cues of someone
needing help, and cues of who should help. One will
only act morally if one is
capable and expected to act. One is always looking for social signals to stay on
the good side, to continue
as a fair person and as a valuable
member of tribe. Imitating neighbours was a major driver for moral behavior in
the environment
of evolutionary adaptedness, and it still
Doing too much is
detrimental
from the fitness perspective: a human cannot have the reputation
of being exploitable. If you give more than you get, it is a bigger
problem than
if you get more than you give.
If we believe rules are generally not obeyed, we will not obey
Even at the level of
international politics, countries may want a good reputation as forerunners in
sustainability, while avoiding
a reputation as suckers that will do more than
their fair share.
To keep a good reputation while not spending too much effort,
has developed the tendency to use various moral excuses in
situations where we decide not to help. To be convincing, we believe our
excuses. We say the problem is not that severe, and/or that others should solve
the problem, and/or that we are not capable of
solving the problem. Distant,
slowly evolving and/or vague problems do not elicit
The brain interprets
there is no benefit in spending precious energy for pro-social acts, if results
cannot be shown. Moral biases
may make us honestly to believe that we (as
Western consumers or as Western countries) are not responsible for the plight of
food system workers or climate change caused by high-carbon food
production.
Conclusions: Human Nature vs. Food System Transition?
Human evolutionary psychology consists of several tendencies that are against
food system sustainability transitions. Our preference
for high-calory foods
such as meat or cheese as well as our disgust towards new foods such as insects
or algae are major hindrances
for the shift. Strong emotions towards distant
peoples or intangible environmental problems are also not readily there, which
a challenge for engaging in moral behavior at the systemic level.
There are, however, possibilities for directing humans towards production and
consumption where diets are both healthy and sustainable,
thereby transforming
the food system. Disgust towards novel foods such can be overcome through
repeated exposure and examples of
high-status persons. Alternative protein
products should taste like they have plenty of calories. Humans can also be
motivated to
act against human rights violations or environmental destruction in
the food system. Moral emotions can be triggered through narratives
the issues close. Humans will change food systems if they feel anger towards
wrongdoers and guilt
for not having done enough. Humans typically engage
in moral competition for status through prestige. Transparency is vital for our
moral intuitions to work, and the eyes-on-you effect is strong. Being thanked
personally is highly rewarding and can support sustainable
Humans are looking for chances to show their responsibility, and witnessing
others acting responsibly increases social pressure. Rewarding
good behavior and
punishing bad behavior is beneficial for one’s reputation only if it is
made in public. While consumption
acts are private in modern food systems,
legislative acts are public. This may explain why consumers have not solved the
of the food system, but the same people as legislators might. Anger
may also have a role: those in power are angrier.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A. Articles/Books/Reports
Armelagos, G.J. ‘The Omnivore’s Dilemma. The Evolution of the
Brain and the Determinants of Food Choice’ (2010)
Anthropological Research
Barclay, P., ‘The evolution of charitable behaviour and the power of
reputation’ in S. C. Roberts (ed),
Applied evolutionary psychology
(Oxford University Press 2011), 149
Bowen, D.J. and N.E. Grunberg, ‘Variations in Food Preference and
Consumption Across the Menstrual Cycle’ (1990) 47(2)
Physiology &
287. DOI: 10.1016/0031-9384(90)90144-s
Evolutionary psychology: The new science of the mind,
ed. (Pearson Education, 2012)
Chao, Y.-H., C.-C. Yang and W.B. Chiou, ‘Food as ego-protective remedy
for people experiencing shame. Experimental evidence
for a new perspective on
weight-related shame’ (2012) 59
Cosmides, L. and J. Tooby, ‘Evolutionary Psychology: New Perspectives
on Cognition and Motivation’ (2013) 64 Annual Review
of Psychology 201
Croson, R. and U. Gneezy, ‘Gender differences in preferences’
(2009) 47(2)
Journal of Economic Literature
Curtis, V., R. Aunger and T. Rabie, ‘Evidence that disgust evolved to
protect from risk of disease’ (2004)
Suppl 4271)
Proceedings of Biological Sciences
Darwin, C.,
The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals
Finnish translation by Leikola, A. (Terra Cognita Helsinki 2009).
Dawkins, R., ‘Sustainability does not come naturally: Darwinian
perspective on values’ (Inaugural Lecture, The Environment
Foundation, 14
November 2001)
Dawkins, R.,
The Selfish Gene
(Oxford University Press, 1976)
R.I.M. Dunbar, ‘The social brain: psychological underpinnings and
implications for the structure of organizations’ (2014)
Directions in Psychological Science
Ganley, R.M., ‘Emotion and Eating in Obesity: A Review of the
(1989) 8(3)
International Journal of Eating
Garcia, J.R. and G. Saad ‘Evolutionary neuromarketing: darwinizing the
neuroimaging paradigm for consumer behavior’ (2008)
Consumer Behaviour
Gettler, L.T., T. W. McDade, A.B. Feranil and C.W. Kuzawa,
‘Longitudinal evidence that fatherhood decreases testosterone in
males’ (2011) 108(39)
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
Griskevicius, V. and D.T. Kenrick ’Fundamental motives: How
evolutionary needs influence consumer behavior’ (2013) 23(3)
Consumer Psychology
Griskevicius, V., S. M. Cantu and M. Van Vugt, ‘The evolutionary bases
for sustainable behavior: implications for marketing,
policy, and social
entrepreneurship’ (2012) 31(1)
Journal of Public Policy & Marketing
Griskevicius, V., J. M. Tybur and B. van den Bergh, ’Going green to be
seen: status, reputation, and conspicuous conservation’
(2010) 98(3)
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
Hamilton, W. D., ‘The genetical evolution of social behaviour
I-II.’ (1964) 7(1)
Journal of Theoretical Biology
Hardy, C.L., and M. Van Vugt (2006). ‘Nice guys finish first: The
competitive altruism hypothesis’ (2006) 32(10)
Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin,
Iredale, W. and M. Van Vugt (2011). ’Altruism as showing off: a
signalling perspective on promoting green behaviour and acts
of kindness’
in S. C. Craig (ed.),
Applied evolutionary psychology
(Oxford University
Press, 2011)
Janssen, C. and J. Vanhamme, J. ’Theoretical Lenses for Understanding
the CSR-Consumer Paradox’ (2015) 130(4)
Journal of Business Ethics
The Evolution of Morality
(MIT Press, 2005)
Jurgilevich, A., T. Birge, J. Kentala-Lehtonen, K. Korhonen-Kurki, J.
Pietikäinen, L. Saikku and H. Schösler, ‘Transition
Circular Economy in the Food System’ (2016) 8(1)
Sustainability
Kahneman, D.,
Thinking, Fast and Slow
. (Penguin Books, 2011)
Kahneman, D., J.L. Knetsch and R.H. Thaler ‘Anomalies: The Endowment
Effect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias’ 5(1)
The Journal of
economic perspectives
Knaapila, A., K. Silventoinen, U. Broms, R. J. Rose, M. Perola, J. Kaprio and
H. M. Tuorila ‘Food Neophobia in Young Adults:
Genetic Architecture and
Relation to Personality, Pleasantness and Use Frequency of Foods, and Body Mass
Index—A Twin Study’
(2011) 41(4)
Behavioural Genetics
Laran, J. and A. Salerno (2013) ‘Life-History Strategy, Food Choice,
and Caloric Consumption’ (2013) 24(2)
Psychological Science
Nowak, M. and K. Sigmund ‘Evolution of indirect reciprocity’
(2005) Nature 437 1291
Perone, P., Ç. Çınar, P. D'ursi, L. R.
Durmuşoğlu, V. Lal and J. Tybur ‘Examining the effect of
on responses to pathogen cues and novel foods’ (2021) 42(2) Evolution and
Human Behavior 371
Puska P., S. Kurki, M. Lähdesmäki, M. Siltaoja and H. Luomala,
‘Sweet taste of prosocial status signaling: When eating
organic foods
makes you happy and hopeful’ (2018) 121
Richardson, B.J. ’A damp squib: environmental law from a human
evo-lutionary perspective’ (2011) 7(3) Osgoode CLPE Research
Paper Series
Ronay, R. and W. von Hippel, ‘Power, Testosterone and
Risk-taking’ (2010) 23(5)
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
Rottman, J., ‘Evolution, Development, and the Emergence of
Disgust’ (2014) 12(2)
Evolutionary Psychology
Saad, G., ‘Evolutionary consumption’ (2013) 23(3)
Consumer Psychology
Saris, W.H.M., S.B. Heymsfield and W.J. Evans, ‘Human brain evolution:
food for thoughts’ (2008) 11(6) Editorial in
Current Opinion in
Clinical Nutrition and Metabolic Care
Schienle, A., J. Potthoff, E. Schönthaler and C. Schlintl
‘Disgust-Related Memory Bias in Children and Adults’ (2021)
Evolutionary Psychology
. April 2021.
Scott-Phillips, T.C., T.E. Dickins, and S.A. West, ‘Evolutionary Theory
and the Ultimate–Proximate Distinction in the
Human Behavioral
Sciences’ (2011) 6(1)
Perspectives in Psychological Sciences
Sell, A., J. Tooby and L. Cosmides, L., ‘Formidability and the logic of
human anger’ (2009) 109(35)
Proceedings of the National Academy of
Shutts, K., K.D. Kinzler and J.M. DeJesus ’Understanding Infants’
and Children’s Social Learning About Foods: Previous
Research and New
Prospects: Selective Social Learning’ (2013) 49(3)
Developmental
Silk, J.B. and B.R. House, ‘Evolutionary foundations of human prosocial
sentiments’ (2011) 108(Suppl 2)
Proceedings of the National Academy of
Thayer, R.E.,
Calm Energy: How People Regulate Mood with Food and
(Oxford University Press, 2003)
Tinbergen, N. (1963). ‘On the aims and methods of ethology’
(1963) 20(4)
Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie
Tooby, J. and L. Cosmides, ‘The Evolutionary Psychology of the Emotions
and Their Relationship to Internal Regulatory Variables’
in M. Lewis, J.
M. Haviland-Jones and L.F. Barrett (eds.),
Handbook of Emotions
(Guilford, 2008)
Trivers, R.L., ‘The evolution of reciprocal altruism’ (1971)
Quarterly Review of Biology
Trivers R.L. ‘Parental investment and sexual selection’ in B.
Campbell (ed.)
Sexual selection and the descent of man
(Aldine, 1972)
Veeck, A. ‘Encounters with Extreme Foods: Neophilic/Neophobic
Tendencies and Novel Foods’ (2010) 16(2)
Journal of Food Products
de Vries, R., P. Morquecho-Campos, E. de Vet, M. de Rijk, E. Postma, K. de
Graaf, B. Engel and S. Boesveldt, ‘Human spatial
memory implicitly
prioritizes high-calorie foods’ (2020) 10
Scientific Reports
Wright, R.,
The Moral Animal: Evolutionary Psychology and Everyday
. (Pantheon, 1994)
Lähteenmäki-Uutela, Finnish Environment Institute, Latokartanonkaari
11, 07900 Helsinki, Finland
anu.lahteenmaki-uutela@syke.fi
E.g. D. Buss,
Evolutionary
psychology: The new science of the mind
(Pearson New International Edition,
2013), 395.
T.C. Scott-Phillips, T.E.
Dickins, and S.A. West, ‘Evolutionary Theory and the
Ultimate–Proximate Distinction in the
Human Behavioral Sciences’
(2011) 6(1)
Perspectives in Psychological Sciences
V. Griskevicius and D.T.
Kenrick ’Fundamental motives: How evolutionary needs influence consumer
behavior’ (2013) 23(3)
Journal of Consumer Psychology
J.R. Garcia & G. Saad
‘Evolutionary neuromarketing: darwinizing the neuroimaging paradigm for
consumer behavior’
(2008) 7(4-5)
Journal of Consumer Behaviour
G. Saad, ‘Evolutionary
consumption’ (2013) 23(3)
Journal of Consumer Psychology
See e.g. A. Jurgilevich, T.
Birge, J. Kentala-Lehtonen, K. Korhonen-Kurki, J. Pietikäinen, L. Saikku
and H. Schösler, ‘Transition
towards Circular Economy in the Food
System’ (2016) 8(1)
Sustainability
L. Cosmides and J. Tooby,
‘Evolutionary Psychology: New Perspectives on Cognition and
Motivation’ (2013) 64
Annual Review of Psychology
W.H.M. Saris, S.B. Heymsfield
and W.J. Evans, ‘Human brain evolution: food for thoughts’ (2008)
11(6) Editorial in
Current Opinion in Clinical Nutrition and Metabolic
683, 684-685.
The Expression
of the Emotions in Man and Animals
(1872), Finnish translation by Leikola,
A. (Terra Cognita Helsinki 2009), 222-223.
J. Rottman,
‘Evolution, Development, and the Emergence of Disgust’ (2014) 12(2)
Evolutionary Psychology
A. Schienle, J. Potthoff, E.
Schönthaler and C. Schlintl ‘Disgust-Related Memory Bias in Children
and Adults’ (2021)
Evolutionary Psychology
. April 2021.
V. Curtis, R. Aunger and T.
Rabie, ‘Evidence that disgust evolved to protect from risk of
disease’ (2004)
Suppl 4271)
Proceedings of Biological
A. Knaapila et al., ‘Food Neophobia in Young
Adults: Genetic Architecture and Relation to Personality, Pleasantness and Use
Frequency of Foods, and Body Mass Index—A Twin Study’ (2011) 41(4)
Behavioural Genetics
R. Ronay and W. von Hippel,
‘Power, Testosterone and Risk-taking’ (2010) 23(5)
Behavioral Decision Making
Gettler et al.,
‘Longitudinal evidence that fatherhood decreases testosterone in human
males’ (2011) 108(39)
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
16 194, 16 194.
G.J. Armelagos ‘The
Omnivore’s Dilemma. The Evolution of the Brain and the Determinants of
Food Choice’ (2010)
Journal of Anthropological Research
P. Perone et al., ‘Examining the effect of
hunger on responses to pathogen cues and novel foods’ (2021) 42(2)
Evolution and Human Behavior
A. Veeck ‘Encounters
with Extreme Foods: Neophilic/Neophobic Tendencies and Novel Foods’ (2010)
Journal of Food Products Marketing
D. Kahneman, J.L. Knetsch
and R.H. Thaler ‘Anomalies: The Endowment Effect, Loss Aversion, and
Status Quo Bias’ 5(1)
The Journal of economic perspectives
K. Shutts, K.D. Kinzler and
J.M. DeJesus ’Understanding Infants’ and Children’s Social
Learning About Foods: Previous
Research and New Prospects: Selective Social
Learning’ (2013) 49(3)
Developmental psychology
R. de Vries et al,
‘Human spatial memory implicitly prioritizes high-calorie foods’
Scientific Reports
D.J. Bowen and N.E.
Grunberg, ‘Variations in Food Preference and Consumption Across the
Menstrual Cycle’ (1990) 47(2)
Physiology & Behavior
J. Laran and A. Salerno
(2013) ‘Life-History Strategy, Food Choice, and Caloric Consumption’
(2013) 24(2)
Psychological Science
R.M. Ganley, ‘Emotion
and Eating in Obesity: A Review of the Literature
(1989) 8(3)
International Journal of Eating Disorders
Y.-H. Chao, C.-C. Yang and
W.B. Chiou, ‘Food as ego-protective remedy for people experiencing shame.
Experimental evidence
for a new perspective on weight-related shame’
R.E. Thayer
Calm Energy:
How People Regulate Mood with Food and Exercise
(Oxford University Press,
W.D. Hamilton, ‘The
genetical evolution of social behaviour I-II.’ (1964) 7(1)
Theoretical Biology
R.L. Trivers, ‘The evolution of reciprocal
altruism’ (1971) 46(1)
Quarterly Review of Biology
Hamilton (n 28).
Trivers (n 29) 35.
Saad (n 7) 361.
Richard Dawkins,
‘Sustainability does not come naturally: Darwinian perspective on
values’ (Inaugural Lecture, The Environment
Foundation, 14 November 2001)
See J. Tooby and L.
Cosmides, ‘The Evolutionary Psychology of the Emotions and Their
Relationship to Internal Regulatory Variables’
in M. Lewis, J. M.
Haviland-Jones and L.F. Barrett (eds.), Handbook of Emotions, 3rd Ed. (Guilford,
2008) 1992.
See, e.g., R.I.M. Dunbar,
‘The social brain: psychological underpinnings and implications for the
structure of organizations’
(2014) 23(2)
Current Directions in
Psychological Science
, 109, 109.
See V. Griskevicius, V., S.
M. Cantu and M. Van Vugt, ‘The evolutionary bases for sustainable
behavior: implications for marketing,
policy, and social entrepreneurship’
(2012) 31(1) Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 115, 117.
P. Barclay, ‘The
evolution of charitable behaviour and the power of reputation’ in S. C.
Roberts (ed),
Applied evolutionary psychology
(Oxford University Press,
M. Nowak and K. Sigmund
‘Evolution of indirect reciprocity’ (2005)
1291; R. Joyce, The Evolution of Morality (MIT Press, 2005) 31.
C.L. Hardy and M. Van Vugt,
‘Nice guys finish first: The competitive altruism hypothesis’ (2006)
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin
1402, 1412.
W. Iredale and M. Van Vugt,
’Altruism as showing off: a signalling perspective on promoting green
behaviour and acts of kindness’
in S. C. Craig (ed.),
evolutionary psychology
(Oxford University Press, 2011) 176.
V. Griskevicius, M. Tybur
and B. van den Bergh, ’Going green to be seen: status, reputation, and
conspicuous conservation’
(2010) 98(3)
Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology
P. Puska, S. Kurki, M.
Lähdesmäki, M. Siltaoja and H. Luomala, ‘Sweet taste of
prosocial status signaling: When eating
organic foods makes you happy and
hopeful’ (2018) 121
Griskevicius and Kenrick (n 5) add exact page
C. Janssen and J. Vanhamme,
J. ’Theoretical Lenses for Understanding the CSR-Consumer Paradox’
(2015) 130(4)
Journal of Business Ethics
Animal: Evolutionary Psychology and Everyday Life
(Pantheon, 1994) 278.
Tooby and Cosmides (n 35)
A.J. Sell, J. Tooby and L.
Cosmides, ‘Formidability and the logic of human anger’ (2009)
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
The Evolution
of Morality
(MIT Press, 2005) add exact page number.
Wright (n 47) 204.
Tooby and Cosmides (n 35)
Janssen and Vanhamme (n
D. Kahneman,
Fast and Slow
(Penguin Books, 2011).
Wright (n 46).
Joyce (n 50).
Griskevicius et al. 2012 (n
Wright (n 47) 278.
Griskevicius et al. 2012 (n
B.J. Richardson ’A
damp squib: environmental law from a human evolutionary perspective’
(2011) 7(3) Osgoode CLPE Research
Paper Series, 38.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (82.2 KB)
PDF format (248 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter