URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2018/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:50:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Eades, David --- "Mental Health and the Impact of Relational Connections in Incarceration: Being 'Other-Orientated'" [2018] CICrimJust 11; (2018) 30(1) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 57
Contemporary Comment
Mental Health and the Impact of Relational Connections in
Incarceration: Being ‘Other-Orientated’
This contemporary comment reviews the shortcomings of the biomedical approach
used in isolation in dealing with stress and mental
health issues in the context
of incarceration and explores the benefits of the biopsychosocial approach,
focusing particularly on
the positive social impact this model may have on the
lives of those incarcerated. Interpersonal relations have been used by those
incarcerated as a way to navigate the circumstances they face. The interpersonal
relationships developed can have a transformational
impact. This comment
explores the concept of being ‘other-orientated’ as a major
contributor in accumulating resilience
and maintaining positive mental health by
those incarcerated.
incarceration – resilience – mental health
– wellbeing –biomedical – biopsychosocial –
interpersonal
Introduction
There is an emerging field within the criminal justice system termed
‘neurolaw’. Proponents of neurolaw are applying neuroscience
variety of different contexts as a result of recent advances in pharmacology and
genetics. Within neurolaw, consideration is
given to how human behaviour can be
modified using pharmaceuticals by transforming the biochemical composition of a
brain. Ryan (2013) highlights that, in the criminal justice
system, biochemical interventions are increasingly being utilised in
rehabilitation, rather than focusing on changing the characters of offenders.
This comment highlights the need within the criminal
justice system for a
biopsychosocial focus that is not constrained by a biomedical approach to
managing behaviour.
The biomedical model as it relates to mental health emphasises
pharmacological means to treat biological abnormalities. Mental disorders
viewed as biologically based brain diseases, chemical imbalances, or abnormal
brain functioning that need to be treated with
psychotropic medicines. This
model is the prevailing perspective through which mental health is assessed and
treated. However, concerns
have been raised regarding the effects of psychiatric
medications used over prolonged periods. For example, Favor (2003), Fava and
Offidani (2010) and Whitaker (2010) argue that the prolonged use of psychiatric
medications may in fact cause a deterioration of
mental health, and Insel (2010)
argues that such medications may not be providing lasting relief. These concerns
relate to the fact
that the biomedical approach at times is used independently
of concerns regarding the social, psychological and behavioural dimensions
people’s wellbeing. Despite the existence of alternative theories for the
treatment of mental health, the biomedical model
continues to dominate the
mental health system, especially in the United States. It has also had a
significant influence on the development
of approaches used in clinical
psychology (Wampold 2001). Deacon notes that biopsychosocial approaches are
neglected in favour of
medical theories because ‘in the biomedical
paradigm, the primary aim of research into the nature of mental disorders is to
uncover the biological causes’ (2013, p. 6) that relate to brain
functioning, rather than the social aspects of life.
It is not the intention of this comment to discredit the biomedical model.
Rather, this comment is concerned with the use of the biomedical
approach in
isolation, with little or no regard for other factors that influence mental
health. Biological and social perspectives
do not need to be incompatible.
Kendler and Schaffner (2011) point out the need for more tolerance of various
frameworks and simultaneously
being self-critical of theories adopted, whether
biological, social or psychodynamic. It is vital that mental health issues are
through a holistic paradigm. This comment considers the benefits of the
holistic biopsychosocial model, a much-neglected perspective
that has many
advantages when used in conjunction with the biomedical approach to understand
Unpacking the term ‘biopsychosocial’, ‘bio’ relates
to living organisms, ‘psycho’ relates to the
‘social’ relates to the aspects of interaction. George Engel
established the biopsychosocial approach in the
1970s, arguing that clinicians
needed to take a more holistic view of illness. This incorporated the biological
(genetic, biochemical,
etc), psychological (mood, personality, behaviour, etc),
and social (cultural, family, socio-economic, etc) dimensions of mental
(Engel 1977; see also Borrell-Carrrio, Suchman & Epstein 2004). Here, I am
interested particularly in the impact of social
interactions on the mental
health of a small sample of people who are incarcerated, especially as it links
to being ‘other-
orientated’. This comment traces the possible
positive impacts that focusing on the needs of others, rather than merely on
self, has on the mental health of those incarcerated. This social commentary was
inspired by numerous informal conversations
I had with people who had been
recently incarcerated, all of whom expressed common experiences relating to
stress and mental health.
Adversity, resilience and community
Different cultures have different ways of understanding suffering and its
impact on people’s resilience. Western societies tend
to focus on treating
the symptoms of mental health issues with biomedical solutions, emphasising
clinical solutions to personal
Ibebeme et al.
(2017) point out that ‘the predominant culture that governs health and
health care activities in the Western
world is scientific rationality or the
biomedical model’ (p. 14). Ibebeme et al. (2017) assert that this model is
assumed in the Western world as ‘a picture of reality’
rather than a mere ‘representation’ and that ‘the
assumptions
of the model are so deeply ingrained in the ways of thinking in Western medicine
that health care workers tend to forget
that it is a conceptual model or a way
of thinking about the world’ (p. 14). In contrast, many non-Western
societies apply
a more social approach, adopting a more holistic, integrated
approach to personal problems. In non-Western societies, issues in life
viewed more within the context of family or community and less with regards to
individual needs. Ibebeme et al. (2017) highlight
that a conceptual
representation of reality observed primarily in
non-Western societies defines illness as a disturbance in social
relationships or to the balance of life, for example, and the cause
is framed in a social context, rather than as a biological process. Brucken,
Giller and Summerfield (1995) support the
notion that individual recovery of
people of diverse cultures involves family and often the wider community.
For many cultures, resilience is based in community, drawing on interpersonal
connections as a way of gaining strength to navigate
adverse circumstances.
Terms such as ‘community resilience’, ‘community
capacity’ and ‘asset-building
communities’ are used to
describe the aspect of resilience that forms as a result of individuals finding
meaningful involvement
through attachments with others (Benson 2003; Tricket
& Birman 2000; Ungar 2005). Incarcerated individuals can gain strength
only from what others give to them, but also through the way they assist others.
Walsh notes that, in reaching out to others,
people unlock resources that they
may not otherwise have drawn upon (2007, p. 218). Staub defines the term
‘other-related’
as a ‘prosocial orientation’, focused on
being of benefit to others and having concern for their welfare (1990, p.
This comment proposes that a contributor to wellbeing is grounded in a
person’s capacity to maintain resilience in adversity
through being
‘other-orientated’. In this context, adversity is being
incarcerated. The concept of resilience is more
than a simple ability,
personality trait or developed skill set. Here, resilience is understood as the
capacity of individuals to
navigate their way to health-sustaining resources,
including feelings of wellbeing, when exposed to significant adversity (Ungar
2006), particularly through utilising interpersonal relations (Wilson 2013). It
includes good mental health, functional capacity
and social competence (Olsson
et al. 2003).
In the context of incarceration, it is difficult for individuals to be
resilient when they isolate themselves. Limiting interaction
with others can
lead to loneliness and depression. Studying patients in hospital, Catalano et
al. (2013) found that those in isolation
had significantly higher scores
relating to depression than those who were not isolated. Steptoe et al. (2013)
also document the
fact that social isolation is an important associative of
depressive symptoms. In contrast, an incarcerated person is likely to find
meaning and a sense of heightened solidarity when he or she contributes to the
lives of others (Wilson 2012).
The following section explores the experiences of a small group of people who
have recently transitioned out of incarceration and
examines their reflections
as case studies of other-oriented action. These experiences were captured
through an ethnography of engagement
by way of field notes through informal
conversations. Although the examples of other-orientated actions by those
incarcerated were
limited in number, these accounts mirrored what other people
had shared informally who had recently been discharged from incarceration.
able to be have contact with the people who formed the basis of the case studies
through shared community connections. Not
all people incarcerated share the same
outlook of the experiences recorded as it is not necessarily a common occurrence
to help another through a sense of altruism. However, these case
studies were recorded as an example of the positive impact being
‘other-orientated’ can have on a person incarcerated.
Utilising the biopsychosocial model for healing: some case studies
Some of the relationships that form while people are incarcerated take on
important symbolic meaning. In the cases I heard, this was
a common theme. A
former ‘bikie’ gang leader acted like a father figure or uncle to
some of the younger men. In reaching
what might be otherwise seen as a mid-life
crisis, he felt obligated to be a better role model than previously as a bikie
He knew that under his leadership, many younger guys had ended up in
He was also aware that he still held a sense of power over the younger men
incarcerated.
A number of these young men were still discovering ‘who they are’
and were trying to work out their self-identity. They
could have easily acted
out to gain attention and approval from others. The former gang leader felt a
sense of moral duty to encourage
the younger men to stay out of trouble and walk
away from arguments or trouble that did not need to take place. What helped him
incarceration was knowing that he could use his influence to curb
antisocial behaviour in others. He told me that he consciously
took on the role
of a ‘mentor’ to guide the younger men on more positive future
pathways. This man expressed the ‘sense
of hope’ he felt after
having passed on positive lessons from what otherwise seemed like his own wasted
years, feeling that
these lessons were used as a resource or reference point to
the lives of the younger men as giving him purpose and was a major contributor
to his positive framework. Walsh (2007) highlights
that many people find purpose
and transformation through actions that benefit others and contribute to
preventing future problems.
Another young man I spoke with was from an English-speaking background and he
reached out to others who had very limited English in
order to help them gain
confidence. He stated that people from non-English-speaking backgrounds easily
felt intimidated and embarrassed
at their lack of competency in English. This
young man took these people ‘under his wing’ to help them integrate
others. Often, humour was used to deepen the friendship between these
individuals. The English speaker developed a unique bond with
the people from a
different culture and gained a sense of satisfaction in knowing he was enabling
the lives of other people to be
less stressful. This young man conveyed to me
that he ‘felt appreciated’ and that helping another brought
meaning’ in his daily routine. He experienced a unique
situation through building close relationships with people from other
who he might formerly never have met. His circumstances were notably more stable
and he felt positive that he could actually
challenging situation.
I spoke with another man who had made a routine of playing the guitar each
afternoon in an activities room. He had started showing
a few others the basic
chords and teaching them how to start playing simple songs. He told me that he
used this time as a way of
‘chilling out’ and he expressed the fact
that the experience had a major therapeutic impact on his day. He also really
enjoyed seeing others play the guitar. He told me that he finished each day with
a ‘sense of satisfaction’ that he had
shared his knowledge with
others and allowed them to experience the same pleasure that he received from
playing music. He started
writing his own music and wondered if perhaps one day
he could do something with his songs.
Another man spoke to me about how he had developed his own form of mentoring
through a physical exercise program. He would wake another
guy every morning and
have him come out to the exercise area to do an hour of fitness. He led this
other man through a personal circuit
training program he had developed. This
experience contributed to a close friendship, but also assisted the other man to
lose a significant
amount of weight. The man I spoke with talked about the way
the process helped him be ‘motivated’ each day to help another
person turn his life around by losing weight and getting fit. He told me that
this gave him a sense of purpose and a reason to get
up in the morning.
The dynamic of one person reaching out to another was not restricted to those
incarcerated. Some of the men I spoke with commented
on the impact various staff
had on their lives. A few of the younger men spoke of the lack of
boundaries in their life previously.
They simply had not had someone to guide or
advise them to maintain a healthy focus in life. These men expressed the felt
a ‘mother’ figure. They explained that they had grown up
without a mother, or with an absent mother who was out working
or more focused
on chasing her own relationships rather than investing her time in her children.
As a result of this, some of the
more mature female officers took on the role of
the ‘mother’ figure. The younger men expressed feeling
because the officers were firm in telling them not to do
something and the officers were committed to maintaining a safety net for
These men stated they experienced a greater sense of peace, calmness and stable
mental health as a result of the positive,
consistent influence of the female
officers. The men’s ongoing interactions with these officers had an
important impact on
changing the men’s way of thinking.
Such relational connections, as outlined, had a major impact on the mental
health of those incarcerated. Krovel (2013) asserts that
dense networks of
social connectedness are related to wellbeing. The personal commitment shown by
a person who had no other reason
to help other than a sense of ‘moral
duty’ or ‘compassion’ provided a significant ‘kick
to ‘doing life’ differently. These experiences gave
those involved a sense of ‘hope’ for a better future
contributed to a strong sense of resilience. Peres et al. (2006) note that hope
is a critically important factor for better
health. Walsh (2007) suggests that
hope ‘fuels energies, and investment to rebuild lives’, it accepts
what has been ‘lost
and cannot be changed, while directing effects to what
can be done and seizing opportunities for something good to come out of the
tragedy’ (p. 213). In addition, special practical skills or interests were
also developed, and these skills provided a foundation
for the future and hope
that life could be better.
The former bikie gang leader realised that he had a skill for working with
troubled youth. The person who built a friendship with
people from a non-English
background contemplated enrolling in a short-term certificate course on tutoring
with the aim of establishing
a business running evening conversational classes
for non-English-speaking people. The person who helped others learn to play the
guitar considered guitar tutoring and perhaps setting up a music store. The
person who helped others in the gym thought about the
possibility of finding
work as a personal trainer. One of the men I spoke with talked about the help he
received from the female
officers and expressed his interest in wanting to do
some youth work for juveniles to help turn their lives around. In each instance,
future hope had become embedded in the outlooks of these men, which motivated
them to have a plan after leaving incarceration. The
positive residual
impact on their mental health occurred as an outcome of this process. They knew
that their skills were able to
enrich the lives of others.
The institution the men were held in had utilised a ‘meaningful
activities program’. However, using their own volition
to help others was
a different experience which elicited very different outcomes to the other
program offered. Those incarcerated
spoke about the difference between attending
an activities program and their own initiated assistance to another person.
These cases
outlined are examples of self-initiated care-giving. The actions
were not compulsory or pre-organised. Rather, these individuals
were building
interpersonal relationships with others by using their own talents. There was no
requirement for this other than a
personal sense, shared by those incarcerated,
that they ‘needed to be there’ for someone else.
For the people described, much of their daily routine had not changed while
being incarcerated. These same men presented themselves
each morning to the
medical centre for their daily methadone and for sleeping tablets at night to
individuals in this present case study had
undergone pharmacological treatment during incarceration. They commented that
these medications
were ‘stop-gap’ measures they relied upon until
their lives were ‘back on track’. They expressed the view
daily medication (biochemical intervention) was issued by nurses to help
stabilise their behaviour during their time of
incarceration. What surprised
them, however, was the overall improvement in their moods through the impersonal
connections they established
with others. In my conversations with these
individuals, they told me that they felt a greater sense of meaning and hope
could be different and bring positive experiences. They felt that all
was not wasted and there was still time left to invest their
contributing to the needs of others. They had already started this process
through their self-initiated interpersonal intervention
into the lives of others
while being incarcerated. This provided a stimulus to bounce back from the
hardships they had experienced
and, through this, their resilience was also
heightened. Walsh (2007) affirms that relational connections support a pathway
in resilience.
The people profiled here have started a process of transitioning from being
‘self-orientated’ to becoming ‘other-orientated’.
determination to go on and make a difference in life emerged from the
development of meaningful interpersonal connections.
These individuals may need
to continue to take prescribed medications to stabilise their day-to-day lives.
However, in my conversations
with these men, many stated that as they became
more established in following their dreams and aspirations in life, there was
need for various other substances (especially illicit) to keep their life
As a caveat to the emphasis placed on interpersonal relations, I do not
suggest that this is in anyway a substitute for the need for
medication by
people with mental health challenges such as bipolar disease. As I have
highlighted in the opening of this article,
the biopsychosocial perspective can
supplement the biomedical approach. Being other-orientated, however, is likely
to have clear
benefits to people with mental health issues for which they need
daily medication. The focus of the biopsychosocial model can provide
inspiration
for people incarcerated to move beyond any biomedical assistance that they have
received in the past. Their ongoing wellbeing
can be positively influenced by
their capacity to draw inspiration from interpersonal connections while they are
incarcerated. Those
incarcerated (discussed in the case studies) expressed that
being released from incarceration was not the answer to fulfilment. They
reinforced, however, the benefit of shifting their focus from
self-interest to being other-orientated.
The feedback I received through my interactions with those who were
incarcerated supports previous research concerning the development
of resilience
through community connections. Walsh (2007) highlights community connections as
an essential resource in trauma recovery
and the impact of utilising communities
for healing and resilience. Westoby (2009) presents the perspective of healing
as a social
paradigm and social process through which a sense of collective
agency is built. Incarcerated individuals develop their own community
institution. Their healing is found within the community more than through any
individual self-help program. They have
stumbled upon a natural way of building
meaningful interpersonal relationships with others and have been able to share a
talent that has also helped enhance the lives of others. Through being
‘other-orientated’, the minds of these individuals
were redirected
to the needs of others, and through this process they themselves felt more
relaxed and shared a greater hope for
their future. There was still a high
likelihood of them re-offending after being released from incarceration.
However, many have
put strategies in place to mitigate this risk. There is a
strong possibility that the impact of the interpersonal relations already
has contributed to a permanent change in their perspectives. In becoming
‘other-orientated’, they have found a
dynamic reflected within the
biopsychosocial model that may have a lasting impact on their lives.
This comment has profiled the limitations of relying purely on a biomedical
approach as it pertains to resolving mental health issues.
It presents the
potential for resilience-building through redirecting attention to reaching out
to others through being other-orientated.
Those incarcerated found hope for the
future through becoming more other-orientated. These people utilised elements
within a biopsychosocial
model that enriched their lives beyond what a
biomedical perspective is able to provide. There is no need, however, to create
either/or paradigm in relation to a biomedical or a biopsychosocial outlook.
What this comment addresses is the neglect of a biopsychosocial
perspective and
the positive impact it plays in the lives of those incarcerated. Examples of the
impact of interpersonal relations
illustrated how the biopsychosocial approach
is worked out in the context of incarceration. This is shown to make a major
in building resilience and enhancing the wellbeing of those
incarcerated.
Benson, P 2003, ‘Developmental assets and asset building community:
conceptual and empirical foundations’ in R Lerner
and P Benson (eds.),
Developmental assets and asset-building communities: implications for
research, policy, and practice
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers,
Borrell-Carrrio, F, Suchman, A & Epstein, R 2004, ‘The
biopsychosocial model 25 years later: principles, practice, and scientific
Annals of Family Medicine
, vol. 2, no. 6, pp.
Bracken, P, Giller, J & Summerfield, D 1995, ‘Psychological
responses to war and atrocity:
the limitations of current concepts’,
Social Science and
, vol. 40, no. 8, pp. 1073–82.
Catalano, G, Houston, S, Catalano, M, Butera, A, Jennings, S & Hakala, S
2013, ‘Anxiety and depression in hospitalized patients
in resistant
organism isolation’,
Southern Medical Journal
, vol. 96, no. 2, pp.
Deacon, B 2013, ‘The biomedical model of mental disorder: a critical
analysis of its validity, utility and effects on psychotherapy
Clinical Psychology Review
, vol. 33, pp. 846–61.
Engel, G 1977, ‘The need for a new medical model: a challenge for
biomedicine’,
, vol. 196, pp. 129–36.
Fava, G & Offidani, E 2010, ‘The mechanisms of tolerance in
antidepressant action’,
Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology
pp. 1593–602.
Favor, G 2003, ‘Can long-term treatment with antidepressant drugs
worsen the course of depression?’,
The Journal of Clinical
pp. 123–33.
Ibeneme, S, Eni, G, Ezuma, A & Fortwengel, G 2017, ‘Roads to health
in developing countries: understanding the intersection
of culture and
Current Therapeutic Research
, vol. 86, pp.
Insel, T 2010, ‘Faulty circuits’,
Scientific American,
Kendler, K & Schaffer, K 2011, ‘The dynamic hypothesis of
schizophrenia: an historical and philosophical analysis’,
Philosophy in
Psychiatry and Psychology
vol. 18, pp. 41–63.
Krovel, R 2013, ‘The role of conflict in producing alternative social
imaginations of the future’,
Media & Culture Journal
no. 5, pp. 1–8.
Megan, R 2013, ‘Science and the new rehabilitation’, Southern
Methodist University — SMU Dedman School of Law Legal
Studies Research
Paper No. 97, pp. 1–51.
Olsson, C, Bond, L, Barns, J, Vella-Brodrick, D & Sawyer, S 2003,
‘Adolescent resilience: a concept analysis’,
Adolescence
, vol. 26, pp. 218–35.
Peres, J, Almeida, A, Nusello, A, & Koenig, H 2006, ‘Spirituality
and resilience in trauma victims’,
Journal of Religion and Health
vol. 46, no. 3, pp 343–50.
Staub, E 1990, ‘Moral exclusion, personal gaol theory, and extreme
destructiveness’,
Journal of Social Issues
, vol. 46, no. 1, pp.
Steptoe, A, Shankar, A, Demakakos, P & Wardle, J 2013, ‘Social
isolation, loneliness, and all-cause mortality in older men
and women’,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Journal
, vol. 110,
no. 15, pp. 5797–801.
Trickett, E & Birman, D 2000, ‘Interventions with diverse children
and adolescents: contextualizing a wellness orientation’
in D Cicchetti, J
Tappaporty, I Sandler and R Weissberg (eds.),
The promotion of wellness in
children and adolescents
CWLA Press, Washington.
Ungar, M 2005, ‘A thicker description of resilience’,
International Journal of Narrative Therapy and Community Work
, vols. 3 &
Ungar, M 2006, ‘Resilience across cultures’,
British Journal
of Social Work
pp. 218–35.
Walsh, F 2007, ‘Traumatic loss and major disasters: strengthening
family and community resilience’,
Family Process
, vol. 46, no. 2,
pp. 207–27.
Wampold, B 2001,
The great psychotherapy debate: models, methods and
, Routledge, New York.
Westoby, P 2009,
The sociality of refugee healing in dialogue with South
Sudanese refugees resettled in Australia
, Common Ground Publishing,
Whitaker, R 2010,
Anatomy of an epidemic: magic bullets, psychiatric drugs
and the astonishing rise of mental illness in America
, Crown, New York.
Wilson, M 2012,
Accumulating resilience: an investigation of the migration
and resettlement experiences of young sudanese people in the Western Sydney
, PhD thesis, University of Western Sydney.
Researcher, WSU Institute for Culture and
Society, Building EM, Parramatta NSW 2751, Australia. Email:
2friends@tpg.com.au.
Classifying the world by
way of descriptions such as ‘Western’ and ‘non-Western’
is limiting and in many
ways counterproductive. However, for the purposes of
this comment, such terminology effectively encompasses the differences being
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (107 KB)
PDF format (364 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter