URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2019/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bennett, Belinda; Evelyn, Jane; Weir, Bridget --- "Driving Into New Frontiers? Data And Driverless Cars" [2019] UNSWLawJlF 8; (2019) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 8
I INTRODUCTION
II DRILLING FOR THE ‘NEW OIL’
III C-ITS DATA
IV KNOWING MY CAR, KNOWING ME?
V BUILDING PRIVACY INTO THE DRIVERLESS FUTURE
VI CONCLUSION
DRIVING INTO NEW FRONTIERS? DATA AND DRIVERLESS
BELINDA BENNETT,
JANE EVELYN
BRIDGET WEIR
I INTRODUCTION
The prospect of driverless cars on Australian roads at some stage in the
foreseeable future has led to a flurry of scholarly
discussion of the safety
and testing of vehicles,
proposals for legislative reform.
Most of the debate both in Australia and overseas has centred around technical
changes to road rules, driver licensing, and insurance
to accommodate a vehicle
that is ‘driven’ without a human
requirements for safety and
testing of vehicles,
and the ethics
of the ‘choices’ that might be made by a driverless car in the event
of an unavoidable crash.
recently, there has been a growing debate over the role of data in automated
vehicles and cooperative intelligent transport
systems (‘C-ITS’),
and the potential privacy-related concerns that may arise in the context of
driverless vehicles.
This article analyses the legal and ethical issues that are raised by the use
of data that will potentially be generated by driverless
cars, comparing
Australian approaches with those in overseas jurisdictions. Although current
vehicle technology can also generate
the focus of this article is
on the data and privacy challenges posed by C-ITS and driverless cars. It will
argue that the policy
landscape for data and driverless cars is characterised by
a series of intersections: between transport infrastructure and automated
vehicles; between federal and state/territory privacy laws; and between access
to data and privacy. The complexity of these intersections
presents significant
challenges for the development of Australian policy and regulation for
driverless cars.
Part II provides an overview of the different types of data that will be used
in the context of driverless vehicles, including the
data that will be generated
at an infrastructure level by connected transport systems, as well as the data
that will be generated
by individual driverless vehicles, which may or may not
be part of a connected transport system. Part III analyses the issues that
arise in relation to transport infrastructure data within C-ITS. Part IV
evaluates the question of access to data generated by
driverless cars, including
the question of accessibility to data by different parties, such as vehicle
owners, law enforcement, manufacturers
and others. Part V considers the
possibility of adopting a ‘privacy by design’ approach to driverless
cars before the
conclusion in Part VI.
II DRILLING FOR THE ‘NEW OIL’
With the emergence of ‘smart cities’ which rely on internet
connectivity and data collection and analysis to tailor service
the connectivity of the
transport system becomes one element in an integrated approach to urban
planning. Smart cities, and the Internet
of Things (‘IoT’), of which
connected vehicles may be one example, are built on connectivity and
data’ era, data increasingly has a commercial value. Indeed, such is this
value that data has been described
as ‘the new
Yet access to data
is becoming a contested space. Increasing connectivity and data collection has
been accompanied by concerns about
surveillance.
consumer control of data are emerging as potential brakes on the ubiquity of
data access.
In the context of transport, there is an emerging debate in Australia and
elsewhere about the role of data in C-ITS and automated
vehicles (driverless
cars). Data is a central issue to these future transportation
With so much data
likely to be generated by driverless cars, the privacy implications of that
data, and the conditions upon which
data may be shared and with whom, are
emerging as important considerations for transportation law and
Glancy argues that there are three privacy interests related to autonomous
vehicles: personal autonomy privacy interests, personal
information privacy
interests and surveillance privacy
Personal autonomy
interests relate to an individual’s decision about whether to use an
autonomous vehicle, and choice and control
in relation to the operation of the
vehicle, including where to go and how to get
The autonomy of the human
operator may be delegated to some degree to the vehicle, with the human user
retaining control over the
goals of the
transportation.
autonomy interests can be addressed through affirmative choice and informed
consent, the complex technical nature of autonomous
vehicles can present
difficulties in terms of making information accessible to consumers so as to
enable informed decision-making.
Autonomy interests may also be addressed by anonymity of data, although it may
be difficult to achieve this within connected transport
The data generated by
autonomous vehicles will also generate personal information privacy interests
around the collection and use
Finally, autonomous
vehicles will raise surveillance privacy
These interests
‘respond to people’s aversion to being constantly watched, tracked
or monitored as they travel from place
Part of the complexity of the debates about data and driverless cars is that
they connect with our expectations of privacy in our
Furthermore, debate
driverless cars cannot be divorced from
the broader debates within society about
data and privacy and consequently are occurring within a rapidly changing
social, ethical
and regulatory environment around data and privacy more
There are two broad areas in which data will potentially be generated by
driverless cars and connected transport systems. The first
relates to C-ITS
which is essentially the road and traffic infrastructure and the
‘smart’ technologies that will allow
vehicles to communicate with
this infrastructure, known as Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (‘V2I’)
communication.
It is in this
sense that automated vehicles would also be connected vehicles, thus allowing
for communication about matters such
congestion.
However, within
C-ITS, vehicles may also communicate with other vehicles (‘V2V’) and
with other road users such as pedestrians
and cyclists
C-ITS have the potential to deliver improvements in road safety through
collision avoidance and hazard detection, for example, by
providing warning of
potential hazards such as stationary vehicles ahead or approaching emergency
vehicles, or warning of road works
or reduced speed
In addition, C-ITS may
improve safety for vulnerable road users such as pedestrians, motorcyclists or
cyclists by providing enhanced
detection by motorists of these road
Drivers may also be
provided with improved signage in their vehicles, providing them with
information on speed zones, stop signs,
changed road surfaces, or hazardous
weather conditions.
response times to crashes could also be reduced by automatic emergency
post-crash notification
The other area in which data may be generated is by the vehicle itself. While
driverless cars are usually also connected vehicles,
referred to as
‘connected and autonomous vehicles’ (‘CAVs’), this is
not necessarily the case. Driverless
cars may simply allow for automated driving
without relying on a connected transport
Levels of driving
automation for vehicles are generally categorised according to the Society of
Automotive Engineers standard SAE
J3016 which has six levels of
automation.
At levels zero, one
and two all or part of the driving tasks are performed by the driver. For
example, at level zero the driver performs
all of the dynamic driving task,
while at level two there is partial driving automation. Parking assist functions
where the vehicle
parks while the driver remains in the car is an example of
partial automation.
discussion about driverless cars refers to higher levels of automation. At level
three (conditional driving automation), a driver
may be required to intervene
and take over the driving when requested to do so by the driving system. Heavy
vehicle platooning is
an example of conditional
automation.
Level four (high
driving automation) assumes that the driving task can be undertaken by the
driving system even if the driver does
not take over control when requested. An
example of high automation would be an automated vehicle that drives on a
pre-determined
route, such as a shuttle
while level five (full
driving automation) does not require any intervention by the human
Some of the data generated by C-ITS or driverless cars will be of a similar
kind to that already generated by vehicles. For example,
current advanced driver
assistance systems already use sensor units to detect obstacles, and electronic
control units to provide
information on journey distance and to warn of vehicle
However developments in
C-ITS and automated vehicle technology may generate new types of data.
In-vehicle video recording, for example,
may be used for driver recognition for
security, or to set driver
preferences.
These technologies
may be extended to the whole of the interior of the vehicle cabin at higher
levels of automation where there may
be no ‘driver
Other data that may
be generated includes event data recorders to record data about crashes,
including whether the driving system
or the human driver were in control of the
vehicle at the time of the crash, as well as V2V and V2I
In its recent discussion paper on data and C-ITS and automated vehicles, the
National Transport Commission (‘NTC’) stated:
While only some types of C-ITS and automated vehicle technology (and the
information generated by it) may raise new privacy challenges,
the breadth and
depth of information that will likely be generated may itself present a
According to the NTC, these privacy challenges are likely to arise for
several reasons: firstly, because automated vehicles will provide
all or most of
the driving task, they will require more inputs to operate than existing driving
secondly, ‘C-ITS
and automated vehicle technology will collect (and broadcast) a greater amount
of information relating to
the safety of vehicle occupants and the road
environment’;
navigation systems and event data recorders will become more widespread and
their data may be stored for longer periods
than is currently the
fourthly, ‘external
camera input units in automated vehicles will most likely move from real time
feed to recording and
and finally,
there are greater opportunities for data linkage by
governments.
With the value of data gaining increasing recognition, the policy approaches
to data management and data sharing are an important
element in the policy and
regulatory environment for the introduction of C-ITS and driverless cars, as is
the application of privacy
laws. Part III below will analyse the Australian
approach to the use of data in relation to C-ITS, while Part IV will focus on
approaches to data generated by the vehicle itself.
III C-ITS DATA
Governments have an interest in being able to access C-ITS data for law
enforcement purposes including crash investigations, for detection
offences such as speeding, to manage traffic, to manage road safety from natural
disasters or other hazards, and to assist
with strategic planning for
infrastructure.
However the
connectivity of future transport systems potentially raises complex issues in
terms of individual privacy. In its recent
discussion paper on ‘Regulating
Government Access to C-ITS and Automated Vehicle
the NTC concluded
that location information generated by C-ITS would most likely constitute
‘personal information’ within
the terms of the
information’ is defined in
information or an opinion about an identified individual, or an individual
who is reasonably identifiable:
(a) whether the information or opinion is true or not; and
(b) whether the information or opinion is recorded in a material form or
Furthermore, location information from C-ITS may reveal ‘sensitive
information’ within the definitions of the
The definition of
‘sensitive information’ includes information such as a
person’s race or ethnic origin, or religious
beliefs, and that is also
‘personal information’ (ie, from which a person is ‘reasonably
identifiable’),
as well as health information about an individual,
‘genetic information about an individual that is not otherwise health
information’,
‘biometric information that is to be used for the
purpose of automated biometric verification or biometric identification’,
or biometric templates.
concluded that location information within C-ITS may reveal sensitive
information about an individual from the venues they
The intersections between C-ITS and privacy laws are made more challenging by
the need to also consider the potential application
of state and territory
The lack of
harmonisation in Australian privacy laws adds to the complexities of the
regulatory environment for data-related issues
in the context of driverless
cars. As Vaile, Zalnieriute and Bennett Moses have noted:
Much of the collection or use of C-ITS & AV data will be done by state
and territory instrumentalities. The privacy legislation,
where it exists, is
broadly similar but some jurisdictions do not have privacy statutes. ... State
and territory differences create
potential inconsistency, complexity and
uncertainty for citizens, regulators and
The challenge of determining whether particular forms of data, such as those
generated by C-ITS, fall within the definitions of the
state and territory privacy legislation is significant. Of course, this is not
simply a challenge for future transportation systems,
but is one arising from
the contemporary data environment more generally. As the Productivity Commission
noted in its 2017 report
The boundaries of personal information are constantly shifting in response to
technological advances and new digital products, along
with community
expectations.
The legal definition of personal information, contained in the
(Cth), has always had an element of uncertainty, and is managed by
guidelines. In the face of rapid changes in sources and types
outcome-focused data definitions remain essential. But practical guidance (that
data custodians and users can rely on) is
required on what sorts of data are
covered by the definitions.
Internationally, the approach to the privacy issues related to automated
vehicles has been mixed. While different approaches to privacy
regulation are
evident internationally,
recognition of the need to address privacy concerns associated with connected
and automated vehicles is a common feature. In Canada
the recommendations of a
recent Senate Report included:
Recommendation 9: The Government of Canada continue to assess the need for
Recommendation 10: Transport Canada bring together relevant stakeholders
– governments, automakers, and consumers – to
develop a connected
car framework, with privacy protection as one of its key
In the United Kingdom, the approach taken by the House of Lords Select
Committee Report on connected and autonomous vehicles reflects
a need to balance
It is essential that any data gathered from CAV are used in accordance with
data protection law. ... However, the meaning of personal
data is unclear in the
context of CAV. It will be important to achieve privacy for individuals and
communities, while using data
to achieve efficiency and safety of CAV
operations. Data relating to an individual’s CAV in terms of position,
speed and performance
on the road cannot be regarded as entirely personal
– such data is needed for public benefit if a CAV system is to operate
a whole. Good data governance will therefore be needed to secure appropriate
protection of personal information while safely using
and linking open and
non-sensitive data. Distinctions will need to be made between commercially
sensitive data owned by technology
providers and open
A 2017 German report on ethics and autonomous vehicles expressly recognised
the ‘autonomy and data sovereignty of road users’:
Permitted business models that avail themselves of the data that are
generated by automated and connected driving and that are significant
insignificant to vehicle control come up against their limitations in the
autonomy and data sovereignty of road users. It is the
vehicle keepers and
vehicle users who decide whether their vehicle data that are generated are to be
forwarded and used.
In relation to the connectivity of transport infrastructure, the German
report cautioned that ‘[a]utomated and connected driving
could result in
the total surveillance of all road users ... Autonomous driving would be at the
expense of autonomous everyday
Drawing on the
‘principles of data minimization and data avoidance, which are enshrined
in European and German
the report states
that ‘[i]n keeping with the data law principle of privacy by default,
vehicles should, upon delivery, already
have privacy-friendly factory
settings’ to ensure that data that is not ‘safety-critical’ is
not collected unless
the collection features are activated by the
The approach in the German report is consistent with the ‘privacy by
default’ approach in current European law. The
General Data Protection
’) requires a ‘privacy by
design’ and ‘privacy by default’ approach for technologies
that collect data.
Earlier work
by the European Commission Article 29 Data Protection Working Party
(‘Working Party’) concluded that data
generated by C-ITS could be
personal data.
The Working Party
recognised the benefits that could be delivered by C-ITS but sounded a
cautionary note on the privacy risks stating:
that the large scale deployment of this new technology, which will entail the
collection and processing of unprecedented amounts of
location data of
individuals in Europe, poses new challenges to the fundamental rights and to the
protection of personal data and
that will possibly be affected.
In 2017 a working group of the European Commission’s C-ITS Platform
concluded that ‘the balance between privacy, data
protection and road
safety should be thoroughly further
As is clear from the above, there is recognition of the need to consider the
are grappling with
the significance of privacy laws for C-ITS data. As Part IV argues, additional
raised by automated vehicles themselves.
IV KNOWING MY CAR, KNOWING ME?
There are two aspects to the data-related issues for driverless cars: first,
whether the data comes within the scope of privacy laws,
and second, who can
access the data from driverless cars. For the most part, C-ITS and driverless
cars are discussed together. There
is good reason for this as many of the
proposed benefits of driverless vehicle technology, such as easing traffic
congestion, will
only be realised when automated vehicles are also connected
vehicles within a C-ITS. Yet driverless cars are not necessarily part
Furthermore, there are
differences between C-ITS and automated vehicles in terms of access to data,
with governments able to collect
data from C-ITS directly, while government
collection of data from automated vehicles will need to rely on third parties
the automated driving system entity (‘ADSE’) for access to
Driverless cars are also
more likely than C-ITS to generate sensitive data, for example from in-cabin
video recordings and health
The data that automated vehicles may generate might be ‘personal
information’ within the
As noted by the NTC,
‘[d]ata from in-cabin cameras is highly likely to be personal information
in all circumstances because
it can identify the driver and vehicle
occupants’.
biological, biometric or health sensors may be used to monitor driver alertness
and behaviour or to identify drivers in
order to customise the driving
experience.
Such data may be
‘personal information’ depending on the ability of the entity
holding the data to analyse it and link
it to other data for identification
The NTC noted that
government entities such as road operators and law enforcement are likely to
have a wider range of data and capacity to analyse the
data than other entities
may have. In their hands, data from biometric, biological or health sensors is
therefore more likely to
be personal
information.
While some of the data generated by driverless cars, such as event data
recorders or sensor input units, may have limited value on
their own, the
ability to combine this data with other vehicle and C-ITS data such as from
in-vehicle or external cameras and microphones
may reveal personal
information.
in-vehicle cameras and sensors may also reveal sensitive information as it may
be possible to deduce a person’s race,
ethnic origin, religious
affiliation, or sexual
orientation,
all of which are
definition of ‘sensitive
information’. Furthermore, data from sensors may reveal health
information, which also falls
within the definition of ‘sensitive
information’.
As noted by
the NTC, the ability to combine data from C-ITS and automated vehicle technology
could reveal sensitive information:
A person who parks their car near a place of worship may do so because they
intend to visit. This could reveal information about their
affiliation. However, the person could just be visiting another venue in the
same vicinity. If this information is combined
with a video from in-cabin
cameras that shows the person wearing religious clothing, then a person’s
religious affiliation
Access to such data from driverless cars may enable profiles of vehicle
operators to be developed.
has argued that although data from driverless cars ‘may enable a range of
attractive consumer features, it is only steps
away from surreptitious
surveillance and untoward influence of consumer behavior, especially by
companies looking to profit from
such valuable
information’.
A further issue is that of who can access the data from driverless cars.
Parties likely to be interested in accessing the data include
the public sector
(eg, law enforcement and transport departments to assist with infrastructure
management and planning),
the private sector (eg, insurers, vehicle manufacturers, and fleet managers), as
well as those injured
those who have suffered property damage in the event of a crash. At levels below
full automation, vehicles may sometimes be
controlled by the human driver and at
other times by the automated driving system. It will be important for police to
identify whether the human driver or the automated driving system
were in control of the vehicle at the time of a crash or a traffic
offence such
as speeding.
The NTC concluded
that ‘[t]o ensure the effective administration of road safety laws,
enforcement agencies, regulators and
the courts should, in the future, be able
to identify who is responsible for a vehicle at a point in
The NTC concluded that ‘Australia’s information access framework
does not sufficiently address the new privacy challenges
of government
collection and use of C-ITS and automated vehicle
technology’.
Furthermore,
the use of C-ITS and automated vehicle data for law enforcement purposes
‘may result in increased surveillance
opportunities’.
Law enforcement is exempt from complying with many collection, use and
disclosure privacy principles where such noncompliance is reasonably
for the performance of law enforcement functions. While the NTC recognises that
these exceptions apply on a case-by-case
basis, the argument that noncompliance
is reasonably necessary could be made in many law enforcement
In the private sector, the degree to which manufacturers who operate the ADSE
are required to share data about crashes or other events
is also important. Such
data may play an important role in the continuous improvement of automated
driving systems, as well as for
government safety assurance of automated
The NTC has noted that ‘vehicle data relevant to determining liability
in an ADS [automated driving system] crash is most likely
to be considered
personal information for the purposes of Australia’s privacy
The NTC concluded
that in determining who should have access to data it was necessary to balance
the privacy interests of owners,
occupants and drivers, with the proprietary
interests of the ADSE or manufacturer in the data, as well as the costs
associated with
storing the data and making it available in the
The NTC noted,
‘[i]n the context of automated vehicle data for personal injury insurance,
a balance needs to be struck so that
only the minimum vehicle data necessary to
determine liability is required to be made, recorded and
In its 2019
policy paper on motor accident insurance the NTC indicated that it ‘will
coordinate a national approach to a data
access framework for insurers to
determine liability as part of the NTC’s automated vehicle reform
The issue of data has also been considered by the NTC in the context of
assessing the requirements for safety assurance for connected
and automated
vehicles. However, while the NTC acknowledged that ‘privacy is an
important consideration’ it also considered
‘that it falls outside
the scope of the criteria for the Statement of Compliance’ recommended by
the NTC as a pre-market
safety requirement for automated vehicles in
The NTC recommended
11 safety criteria for ADSEs to demonstrate their management of safety risks and
recommended a further three
obligations for ADSEs to assist with assigning
liability in the event of a crash or a breach of the traffic laws, with one of
obligations relating to ‘data recording and
Data would be
recorded to enable enforcement of traffic laws and safe vehicle operation,
including data related to crashes. There
would be a requirement for the recorded
data to be made available by the ADSE to insurers, police, consumers and other
relevant parties
and in accordance with the provisions of the
The NTC has also published a consultation regulation impact statement
(‘RIS’) on in-service safety for automated vehicles,
that is, for
service after the vehicles are on Australian
Among the proposed safety
criteria and obligations are obligations related to data recording and sharing
which require that ‘[t]he
applicant must outline the ADS data it will
record and how it will provide the data to relevant
The RIS also
notes that ‘[i]n responding to this criterion, the applicant should note
(Cth) places limitations on the collection, use
and disclosure of personal information, which may limit the data the applicant
record and share’.
Other legal developments in Australia will also help to shape the regulatory
landscape relating to data.
example, the Consumer Data Right will give consumers rights to facilitate access
to and control of their data to assist consumer
choice and the benefits of
competition.
As the NTC has
noted: ‘[t]he Commonwealth government’s policy development
highlights a move to improved data sharing.
... the NTC is considering reform
options for data sharing between government agencies to cover the new privacy
challenges of C-ITS
and automated vehicle
technology’.
V BUILDING PRIVACY INTO THE DRIVERLESS
The NTC has proposed policy options for automated vehicle and C-ITS
The NTC has also
developed a set of draft design principles for government access to C-ITS and
autonomous vehicle data.
In an analysis of privacy and data in relation to driverless cars, while a
distinction can be drawn between data generated within
C-ITS and the vehicles
themselves, practical challenges may arise in the maintenance of this
distinction. Many of the purported benefits
of driverless cars, including those
related to traffic congestion, will only arise when driverless cars are part of
C-ITS. Once automated
vehicles become connected vehicles and part of C-ITS, the
ability to maintain a distinction between the categories of data and the
of the data (vehicle or C-ITS) is unclear. Furthermore, with one Australian
survey of devices and products within the IoT
finding that many did not have
disclosure of personal
information,
the connected
nature of driverless cars may present privacy dilemmas for regulators, drivers,
and others.
Adequate privacy protections will be an important part of fostering public
trust in autonomous vehicles.
protections in the development stage of new
technologies.
Described as
‘the next generation of privacy
protection’
design is premised on ‘building in privacy right up front, directly into
the design specifications and architecture
of new systems and
processes’.
foundational principles have been articulated for privacy by
‘Proactive not Reactive; Preventative not Remedial’ in which
events that intrude on privacy are anticipated in advance,
with the aim of
preventing them;
‘Privacy as the Default’ ‘by ensuring that personal data
are automatically protected in any given IT system or business
‘Privacy Embedded into Design’ meaning that ‘privacy
becomes an essential component of the core functionality being
delivered’;
‘Full Functionality – Positive-Sum, not Zero-Sum’ in which
all legitimate interests and objectives are accommodated;
‘End-to-end Lifecycle Protection’ where privacy ‘extends
securely throughout the entire lifecycle of the data involved,
from start to
‘Visibility and Transparency’ of all parts and operations;
‘Respect for User Privacy’ with the interests of the individual
kept uppermost through ‘such measures as strong
appropriate notice, and empowering user-friendly options’.
The German report on
automated vehicles discussed above advocates a privacy by default approach in
which ‘users take a decision
of their own volition on the use of their
One possible
suggestion, outlined in the German report, is for the licensing of automated and
connected driving functions:
It would then only be possible for the vehicle to drive in automated mode if
it is ensured that it obtains certain certificates, and
when in operation,
exchanges sufficiently pseudonymized condition data with other vehicles and the
infrastructure.
In Australia, in 2013 the Standing Council on Transport and Infrastructure
agreed a recommendation ‘that Austroads adopt privacy
principles, including the undertaking of a privacy impact assessment, in the
development of the C-ITS operational
framework’.
discussion paper on data, the NTC noted that two of its reform
options focus on limiting the collection, use and disclosure of C-ITS
information to specific purposes and explicitly incorporating
elements where government directly collects C-ITS
information.
While privacy by design began as a concept, it has now been incorporated into
, converting it ‘from a theoretical concept to a legal
obligation and an essential principle of data protection that every controller
and processor must
may be relevant to some Australian businesses, ‘[i]t does not
however generally extend to processing of EU citizens’
personal data in
Australia, or processing of [their] personal data by law enforcement and other
government agencies in
Australia’.
However, by
formalising the requirement for privacy by design through the
likely that European law will provide opportunities for considering how to put
for C-ITS and automated
Although privacy by
design is just one aspect of broader privacy protections governed by privacy
laws and regulation that may be
relevant for new automation technologies, the
concept provides a framework for articulating the co-design of new technologies
VI CONCLUSION
Public trust will be an important element in the successful introduction of
driverless cars in Australia and elsewhere. Concerns about
data access and
technology, including C-ITS.
With the introduction of driverless cars at high levels of autonomy still in the
future, there is now a window of opportunity in
which to address these concerns.
However the intersections between driverless cars and C-ITS, between federal,
state and territory
combine to form a challenging regulatory environment for transport-related
generated by driverless cars and C-ITS that will challenge the likelihood of
providing clarity for consumers and motorists in
this area. Yet regulatory
clarity around the collection, use and sharing of data will be key to enabling
innovations in transportation
and to engaging public trust to support the
adoption of driverless cars. While some of the challenges relating to data and
cars may be overtaken by broader regulatory reforms in Australia
through proposed new federal data sharing
legislation
introduction of a Consumer Data Right, whether these will prove sufficient in
providing the necessary clarity for the driverless
future remains to be
* Professor of Health Law and New Technologies, Faculty of Law, Queensland
University of Technology (&#82
Work for this article was supported by the Institute for Future Environments at
QUT. I wish to thank Elizabeth Dallaston
for her research assistance and Mark
Burdon, Des Butler and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments.
** Sessional Academic, School of Law, Faculty of Law, Queensland University
of Technology.
*** Doctoral Candidate and Sessional Academic, School of Justice, Faculty of
Law, Queensland University of Technology.
1 See, eg, Kieran Tranter, ‘The Challenges of Autonomous Motor
Vehicles for Queensland Road and Criminal Laws’ (2016)
University of Technology Law Review
59; Lisa Collingwood, ‘Privacy
Implications and Liability Issues of Autonomous Vehicles’
(2017) 26(1)
Information & Communications Technology Law
; Melinda Florina
Lohmann, ‘Liability Issues Concerning Self-Driving Vehicles’
European Journal of Risk Regulation
; Mark Brady et al,
‘Automated Vehicles and Australian Personal Injury Compensation
(2017) 24(1)
Torts Law Journal
; Michael Mattioli,
‘Autonomy in the Age of Autonomous Vehicles’
(2018) 24(2)
University Journal of Science and Technology Law
Joint Standing Committee on Road Safety
(Staysafe), Parliament of New South Wales,
Driverless Vehicles and Road
Safety in NSW
(Report No 2/56, September 2016) (‘
Vehicles and Road Safety in NSW
’); David B Logan et al, ‘Safety
Benefits of Cooperative ITS and Automated Driving in Australia and New
(Research Report No AP-R551-17, Austroads, October 2017).
National Transport Commission Australia,
‘Regulatory Options for Automated Vehicles’ (Discussion Paper, May
2016) (‘2016
Regulatory Options Discussion Paper’).
Tranter (n 1); Mitchell L Cunningham,
Michael A Regan and John Catchpole, ‘Registration, Licensing and CTP
Insurance Issues
Associated with Automated Vehicles’ (Research Report No
AP-R540-17, Austroads, March 2017); National Transport Commission Australia,
‘Clarifying Control of Automated Vehicles’ (Policy Paper, November
2017); National Transport Commission Australia, ‘Changing
Driving Laws to
Support Automated Vehicles’ (Policy Paper, May 2018).
Driverless Vehicles and Road Safety in
(n 2); Logan et al (n 2). See also National Transport Commission
Australia, ‘Regulatory Options to Assure Automated Vehicle
Australia’ (Discussion Paper, June 2017).
Noah J Goodall, ‘From Trolleys to
Risk: Models for Ethical Autonomous Driving’ (2017) 107(4)
Journal of Public Health
496; Jan Gogoll and Julian F Müller,
‘Autonomous Cars: In Favor of a Mandatory Ethics Setting’ (2017)
Science and Engineering Ethics
See, eg, National Transport Commission
Australia, ‘Regulating Government Access to C-ITS and Automated Vehicle
(Discussion Paper, September 2018) (‘2018 Access to
Data Discussion Paper’); National Transport Commission Australia,
‘Regulating Government Access to C-ITS and Automated Vehicle
(Policy Paper, August 2019) (‘2019 Access to Data
Policy Paper’); David Vaile, Monika Zalnieriute and Lyria Bennett Moses,
The Privacy and Data Protection Regulatory Framework for C-ITS and AV
Systems: Report for the National Transport Commission
(Report, 2 July 2018);
Angela Daly, ‘Privacy in Automation: An Appraisal of the Emerging
Australian Approach’
(2017) 33(6)
Computer Law & Security
; Collingwood (n 1); Dorothy J Glancy, ‘Privacy in
Autonomous Vehicles’
(2012) 52(4)
Santa Clara Law Review
Chassel Lee, ‘Grabbing the Wheel Early: Moving Forward on Cybersecurity
and Privacy Protections for Driverless Cars’
(2017) 69(1)
Communications Law Journal
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 22–3; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n
Jesse W Woo, ‘Smart Cities Pose
Build Them’
(2017) 85(4)
University of Missouri-Kansas City Law
953, 955; Sofia Ranchordás and Abram Klop,
Data-Driven
Regulation and Governance in Smart Cities
(University of Groningen Faculty
of Law Research Paper Series No 7/2018, February 2018)
<https://ssrn.com/abstract= 3126221>
Woo (n 9); Ranchordás and Klop
See, eg, ‘The World’s Most
Valuable Resource Is No Longer Oil, but Data’,
The Economist
(online, 6 May 2017)
<https://www.economist.com/leaders/2017/05/06/the-worlds-most-valuable-resource-is-no-longer-oil-but-data>;
Susie Gharib, ‘Intel CEO Says Data is the New Oil’,
(online, 7 June 2018)
http://fortune.com/2018/06/07/intel-ceo-brian-krzanich-data/
‘Data Is the New Oil’,
The Australian
(online, 5 May 2017)
<https://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/inquirer/the-new-oil-data-is-the-worlds-most-valuable-resource/news-story/f386217a9c63ac5ee6e1473413e9bda>;
Perry Rotella, ‘Is Data the New Oil?’,
April 2012)
<https://www.forbes.com/sites/perryrotella/2012/04/02/is-data-the-new-oil/#20d39e57db3d>.
Woo (n 9); Ranchordás and Klop
Collingwood (n 1) 35.
Ibid; Daly (n 7).
Glancy (n 7) 1187–216, discussed
in Collingwood (n 1) 35–6.
Glancy (n 7) 1188–95.
Ibid 1190–1.
Ibid 1195–206.
Ibid 1216–25; Collingwood (n 1)
As the NTC notes, ‘C-ITS data is
produced when components of the transport network (vehicles, roads and
infrastructure) communicate
and share real-time information (for example,
information on vehicle movement, traffic signs and road conditions) through
C-ITS devices’:
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion Paper’ (n 7)
Logan et al (n 2) 2.
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
(n 7) 61–2; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy
Paper’ (n 7) 48. See also Glancy (n 7) 1176 (drawing a distinction between
‘selfcontained autonomous vehicles’ and ‘interconnected
autonomous vehicles’).
‘2016 Regulatory Options
Discussion Paper’ (n 3) 31.
Ibid 32: with platooning,
‘except for the lead truck in the platoon, the system takes control of
driving and monitoring the
road environment on specific roads, and the driver
monitors the automated driving system’.
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 22; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n 7)
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 25; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n 7) 25.
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 25–6; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 26–8; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 30. See also ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’
(n 7) 36–8.
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 30; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n 7)
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 30. See also ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 30; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n 7)
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 31. See also ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 31; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n 7)
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 39–40, app C; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy
Paper’ (n 7)
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7).
Ibid 33–5. See also ‘2019
Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n 7) 42. For discussion of privacy laws see
Vaile, Zalnieriute
and Bennett Moses (n 7) 11–23.
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 34–6; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n
7) 42; Vaile,
Zalnieriute and Bennett Moses (n 7) 23–6. For discussion of
the definitions of ‘personal’ and ‘sensitive’
information in Commonwealth, state and territory privacy legislation see Vaile,
Zalnieriute and Bennett Moses (n 7) app B.
discussion see ‘2018 Access to Data Discussion Paper’ (n 7) 34;
‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n
7) 39; Vaile, Zalnieriute and
Bennett Moses (n 7) 23–6.
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 36; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n 7) 42.
See also Vaile,
Zalnieriute and Bennett Moses (n 7) 26.
Vaile, Zalnieriute and Bennett Moses
(n 7) app B
Information Privacy Act 2014
and Personal Information Protection Act 1998
Information Act 2002
Information Privacy Act 2009
(Qld); Department of the Premier
and Cabinet, ‘Cabinet Administrative Instruction 1/89, Also Known as the
Information Privacy
Principles (IPPS) Instruction, and Premier and Cabinet
Circular 12, as Amended by Cabinet 6 February 2017’ (Circular No 12,
Government of South Australia, 6 February 2017);
Personal Information
Protection Act 2004
Freedom of Information Act 1992
Vaile, Zalnieriute and Bennett Moses
Productivity Commission,
Availability and Use
(Inquiry Report No 82, 31 March 2017) 137, finding
For example, for discussion of the
differences between approaches to privacy law in Europe and the United States
see Vaile, Zalnieriute
and Bennett Moses (n 7) 52–66; ‘2018 Access
to Data Discussion Paper’ (n 7) 16–18; ‘2019 Access to
Policy Paper’ (n 7) 67–9.
Standing Senate Committee on Transport
and Communications, Senate of Canda,
Driving Change: Technology and the
Future of the Automated Vehicle
(Final Report, January 2018) 58.
Science and Technology Select
Committee, House of Lords,
Connected and Autonomous Vehicles: The Future?
(House of Lords Paper No 115, Session 2016–17) 43 [169–70].
Federal Ministry of Transport and
Digital Infrastructure,
Ethics Commission: Automated and Connected
(Report, June 2017) 12 (‘
Ethics Commission: Automated and
Connected Driving
’). For discussion of the German report see Christoph
Luetge, ‘The German Ethics Code for Automated and Connected Driving’
(2017) 30(4)
Philosophy and Technology
Ethics Commission: Automated and
Connected Driving
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 16–17; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’
(n 7) 68; Vaile,
Zalnieriute and Bennett Moses (n 7) 56.
European Commission Article 29 Data
Protection Working Party, ‘Opinion 03/2017 on Processing Personal Data in
the Context
of Cooperative Intelligent Transport Systems (C-ITS)’ (Working
Paper No 252, October 2017). For discussion see Vaile, Zalnieriute
and Bennett
Moses (n 7) 54–5, 115. With the introduction of the
in May 2018, the Article 29 Working Party has now been replaced by the European
Data Protection Board: ‘Article 29
Working Party’,
European Data
Protection Board
http://www.edpb.europa.eu/our-work-tools/article-29-working-party_en
European Commission Article 29 Data
Protection Working Party (n 64) 8.
C-ITS Platform Phase II,
Cooperative Intelligent Transport Systems Towards Cooperative, Connected and
Automated Mobility
(Final Report Phase II, European Commission, September
2017) 31. For discussion see Vaile, Zalnieriute and Bennett Moses (n 7)
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 61–2; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n
also ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n 7) 49:
‘[a]t this early stage of regulatory framework development, the
considers it is possible to have a broadly similar approach for both
technologies’.
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 62; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n 7) 48.
The automated
driving system entity (‘ADSE’) is the ‘legal
entity responsible for the ADS’ (automated driving system):
Transport Commission Australia, ‘Safety Assurance for Automated Driving
Systems: Decision Regulation Impact Statement’
(Regulation Impact
Statement, November 2018) 16 (‘2018 Safety Assurance for Automated Driving
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 62; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n 7) 48.
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 34–5; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n
See also Vaile, Zalnieriute and Bennett Moses (n 7)
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 34; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n 7)
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 23; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n 7)
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 35; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n 7)
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 35. See also ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 35–6; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 36. See also ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’
(n 7) 41; Vaile,
Zalnieriute and Bennett Moses (n 7) 23–6.
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 36; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n 7) 42;
Vaile, Zalnieriute
and Bennett Moses (n 7) 8, 23–6.
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 36; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n 7) 42.
See also Vaile,
Zalnieriute and Bennett Moses (n 7) 26.
Lee (n 7) 33.
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 39–40; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’
(n 7) 31–3.
National Transport Commission
Australia, ‘Motor Accident Injury Insurance and Automated
(Discussion Paper, October 2018) 66 (‘2018 Motor
Accident Injury Insurance and Automated Vehicles’); National Transport
Commission Australia, ‘Motor Accident Injury Insurance and Automated
(Policy Paper, August 2019) 40–1 (‘2019 Motor
Accident Injury Insurance and Automated Vehicles’).
The NTC has issued guidance on
enforcement in relation to automated vehicles: National Transport Commission
Australia, ‘National
Enforcement Guidelines for Automated Vehicles’
(Guidelines, November 2017).
National Transport Commission
Australia, ‘Regulatory Reforms for Automated Road Vehicles’ (Policy
Paper, November 2016)
66 (‘2016 Regulatory Reforms Policy
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 60. See also ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 61. See also ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 61.
‘2018 Safety Assurance for
Automated Driving Systems’ (n 68
) 147–8. See
also ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n 7) 32.
‘2018 Motor Accident Injury
Insurance and Automated Vehicles’
66. See also
‘2019 Motor Accident Injury Insurance and Automated Vehicles’ (n 82)
‘2018 Motor Accident Injury
Insurance and Automated Vehicles’
‘2019 Motor Accident Injury
Insurance and Automated Vehicles’ (n 82) 44.
‘2018 Safety Assurance for
Automated Driving Systems’ (n 68) 74.
National Transport Commission
Australia, ‘In-Service Safety for Automated Vehicles’ (Consultation
Regulation Impact
Statement, July 2019).
‘2018 Access to Data Discussion
Paper’ (n 7) 75–7; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’ (n
‘2018 Access to Data
Discussion Paper’ (n 7) 75; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy Paper’
(n 7) 64. See
Treasury Laws Amendment (Consumer Data Right) Act 2019
‘2018 Access to Data
Discussion Paper’ (n 7) 75. See also ‘2019 Access to Data Policy
Paper’ (n 7) 64.
‘2018 Access to Data
Discussion Paper’ (n 7) 61–2; ‘2019 Access to Data Policy
Paper’ (n 7) 48–56.
See also (n 67).
‘2019 Access to Data Policy
Paper’ (n 7) 58–61.
Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner, ‘Privacy Commissioners Reveal the Hidden Risks
of the Internet of Things’
(Media Release, 23 September 2016)
<https://www.oaic.gov.au/updates/news-and-media/privacy-commissioners-reveal-the-hidden-risks-of-the-internet-of-things/>.
Glancy (n 7) 1225; Daly (n 7) 844;
‘2016 Regulatory Reforms Policy Paper’ (n 84) 17.
Glancy (n 7) 1226. See also Ira S
Rubinstein, ‘Regulating Privacy by Design’
(2011) 26(3)
Technology Law Journal
Ann Cavoukian, ‘Privacy by
Design in Law, Policy and Practice: A White Paper for Regulators,
Decision-Makers and Policy-Makers’
(White Paper, August 2011) 10, 27.
Joshua Schoonmaker,
‘Proactive Privacy for a Driverless Age’
(2016) 25(2)
Information
& Communications Technology Law
Ethics Commission: Automated and
Connected Driving
‘2018 Access to Data
Discussion Paper’ (n 7) 62.
Anna Romanou, ‘The Necessity
of the Implementation of Privacy by Design in Sectors Where Data Protection
Concerns Arise’
(2018) 34(1)
Computer Law & Security Review
102. See also Vaile, Zalnieriute and Bennett Moses (n 7) 56.
Vaile, Zalnieriute and Bennett
Moses (n 7) 53.
Daly (n 7) 837.
Glancy (n 7) 1225–6; Daly (n
7) 844; ‘2016 Regulatory Reforms Policy Paper’
Department of the Prime Minister
and Cabinet, ‘New Australian Government Data Sharing and Release
Legislation: Issues Paper
for Consultation’ (Issues Paper, Australian
Government, 4 July 2018).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (162 KB)
PDF format (238 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter