URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle --- "Chapter 4 - Capacity to Make a Will" [2011] SydUPLawBk 6; in O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle (eds), "Capacity and the Law" (Sydney University Press, 2011)
4. 1. Introduction
4. 2. The classic statement of the law
4. 3. The present day requirements for will-making capacity
4. 4. The responsibilities of lawyers when taking instructions for and seeing to the execution of wills where the will-making capacity
of the will-maker is in doubt
4. 5. The tendency to uphold the will-makers right to make a will
4. 6. Proving a will is valid – the onus of proof and who has it
4. 7. Proving a will –suspicious circumstances and undue influence
4. 7. 1. Suspicious circumstances
4. 7. 2. Undue influence
4. 7. 3. The role of the expert in the assessment of undue influence
4. 8. Court intervention to revoke or alter a will made by a person lacking will-making capacity
4. 9. Making and changing wills where will-making capacity is in doubt – the role of the lawyer and the role of the capacity
4. 9. 1. The practice implication for lawyers arising from the current law – an overview of general considerations
4. 9. 2. Caution when taking instructions for the drafting of a will
4. 9. 3. Conditions which might affect capacity
4. 9. 4. Expert opinions – contemporaneous and retrospective
4. 9. 5. Writing an expert report
4. 9. 6. Experts in court
4. 10. Court authorised (statutory) wills
4. 11. Conclusion
CHAPTER 4 - Capacity to make a will
4. 1. Introduction
As our society becomes richer and more and more people have real and personal
property to leave when they die, and because of the
likelihood of a great
increase in the prevalence of dementia,
it is likely that there will be many
more people with cognitive disabilities making or changing their wills near the
end of their
There will be challenges to some of these wills,
some not anticipated, making it necessary to collect the evidence of the
will-makers
will-making capacity after their deaths.
In this chapter we set out the law relating to will-making capacity, which is
what we call testamentary capacity, as well as the law
that has been developed
to allow challenges to wills made when the will-maker has lacked capacity, where
the will was made in suspicious
circumstances or where the will was made as a
result of undue influence. The chapter also sets out what is expected of
when acting for people whose will-making capacity is in doubt. It
also deals with the conditions which may lead to incapacity and
attitude of the courts to the evidence about a person’s will-making
capacity, who gives that evidence and when and
how they formed their opinions
Testamentary capacity [will-making capacity]is one of those mental functions
that cross the legal and medical domains. It is both
a legal concept and a
specific focus of medical assessment. This blurring can cause considerable
difficulties in the Courts. Challenges
are made on a legal basis yet evidence
can be dependent upon expert psychiatric or medical assessment. Furthermore, on
an international
level, testamentary capacity is one of the few capacities that
is almost entirely dependent on case law without much statutory
This quotation from an important article by two Canadian psychiatrists and a
lawyer reflects part what we are attempting to do in
this chapter. We describe
the law relating to will-making capacity, derived mostly from the decided cases
spanning the 19
centuries, and the increasing
understanding of that matter from the medical perspective. We also set out how
lawyers should act so
as to ensure that their clients make valid wills thereby
protecting their clients’ rights to distribute their assets according
their own wishes. We deal with how health professionals, acting as experts, can
contribute appropriately and effectively to that
We have already noted that we call testamentary capacity “will-making
capacity” in this chapter. We also call a testator
or testatrix a
“will-maker”; however we do not change those terms when they appear
in any quotation from another source.
4. 2. The classic statement of the law
In 1870, Cockburn CJ gave the judgment of the Court of Queens Bench
comprising himself, Blackburn, Mellor and Hannen JJ in
laid down the test for will-making capacity which was adopted in Australia
and other common law countries and has been reaffirmed
many times in the
Cockburn CJ said in
relation to the capacity or power to make a will that:
It is essential to the exercise of such a power that a testator shall understand
the nature of the act and its effects; shall understand
the extent of the
property of which he is disposing; shall be able to comprehend and appreciate
the claims to which he ought to give
effect; and, with a view to the latter
object, that no disorder of mind shall poison his affections, pervert his sense
or prevent the exercise of his natural faculties - that no insane
delusions shall influence his will in disposing his property and
bring about a
disposal of it which, if the mind had been sound, would not have been
Banks v Goodfellow
continues to be a leading case, as will been
seen more than once in this chapter, the law moves on. Recent court decisions in
have acknowledged the differences between the 19
context and today. One example is
Kerr v Badran
which highlighted the
differences between 1870 and today on the issue of assets
In that case Windeyer J
In dealing with the
Banks v Goodfellow
test it is, I think, necessary to
bear in mind the differences between life in 1870 and life in 1995. The average
expectation of
life for reasonably affluent people in England in 1870 was
probably less than 60 years and for others less well off under 50 years:
average life expectancy of male in Australia in 1995 was 75 years. Younger
people can be expected to have a more accurate understanding
of the value of
money than older people. Younger people are less likely to suffer memory loss.
When there were fewer deaths at advanced
age, problems which arise with age,
such as dementia, were less common. In England in 1870, if you had property it
was likely to
be lands or bonds or shares in railway companies or government
backed enterprises. Investment in ordinary companies was far less
common than
now. Older people living today may well be aware that they own substantial
shareholdings or substantial real estate,
but yet may not have an accurate
understanding of the value of those assets, nor for that matter the addresses of
the real estate
or the particular shareholdings which they have. Many people
have handed over management of share portfolios and even real estate
investments
to advisors. They might be quite comfortable with what they have; they may
understand that they have assets which can
provide an acceptable income for
them, but at the same time they may not have a proper understanding of the value
of the assets which
provide the income. They may however be well able to
distribute those assets by will. I think that this needs to be kept in mind
2004 when the requirement of knowing “the extent” of the estate is
considered. This does not necessarily mean knowledge
of each particular asset or
knowledge of the value of that asset, or even a particular class of assets
particularly when shares in
private companies are part of the
Banks v Goodfellow
the jury had held, and the judges had agreed,
that the will-maker, John Banks, was suffering from insane delusions.
Nevertheless,
his capacity and right to make a will was upheld. Cockburn CJ
No doubt, where the fact that the testator has been subject to any insane
delusion is established, a will should be regarded with
great distrust, and
every presumption should in the first instance be made against it. Where insane
delusion has once been shown
to have existed, it may be difficult to say whether
the mental disorder may not possibly have extended beyond the particular form
instance in which it manifested itself. It may be equally difficult to say how
far the delusion may not have influenced the testator
in the particular disposal
of his property. And the presumption against a will made under such
circumstances becomes additionally
strong where the will is … one in which
natural affection and claims of near relationship have been
disregarded.
Cockburn CJ went on to note that neither of the delusions that Banks suffered
from namely that he was pursued by spirits and that
a man long since dead came
to molest him had “affected the general faculties of his mind, and could
have no affect upon the
will” and held that there was “no sufficient
reason why the testator should be held to have lost his right to make a
why a will made under these circumstances should not be
Consequently,
Banks v Goodfellow
not only lays down the test for
will-making capacity, but also makes it clear that a partial unsoundness of
mind, not affecting the
person’s general faculties and not operating on
the person’s mind in regard to a particular testamentary disposition,
not be sufficient to deprive the person of the power to dispose of their
property in a will.
example of a case of a “prolific” will-maker who was held to lack
will-making capacity in relation to a particular
will because of an unfounded
and irrational belief that was persistently held despite overwhelming proof of
its falsity, see
However, as Gleeson
CJ has pointed out, “the law treats as critical the distinction between
mere antipathy, albeit unreasonable,
towards one who has a claim, and a judgment
which is affected by disorder of the
Banks v Goodfellow
remains the leading case on capacity to make a will
after 140 years not only because of the common law’s reliance on precedent
to ensure consistency in the application of the law but also because of the
lawyer’s love of flowery phrases which attract
attention to the way the
test is stated in that case. Nevertheless, the common law moves on in the light
of new knowledge and understanding
of medical and psychological matters. In a
breakthrough case arising from a person developing a psychiatric condition as a
of shock caused by an accident at work, Windeyer J noted “Law
marching with medicine but in the rear and limping a
in a leading case on will-making capacity,
Timbury v Coffee
, a case of a
will-maker who drank himself into a state of physical exhaustion and mental
disturbance, Dixon J noted that:
We are not bound to go on applying views held over a century ago about mental
disturbance and insanity and to disregard modern knowledge
and understanding of
such conditions.
It has been suggested recently that the law is limping too far behind
medicine in relation to the assessment of will-making
Some catching up was done in the English Court of Chancery in 2010 when
Briggs J stated the following:
Without in any way detracting from the continuing authority
Banks v. Goodfellow
, it must be recognised that psychiatric medicine
has come a long way since 1870 in recognising an ever widening range of
circumstances
now regarded as sufficient at least to give rise to a risk of
mental disorder, sufficient to deprive a patient of the power of rational
decision making, quite distinctly from old age and infirmity. The mental shock
of witnessing an injury to a loved one is an example
recognised by the law, and
the affective disorder which may be caused by bereavement is an example
recognised by psychiatrists….
One of the expert witness psychiatrists in the case described the symptomatic
effect of bereavement as capable of being almost identical
to that associated
with severe depression. Having noted this, Briggs J continued:
Accordingly, although neither I nor counsel has found any reported case dealing
with the effect of bereavement on testamentary capacity,
test must be applied so as to accommodate this, among other
factors capable of impairing testamentary capacity, in a way in which,
the court would have found difficult to recognise in the 19
4. 3. The present day requirements for will-making
Will-makers must be of sound mind, memory and understanding to make a valid
will. What is required of them is that they:
1. understand the nature and effect of a will;
2. know the nature and extent of their
3. comprehend and appreciate the claims to which they ought to give effect;
4. are not affected delusions that influence the disposal of their assets at
the time they are making their will.
Clearly, these basic elements, derived from
Banks v Goodfellow
not changed. However, the way in which we apply these elements to the
determination of will-making capacity has changed. Our
understanding of
conditions such as dementia - which predominates as the leading cause of mental
disturbance interfering with will-making
capacity today – has evolved. In
particular, our understanding of the ways in which such conditions impact on a
know, comprehend
become more sophisticated and complex, as will be discussed in this chapter.
Sometimes the question arises, did the will-maker lose their will-making
capacity between the time they gave instructions for the
will and when they
signed the will? That issue has been settled since 1883 by the courts in England
and Australia taking the following
approach. If the will-maker had will-making
capacity when they gave instructions for the will and believed that the will, as
reflected those instructions, and that was true as a matter of fact and
they executed the will in that belief, the will was valid
and would be admitted
to probate.
In 2010, a unanimous England and Wales Court of Appeal confirmed that
In that case,
Moore-Bick LJ pointed out that unless there was reason to question it, proof of
will-making capacity and the execution
of the will were sufficient to establish
knowledge and approval of its contents. Furthermore, it could normally be
accepted that
a person of sound mind was capable of disposing of their property
and intended to do so in the manner set out in the will. Consequently,
cases it was irrelevant to enquire whether the will-maker lacked capacity at the
time when they gave the instructions, whether
those instructions continued to
reflect their intentions or whether they realised that the will gave effect to
those instructions.
It is enough that the will-maker was capable of making the
decision at the time they executed the will document.
However, he went on to state that where a will-maker
loses some of their faculties between giving instructions and executing the
the position is different. He continued:
One must then ask (i) whether at the time [the will-maker] gave the
instructions he had the ability to understand and give proper
consideration to
the various matters which are called for, that is, whether he had [will-making]
capacity, (ii) whether the document
gives effect to his instructions, (iii)
whether those instructions continued to reflect his intentions and (iv) whether
at the time
he executed the will he knew what he was doing and thus had
sufficient mental capacity to carry out the juristic act which that involves.
all those questions can be answered in the affirmative, one can be satisfied
that the will accurately reflects the deceased's
intentions formed at a time
when he was capable of making fully informed
In the opinion of Moore-Bick LJ, that was what
4. 4. The responsibilities of lawyers when taking
instructions for and seeing to the execution of wills where the will-making
of the will-maker is in doubt
In 1841 in the first edition of
Jarman on Wills
, Mr Jarman wrote, and
it was repeated in all subsequent editions:
Few of the duties which devolve upon a solicitor, more imperatively call for the
exercise of a sound, discriminating, and well-informed
judgment, than that of
taking instructions for wills.
He completed his
Suggestions to persons taking
instructions for Wills
by referring the “admonishing of professional
gentlemen generally” of Sir John Nicoll in the Prerogative Court in 1822
[W]here instructions for a will are given by a party not being the proposed
testator – a fortiori where by an interested party
– it is their
bounden duty to satisfy themselves thoroughly, either in person or by the
instrumentality of some confidential
agent, as to the proposed testator’s
volition and capacity – or in other words, that the instrument expresses
testamentary intentions of a capable testator – prior to its
being executed ….
In a 1962 case,
In the estate of Tucker, Deceased
, Mayo J of the
Supreme Court of South Australia warned against taking instructions to make a
will by post.
In that case Mr
Tucker asked a trustee company to draw up a new will for him as he intended to
marry a certain person. The will was
drafted and returned to him for execution
after his marriage. Mr Tucker executed the will but did not marry. Inquiries
his death showed that at the time he executed the will he was
suffering from delusions. He believed that someone was trying to poison
he was under the delusion that the beneficiary of that will had actually become
his wife. The trustee company did not seek
probate of that will, but obtained
probate of an earlier will. Mayo J noted the likelihood of this problem being
avoided if a local
agent of the trustee company had been engaged to obtain
instructions.
In 1994 in New South Wales, Santow J set out some observations in the hope of
reducing the number of cases coming to the Supreme Court
based on the lack of
will-making capacity of the
will-maker.
First, he confirmed
that: “The essence of a solicitor’s fiduciary obligation to a client
is the unfettered service of
that client’s
interests”.
He then noted
the real possibility of a conflict of interest for a solicitor who receives
instructions from an established client
to prepare a will on behalf of another
person, particularly when the established client is to be a principal or major
beneficiary
under the will. He cautioned against acting for more than one of the
parties in these circumstances.
Santow J went on to state that duty of a solicitor when taking instructions
from “an obviously enfeebled testator, where testamentary
capacity is
potentially in doubt” is to take particular care “to gain reasonable
assurance as to the testamentary capacity
He noted that
“any suggestion that someone, potentially interested has instigated the
will, whether or not a client of the
will draftsperson, should particularly
place the solicitor concerned on the
Caution in such a
situation is well advised. In Chapter 2. 2 and 2. 3. 1. we have discussed how
the procurement of a will –
or indeed any legal document - in such
circumstances may be an indicator of influence, particularly if the will-maker
is cognitively
Although Sir John Nicoll, Jarman and Mayo J refer to the possibility of using
agents, Santow J suggested that the solicitor who is
to draft the will should
attend the will-maker personally. The solicitor should question the will-maker
fully to determine their
capacity with the questions directed to ascertain
whether the will-maker understands that they are making a will, what the effect
of a will is, the extent of the property they are disposing of and the claims to
which they ought to give effect – in other
Santow J also suggested that the solicitor should arrange for one or two
other people to be present who have been chosen for “their
witnesses” as to the will-maker’s capacity should that issue be
raised later. No one else should be present
except with the consent of the
will-maker. Where possible, one of these witnesses should be a doctor, one who
has been treating and
is familiar with the
will-maker.
Santow J suggested that this doctor too should question the will-maker in
detail, thoroughly examine the will-maker’s condition,
and advise the
solicitor as to the capacity and understanding of the
will-maker.
There is a developing expectation that if doctors are asked to act as
witnesses to the signing of significant documents such as wills,
they will go
beyond just observing the person signing the document and assure themselves that
the person understands the nature of
the document they are signing and its
consequences. Although the Medical Board of Victoria did not find that a doctor
unprofessional conduct when he acted as a witness without conducting
adequate inquiries to ascertain whether a 91 year old man with
dementia had
capacity to execute a statutory declaration, they were very critical of him and
stated the following:
It reflects ill on the practitioner and on the profession of medicine if a
doctor is privy to, and a facilitator of, persons signing
documents, to their
potential disadvantage, when they are unable to do so with any real
understanding of what they are doing. This
is especially so if the person
signing documentation is a medical practitioner’s current patient. In the
opinion of all members
of this Panel, it is the responsibility of medical
practitioners in the current environment to take modest steps to assure
that they and their profession are not being manipulated or abused in
the context of the witnessing of important
documentation.
Santow J advised that the solicitor should take a detailed written record of
what took place. The doctor should record the results
of the medical examination
and the others present should take
Santow J went on to state in a sentence intentionally containing a double
If after careful consideration of all the circumstances the solicitor is not
satisfied that the testator does not have testamentary
capacity he should
proceed and prepare the
However Santow J subsequently qualified that opinion with the following
If those questions and the answers to them, leave the solicitor in real doubt as
to what should be done, other steps may be desirable.
This may include obtaining
a more thorough medical appraisal or, if the testator declines, considering
whether the will can be properly
drawn, should assurance on testamentary
capacity fail to satisfy the test just
He also recommended that the “good general practice” that the
solicitor who took the instructions to draw the will should
be present when the
will-maker executes the will should be followed in these circumstances, that the
witnesses attesting the will
should be chosen from those present when the
instructions were taken and that detailed notes of the events that occurred and
discussions that took place at that time should be
In 1977 Templeman J
(later Lord Templeman of the House of Lords) in the Chancery Division noted that
the making of a will of an
old and infirm will-maker “ought to be
witnessed and approved by a medical practitioner who satisfies himself as to the
and understanding of the testator and makes a record of his examination
and findings”.
In the Manitoba Court of Queen’s Bench in 1985, Kroft J took a strong
and clear position on the role of solicitors in relation
to will-making by weak
and ill people at the end of their
He “garnered”
“basic rules” from
Banks v Goodfellow
and subsequent Canadian
cases noting the following in particular:
The duty of a solicitor taking instructions for a will is always a heavy one.
When the client is weak and ill, and particularly when
the solicitor knows that
he is revoking an existing will, the responsibility will be particularly
A solicitor cannot discharge his duty by asking perfunctory questions, getting
apparently rational answers, and then simply recording
in legal form the words
expressed by the client. He must first satisfy himself that true testamentary
capacity exists, that the instructions
are freely given, and that the effect of
the will is understood.
Santow J also suggested that that it may be appropriate for the Law Society
of New South Wales to give guidance to solicitors as to
what was professional
conduct in these circumstances. In 2009, the Society published, “A
Practical Guide to Solicitors: When
a client’s capacity is in
It noted that it
was not the responsibility of a solicitor to be an expert in capacity assessment
of their client. However, they
could be involved in carrying out a
“legal” assessment of their client’s capacity and suggested
that this involves:
1. making an initial, preliminary assessment of capacity involving looking
out for warning signs and using basic questioning and assessment
2. if doubts arose, seeking a clinical consultation or formal evaluation of
the client’s capacity by a clinician with expertise
in cognitive capacity
assessment,
3. making a final, legal judgment about capacity for the particular decision
or transaction.
In the 2009 case
Nicholson v Knaggs
, Vickery J of the Supreme Court of
Victoria recommended a “considered and appropriately structured interview
with the testatrix”
and emphasized:
in order to establish knowledge and approval of a will by a testator, more is
required than merely establishing that the testator
executed it in the presence
of a witness after it had been read to or by him
Vickery J also referred to the 1955 High Court decision,
Boreham v Prince
Henry Hospital
in which the Court noted the well accepted proposition that a
will made in “advanced age” is “always carefully
scrutinised
by the court” and then continued:
The proper approach of the Court to the question whether a testator has
testamentary capacity is clear. Although proof that a will
was properly executed
prima facie
evidence of testamentary capacity, where the evidence as a
whole is sufficient to throw a doubt upon the testator's competency, the
must decide against the validity of the will unless it is satisfied
affirmatively that he was of sound mind, memory and understanding
executed it or, if instructions for the will preceded its execution, when the
instructions were
Vickery J then pointed out that while the approach in such cases was to
scrutinise the evidence more closely than is usual in the
course of reaching a
decision on the balance of probabilities, the High Court was not imposing a
higher standard of proof. The standard
remains that of affirmative satisfaction
on the balance of probabilities. The High Court was indicating that what was
required was
that the evidence as a whole was considered but with a degree of
caution to be applied when considering each of the factual issues
that was under
scrutiny. For example, was the will-maker’s soundness of mind an issue and
what did the evidence show? The same
approach was to be applied to the
will-maker’s memory or to their understanding of what they were doing when
they gave instructions
for or executed the will, if those matters arose as
issues, then the standard of proof would be applied to that
While the presumption of capacity remains in place when elderly people are
making or changing wills, particularly if they are frail
or unwell or showing
signs of confusion or dementia, we suggest that the courts will now expect
solicitors to obtain expert advice
on the question of the person’s
capacity to make or change a will. We also suggest that solicitors will be
expected to place
more reliance on that advice than on their own assessment of
their client’s will-making capacity. Consequently, we suggest
that it may
no longer be appropriate to rely on Santow J’s advice that; “if
after careful consideration of all the circumstances
the solicitor is not
satisfied that the testator does not have testamentary capacity he should
proceed and prepare the will”
unless they have intimate and both recent
and long-term knowledge of their client and their capacity. Nevertheless, we
acknowledge
that it remains up to solicitors to make the ultimate judgment
themselves about their client’s will-making capacity.
We also note that
the judges appear to prefer contemporaneous evidence of capacity to
retrospective diagnoses of specialists, particularly
if the solicitors have
adopted practices recommended in the guide referred to
Our confidence in our suggestion was enhanced in 2010 by the English Court of
Chancery by the case of
Key & Anor v Key & Ors
in which Briggs J
noted that a solicitor accepted instructions for the preparation of a will from
an 89 year old will-maker whose
wife of 65 years' standing had been dead for
only a week. The solicitor did so without taking any proper steps to satisfy
of the will-maker’s will-making capacity, and “without even
making an attendance note of his meeting with [the will-maker
and one of his
daughters who became a major beneficiary as a result of the new will], at which
the instructions were
Briggs J described this as a failure to comply with the “Golden
Rule” which he described as follows:
The substance of the Golden Rule is that when a solicitor is
instructed to prepare a will for an aged testator, or for one who has
seriously ill, he should arrange for a medical practitioner first to satisfy
himself as to the capacity and understanding of
the testator, and to make a
contemporaneous record of his examination and
Briggs J went on to point out that the “Golden Rule” was not a
rule of law affecting the validity of a will, but a recommendation
practice. He said:
Compliance with the Golden Rule does not, of course, operate
as a touchstone of the validity of a will, nor does non-compliance demonstrate
its invalidity. Its purpose, as has repeatedly been emphasised, is to assist in
the avoidance of disputes, or at least in the minimisation
of their scope. As
the expert evidence in the present case confirms, persons with failing or
impaired mental faculties may, for perfectly
understandable reasons, seek to
conceal what they regard as their embarrassing shortcomings from persons with
whom they deal, so
that a friend or professional person such as a solicitor may
fail to detect defects in mental capacity which would be or become apparent
trained and experienced medical examiner, to whom a proper description of the
legal test for testamentary capacity had first
4. 5. The tendency to uphold the will-makers right
to make a will
While we doubt that Santow J’s advice to solicitors reflects the
current position of the court in relation to the assessment
of will-making
capacity, it does reflect a policy that appears to be implied in the common law
namely that a person’s right
to make a will is to be upheld wherever it is
legitimate to do so.
Consequently, a person who is the subject of a financial management order made
by the Guardianship Tribunal of New South Wales will
still be able to make a
will, provided it can be proved that they had will-making capacity at the time
they made the will, even though
they may not enter into contracts or dispose of
their property during the time they are subject to a financial management
Similarly, a person who
is the subject of a guardianship order made by the Guardianship Tribunal of New
South Wales may still be
able to make a will as the findings of the Tribunal
have no effect on the person’s capacity to make a
Nevertheless, the findings
of the Tribunal may be admitted in evidence before the Supreme Court to be taken
into account by it “to
the extent of whatever rational persuasive power
they may have”.
A similar approach was taken in Victoria in relation to findings and
decisions of the Guardianship and Administration Board there
Guardianship List of the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Following the New
South Wales approach, a Full Court of the Supreme Court of Western Australia has
been held that a person the subject
of an administration order may still be able
to make a will, but that for such a will to be given effect to it would be
to prove that the person had will-making capacity at the time they
made their will.
that this approach is consistent with the concept of task-specific capacity that
is that a person’s capacity to
make a decision in one area or task (for
example will-making) is distinct and separate, and therefore cannot be
extrapolated, from
their capacity to perform another task (for example making
decisions about lifestyle or finances).
Subject to any legislative provisions limiting or precluding those who are
the subject of administration orders making or varying
wills or imposing
restrictions on the circumstances in which a person the subject of a
guardianship or administration order may make
or vary a will, there is no reason
why the position taken by the Supreme Courts of New South Wales, Victoria and
Western Australia
would not be followed in the other Australian
Australian Guardianship Board is authorised to direct that a person the subject
of a guardianship or administration order
may make a will-making disposition
only after compliance with such precautions as the Board thinks fit to
In Western Australia
however, a provision which may have been intended to give a similar power to the
State Administrative Tribunal
has been held not to apply to wills or other forms
of testamentary instrument, for example
As Powell J shows in
Perpetual Trustee Co v Fairlie-Cunninghame
courts and commentators in England and Australia have long since held that the
opinion that those with mental illnesses may
be able to make wills during lucid
periods. In any event their wills have no effect during their lifetime and the
validity of such
wills may be tested before probate of them is
The issue of lucid
intervals is complex and is one area where the law lags behind medicine, as
discussed below.
In a subsequent case, Powell JA referred to many forms of mental disorder
that may be relevant to the question of whether or not a
will-maker had
will-making capacity at the time they made their will. He referred to
multi-infarct dementia, Alzheimer’s type
dementia which is progressive but
irreversible at present, delirium from alcoholism or other causes which may be
reversed, at least
to a degree. He also referred to forms of psychosis,
including schizophrenia and bi-polar disorder, which may be controllable either
substantially or to some degree by anti-psychotic
medications.
Many of the
conditions he referred to are described below together with their likely impact
on a person’s will-making
Re Hodges; Shorter v Hodges
, Powell J noted the opinion of a
leading psychiatrist giving expert evidence that the cognitive changes brought
did not affect the person’s capacity to reason but
affected the person’s motivation for action and held that a depressed
person who shot himself soon after making a will had will-making capacity when
he made it.
When a person has been prone to bouts of alcoholism the question has arisen
as to whether or not they could make a valid will. In
Landers v Landers
man had temporary beliefs described as absurd when affected by
The question that the
High Court dealt with was put by Rich J as “whether the delusion alleged
to exist in the mind of the
testator when drunk was also present in his mind
when sober”.
evidence satisfied the court that the alleged delusion did not affect the
will-maker when he made his will, the High Court
held that he had will-making
capacity at that time. As already noted,
Timbury v Coffee
was a case of a
will-maker who drank himself into a state of physical exhaustion and mental
disturbance.
In the intervals
between the bouts he behaved in a reasonable manner in most respects.
Nevertheless, he developed an intermittent
distrust of and antagonism towards
his wife. Even when apparently free from alcoholism, he sometimes recounted
incidents relating
to her that were improbable and, in some cases, inconsistent
with the proven facts. He made four wills during intervals between his
alcoholism. The facts of the case were decided by a jury. The jury decided that
he was not of sound mind, memory and understanding
when he made his last will,
but was in that state when he made his second last will. The High Court did not
interfere with the jury’s
Advanced age does not of itself prove that the will-maker was incapable, even
when associated with serious illness. However, the will
of such a person will be
carefully scrutinized by the
In 1924, in
the five members of the High Court agreed on the principle, but
disagreed as to whether the will-maker had
The minority stated
the principle as:
[G]reat age, while it necessarily excites the vigilance of the Court, does not
of itself establish want of
Mr Bailey was 88 and suffering from pneumonia when in 1923 he made what was
his seventh will. He signed it with a mark as he was too
ill to sign his name.
He died three days later. The majority of the High Court upheld this will rather
than his sixth will made in
For a more recent
example, see
Re Estate of
In that case an
unsigned will was accepted as the last will of an elderly woman, aged either 88
or 90. She was suffering from a degree
of dementia as well as congestive heart
failure and renal failure. She was also the subject of a guardianship order.
One of the disadvantages of advancing age is the risk the onset of dementia.
The fact that a person has got dementia does not preclude
them from making a
will. A will made by a woman when she had mild dementia was upheld in the
Supreme Court of Victoria in
The key issue is the
severity of the dementia and whether it impaired insight, judgment and
decision-making skills.
In a 2009 case, even though Vickery J of the Supreme Court of Victoria found,
the evidence as a whole is sufficient to throw doubt
upon the competency of the
will-maker, he was positively satisfied that she was of sound mind, memory and
understanding when she
executed her1999 will and her March 2000 codicil. He
noted that:
[A]t the time when she gave her instructions for those instruments, she knew
what she was doing, and she understood the effect of
the principal clauses in
the will; she had a general knowledge of the nature of her property and that it
was an estate of significant
value; and she acknowledged the friends and
relatives who she ought to have considered at the
Although Vickery J found that by mid-1999 the will-maker was suffering from
cognitive impairment characteristic of the pre-dementia
Alzheimer’s disease and remained in that condition in March 2000, that
degree of mental impairment did not necessarily
preclude her from having
will-making capacity as defined in law, and that it did not have that effect in
either 1999 or March 2000.
However, he was affirmatively satisfied that by December 2000 and in 2001 she
was not of sound mind, memory and understanding. Consequently,
the December 2000
codicil and the 2001 will were not valid and were set
Further, Vickery J provided another basis for supporting the right of
will-makers to make wills even if they cognitive disabilities.
He referred to
Article 12(2) of the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
which Australia has ratified and which is in force. Vickery J noted
that in the context of will-making, the
provided for “an
obligation on Australia to recognise that persons with disabilities enjoy the
exercise of the right to freedom
of testamentary disposition on an equal basis
with all other
4. 6. Proving a will is valid – the onus of
proof and who has it
Most wills are not contested and the executor will obtain the permission of
the Supreme Court to distribute the estate, that is the
real and personal
property of the will-maker who has died. This is done by a process called
seeking probate of the will in common
form. If the will is contested, the
process is to seek a grant of probate from the Court in “solemn
form”. The effect
of such a grant of probate is that it is binding on all
the parties to the court action and everyone else, subject to certain
exceptions.
Usually the
executor, but sometimes another person, applies to the Supreme Court for a grant
of probate in solemn form. Whoever does
so is said to “propound” the
will. They bear the onus of proving that the will is the validly made and valid
and testament of the will-maker. This onus of proof, which is to the
civil standard of balance of probabilities, remains with them
until the end of
the process.
Even though during
the process the onus may shift to a party alleging that the will should not be
admitted to probate to show why
it should not be so admitted, the ultimate
responsibility of satisfying the Court that the will should be admitted to
probate lies
with the applicant.
However, where a will is rational on its face and duly executed, there is a
presumption that the will-maker had will-making capacity.
Nevertheless, that
presumption is rebuttable and the legal onus remains with those
“propounding” the
That part of the test relating to the will-making capacity of the will-maker
was restated in 1995 by Gleeson CJ, when he was still
Chief Justice of New South
Wales, as follows:
Where the evidence in a suit for probate raises a doubt as to testamentary
capacity, there rests upon the plaintiff the burden of
satisfying the conscience
of the court that the [will-maker] had such capacity at the relevant time. If,
following a vigilant examination
of the whole of the evidence, the doubt is felt
to be substantial enough to preclude a belief that the [will-maker] was of sound
mind, memory and understanding at the time of execution of the will, probate
will not be
In a 2010 case, Briggs J of the English Court of Chancery stated the burden
of proof “rules” for will-making capacity
even more plainly but
using the legal terminology of “testamentary capacity” and
“propounder”. He said:
The burden of proof in relation to testamentary
capacity is subject to the following rules:
1. While the burden starts with the propounder of a will to establish
capacity, where the will is duly executed and appears rational
on its face, then
the court will presume capacity.
2. In such a case the evidential burden then shifts to the objector to raise
a real doubt about capacity.
3. If a real doubt is raised, the evidential burden shifts back to the
propounder to establish capacity
nonetheless.
4. 7. Proving a will –suspicious circumstances
and undue influence
When people with cognitive deficits suddenly makes their first will or a new
will benefitting those who have played a role in getting
the will made, these
circumstances will be treated as suspicious with implications for those wishing
to prove that a will made in
these circumstances was valid.
Experience has shown suspicious circumstances and undue influence being
exerted on the will-maker are often linked. In a 1968 case
Scarman J claimed
that Lord Penzance, a famous English judge of the second half of the
century, had once said that the issues of will-making capacity,
knowledge and approval, undue influence and fraud very often merged
Where a person was old,
ill and feeble and has cognitive deficits or is a person with acquired brain
damage, psychiatric condition
or intellectual disabilities reducing their
capacity to appreciate what they are doing and make decisions, they were
sometimes encouraged
by unscrupulous family members or “new found
friends” to make wills in their
Getting the person to
make a new will favouring people who would not normally have a claim to the
person’s bounty or to give
disproportionate benefits to one such claimant
over other claimants are two common ways among the myriad of ways in which
vulnerable,
cognitively impaired individuals can be taken advantage of. Such
wills can be challenged but only after the death of the will-maker
when probate
of their will is being sought so that their estate can be distributed to the
beneficiaries. Gifts made during life time
are treated differently and are dealt
with in Chapter 3.
One approach is to allege suspicious circumstances another is to claim undue
influence in the will-making process. Despite the fact
that they may arise from
the same fact situations, they are treated differently by the courts.
4. 7. 1. Suspicious
circumstances
There are no restrictions on the factual situations which may constitute
suspicious circumstances. Wherever a well-grounded suspicion
is raised, those
who wish to prove that the will is valid must remove the
The whole will is of
no effect if they fail to do
The principles to be
applied in suspicious circumstances cases are clear and have been
authoritatively stated by the High
Adapting the words of
Isaacs J, these can be summarized as follows:
1. where there are no circumstances exciting suspicion that the will-maker
may not have fully known or approved the provisions of
the will, the mere proof
of the will-maker’s capacity and of the fact of the due execution of the
will creates an assumption
that will-maker knew of and assented to its contents,
2. where any suspicious circumstances exist, the assumption does not arise,
and the proponents have the burden of removing the suspicion
affirmatively by clear and satisfactory proof (on the balance of probabilities)
that the will-maker knew and approved
of the contents of the will,
3. a probate court’s suspicion will be aroused if the person who wrote
or prepared the will is to take a benefit under it.
It will be expected to
undertake a vigilant and anxious examination of the evidence as to the
will-maker's appreciation and approval
of the contents of the will,
4. where a probate court is not satisfied that the will does contain the
real intention of the will-maker, the court is bound to
find that the will is
not entitled to probate,
5. however, this ‘rule’ goes no further than requiring vigilance
in seeing that the case is fully proved. It does not
introduce a
disqualification,
6. nor does it require, as a matter of law, any particular species of proof
to satisfy the onus of proof on the applicant to the court,
7. also, the requirement that suspicion must be cleared away does not create
'a screen' behind which fraud or dishonesty may be relied
on without pleading
them specifically when bringing the
application.
If the suspicious circumstances, whatever their nature, are not dispelled,
the will will not be not admitted to
It is only when
suspicion is removed by proof that the will-maker knew and approved of the
contents of the will that the onus is
thrown on those who oppose the will to
prove the fraud or undue influence, or whatever else they rely on to displace
the case made
for proving the
At this point it is likely
that, even though the will-maker is considered to have capacity, often as a
result of the common law’s
policy of upholding a person’s right to
make a will despite weakening capability set out in 4. 5 above, there will be
substantial
evidence of the will-maker’s decline or long-time low capacity
to make a will and evidence giving rise the possibility of undue
4. 7. 2. Undue influence
The most succinct description of undue influence in relation to will-making
was given by Sir James Hannen P in 1885 as follows:
To be undue influence in the eye of the law there must be – to sum it up
in a word –
lines later he continued:
It is only when the will of the person who becomes the testator is coerced into
doing something he or she has no desire to do, that
it is undue
Hood J of the Supreme Court of Victoria was similarly succinct when in 1897
To constitute undue influence there must be coercion or pressure, so as to
overpower the volition of the testatrix; there must be
some substitution of
another mind for
In 1868, Sir J.P. Wilde (later Lord Penzance) had been more discursive. He
noted that to make a valid will the will-maker must be
a free agent, but that
not all influences were unlawful. He continued:
[P]ressure of whatever character, whether acting on the fears or the hopes, if
so exerted as to overcome the volition without convincing
the judgment, is a
species of restraint under which no valid will can be made. Importunity or
threats, such as the testator has not
the courage to resist, moral command
asserted and yielded to for the sake of peace and quiet, or of escaping from
distress of mind
or social discomfort, these, if carried to a degree in which
the free play of the testator’s judgment, discretion or wishes
overborne, will constitute undue influence, though no force is either used or
threatened.
In 2003 in the Supreme Court of Queensland, and relying on late
century authority, Jones J said:
Where a will, apparently regularly executed, by a person of competent
understanding is challenged on the ground of undue influence
the burden of
establishing that its execution was so influenced lies on the person making the
To succeed in this … the defendant must prove the
following:-
(a) that the plaintiff had the capacity to influence the complainant;
(b) the influence was exercised;
(c) its exercise was undue
(d) its exercise brought about the
transaction.
The standard of proof is always on the balance of probabilities. However, the
strength of the evidence necessary to establish a fact
or facts on the balance
of probabilities may vary according to the nature of what it is sought to
Mere suspicion on behalf
of a disappointed potential beneficiary, without more, is not sufficient to
suggest that the will-maker
was overcome by undue
In many cases
those alleging undue influence will have to rely on circumstantial evidence to
prove it. This is because the source
of the best evidence on the matter, the
will-maker, is already dead, and those against whom the undue influence is
alleged will usually
The accepted position used to be, and may still be in New South Wales, that,
if the evidence relied upon was circumstantial, it was
not sufficient to show
that the circumstances surrounding the execution of the will were consistent
with the hypothesis that the
will was obtained by undue influence. It had to be
shown that the circumstances were also inconsistent with a contrary
hypothesis.
decision, Vickery J of the Supreme Court of Victoria criticised that standard of
proof stating that:
[It] imports a formidable standard of proof and imposes a significant
constriction on the capacity of the principle to provide an
effective remedy in
cases where testamentary undue influence may arise. It not only goes beyond the
accepted civil standard of proof
applied in Australia in cases sought to be made
out by circumstantial evidence, but the formulation equates to the criminal
and arguably even goes beyond that
Following the well established Australian position that the standard of proof
in civil cases is always proof on the balance of probabilities,
Vickery J said
that where an allegation of undue influence required a probate court to draw an
inference from circumstantial evidence,
the court must be satisfied that the
circumstances raised a more probable inference in favour of what was alleged
than not, after
the evidence on the question had been evaluated as a
Vickery J went on to
An allegation of testamentary undue influence is a serious matter with
potentially significant consequences for the expression of
the will of a
testator and for the testamentary dispositions made under it. Further, the
exercise of undue influence in a testamentary
context may also be regarded as an
inherently unlikely event in the circumstances of most cases. Expectant
beneficiaries do not ordinarily
put pressure on elderly testators in an
endeavour to change their minds against their will. Bearing these matters in
mind, in the
assessment of the evidence which has been marshaled in support of
the allegation made in this case, and in arriving at the ultimate
conclusion, I
adopt and apply the approach of Dixon J in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
and the majority in
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty
While it is suggested that Vickery J has stated the test correctly in terms
of the law on the standard of proof in civil cases in
Australia, it should be
noted that the established position in New South Wales, based on the
century English authority, is that to succeed with a claim for
undue influence, the applicant has to prove the actual coercion. Undue
cannot be inferred; consequently evidence of circumstances consistent with
coercion, but not amounting to proof of coercion,
As Windeyer J pointed
Revie v Druitt
, it is difficult to prove undue influence:
It is generally recognized that it is extremely difficult to prove undue
influence. The person who could give the best evidence is
dead. That does not
mean that it is impossible to establish undue influence, although I know of no
case in New South Wales where
the issue has been successfully
In its 1986 report, “Wills: Execution and Revocation” the New
South Wales Law Reform Commission noted that the strict
law of probate, under
which undue influence cannot be inferred, permitted if not encouraged pressure,
particularly on the old and
feeble and that this had led one of its consultants
to suggest that equitable principles, including presumptions of influence,
be introduced into the law of wills.
The Commission did not recommend
either way on this matter and the law has not yet been changed by either the
judges or the parliament.
Nevertheless, concerns still remain that some
will-makers die having made wills that do not represent their true intentions
cannot be rectified after their death.
4. 7. 3. The role of the expert in the assessment
of undue influence
First, it must be understood that undue influence and lack of capacity to
make the challenged will are mutually exclusive. For a court
to make a finding
of undue influence, it must first have found that the person possessed the
capacity to make a will.
Deciding which is the predominant issue in the legal challenge, lack of capacity
to make a will or undue influence, is the work
of the lawyers running the case,
but that decision is likely to be made in the light of the report provided by
the clinician expert.
Second, the clinician expert’s evidence should deal with the question
of the will-maker’s vulnerability to undue influence.
It is for the court
to decide whether influence was exercised or not. To that end, a recent
international task force has outlined
the kind of risk factors that make a
will-maker vulnerable to undue
These include:
1. Relationship risk factors namely, “confidential” or close
relationships between vulnerable will-makers and a range
of family members,
friends, associates or carers.
2. Social or environmental risk factors such as dependency and isolation.
3. Psychological factors such as delirium; emotional vulnerability conferred
by grief, loneliness, death bed situations and sexual
bargaining; personality
traits such as dependency, psychiatric illnesses such as depression, psychosis
and anxiety, and cognitive
impairment. With regards to cognitive impairment,
Shulman et al’s threshold concept suggests that a will-maker with only
impairment of cognitive function has to be subjected to a severe level
influence to the point of coercion or containment before that
influence would be
considered undue. However, as the disease progresses to more severe dementia the
person would be more susceptible
to subtle influence.
This in turn must be tempered by
an understanding of the person’s individual pattern of cognitive deficits
such that someone
with only mild cognitive impairment associated with frontal
lobe deficits in judgment may be particularly susceptible to influence
though their dementia is only mild.
4. Legal risk factors such as the procurement of the will by the beneficiary
who is favoured in the will, unnatural provisions which
exclude natural
beneficiaries, and a will which is inconsistent with previous
Clinicians should be mindful that there are also probably
“‘protective” or mitigating factors which render a person
resistant to the opinion and advice of others. These might include non-specific
suspiciousness towards all and sundry including possible
“influencers” (this contrasts with suspicion or paranoid ideation
focused on one person who is a possible beneficiary
which can be exploited by an
“influencer” who may fuel the paranoia and encourage exclusion of
that person from the will).
Similarly, personality traits of stubbornness,
intransigence and belligerence may be protective against influence.
Furthermore, while some disabled older people are vulnerable to the influence
of carers, others use their wealth to manipulate carers.
It is not unusual for
older persons with financial resources to bargain with carers, using promises of
will bequests to secure promises
4. 8. Court intervention to revoke or alter a will
made by a person lacking will-making capacity
The matters dealt with above may only be raised in the context of an
application for probate or the revocation of probate of a will-maker
died. The Supreme Courts of all the States and the two Territories have powers
to make or alter wills or to revoke them in
whole or on part during the lifetime
of a person who does not have will-making
In Tasmania the
Guardianship and Administration Board has the power to make a will on behalf of
a person who does not have will-making
The South Australian case of
Public Trustee v Phillips
provides an
example of a classic case of a will made by an elderly person with dementia
acting under the undue influence of
Mrs Phillips was in
her mid seventies in 1996 when the Guardianship Board of South Australia found
that she had dementia and was
unable to manage her own affairs. The Board
appointed the Public Trustee to administer her financial affairs for her. The
was that Mrs Phillips had been unable to manage her affairs because of
dementia from about 1993. In 1992 she came under the influence
of a Mr Venning
who persuaded her to buy a car, although she didn’t drive, and to sell her
then executed a power of attorney
appointing Mr Venning as her attorney. Acting under the power of attorney, Mr
Venning undertook
a number of transactions in relation to Mrs Phillips’
property. These transactions disadvantaged her and substantially advantaged
In May 1993 Mrs Phillips made a will appointing Mr Venning as her sole executor
and allowing him to control the disposition
of her estate and to direct it to
himself if he so wished. Doyle CJ found that Mrs Phillips made this will as a
result of the influence
exercised over her by Mr Venning and without a proper
appreciation of his motives.
Wills Act 1936 (SA)
the Supreme Court may make an order
revoking the will of a person who lacks will-making capacity. It may also make
or alter the will
The Public Trustee,
as administrator of Mrs Phillips’s estate, was given leave to apply for
such an order. Doyle CJ was satisfied
that while Mrs Phillips had lost
will-making capacity she had indicated that she wanted her son to inherit her
estate. She would
not want Mr Venning to benefit by inheriting her estate and
that she would not want her 1993 will to remain unrevoked. Doyle CJ revoked
As already noted, the Guardianship and Administration Board of Tasmania has
the power to authorise the making of a will on behalf
of a person who does not
have will-making capacity. However, the Board may direct the application to it
be made to the Supreme Court.
While the Board may authorise the making of a will and revoke any will made
under its orders, it does not have the capacity to revoke
a will made by a
person when they did not have will-making
However, the
Supreme Court has this power within its broad power to revoke a will of a person
who lacks will-making power.
4. 9. Making and changing wills where will-making
capacity is in doubt – the role of the lawyer and the role of the capacity
4. 9. 1. The practice implication for lawyers
arising from the current law – an overview of general
considerations
The test for will-making capacity is long-standing and stable yet not so
intransigent as to fail to take into account new medical,
psychiatric and
psychological knowledge and the fact that many more people are much wealthier
than in the 19
century with a wider range of assets which may
include real property and a number of different kinds of personal property.
There is an expectation that solicitors will take great care and careful
notes when obtaining instructions from those whose will-making
capacity may be
in doubt. They are also expected to obtain medical and other appropriate advice
capacity to meet all the elements of the
legal test for such capacity both at the time the instructions for the will were
again at the time of the execution of the will if there is a
significant gap between those two events.
The positive attitude of the courts to the evidence of those who were
familiar with the will-maker in day to day life and who were
lay to medicine is
shown in the following examples. A specialist geriatrician gave an opinion more
than four years after the death
of the will-maker that he lacked capacity when
he made his last will. However, this opinion was not accepted because the
evidence of a number of witnesses who had extensive contact with the
will-maker.
The evidence of a
will-maker’s general practitioner was found not to be particularly helpful
and the trial judge applied the
evidence of the expert witnesses only to the
extent that it supported rather than trumped or contradicted the evidence from
non-expert sources.
a case in which the will-maker made a will in 1995 and was made the subject of a
financial management order by the Guardianship
Tribunal of New South Wales in
2000, experienced consultant psychiatrists were used by both
One psychiatrist said
that the will-maker had capacity in 1995; the other took the contrary view. The
trial judge considered neither
expert witness convincing, partly because they
both relied on statements excluded from the evidence but also because they had
evidence of the day to day life of the will-maker to assist
The judge gave detailed
consideration to the evidence of the non-expert
There is a tendency to treat the solicitors who took the instructions and
drafted the contested will as independent witnesses when
consideration is given
to their views about the capacity of will-maker to make a will.
The cases also show the respect, even the preference, that is given to the
evidence of those able to relate their observations of
the will-maker at, or
As a result, it does
not follow that the evidence of medical specialists or psychologists, no matter
how eminent, will be accepted
in preference to the evidence of the solicitor who
took the instructions and was involved with the execution of the will or in
to the evidence of other eye-witnesses.
It is also essential that doctors and other expert witnesses are advised of
the legal test for will-making capacity before they provide
That issue and the
attitude of the courts to the evidence of health professionals retained to give
expert witness opinions about
a person’s will-making capacity after the
person’s death are reflected in
In that case, a
doctor gave an opinion after the death of the will-maker and more than four
years after the will was made to the
effect that the will-maker did not have
will-making capacity when she made her last
The doctor’s
evidence was not given much weight because it was based on someone else’s
diagnosis of “emerging Alzheimer’s
disease” and the
doctor’s assumption that such a diagnosis was inconsistent with
will-making capacity.
the doctor’s opinion did not show an understanding of the legal test for
incapacity.
On the other hand
the evidence of will-making capacity came from one of those seeking to prove the
validity of the will who was a
registered nurse and who had had a great deal of
The validity of the
will was upheld.
This review of the cases indicates an apparent preference by judges to uphold
the right of a person to make a will even if they have
cognitive defects and are
the subject of guardianship or administration orders made by tribunals
exercising guardianship jurisdiction.
The fact that those who have been found to lack decision-making capacity and
to be in need of either a guardian or an administrator
or both and the legal
policy in favour of upholding the right of adults to make wills even if they are
cognitively impaired emphasises
the need for doctors and other health
professionals to appreciate the differences between the legal tests for
will-making capacity
and for capacity for other purposes. This situation creates
tensions between those trying to give effect to a person’s capacity
make or remake a will and service providers seeking to protect those with
cognitive defects from exploitation. However, that is
only one example of the
complexities, tensions and uncertainties that can arise when action is taken to
to make that will when their will-making capacity is,
or may be seen to be in the future to have been in doubt when they made the
in question.
4. 9. 2. Caution when taking instructions for the
drafting of a will
It is not always easy for solicitors to identify those clients who are
incompetent because people with early dementia may appear relatively
casual conversation and maintain their social graces particularly in earlier
stages of the disease.
observation is incorporated in dementia staging systems such as the CDR, which
acknowledge that dementia may not be evident
to others until moderate to severe
stages of the disease.
Further, lawyers cannot always rely on family members to inform them that a
client has dementia because families often deny early
signs of dementia out of
fear of the diagnosis or dismiss such signs as “normal for that
age”. Even health care professionals
dealing with the client may be no
more alert to the diagnosis. Dementia can be missed unless it is specifically
looked for. Family
doctors, many of whom rely on passive identification rather
than active screening of dementia for diagnosis, often fail to identify
Studies have shown consistently that 80-91% of cases of
dementia are missed by general
practitioners.
The same is
often true for nursing staff in nursing
Finally, the
determination of testamentary capacity is a highly specialised task based on
structured assessment.
As already noted, it is therefore prudent in all cases, if not essential, to
document the process of taking instructions from all
clients over 65. It is
also wise to normalise the process so as not to alienate elderly clients who may
be offended by any suggestion
of infirmity or incapacity. The following
explanation might be helpful:
I hope you don’t mind, but I’m going to ask you some questions in
order to properly document this will-making process.
I do this with everyone
who comes to see me over 65.
It may be helpful to ask the client to:
1. “describe your assets”; and,
2. “describe who your heirs are, how they are related to you”;
3. “why you are disposing of your property in the way you have
It is preferable if the health care professional can be given information
pattern. The person
changing their will should be questioned about the rationale behind any proposed
changes to the way they had
previously disposed of their property in their will.
When checking the knowledge or understanding of the client, they should be
asked to explain the effect of what they are doing in their
own words. Their
responses should be recorded verbatim. It is important to remember that an
affirmative answer to the question
“Do you understand what this
will contains?” is not an adequate reflection of understanding
Further, as orientation and social presentation are separate from the
cognitive functions required for will-making, the observation
that a person was
“pleasant, well–dressed and chatted about the weather” does
not help prove that they had capacity
to carry out the will-making process
competently.
It is prudent to inquire specifically whether the will-maker has been the
subject of any application to the guardianship and administration
tribunal in
the relevant State or Territory and whether any administration or financial
management order has been made in relation
to them by that tribunal, any other
tribunal or a Supreme Court. It is also wise to enquire whether any enduring
power of attorney
is in operation or whether the person has made an appointment
of enduring guardian, and who the enduring attorney and the enduring
are. It is also useful to check whether the person is still making their own
medical consent decisions or whether their
“person responsible” or
other legally authorised substitute decision-maker is doing that for them. While
none of these
matters demonstrate that the person has lost will-making capacity
it puts people on notice that they may have done so.
4. 9. 3. Conditions which might affect capacity
Banks v Goodfellow
was based on a case of psychosis. These days cases
of dementia far outnumber cases of psychosis as the basis for will challenges.
In a case series of 25 challenges to testamentary capacity referred to a
Canadian psychiatrist, 40% were based on dementia,
28% were alcohol related,
28% based on neurological or psychiatric disorder, 20% to personality disorder
and 12% related to suicide
The personal experience with will challenges of one of the authors reflects a
similar, but greater, preponderance of dementia amongst
a heterogeneous group of
syndromes observed. In a series of 41 will challenges, 78% were based on
dementia, 7% on delirium or complex
medical conditions, 5% on schizophrenia or
paranoid states, and 2.5% each on alcohol, personality disorder, bipolar
disorder and
depression/suicide.
not as frequently represented as the primary condition, alcohol abuse was the
most common co-morbid condition. Clearly
this will vary according to the
specialty of the expert and the patterns of referral to psychologists or
geriatricians may well differ.
4. 9. 3. 1. Dementia and testamentary capacity: definition and causes
Dementia is a neurodegenerative syndrome characterised by the development of
multiple, cognitive (intellectual) deficits, usually
including memory
impairment. According to the DSM- IV, dementia is diagnosed in the presence of
memory impairment and one or more
of the following cognitive disturbances:
1. aphasia (language disturbance)
2. apraxia (impaired ability to carry out motor activities or translate ideas
into actions)
3. agnosia (failure to recognise or identify objects)
4. disturbance in executive functioning (ie, planning, organising,
sequencing, abstracting)
To satisfy the criteria for a diagnosis of dementia these cognitive deficits
must cause significant impairment in social and occupational
functioning and
represent a significant decline from a previous level of functioning. As
already noted, a diagnosis of dementia
does not preclude testamentary capacity.
There are over one hundred causes of dementia, although Alzheimer’s
disease is thought to be the most common cause, followed
by Vascular Dementia
and Lewy Body Dementia, depending on whether clinical or autopsy diagnoses are
examined. Mixed dementia is
far more common than was previously suspected.
Approximate relative contributions of various causes of dementia are as follows:
pure Alzheimer’s Disease 35%; Mixed Vascular Dementia /Alzheimer’s
disease 15%; Pure Vascular Disease 10%; Lewy Body
Dementia 15%; Fronto-Temporal
Lobe Disease 5%; and Other 20%
Each type of dementia is
associated with a particular type and distribution of brain pathology, cognitive
profile and rate and nature
of decline with variable impact on capacity.
Alzheimer’s disease is a progressive disorder characterised by the
deposition of protein aggregates called plaques and neuronal
inclusions called
tangles. These develop initially in the temporal lobe regions of the brain but
spread to involve other cortical
areas. Alzheimers’ disease is manifested
by early memory loss accompanied by multiple deficits in language, motor skills
perception and with gradually continuing global cognitive decline and
progressive worsening of
Vascular dementia is defined as dementia that results from vascular or
circulatory lesions (i.e. cerebrovascular disease) in the
Such lesions may
include obvious stroke/s involving occlusion of large vessels but there are
multiple types of “small vessel
dementias” which may involve tiny
complete or incomplete “silent strokes” (of which the person may be
disease of the blood vessels and surrounding brain and hemorrhagic
lesions. The pattern of deficits depends on the location and
distribution of
such lesions but in general, patients with vascular dementia have only modest
problems with memory but with significant
executive (i.e. problems with planning
and judgment) dysfunction.
Dementia with Lewy Bodies has been acknowledged increasingly as a relatively
common cause of dementia; some would say the second most
common cause of
dementia after Alzheimer’s disease, at least at
It is characterised
by the presence of spherical bodies inside brain neurons and a clinical
presentation of dementia with early
problems with attention, judgment and
visuospatial difficulties predominating over memory deficits, falls, signs of
Parkinsonism
and prominent
hallucinations.
Distinguishing the cause of dementia in a person whose will-making capacity
is being questioned is relevant insofar as it may help
predict the likelihood of
certain deficits at different stages of the disease, although there is still
much variation between individuals.
For example, as stated previously, someone
with vascular dementia may have early loss of frontal, “executive”
such as judgment and reasoning, because of the vulnerability of the
frontal lobe to the type of cerebrovascular pathology that causes
dementia, and accordingly early difficulties weighing the claims of
beneficiaries.
4. 9. 3. 1. 1. The relevance of severity of dementia
An assessment of the severity of dementia is usually based on the extent of
the person’s cognitive and functional impairment.
A person in the early
stages of dementia may require minimal assistance or prompting in their
performance of activities of daily
living. At the later stage they may be
totally dependant on others for basic activities such as feeding and toileting
final stages of dementia the person may be bedridden. Thus, although
there is probably only a modest correlation between performance
on scales which
measure functional impairment and will-making capacity, performance on such
scales may give an idea of the severity
of the person’s dementia.
Also, general cognitive screens such as the Mini Mental State Examination
(MMSE) do not identify incapable people with any degree
of sensitivity or
specificity except at the extremes of performance.
The MMSE is a bedside
screen of cognitive function. It is not a diagnosis; it is merely a guide for
rating severity. A MMSE score
between 18 and 24 suggests mild dementia; a score
of 10 to 17 suggests moderate dementia and less than 10, severe dementia. These
thresholds are very loose as scores on the MMSE vary according to education,
language, how it is administered and how the patient
feels on the
Further, the MMSE is
limited in value because of its failure to include items which test frontal or
executive function which are
crucial in the will-making process. In slowly
progressive dementias such as Alzheimer’s disease, a person may lose 3 to
points on the MMSE per
When assessing the relevance of severity to capacity, it is important to
consider each case on its individual merits. In particular,
the job of the
expert is to consider the cognitive capacity of the person in the context of the
complexity or “task specific”
aspects of the decision to be made, as
suggested by Shulman and
For example, a
person with severe dementia may still have capacity to distribute a simple
estate, for example if their only asset
was their house to be bequeathed to one
surviving relative, while a person with mild dementia may have difficulty
apportioning an
estate involving a complex share and real estate portfolio in
various proportions amongst multiple beneficiaries. Importantly, dementia
not have to be severe to affect one’s capacity for highly complex
reasoning such as appraisal of family members as discussed
in Chapter 1.2.
4. 9. 3. 1. 2. Dementia and lucid intervals
As stated previously, the courts have long held the idea that those with
mental illnesses may be able to make wills during lucid periods.
However, it is
generally agreed among clinicians that while persons with dementia may have
better days or better times of the day,
those with advanced dementia do not have
“lucid-enough” intervals to make a will competently during those
periods. While
much has been made of the determination of mental capacity at the
precise moment the will is made, it is often difficult to ignore
“before and after
Windeyer J,
Robinson v Spratt
accepted evidence as to “good days and bad
days” but noted:
The clear psychiatric evidence is that the deceased was on a downhill path from
1989 onwards as a result of dementia. There were
some better periods but the
path was always downwards.
4. 9. 3. 2. Aphasia
One of the hallmarks of capacity is the ability to communicate a preference
or a decision and is thus dependent on language performance.
Aphasia is defined
as an impairment in the understanding or transmission of ideas by language in
any of its forms, namely, speaking
(expressive and receptive speech), reading or
writing, which is due to brain injury or disease,
most commonly stroke. The
presence of aphasia may thus hamper the assessment of both capacity and overall
cognitive function. The
challenge for the clinician is to determine the extent
of cognitive impairment, if any, accompanying
Indeed there is
mounting evidence to suggest that it is impossible to predict the status of
other aspects of cognition on the basis
of language
Higher level
executive skills such as involved in judgment, flexibility, planning and
foresight are the most vulnerable to the effects
of brain damage associated with
aphasia and must be carefully screened for in such
previous suggestions of using prompted recall and recognition memory with cues
(e.g. identifying the correct response
from a list of correct and incorrect
answers) to maximize communication with an aphasic will-maker provide fairly
gross estimation
of understanding and should be best interpreted by a
speech-language pathologist.
It is advised that a speech-language pathologist facilitate communication
between a client with language disturbance and solicitor
or a client and an
expert assessing capacity.
4. 9. 3. 3. Delirium
Delirium is a transient, often fluctuating impairment in consciousness,
attention and cognition. It may mimic dementia, but it is
of sudden onset and is
caused by underlying physical illness such as chest or urinary tract infection
or drug toxicity. It is usually
reversible once its underlying cause is
treated; however it often complicates dementia making the dementia appear
temporarily worse.
Delirium may affect will-making capacity due to its global
effects on cognition, and particularly because of its effects on concentration,
perception of reality, memory and reasoning, although the effect on will-making
will depend largely on the severity of the delirium,
its fluctuation, and the
complexity of the will-making task.
The issue of delirium is
usually relevant when instructions are taken in the hospital setting,
particularly when someone decides,
or is prompted, to make a will on their
“death bed” or when they are extremely unwell. Consequently, any
doctor assessing
a person’s will-making capacity, either contemporaneously
or subsequently, should be extremely careful to assess whether or
not the person
had delirium when they made the relevant
4. 9. 3. 4. Alcohol and drug-related disorders
Alcohol-related disorder is an important co-morbid condition in documented
will challenges, comprising 28% of the challenges in one
Regardless of
whether or not the will-maker suffered habitual intoxication, abuse or
dependence, the effect of alcohol abuse is
only relevant if the person was
intoxicated, withdrawing from alcohol or suffering other consequences of alcohol
abuse such as paranoid
ideation or brain damage at the time of making the will
and that such mental disorder rendered the person incapable of performing
more of the mental functions necessary to make a valid will.
This was illustrated in
Timbury v Coffee
, a case in which the
will-maker’s suspicions, distrust, resentment and tendency to hostility
towards his wife as a result of
his alcoholism were enough for the jury to find
that he was “not of sound disposing mind” when he made his last
The overuse of
alcohol can cause permanent brain damage and, as a’Beckett J pointed out
In re White
, cause, to a great extent, the loss of a person’s
will and intelligence such that they can easily be influenced when making
This is the case with any drug-related disorder. Drugs (and this means both
therapeutic and recreational) or withdrawal from them
can cause changes in
consciousness, perception of reality and reasoning all of which can impact on
the will-making process. Drug
effect can vary between subtly altering the way
complex decisions are made at one extreme, to rendering a patient unconscious at
4. 9. 3. 5. Psychotic conditions such as schizophrenia
Psychotic symptoms include delusions (fixed false ideas about poverty, theft,
sin, paranoia etc) and hallucinations (false sensory
perceptions such as hearing
voices). Some elderly people suffer psychotic symptoms due to illnesses such as
schizophrenia or bipolar
disorder (sometimes called manic depressive disorder)
which they have developed earlier in life and continue to suffer in old age
while others present with such illnesses for the first time in old age.
Psychotic symptoms may also complicate dementia. Up to 86%
of sufferers have
depression, 205 to 73% have delusions and 15% to 49% have
hallucinations.
alcohol and other drug related disorders, psychotic symptoms are only relevant
if they render the person incapable of performing
one or more of the mental
functions necessary to make a valid will.
4. 9. 3. 6. Mood disorders and suicide
Mood disorders such as depression will impact on the will-making process if
they are accompanied by symptoms of hopelessness or delusions
of persecution,
poverty or sin which might effect the will-maker’s perception of his
assets or relationships.
As already noted, the act of suicide is not
regarded as evidence per se of
incapacity.
Suicide usually
occurs in the context of psychiatric disorders such as depression, alcohol abuse
and delusional beliefs and its relevance
to capacity must be interpreted in the
light of these contextual psychiatric disorders as well as the nature of gifting
the will (i.e. whether it was expected or rational or otherwise) and
the proximity of the making of the will to the writing of the
suicide note and
the suicide itself.
4. 9. 3. 7. Personality disorder
As stated previously, the law draws a distinction between mere antipathy,
albeit unreasonable, towards one who has a claim, and judgment
affected by
disorder of the mind. This was exemplified in the case of
Re Estate of
Mrs Griffith
was a widow who made no provision for her son, her only child, in her final
will. Prior to this, their relationship
had irretrievably broken down such that
they did not speak to each in the last ten years of her life. He had been a
dutiful and loving
son who was attentive to his mother’s needs. Mrs
Griffith had taken strong exception to his relationship with a lady friend.
Emotions of possessiveness and jealousy may have been involved. There was
evidence of a 14 year history of bizarre and aggressive
behaviour on her part
culminating in her bursting into her son’s room in the early hours of the
morning brandishing a kitchen
knife screaming that she hated him and telling him
to get out.
The psychiatric evidence offered was that she suffered a paranoid personality
disorder which manifested itself in delusions that her
son did not care for her,
that he was a threat to her and that he suffered from serious character defects.
The trial judge, Santow
J, was unable to conclude either way that Mrs
Griffith’s rejection of her son stemmed from a paranoid personality
or a delusion of such extremity that as to connote a condition of
insanity. He went on to note that if he had had to find that Mrs
Griffith had
had a delusion in the form of “a fixed and incorrigible false
belief” that she could not be reasoned out
of, he would have done so.
However, he noted that the party wishing to prove that the will was valid had to
show that she had will-making
capacity at the time she made the will and that
they had failed to do so. The New South Wales Court of Appeal upheld Santow
decision as a correct view of the
Gleeson CJ, with whom Handley JA agreed, noted that Santow J’s
reasoning involved the premise that:
[I]t was unnecessary for him to make a positive finding that the testatrix was
suffering from insane delusions in order for the onus
of proof of testamentary
capacity to fall upon the party propounding the
At the end of his judgment Gleeson CJ noted that the evidence of the
psychiatrist:
[A]dded sufficient weight to the contention that what was here involved was
mental disturbance, and a judgment that could be characterised,
not merely as
being unfair, but as being the product of mental
Court of Appeal’s decision stands for the proposition that a positive
finding of delusion is not necessary to raise a doubt
as to capacity. Gleeson
CJ’s comments open up the possibility of the law catching up to where the
knowledge of medicine is
in relation to personality disorder. This knowledge
includes a realization that personality disorders can have just as distorting
effect on a will-maker’s capacity as can what the law has called since
1870 at least, “insane
delusions”.
Some personality disorders, such as paranoid (pervasive distrust and
suspiciousness of others), borderline (pervasive instability
of interpersonal
relationships, self image and feelings) and narcissistic (pervasive grandiosity,
need for admiration and lack of
empathy) can present as serious disorders of
mind, associated with abnormalities in mood, ideation and object relations (i.e.
with loved ones). In severe cases, symptoms such as: (i)
“splitting” namely distorted perceptions of others as belonging
either the idealized or all-good group, or the devalued or all-bad group (e.g.
the good wife, the good grandson versus the bad
sons and the bad wife); (ii)
“idealization” namely attributing exaggerated positive qualities
such as omnipotence and
perfection to others; (iii) “devaluation”,
namely attributing exaggerated negative qualities to others; and (iv) paranoid
ideation with or without accompanying mood disturbance may poison affections
towards beneficiaries and render a will-maker unable
to adequately weigh the
claims of potential beneficiaries.
Notwithstanding this, caution is advised when suggesting that personality
disorder might be incompatible with will-making because
the diagnosis of
personality disorder is based on a life-long and enduring pattern of behaviour
and relating to others. It is probably
incompatible with sound disposition only
in severe cases or during times of crisis or decompensation (i.e. when under
stress, the
person with personality disorder becomes particularly disturbed).
4. 9. 4. Expert opinions – contemporaneous
and retrospective
The importance of obtaining assessments by doctors or psychologists of a
person’s will-making capacity before they make a will
if their will-making
capacity is in doubt is clear from the earlier parts of this chapter. It is also
prudent, if it can be foreseen
that the will is likely to be challenged and the
will-maker’s estate is substantial, and it is possible to take the time to
get a specialist’s opinion without risking the person dying before their
will can be finalized, to seek and obtain that opinion
contemporaneously.
Despite the preference for contemporaneous evidence apparent from the decided
cases, it is still worthwhile obtaining
the (retrospective) opinion of an
experienced specialist with the relevant expertise if the will is challenged
after the death of
the will-maker.
However, these expert opinions will have probative value only if the
specialists retained are properly briefed as to the legal tests
for will-making
capacity and are provided with all the available documentary and other evidence
at the time they gave their instructions
for and made their will and any other relevant factual information. These
matters are taken
up in more detail below.
4. 9. 4. 1. What kind of expert?
From the lawyer’s perspective, the first question is what kind of
specialist is the most appropriate to give the expert opinion
required in the
circumstances. It is wise to retain a health care professional with relevant
psychological (e.g. neuropsychologist),
medical (e.g. neurologist or
geriatrician) or psychiatric (e.g. general psychiatrist, forensic psychiatrist
or psychogeriatrician)
expertise and medico-legal experience. Different cases
are more suited to different types of experts. For example, a psychiatrist
have special expertise to consider a case which relies on the presence of
psychiatric disorder or psychotic symptoms. A neurologist
or geriatrician may
have special expertise in a case of delirium and complex medical conditions. A
neuropsychologist may offer special
expertise in a case in which there is little
formal medical documentation of dementia and relies on extrapolation of
behavioural
disturbance to prove cognitive dysfunction.
When a health care professional is asked to act as an expert witness in any
medico-legal case, they must turn their mind to the issue
Codes of conduct
require experts to note if a question falls outside their field of expertise, so
it is useful to consider: “Am
I the best person to comment on this case?
Should I recommend someone else? ”. After agreeing to take on the case,
embarking on any work, it is helpful to outline the terms of
engagement such as availability, hourly fees, approximate total cost
expected procedure for finalising the report and payment.
4. 9. 4. 2. Assessment at the time the will is being made
As Santow J pointed out, if there is doubt about a person’s will-making
capacity when they are making or remaking their will
it is most prudent, if not
essential, for the solicitor acting for the will-maker to have the will-maker
examined by a health professional
with expertise in assessing will-making
capacity and to receive and consider that
If there is any
significant time period between when the instructions for the will are taken and
the will is executed (actually made),
expert opinion about the person’s
will-making capacity should be obtained contemporaneously with each occasion.
In such cases, the will document must give effect to the will-maker’s
instructions and those instructions must continue to reflect
those intentions.
We would suggest that this last matter is to be inferred unless there is an
evidential basis for believing that
the will-maker changed their mind between
giving instructions and executing the will. Crucially however for the will to be
the will-maker must know at the time they executed the will what they
were doing and thus had sufficient mental capacity to carry
out the juristic act
which will-making involves. That specifically is what the will-maker must have
capacity to understand in order
to be found to have will-making capacity at the
time they executed the will.
4. 9. 4. 3. What to provide to the expert
The expert dealing with a matter while the will-maker is still alive should
be provided with the following:
1. A concise statement of the legal test for will-making capacity;
2. All of the will-maker’s previous wills to establish the will-making
3. Evidence of previously established trust on the part of the will-maker
e.g. previously appointed attorneys under powers of attorney
or appointed
enduring guardians;
4. Any medical notes (e.g. notes of the will-maker’s general
practitioner and any specialist medical reports relevant to capacity);
5. A family tree to establish the accuracy of the will-maker’s recall
of potential beneficiaries;
6. An account of the will-maker’s assets to assess the accuracy of the
will-maker’s knowledge of their estate.
4. 9. 4. 4. Making the contemporaneous assessment
Prior to assessing a client for a solicitor in a contemporaneous case it is
essential that the expert be armed with the information
outlined above.
Consultation with the lawyer is important and sometimes it is helpful to have
the solicitor present during the assessment.
At the outset of the assessment,
the expert assessor should establish the will-maker’s understanding of the
nature and purpose
of the assessment and get their consent to
In order to gauge the extent of the potential will-maker’s functional
incapacity, it is useful to interview a person, such as
a family member or
carer, who has had regular and recent contact with the potential will-maker. It
is advisable that any such interviewee
should not be present in the room during
the examination of the potential will-maker.
The assessment should include a medical and psychiatric history, mental
status and cognitive examination in order to exclude or make
a diagnosis of
mental disorder, as well addressing the specific tests for testamentary
capacity. Ultimately, the clinical examination
should be linked to the
will-maker’s capacity to meet the specific elements of testamentary
The expert should,
where possible, gain an understanding of the potential will-maker’s family
relationships and the “emotional/psychological
milieu” in which the
will-maker lives with specific reference to conflicts or tensions within the
family, of which the will-maker
The expert should also
gain an understanding of the will-maker’s rationale for the disposition of
their property in the light
of family relationships and patterns of trust
established in the previous will-making pattern or the pattern of other
documents such
as any powers of attorney. If possible, the will-maker should be
asked to reflect on the implications of their decision. They should
the consequences and impact of a particular disposition, especially if it
excludes natural or usual beneficiaries such
as close family members. The expert
should seek clarification of concerns regarding potential beneficiaries who are
excluded from
the will or bequeathed lower amounts than
Caution on this matter has been advised previously as people with frontal
lobe deficits may be able to narrate in detail the consequences
of an action
without considering their
significance.
This may be
particularly relevant if a person with dementia has been influenced and coached
in their decision and is able to “parrot”
reasons for disposing of
their assets in a way which favours certain individuals. Careful probing is
especially important if there
is a proposed departure from previous wills or
consistently expressed wishes. Such probing is also prudent if the potential
proposed to make multiple changes in their will as a means of
controlling individuals necessary for their support or independence
or if those
who appear to be the proper objects of the person’s bounty are
Shulman and others have provided a useful guide as to the questions that
might be asked of the potential will-maker to assess their
understanding of some
of these issues. These are:
1. Can you tell me the reason(s) why you have decided to make changes in your
2. Why did you decide to divide the estate in this particular way?
3. Do you understand how individual A might feel, about being excluded from
the will or about being given a significantly less amount
than previously
expected or promised?
4. Do you understand the economic implications for individual B of this
particular distribution in your will?
5. Can you tell me about the important relationships in your family and
others close to you?
6. Can you describe the nature of any family or personal disputes or tensions
that may have influenced your distribution of assets?
It is also helpful to ask the potential will-maker to repeat their intent
with regards to disposition of their estate at the end of
the consultation to
check consistency. Some experts do assessments on two separate days to ensure
this. It is important to document
in detail the potential will-maker’s
wishes. Some clinicians advocate tape or video assessments to ensure
4. 9. 4. 5. Assessment after the will-maker has died
After the will-maker has died, any expert commenting on capacity is at a
relative disadvantage compared to those who have seen the
will-maker during
life. Notwithstanding that, there is often a wealth of documentation, usually
more than was available during the
will-maker’s life, upon which an expert
may draw their conclusions, providing they are given all the available and
4. 9. 4. 6. What to provide to the expert
The expert dealing with a matter after the will-maker has died should be
provided with the following:
1. Any medical notes relating to the will-maker made contemporaneously with
the will, especially the records of the will-maker’s
general practitioner,
hostel, nursing home or hospital progress reports, Aged Care Assessment Team
2. Affidavits made by lay people relating to the will-maker’s
relationships with their beneficiaries and any other relevant
information from
non-professional people which may point to a change in the will-maker’s
personality or relationships, or show
conflict coinciding with the
will-maker’s dementing or other illnesses relevant to will-making
capacity. Such lay people could
include family members, friends and carers who
had first-hand experience of the will-maker;
3. Evidence of previously established trust on the part of the will-maker
e.g. previously appointed attorneys under powers of attorney
or appointed
enduring guardians;
4. All previous wills to establish the will-making pattern, or the lack of
5. Any file notes or affidavits from the solicitor who took instructions from
the will-maker;
6. All documents provided to the experts acting for the other parties if
litigation has been commenced.
4. 9. 4. 7. Retrospective assessment
Although retrospective assessment is often less valued by the courts, there
is often more documentation available to the expert than
that available to an
expert making a contemporaneous assessment. There is usually more time available
to gather the relevant material.
Medical records may provide detail about relevant medical conditions such as
history of stroke, risk factors for cerebrovascular disease
or the results of
any cognitive examination. Progress notes from residential care facilities are
particularly helpful in that they
often document patterns of behaviour relevant
to decision making in detail on and around the day the will was made; for
behaviours reflective of poor impulse control, planning or judgment.
Evidence from lay people will often demonstrate the nature of family
relationships or previously expressed wishes as well as provide
descriptions of
behaviour. All these matters must be interpreted in terms of their relationship
to the legal criteria for will-making
capacity. Less helpful aspects of lay
testimony include the frequently made but faulty assumption that the will-maker
was competent
because their social graces had been preserved.
4. 9. 5. Writing an expert report
4. 9. 5. 1. The content of the report
Regardless of whether the assessment is contemporaneous or retrospective, in
addition to addressing the specific criteria for will-making
capacity, the
expert witness should provide an account of the will-maker’s relationships
and must obtain their medical history,
the history of their cognitive decline
and the results of any cognitive examinations of the will-maker. These issues
must be addressed
in the expert’s report, a suggested outline of which is
set out in the box below.
Suggested outline of report for will-making capacity:
1. Expertise or CV annexure;
2. Questions asked;
3. Acknowledgement of having read the relevant expert code;
4. Evidence upon which opinion is based (i.e. a list of the documents
5. Circumstances of assessment if contemporaneous (i.e. visited at
6. Facts, matters and assumptions upon which opinion is based;
(a) Personal history of the testator and family relationships;
(b) General medical history;
(c) History of cognitive decline or psychiatric history, if relevant;
(a) Diagnosis, including a rating of severity of cognitive impairment
if possible;
(b) Outline legal tests for will-making capacity & address each
element separately;
8. Conclusion (N.B. if the opinion is incomplete or not a concluded opinion,
codes of conduct usually require a statement to that
effect); and
9. References (codes of conduct usually require that any literature or other
materials utilised in support of the opinions are outlined).
4. 9. 5. 2. The criteria for will-making capacity and how to assess
criteria for
defining will-making capacity remain the established law, a need to go beyond
those criteria has been identified recently
in the international literature.
Shulman, Cohen and Hull have commented:
Many cases of challenges to testamentary capacity involve complex and subtle
issues that call for a need to go beyond the traditional
Banks v Goodfellow
criteria. Lawyers and expert assessors need to ensure that they take into
account the capacity to appreciate the consequences of executing
especially in suspicious circumstances where there has been a radical change to
a will in the context of a complex or conflictual
environment or where there is
evidence of a significant medical/neurologic
Our understanding of psychopathology and cognition, and our expectations of
will-makers today compared with those in 19
century England have
evolved. This has had most impact on the criteria for knowledge of the nature
and extent of assets (the threshold
for which has been lowered) and for
recalling and understanding the claims of potential beneficiaries (the threshold
for which has
As noted earlier, in
Kerr v Badran
, Windeyer J acknowledged the
current day reality of understanding of assets which has in effect dropped the
threshold for a will-maker
to understanding the extent of their
In contrast, the New
South Wales Court of Appeal case,
Read v Carmody
, may have raised the
threshold for the appraisal of the claims of beneficiaries.
It was a case in which there
were many who could qualify as the objects of the will-maker’s bounty, few
of whom were included
in the his final will which was made only two days after
his second last will. The matter was resolved by the trial judge finding,
the Court of Appeal upholding that finding, that the will-maker had will-making
capacity when he made his final will.
In that case Powell JA restated the
Banks v Goodfellow
His more complex
description for the criteria for capacity has been modified into a set of
questions for clinicians. These are as
1. Is it likely that any impairment was present which may have compromised
the deceased’s capacity with respect to an awareness
and appreciation of
the significance of the act of making a will?
2. Is it likely that any impairment was present which may have compromised
the deceased’s capacity with respect to awareness
in general terms of the
nature and extent of his estate?
3. Is it likely that any impairment was present which may have compromised
the deceased’s capacity with respect to an awareness
of those who might
reasonably have been thought to have a claim on the deceased’s
testamentary bounty?
4. Is it likely that any impairment was present which may have compromised
the deceased’s capacity with respect to ability to
identify, evaluate and
discriminate between the respective strengths of the claims of such persons?
5. Is it likely that any disorder of mind such as delusions and
hallucinations which would influence the deceased’s awareness
of facts or
reasoning and decision making ability specifically with regard to the above four
capacities.
As with other capacities, the assessment of will-making capacity has
task-specific elements as outlined by the four specific criteria
for defining
capacity, and situation-specific elements depending on the individual
circumstances of the case.
The job of the expert is to take both into consideration. While each of the
criteria which define will-making capacity requires
specific cognitive skills,
the threshold of cognitive deficit which might preclude capacity will vary
according to the complexity
of the estate and the way it is disposed of in the
will. The following paragraphs outline the skills specific to each of the
and their practical application to guide health care professionals in
their assessment.
4. 9. 5. 3. Awareness and appreciation of the significance of the act of
making a will
This concept is stored in long term memory or what is considered
“crystallized” or “old”. It is therefore
unlikely that
such "old" knowledge is lost until very late stages of a dementing illness.
4. 9. 5. 4. Awareness of the nature and extent of the estate
, the standard for
knowledge of estate has been lowered to “bear on existing circumstances in
modern life” where older
people living today may well be aware that they
own substantial shareholdings or real estate but not have an accurate
understanding
of the value or addresses of those assets. Some ten years ago
this approximation of assets was advocated by American experts in
the field who
suggested that a testator understand in a “general way” the extent
of property and its form, for example,
cash, bonds, real estate, and “not
necessary exact dollar figure in mind as to net worth but in general way should
know whether
has substantial amount or very little”.
Notwithstanding the lowering of the required legal standard, the requisite
cognitive skills will depend on situation-specific factors
the estate. If the estate is simple and little has changed over the years, for
example, ownership of the family
investment, the will-maker can rely on often-preserved crystallised, long term
memory. Thus,
knowledge of assets may be retained well into the course of
established dementia. Difficulties arise when there have been recent
real estate or shareholdings, for example, sales or gifts of real estate to
family members, during the course of dementia.
Early deficits in
short–term memory, seen particularly in Alzheimer’s disease, may
cause recent significant changes
in assets to be forgotten when the will-maker
gives instructions as to how their estate is to be distributed under their will.
Other functions which may be important to knowledge and distribution of
estate include “calculia”, which is the ability
to calculate and
manipulate numbers, particularly if more than simple distribution of assets is
involved. In
Grynberg v Muller; Estate of Bilfeld
, a wealthy testator was
described by the solicitor who took instructions as “having difficulty
with ‘how many zeros’
” to be included in the gift to one of
her beneficiaries. The solicitor also said he had to explain to explain to his
“what $150,000 was vis a vis
In another case
a will-maker made a complex fractional distribution of her estate and changed
those fractions when she made new wills.
Windeyer J regarded the change of
fractions as significant and noted that “the changes between the 1990 and
1993 wills are
quite difficult to comprehend” and criticized the solicitor
for drafting the will in this
4. 9. 5. 4. Awareness of those who might reasonably have been thought to
have a claim on the deceased’s testamentary bounty
This criterion relies mostly on long-term memory which is usually retained
well into the course of dementia. Problems arise when
important potential
beneficiaries, for example siblings of the will-maker die during the course of
the dementia and the will-maker
is unable to recall this. Again,
situation-specific issues can make the task easy or difficult for a will-maker
with dementia. Clearly
the task of remembering who are the proper objects of
one’s bounty is easier for a will-maker with dementia who has only one
living relative or consistent beneficiary compared with a will-maker with
dementia who has consistently divided their estate among
a substantial number of
beneficiaries.
4. 9. 5. 5. Capacity with respect to ability to identify, evaluate and
discriminate between the respective strengths of the claims
Most wills are challenged on the basis of the will-maker’s capacity to
identify, evaluate and discriminate between the respective
strengths of the
claims of their potential beneficiaries. This is perhaps the most complex task
for the will-maker, particularly
to the assessment of
this crucial aspect of capacity is based on the examination of the following
pieces of evidence:
The history of disposal or the will-making pattern
. This is because
previous wills may demonstrate an enduring and stable pattern of bequests and
reflect views held by the will-maker
prior to any significant deterioration in
their mental state. This history may also reflect a person's “highest
order preferences”.
When assessing this aspect of will-making capacity, the expert should reflect on
the original
Banks v Goodfellow
concept: Is this a disposal which, if the
mind had been sound, would not have been made? Suspicion as to incapacity is
aroused when
a will-maker revokes prior wills and executes entirely different
dispositions during a period of mental
enfeeblement.
Posener and
Jacoby emphasise the fundamental importance of the will-maker being aware that
their new will revokes their previous
will and the need for the will-maker to be
aware of the differences between the old will and the new will and to be able to
the rationale for the changes.
The terms of the will
. This is because an inference of capacity may
be derived from the will itself. Where the will is inofficious, that is where no
or an apparently inadequate or unfair provision, has been made for
those who ought to be the objects of the will-maker’s bounty
then fuller
and clearer evidence of capacity is
The will-maker’s appraisal of their potential heirs
discussed in Chapter 2, many of the neuropsychological deficits typically
associated with common forms of dementia, with
or without complicating paranoid
ideation, may render a person with dementia unable to appraise their past and
present relationships.
The findings of the association between family conflict
and dementia discussed in Chapter 2 suggest a need to obtain very careful
histories of family relationships when making assessments of capacity to execute
a will. The rationale behind changes in such documents
should be carefully
scrutinised, particularly if there are changes in an established pattern of
trusting or favouring certain family
members. Thus, to ensure ill-feeling
towards family members is not contaminated by dementia, in situations involving
complex and
conflictual issues amongst potential beneficiaries, the will-maker
should show an awareness of these issues and provide the rationale
disposition, or as is most often the case, the change in the
disposition.
4. 9. 5. 6. Disorder of mind such as delusions and hallucinations
As originally outlined in
Banks v Goodfellow
, psychotic symptoms are
only relevant to the will-making process if they impact on the act of
disposition. Probably the best example
of the impact of relevant delusions is
the previously discussed case of
Timbury v Coffee
in which an alcoholic
will-maker suffered delusions which caused him to believe his wife was
unfaithful.
These psychotic
symptoms influenced testamentary dispositions which were held invalid.
That was a fairly clear-cut case but sometimes the role of the expert in
clarifying the significance of abnormal ideas is more complex
than that. First,
the line between unreasonable beliefs and delusional beliefs associated with
psychotic thinking is sometimes hard
to define. Delusions and non-delusional
beliefs are best conceptualised as a spectrum rather than a dichotomous
phenomenon. A person
may hold “over-valued ideas” which are
unreasonable and sustained beliefs maintained with less than delusional
but potentially capable of poisoning affections if pervasive and
persistent. Second, while delusions are usually false beliefs (and
can often be
diagnosed as such by their very implausibility), they are not invariably so.
Rather their hallmark is that they are
held on inadequate grounds; that is the
belief is not arrived at through normal processes of logical thinking. This is
because one cannot always rely on the bizarreness or lack of veracity
of a belief to establish its pathological nature. For example,
a will-maker may
accuse his wife, with whom he is in business, of theft, sabotage or sexual
liaisons, but it is only the basis upon
which he arrived at these beliefs that
will distinguish whether or not they are pathological.
4. 9. 6. Experts in court
In recent judgments judges have downplayed the role of expert witnesses in
court proceedings relating to will-making capacity, particularly
the role of
those expert witnesses who have never seen the will-maker. In
, Windeyer J noted:
As I have pointed out quite recently in
, lay evidence of
the activities, conversations, family circumstances and relationships of the
deceased and evidence from doctors,
often general practitioners who were
treating doctors during the lifetime of the deceased, usually is of far more
value than reports
of expert specialist medical practitioners who have never
seen the deceased.
Young J commented on
Kerr v Badran
in the Australian Law Journal in
the following terms; "The clear message [from
Kerr v Badran
often presenting such psychiatric evidence is a waste of time and
A more detailed
discussion of the cases on this matter is found in 4. 9. 1 above.
Ferguson and others examined the key influences on the judgment and found
that the judge explicitly placed most weight on the lay
evidence. They noted
that 37% of the references made by the judge about aspects of the aphasic
will-maker’s communication were
to family members’ evidence, 23 % to
the solicitor’s evidence, 20% to the general practitioner’s evidence
to the evidence of the psychiatrist and neuropsychologist.
The authors noted that the judge
“explicitly placed most weight on lay accounts, making use of expert
opinions only to check
if any reconsideration was
The authors
concluded that this attested to the “high social validity of detailed
eye-witness accounts”.
It is beyond the scope of this book to discuss the detailed law relating to
expert witnesses and the admissibility of their evidence.
However, as Freckelton
has pointed out, “there is a begrudged dependency by the courts and
tribunals in respect of expert opinions.
The role of expert report writers and
witnesses is fundamental to the resolution of many forms of civil
litigation”.
South Wales in particular the judges are encouraging the court appointment of
witnesses and communication between the expert
witnesses for the different
parties in a court matter.
4. 10. Court authorised (statutory) wills
In each State and Territory the Supreme Court may grant leave to any person
to apply to the Court for it to make, alter or revoke
a will for any adult and,
except for Western Australia, any person under 18 years of age who lacks
capacity to make their own
The Court must approve
the specific terms of the will to be made or of the alterations to be made to
the existing will.
In New South Wales, before the Supreme Court will authorise a will, it must
be satisfied that the applicant for leave is an appropriate
person to make the
application and that adequate steps have been taken to allow representation of
all persons with a legitimate interest
in the application including those who
have reason to expect a gift or benefit from the estate of the person the
application is about.
Then the Court must be satisfied that:
1. there is reason to believe that the person the application is about is, or
is reasonably likely to be, incapable of making a will,
2. the proposed will, alteration or revocation is, or is reasonably likely to
be, one that would have been made by the person if they
had testamentary
capacity, and
3. it is or may be appropriate for the order to be made.
The Queensland, Tasmanian and Australian Capital Territory provisions are
essentially the same as those of New South
So too are the South
Australian. There the Court may authorise the making, alteration or revocation
of the will if it is satisfied
that the proposed will, alteration or revocation
would accurately reflect the likely intentions of the person if they had
testamentary
Victoria, there is a further variation on the wording used. Before the Supreme
Court of Victoria may authorise a statutory will,
or revoke an existing will, it
must be satisfied that the proposed will or revocation reflects “what the
intentions of the
person would be likely to be, or what the intentions of the
person might reasonably be expected to be, if he or she had testamentary
In Western Australia there is also a variation in the language used. The
Supreme Court must refuse the application unless it is satisfied
statutory criteria, including that the suggested will, alteration or revocation
“is one which could be made by the
person concerned” if they had
In the Northern Territory, the Supreme Court “must refuse to grant
leave to make an application” unless the proposed will
or alteration or
revocation of a will is, or might be, one that would have been made by the
proposed testator” if he or she
had [will-making]
Since February 2008 a plenary guardian or a plenary administrator has been
able to apply to the Supreme Court of Western Australia
for an order to make a
will for the person they are the guardian of or whose estate they
administer.
It is likely that
a Supreme Court elsewhere in Australia would consider that an appointed
guardian, enduring guardian, an attorney
under an enduring power of attorney or
an appointed administrator or financial manager was an appropriate person to
make such an
application, unless there was some other reason to exclude them in
a particular case.
As noted earlier in this chapter, the South Australian provisions about
statutory wills have been use to have the South Australian
Supreme Court revoke
a will on the grounds that a person who had lost will-making capacity would not
want a will she made benefiting
a man who took advantage of her when she was
under his influence to remain
The first New South Wales case to deal with statutory wills,
Application
of J. R. Fenwick and Re
, involved an
application about a 60 year old man with serious acquired brain injury and an 11
year boy who suffered severe and irreversible
brain damage when he was four
months old. Palmer J, who heard these applications, used the occasion as an
“opportunity to explore
some of the principles which should guide the
Court in applying these new statutory
provisions”.
the cases that could arise under the legislation into three categories. First,
“lost capacity cases” like
the case of the 60 year old man who had
made a will, but who could no longer change it or make a new one because if his
brain injury. Second were the “nil capacity cases” like
that of the 11 year old boy. Third were the “pre-empted
cases; those in which a person, still a minor and therefore lacking formal
testamentary capacity, was old enough
to form relationships and to express
reasonable wishes about property before losing testamentary capacity. Palmer J
gave as an example,
a 17 year old person who suffered severe and permanent brain
injury as a result of a motor vehicle accident and who was subsequently
large damages.
After discussing the background to the legislation, he went on to state that
in relation to the provision in the
Succession Act 2006
“the proposed will, alteration or revocation is, or is reasonably likely
to be, one that would have been made by the person
if they had testamentary
[The] Court should start ‘with a clean slate’; it must interpret the
words of the section in the light of the problems
and difficulties which the
legislation seeks to remedy, bearing in mind that legislation of this kind
should receive a benevolent
construction.
In relation to lost capacity cases, he suggested that the Court ought not to
start with a presumed intention against intestacy. Rather,
it must be satisfied
by the evidence that it is “reasonably likely” – in the sense
of “a fairly good chance”
– that the person would have made a
will at some time or other, had they not lost their will-making
In relation to the “nil capacity” cases Palmer J thought that the
Court must start from a position that, if there were
significant assets in the
minor’s estate, the Court should authorise some kind of statutory will
unless it was satisfied that
what would occur on intestacy would provide
adequately for all the reasonable claims on the
Palmer J granted the application to authorise the proposed codicil, thus
altering Mr Fenwick’s
He also granted the
application to authorise the proposed will for the 11 year old boy thus making a
will for him.
The circumstances in which statutory wills are used and some of the relevant
case law is set out
In the United
Kingdom, court authorised or statutory wills are now made under the
Capacity Act 2005 (UK)
provides that an act done, or
decision made, under it for or on behalf of a person who lacks capacity must be
done, or made, in their
The judges making
statutory wills under that
consider that it replaced the notion of
substituted judgment, which is reflected in the Australian legislation, with an
test as to what was would be in the best interests of the person who
had lost capacity.
4. 11. Conclusion
Over a century later,
Banks v Goodfellow
remains the formal authority
in will-making capacity, because of its flowery language and because it was
ahead of its time in terms
of its insight into the various components of
will-making capacity and respect for the notion that the mere presence of mental
does not, of itself, preclude capacity. However, will-makers have
changed, as has our understanding of the kind of conditions which
person’s ability to make a valid will. Will-makers are more likely to be
older and their wills are less likely to
be challenged on the basis of
delusions. They are more likely to be challanged on the basis of deficits in the
cognitive skills of
memory, judgment and reasoning crucial to the will-making
process. There is a myriad of ways in which deficits in such skills may
on the will–making process and this is further complicated by the
situation specific aspects of each individual case.
The law has also evolved to
some extent with an acknowledgement of the increasing complexity of estates and
the corresponding lowering
of the threshold for knowledge of assets. Further,
some acknowledgement has been given to the fact that comprehending and
appreciating
the claims to which one ought to give effect requires more than
just knowing who one’s beneficiaries are, but rather weighing
discriminating between potential claims.
Clearly, the determination of capacity is far more complex today than
reflected in the traditional
Banks v Goodfellow
criteria. As stated by
Shulman et al:
It is time for the medical and legal professions to move to new level in dealing
with an important growing societal concern –
the fundamental right to make
a Will in a competent frame of
Roman G.C.,
Vascular Dementia
, London, Science Press, 2003, p1 .
Shulman,K, Cohen, C and Hull,
I, “Psychiatric issues in retrospective challenges of testamentary
Int J Geriatr Psychiatry
, (2005) 20: 63-69, 64.
Banks v Goodfellow
(1870) LR 5 QB 549.
Hood J restated the test in
Banks v Goodfellow
in his own words in
In the Will of Wilson
[1898] VicLawRp 39
(1897) 23 VLR 197
, 199-200. Knox CJ and Starke J treated the test as settled law
Bailey v Bailey
[1924] HCA 21
(1924 34 CLR 558
, 566. The views of two current
members of the High Court of Australia, Gleeson CJ and Kirby J are found in
Re Estate of Griffith; Easter v Griffith
(1995) 217 ALR 284
, 290 and 295.
Shorten v Shorten
[2002] NSWCA 73
Theophanous v
[2001] QSC 177
Martin v Fletcher
[2003] WASC 59
Kerr v Bardan
[2004] NSWSC 735
Trust Co of Australia
[2003] VSC 358
Banks v Goodfellow
was followed in
Murphy v Lamphier
(1914) 31 OLR 287. For a long-standing US
case, without the flowery language see,
Cunningham v Stender
Banks v Goodfellow
(1870) LR 5 QB 549
[2004] NSWSC 735.
Ibid. [49].
Banks v Goodfellow
(1870) LR 5 QB 549
Ibid.pp. 570-571. For an
application of this point in Australia see,
Tipper v Moore
[1911] HCA 42
(1911) 13 CLR
For a more recent case in which views were held to be “not simply
harsh, unfair or unjust … but passed into the realm
of paranoid
delusion”, see
Grynberg v Muller; Estate of Bilfeld
[2001] NSWSC
Ibid. p. 556.
[1942] HCA 13
(1942) 66 CLR 295.
Re Estate of Griffith;
Easter v Griffith
(1995) 217 ALR 284
, 290. See also
Weschler v Du
[2002] NSWCA 13
Di Cecco v Contini
[2004] VSC 211.
Mount Isa Mines Ltd v
[1970] HCA 60
(1970) 125 CLR 383
[1941] HCA 22
(1941) 66 CLR 277
Re Estate of Griffith
(1995) 217 ALR 284
Shulman, Cohen and
Hull,(2005) op. cit. (footnote 1), pp. 67-69.
Key & Anor v Key
[2010] EWHC 408 (Ch)
[95]. Also reported as
[2010] EWHC 408
Note the effect of the
approach in
Badram v Kerr
[2004] NSWSC 735
[49] on this requirement.
Parker v Felgate
[1883] UKLawRpPro 41
(1883) LR 8 PD 171
Re Crooks (Estate); Ackerman v Brown
(BC9403413)
(unreported, Supreme Court of NSW, Young J, 14 December 1994);
[2010] EWCA Civ 840
[2011] 2 All ER 174.
Perrins v Holland
[2010] EWCA Civ 840
[2011] 2 All ER 174.
Ibid. [55].
Ibid. [56].
Jarman on Wills
London, Sweet and Maxwell, 8
ed., 1951, Vol. 3, 2073.
Ibid., p. 2077.
(1822) 162 ER 12
[1962] SASR 94.
Ibid., 102.
Pates v Craig and
Public Trustee, Estate of Cole
[1995] NSWSC 87
[142]-[148]
. Wills Probate
and Administration Service (NSW)
, Butterworths (looseleaf) [10,019] and
Pates v Craig and Public
Trustee, Estate of Cole
[1995] NSWSC 87
Ibid., [144].
Ibid., [147].
(1870) LR 5 QB 549
Pates v Craig and Public Trustee, Estate of Cole
[1995] NSWSC 87
Pates v Craig and Public
Trustee, Estate of Cole
[1995] NSWSC 87
Re: Dr Athanasios
[2004] MPBV 10, [75].
Pates v Craig and Public
Trustee, Estate of Cole
[1995] NSWSC 87
Ibid. [148].
Ibid. [147].
In re Simpson
Sol Jo 224.
Kerridge notes this as an English “golden rule” but also
notes that it appears to have been applied in England only in
cases in which the
will-maker was obviously and severely incapacitated. See, Kerridge, R,
“Willls made in Suspicious Circumstances:
the Problem of the Vulnerable
Cambridge L J
Freisen and Holmberg v
Freisen Estate
(1985) 33 Man R (2d) 98.
www.lawsociety.com.au.
A Practical Guide to
Solicitors: When a client’s capacity is in doubt
www.lawsociety.com.au
, p 1.For an
example of good practice see,
Nichoson v Knaggs
[2009] VSC 64
[581]-[582]
and for poor practice see the preparation of the December 2000 codicil and 2001
will in that case. See also
Re Ellul dec,d; Ellul v Ellul
[2004] VSC 351
as an example of the steps that should be taken to ensure that a person whose
will-making capacity is in doubt and who needs an interpreter
to help them give
instructions and to understand the contents of their will to make a valid will.
For criticism of a solicitor for
complicating the way in which the gifts to the
beneficiaries was expresses and for just giving the will to the will-maker to
and not reading it aloud to them see,
Robinson v Spratt
[2002] NSWSC
, [30] and [31]. See also
Challen v Pitt
[2004] QSC 365
as an example
of what happens when the final will of an elderly person, possibly with
dementia, who has made a number of wills later
in life, is challenged. In that
case, the solicitor believed that the will-maker was elderly, physically
disabled but mentally alert
when she gave the instructions for and executed the
will. The judge preferred the contemporaneous evidence of capacity which came
from various sources to the retrospective diagnosis of the specialist and upheld
the will finding no suspicious circumstances at
the time of its execution.
Nichoson v Knaggs
[2009] VSC 64
, [581]-[582] and [664]
(1955) 29 ALJ 179
medium free citation)
Nicholson v Knaggs
[2009] VSC 64
, [93]-[94].
For examples of good and bad
practise see,
Nichoson v Knaggs
[2009] VSC 64.
[2004] QSC 365.
Key & Anor v Key
[2010] EWHC 408 (Ch)
[6]. Also reported as
[2010] EWHC 408
Re Estate of Griffith
(1995) 217 ALR 284
, 289-291(Gleeson CJ), 294-296 (Kirby P).
Perpetual Trustee Co v
Fairlie-Cunninghame
(1993) 32 NSWLR 377.
See also s. 23A
Estates Act 1983
Re Estate of Bellew
(unreported, Supreme Court of NSW, Windeyer J, 8 September 2005, BC200506913).
For a US example see,
In re Estate of Mayes
843 S. W.2d 418, 425-426
Ibid. For a recent case in
which medical evidence before the NSW Guardianship Tribunal was held to be of
little weight on the question
of testamentary capacity see
Revie v Druitt
(unreported, Supreme Court of NSW, McLelland J, 13 August 1992, BC9201679), p.
Norris v Tuppen
[1999] VSC 228.
[66] and [339].
Re Full Board of the
Guardianship and Administration Board
[2003] WASCA 268
, [54], [55],
[2003] WASCA 268
(2003) 27 WAR 475
For a US authority see
re Estate of Mayes
843 S.W. 2d 418
Guardianship
and Administration Act
Board of the Guardianship
and Administration Board
[2003] WASCA 268
, [77] and [78]
[2003] WASCA 268
(2003) 27 WAR
Perpetual Trustee Co v
Fairlie-Cunninghame
(1993) 32 NSWLR 377.
See 4. 9. 3. 1. 2 below.
Shaw v Crichton
(unreported, Court of Appeal NSW, Powell J, 23 August 1995), in
Wills Probate
and Administration Service (NSW)
, Butterworths (looseleaf) [13,037].
See 4. 9. 3 below.
(1988) 14 NSWLR 698.
Landers v Landers
[1914] HCA 74
(1914) 19 CLR 222.
[1941] HCA 22
(1941) 66 CLR 277.
Bull v Fulton
[1942] HCA 13
[1924] HCA 21
(1924) 34 CLR 558.
Ibid., Knox CJ and Starke J,
Isaacs, Gavan Duffy and Rich
Unreported, Supreme Court of
NSW, McLelland J, 13 August 1992, (BC9201679).
Re Brokenshire; Equity
Trustees Co Ltd v Worts
[1998] VSC 183
(1998) 8 VR 659.
[1999] VSC 228.
A case in which probate of a will and codicils was
refused on the grounds that the will-maker did not have capacity to make a
Nichoson v Knaggs
[2009] VSC 64
Ibid. [580] and [583].
Ibid. [668]-[670].
Nichoson v Knaggs
[2009] VSC 64
. Wills Probate and
Administration Service (NSW)
op. cit. [6061].
Bailey v Bailey
[1924] HCA 21
(1924) 34 CLR 558
Re Hodges; Shorter v Rogers
(1988) 14 NSWLR
Bailey v Bailey
[1924] HCA 21
(1924) 34 CLR 558
Shorten v Shorten
[2002] NSWSCA 73, [54].
Re Estate of Griffith;
Easter v Griffith
(1995) 217 ALR 284
Worth v Clasohm
[1952] HCA 67
For an example of a will-maker who was the subject of an administration
order in Queensland not meeting the test for testamentary
capacity because of
dementia see,
Re will of Pill
[2001] QSC 447.
For an example of a case
applying the relevant principles but in which evidence pointing to a lack of
testamentary capacity was not
offset by evidence indicating that the will-maker
had testamentary capacity at the time she made her last will see,
Trustee (WA) v Churches of Christ Homes and Community Services Inc
For a case applying the test for capacity in which the evidence of a
doctor raised a doubt about the capacity of the will-maker,
but a doubt not
substantial enough to preclude a finding of testamentary capacity see,
[2003] WASC 237.
Key & Anor v Key
[2010] EWHC 408 (Ch)
[97]. Also known as
[2010] EWHC 408
In the Estate of Fuld
[1968] P 675
For a clear but ultimately
unsuccessful attempt of “friends” to obtain a will from an elderly,
moribund man see,
Willmott v Mc Court
[2002] WASC 210.
Tyrrell v Painton
[1893] UKLawRpPro 56
[1894] P 151
Ridge, P “Equitable
undue influence and wills”
Law Quarterly Review
Her article deals with the detailed equitable rules about suspicious
circumstances and notes that there is authority for the
proposition that if the
circumstances surrounding the execution of a will raise issues of undue
influence and fraud, they cannot
be alleged as suspicious circumstances (at
623). See also Kerridge, R “Wills made in suspicious circumstances: the
of the vulnerable testator”
Cambridge Law Journal
Nock v Austin
[1918] HCA 73.
Tyrrell v Painton
[1893] UKLawRpPro 56
[1894] P 151
Roos v Karpenkow
(1998) 71 SASR 497
[1998] SASC 7228..
Nock v Austin
For cases in which
suspicious circumstances were not dispelled and the will was declared invalid
Tyrrell v Painton
[1893] UKLawRpPro 56
[1894] P 151
, Freisen and
Holmberg v Freisen
(1985) 33 Man R (2d) 98
Slater v Chitrenky
[1981] 4 WWR 421
Michaud v Poirier
[1944] SCR 152.
Tyrrell v Painton
[1893] UKLawRpPro 56
[1894] P 151
, 157. For an example of a woman with cognitive impairment
characteristic of the pre-dementia stage of Alzheimer’s disease being
found competent to make
[1885] UKLawRpPro 46
(1885) 11 PD 81
, 82. For an example of where there was held not to
be proof of undue influence in this legal sense of the term see,
[1906] UKLawRpAC 3
[1906] AC 169.
In the will of Wilson
[1898] VicLawRp 39
(1897) 23 VLR 197
Hall v Hall
1 P & D 481, 482.
Johnston v Johnston
[2003] QSC 075
, [28] and [29],
Winter v Crichton
(1991) 23 NSWLR
,121-122 and
Bank of Credit and Commerce International v Aboody
(1990) 1 QB 923
Neat HoldingsPty Ltd v
Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] HCA 66
(1992) 110 ALR 449
, 450 following
Dixon J’s approach in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, 362, namely that “it is enough that the affirmative of
an allegation is made out to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal.
reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is attained or established
independently of the nature and consequence of
the fact or facts to be proved.
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description,
or the gravity of the consequences flowing
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
whether the issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters "reasonable satisfaction" should
not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences”.
Green v Critchley
[2004] QSC 022
[19]. See also
Re Ellul dec’d; Ellul v Ellul
Rossborough
(1857) 10 ER 1192
In the Will of Boyd
(I, E & M) 46, 48..
Nichoson v Knaggs
[2009] VSC 64
Ibid. [127].
Ibid. [130].
Winter v Crichton
(1991) NSWLR 116, Powell J at 122 referring to
Wingrove v Wingrove
[1885] UKLawRpPro 46
LR 11 PD 81
Boyse v Rossborough
(1857) 10 ER 1192
Revie v Driutt
[2005] NSWSC 902
NSW Law Reform
Commission Report 47,
Wills: Execution and Revocation
Government Printer, 1986, 8.34.
Ridge, op cit (footnote
72) 638 and Kerrige op cit (footnote 72).
As an example see,
Nichoson v Knaggs
[2009] VSC 64.
wills of older people: risk factors for undue influence.
Peisah C, Finkel S,
Shulman K, Melding P, Luxenberg J, Heinik J, Jacoby R, Reisberg B, Stoppe G,
Barker A, Firmino H, Bennett H; International
Psychogeriatric Association Task
Force on Wills and Undue Influence.Int Psychogeriatr. 2009 Feb;21(1):7-15
Shulman, K., Cohen, CA.,
Kirsh F.C., Hull, I.M., Champine, P.R. “Assessment of testamentary
capacity and vulnerability to undue
influence”,
American Journal of
(2007) 164(5) 725.
Spar JE, Garb AS.,
“Assessing competency to make a will.”
American Journal of
, (1992) 149:169-174.
Peisah C, Finkel S,
Shulman K, Melding P, Luxenberg J, Heinik J, Jacoby R, Reisberg B, Stoppe G,
Barker A, Firmino H, Bennett H;
wills of older people: risk factors for undue influence.
International
Psychogeriatric Association Task Force on Wills and Undue Influence.
Psychogeriatr
. 2009 Feb;21(1):7-15
Succession Act
Succession Act
[2009] NSWSC 530
made wills for the Incapable”
(2009) 83 ALJ 521
and Hockley, J,
“Statutory wills in Australia: Wills for persons lacking capacity”
Wills Act 2008
[2004] SASC 142.
Wills Act 1936
Public Trustee v
[2004] SASC 142.
Wills Act 2008
The Supreme Court’s will-making power is set out at
Wills Act 2008
. See also 4. 10 below.
Wills Act 2008
Wills Act 2008
Scattini v Matters
[2004] QSC 459.
Herbert v Grey
[2003] SASC 384
in which the
expert evidence of a neuro-psychologist was not accepted.
Shorten v Shorten
[2001] NSWSC 100
[95]-[99] and [114-119]. See also
Shorten v Shorten
[2002] NSWCA 73
[35], [37] and [42].
Kerr v Badran
[2004] NSWSC 735.
Ibid. [57]. See also
(2004) 78 ALJ 719-720.
For a case in which the evidence of one expert witness
was preferred over another see,
Read v Carmody
(unreported NSW Court of
Appeal, Meagher, Powell and Stein JJA, 21 November 1998, BC9803374).
For a case involving
highly respected, but differing, expert witnesses whose evidence was given full
credit, but nevertheless led
the judge to state; “I cannot come to any
final conclusion simply by reference to the medical evidence”, see
Grynberg v Muller; Estate of Bilfeld
[2001] NSWSC 532
As to treating the
solicitor who took instructions and drafted the will as an independent witness
Theophanous v Gillespie
[2002] QCA 117
[6]-[7] (a case involving a
man dying of cancer);
Martin v Fletcher
[2003]WASC 59 [14]-[25] ( case
involving a man with Lewy Body dementia described as a condition that can
fluctuate significantly
and involve hallucinations but a degree of memory
impairment not as severe as with Alzheimers disease);
Scattini v Matters
[2004] QSC 459.
Seale v Cross
[2003] WASC 237
Ibid. [29].
Ibid. [21].
Shulman, K., Cohen, CA.,
Kirsh F.C., Hull, I.M., Champine, P.R. Assessment of testamentary capacity and
vulnerability to undue influence
American Journal of Psychiatry
164(5): 722-727.
Berg L. (1988) Clinical
Dementia Rating (CDR)
Psychopharmacology Bulletin
24:637-639.
Brodaty H, Howarth GC,
Mant A, Kurrle SE. “General practice and dementia. A national survey of
Australian GPs.”
The Medical Journal of Australia
160(1):10-4; Lliffe et al, (2010) Evidence-based interventions in dementia:
A pragmatic cluster-randomised trial of an educational
intervention to promote
earlier recognition and response to dementia in primary care (EVIDEM-ED).Trials
11:13; Valcour et al (2000)
Archives Internal Medicine
160: 2964-8;
Villars et al (2010) The primary care physician and Alzheimer’s disease:
an international perspective
The journal of nutrition health and ageing
14(2): 1-11 Implementing a Screening and Diagnosis Program for Dementia in
Primary Care; Boustani M., et al (2005)
J Gen Intern Med
Sorensen L., Foldspang,
A., Gulman, N & Munk-Jorgensen P. “Assessment of dementia in nursing
assistants: criteria validity and
determinants.”
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry
(2001)16, 615-621.
Shulman KI, Peisah C,
Jacoby R, Heinik J, Finkel S. “
Contemporaneous
assessment of testamentary capacity”.
Int Psychogeriatr.
Jun; 21(3):433-9
Shulman, Cohen and Hull,
(2005) op. cit. (footnote 1), p. 67.
Peisah, C (unpublished
American Psychiatric
Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fourth
Edition. (DSM-IV), Washington, DC,
American Psychiatric Association, 1994.
Mendez MF, Cummings JL.,
Dementia: A Clinical Approach
, Philadelphia, Butterworth Heinemann, (3rd
Kril Halliday G.,
“Alzheimer’s disease: its diagnosis and pathogenesis”
Rev Neurobiology
(2001) 48: 167-217.
Roman GC. op.cit. p5.
McKeith I.,
“Dementia with Lewy Bodies: Clinical and pathological diagnosis.”
Alzheimer’s Reports
Peisah, C and Brodaty, H,
“Dementia and the will-making process: the role of the medical
practitioner”,
(1994) 161, 381, 382.
Peisah, C., Brodaty, H.,
“The role of the GP in the management of Alzheimer’s
Medicine Today
(2004) 5: 16-25.
American Psychiatric
Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fourth
Edition. (DSM-IV) 1994; Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Association
Shulman, K., Cohen, CA.,
Kirsh F.C., Hull, I.M., Champine, P.R. Assessment of testamentary capacity and
vulnerability to undue influence,
American Journal of Psychiatry
164(5): 722-727. See also
Contemporaneous
assessment of testamentary capacity.
Shulman KI, Peisah C, Jacoby R, Heinik
J, Finkel S.
Int Psychogeriatr
. 2009 21(3):433-9
Sprehe, D.J., Kerr, A.L.
(1996) Use of legal terms in will contests: implications for psychiatrist.
Bulletin of the American Academy of Psychiatry and Law
24: 255-265.
[2002] NSWSC 426
For a case involving the loss of will-making capacity because of dementia and no
evidence of it being a “good day”
when one of the wills was made
Herbert v Grey and Khorasane
[2003] SASC 384.
For a US example of a
person with mild Alzheimer’s Disease being held to have will-making
capacity see,
Estate of Harms
149 P. 2d 557
(2006) and for a person with
depression and dementia see,
Pyle v Sayers
39 S.W.3d 774
American Psychiatric
Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fourth
Edition. (DSM-IV), Washington, DC,
American Psychiatric Association, 1994.
Ferguson A, Worrall. L.,
McPhee J., Buskell, R., Armstrong, E, Togher L. “Case study -Testamentary
capacity and aphasia: A
descriptive case report with implications for clinical
Aphasiology
(2003) 17 (10) ,965-980.p 973.
Helm-Estabrooks N,
“Cognition and aphasia: a discussion and a study”
Communication Disorders
, (2002) 35: 171-186.
Spar JE, Garb AS.,
“Assessing competency to make a will.”
American Journal of
, (1992) 149:169-174.
Liptzin, B. Peisah C.,
Shulman K. Finkel S. for the International Psychogeriatric Association Task
Force on Wills and Testamentary
Capacity (2010) Testamentary capacity and
International Psychogeriatrics
, 22:6, 950–956
For a case in which
delirium was an issue, see
Grynberg v Mulle; Estate of Bilfeld
Shulman, Cohen and Hull,
(2005) op. cit. (footnote 1), p. 67.
Shulman KI, Hull I, Cohen
CA. “Testamentary capacity and suicide: an overview of legal and
psychiatric issues”,
Int J Law Psychiatry
, (2003) 26 :403-415 at
pp 406-407.
Shulman, K., Cohen, CA.,
Kirsh F.C., Hull, I.M., Champine, P.R. Assessment of testamentary capacity and
vulnerability to undue influence
American Journal of Psychiatry (2007); 164(5):
[1941] HCA 22
(1941) 66 CLR 277.
Landers v Landers
[1914] HCA 74
(1914) 19 CLR 222
Re Pommerehnke’s
(1979) 16 A. R. 442.
[1892] VicLawRp 124
(1892) 18 VLR 715
Ferner RE., “Drugs
and testamentary capacity”,
Journal of Clinical Forensic Medicine
(1997) 4: 185-187.
International
Psychogeriatric Association (IPA) Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of
Dementia (BPSD) Educational Pack 2002
International Psychogeriatric
Association.
Re Hodges; Shorter v
(1988) 14 NSWLR 689. See 4. 9. 3. 6 above.
Shulman KI, Hull I, Cohen
CA. (2003) op.cit. (footnote 124), p. 406.
Re Estate of Griffith;
Easter v Griffith
(1995) 217 ALR 284.
Ibid. Gleeson CJ and
Handley JA; Kirby P in dissent.
For a US statement of the
insane delusion test see,
Breeden v Stone
922 P.2d 1167
(2006) and for a
US example of an insane delusion leading to the setting aside of a will see,
Miami Rescue Mission Inc v Roberts
943 So. 2d 274
(2006). For a
cautionary tale about a person disinherited for putting the will-maker in a
nursing home see,
Dougherty v Rubenstein
914 A. 2d 184
(2007). The
will-maker was held not to be suffering from an insane delusion. For another
cautionary tale see,
In the Estate of Diaz
524 S.E.2d 219
(1999) in which
a woman disinherited her children who had caused her to be committed
involuntarily to a mental hospital after she
refused to seek treatment. The
codicil to her will was upheld, despite her depression and cancer.
Contemporaneous
assessment of testamentary capacity.
Shulman KI, Peisah C, Jacoby R, Heinik
J, Finkel S.
Int Psychogeriatr
. 2009 Jun;21(3):433-9
Pates v Craig and
Public Trustee, Estate of Cole
[1995] NSWSC 87
Perrins v Holland
[2010] EWCA Civ 840
[2010] EWCA Civ 840
[2011] 2 All ER 174.
Shulman KI, Peisah C,
Jacoby R, Heinik J, Finkel S.
Contemporaneous
assessment of testamentary capacity.
Int Psychogeriatr
Jun;21(3):433-9
Shulman, K., Cohen, CA.,
Kirsh F.C., Hull, I.M., Champine, P.R. Assessment of testamentary capacity and
vulnerability to undue influence
American Journal of Psychiatry
164(5): 722-727.
Freedman, M., Stuss,
D.T., and Gordon, M., (1991) Assessment of competency: the role of
neurobehavioural deficits.
Ann Int Med
, 115, 203-208.
Shulman, Cohen and Hull,
(2005) op. cit. (footnote 1), p. 68
Shulman, K., Cohen, CA.,
Kirsh F.C., Hull, I.M., Champine, P.R. Assessment of testamentary capacity and
vulnerability to undue influence
American Journal of Psychiatry 2007; 164(5):
(1870) LR 5 QB 549
Shulman, Cohen and Hull,
(2005) op. cit. (footnote 1), pp. 67-68.
[2004] NSWSC 735
(Unreported, NSW Court of
Appeal, Meagher, Powell and Stein JJA, 23 July 1998) BC9803374.
Bennett, H.P., and
Hallen, P., “Dementia, cognition and testamentary capacity.”,
Brain Impairment
, (2004) 5: 69-70.
Shulman, Cohen and Hull,
(2005) op. cit,(footnote 1), p. 64.
[2004] NSWSC 735.
Sprehe, D.J., Kerr, A.L.
(1996) Use of legal terms in will contests: implications for psychiatrist.
Bulletin of the American Academy of Psychiatry and Law
24: 255-265. For some
US cases taking this approach see, Estate
126 P. 3d 228 (2005)
Will of Khazaneh
834 N.Y.S. 2d 616
[2001] NSWSC 532
As to a reference to the will-maker’s “dyscalculia”, see
Robinson v Spratt
[2002] NSWSC 426
, [30], [40 and [41].
(Unreported, NSW Court of
Appeal, Meagher, Powell and Stein JJA, 23 July 1998) BC9803374.
Peisah, C. (2005)
Reflections on changes in defining testamentary capacity International
Psychogeriatrics 17 (4): 709-712.
Davis, J.K. (2002) The
concept of precedent autonomy
2002; 16:114-133.
Bailey v Bailey
[1924] HCA 21
(1924) 34 CLR 558
Posener HD, Jacoby R
(2002) Testamentary capacity. In
Psychiatry in the Elderly
Ed Jacoby R, Oppenheimer C (Ed) Oxford University Press: Oxford: 932-940. p
(1890) 11 NSWR Eq 134, 138.
Shulman,K, Cohen, C and
Hull, I,(2005) op.cit, (footnote 1), p 68.
[1941] HCA 22
(1941) 66 CLR 277.
[2004] NSWSC 735
[2005] NSWSC 902
“Wills: Capacity
– Assessment”
(2004) 78 ALJ 720
Ferguson A, Worrall. L.,
McPhee J., Buskell, R., Armstrong, E, Togher L. “Case study -Testamentary
capacity and aphasia: A
descriptive case report with implications for clinical
Aphasiology
(2003) 17 (10) ,965-980.p 973.
Ibid. p 976
Ibid. p 975
Freckelton, I,
“Doctors and Forensic Expertise” in Freckelton, I and Petersen, K,
Disputes and Dilemmas in Health Law,
Sydney, The Ferderation Press, 2006, 406.
Freckelton’s chapter deals with the law relating to expert witnesses and
the current
debate about the role of expert witnesses in the justice system.
Succession Act
Succession Act 1981
Wills Act 1936
Wills Act 2008
Wills Act 1997
(1) effectively allows
for the alteration of a will by the Supreme court ;
Wills Act 1970
effectively requires leave of the Court;
Wills Act (NT)
ss 19 and 20.
Succession Act
. As to the matters the Supreme Court must
consider, see s 24 of the
Wills Act 2008
in particular.
Wills Act 1968
Wills Act 1936
s 7. For an example of an application for an order to make a
statutory will see,
Hoffman v Waters
[2007] SASC 273and
[2009] SASC 345.
Wills Act 1997
s 26(b). See
generally. For some examples see,
[2004] VSCA 112
(2004) 9 VR 495
State Trustees Ltd v
[2002] VSC 98
State Trustees Limited v Do and Nguyen
[2011] VSC 45.
Wills Act 1970
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
Public Trustee v
[2004] SASC 142.
[2009] NSWSC 530.
Ibid. [28].
Ibid. [148]. See
Succession Act
Application of J. R.
Fenwick and Re Charles
[2009] NSWSC 530
Ibid. [172].
Ibid. [219].
Ibid. [261].
Hockley, J,
“Statutory wills in Australia: Wills for persons lacking capacity”
For more recent cases, see not only
Application of J.
R. Fenwick and Re Charles
[2009] NSWSC 530
, but also,
Re Estate of Crawley
[2010] NSWSC 618
[2009] SASC 288
Brown v Brown
[2009] SASC 345
Deecke v Deecke
[2009] QSC 65
AB v CB and others
[2009] NSWSC 680
Payne v Smyth
as Litigation Guardian for Welk
[2010] QSC 45.
Mental Capacity Act
See for example
(Statutory Will)
[2009] EXHC 163 (Ch) and
[2010] EWHC 2159
also cited as
[2011] 1 All ER 859.
Shulman et al, (2005) op
cit. , p68.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (736 KB)
PDF format (318 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter