URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRCRefJl/2009/40.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:12:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wiffen, Graeme --- "Retaining the 'spirit of place': Housing and heritage" [2009] ALRCRefJl 40; (2009) 94 Australian Law Reform Commission Reform Journal 42
Reform Issue 94 Summer 2009
This article appears on pages 42–44 of the original
Retaining the ‘spirit of place’
Housing and heritage
By Graeme Wiffen*
Tensions between heritage and housing often arise.
Many will immediately think of an old house, which new owners want to extend,
on a big block suitable for subdivision. Is the line
of old houses near a
railway station a heritage precinct or are they on land suitable for higher
density? Should an old factory or
a school with heritage significance be
converted to ‘New York style lofts’, or is this introducing high
density living
to a new area?
Note that economics do not always go the one way. Demolishing the old house
may allow for a more intensive use of the site, but the
conversion of the
factory might allow for an intensity that would not be allowable if the factory
were demolished and more recent
planning restrictions applied.
Heritage issues, therefore, impinge on housing as an aspect of the regulation
of land use, and the most contentious issues often centre
on which set of
policies should apply. While this article refers to Australia’s heritage
laws, most heritage issues are addressed
at the local level by councils
administering their local land use schemes.
Terminology
It is useful to avoid talking of ‘heritage buildings’ and to
prefer ‘places of heritage significance’. The
difference is
important intellectually in approaching the question of the identification of
what is important and legally in setting
the parameters of the regulatory
activity that heritage has become. As a regulatory activity, questions of
heritage quickly intersect
with law. Heritage laws are important in land use and
development and seem to be under continual scrutiny.
These are some of the questions that the laws address.
What is significance?
The Australian national group of the International Committee for Monuments
and Sites (Australia ICOMOS) is an organisation for heritage
professionals. The
Burra Charter, sponsored by Australia ICOMOS, asserts that in considering places
with cultural heritage significance:
aim of conservation
is to retain the
cultural significance
means site, area, land, landscape, building or other work, group of
buildings or other works, and may include components, contents,
Cultural significance
means aesthetic, historic, scientific, social or
spiritual value for past present or future generations.
significance
is embodied in the
itself, its
fabric, setting,
use, association, meanings, records, related places and related
recent ICOMOS Congress in Quebec, delegates considered how the task of
conservation was not so much to preserve fabric but
to assist in maintaining the
‘spirit of place’.
Setting a daunting regulatory task, ICOMOS is calling for the protection of
Spirit of place (which) is defined as the tangible (buildings, sites,
landscapes, routes, objects) and the intangible elements (memories,
narratives,
written documents, rituals, festivals, traditional knowledge, values, textures,
colours, odours, etc.), that is to say
the physical and the spiritual elements
that give meaning, value, emotion and mystery to
may not be a house and may have natural or cultural significance
and—within cultural—the significance may be
within an Indigenous or
non-Indigenous tradition. Similarly, the issue may not be to save an historic
building, but to identify the
significance of a place and work out how to
preserve that significance, ideally in a way that maintains the ‘spirit of
Regulatory scheme
Considering the question in this way does allow for a range of regulatory
approaches. Walk down a city street where old facades have
been preserved in
front of multi-story developments and, before condemning the tokenism of
facadism, consider: What is the place?
Is it the buildings or the street with a
historical streetscape? What was the significance? Does keeping the facade
maintain it?
Is the issue less about preserving the buildings and more about
determining a setback between the old facade and the facade of the
above it? And as the Quebec Declaration says: What about the
World heritage sites are required to have a buffer zone, so important
heritage laws for the Sydney Opera House are not only those
that preserve the
building but the planning laws that protect views to and from the building up
and down Sydney Harbour.
Australian heritage laws adopt the strategy of listing places of heritage
significance on a heritage register. Reliance is often placed
on plans of
management to provide the fine detail of how places are to be treated. Once
heritage significance is decided on, there
can be trade offs with what is less
significant but which may be of value to the owner.
Significance for whom?
It is clear that heritage is complex in a multicultural country with a long
Indigenous tradition. Australia is also a federated nation
of nine jurisdictions
with heritage laws. Australia’s first national heritage laws, the
Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975
(Cth), took a national
perspective through a Register of the National Estate. By 2003 this comprised
more than 14,000 items. In a
view of the
Constitution
the Register of the National Estate was not supported by
civil or criminal sanctions, but listing on the Register had persuasive
authority. Unlike the US model on which it was based, this Register was not
integrated with the state and territory lists, which
did have sanctions.
This model changed in 2004, when the then Commonwealth Government repealed
the legislation and brought national heritage laws within
the omnibus
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
(Cth) (EPBC
Act). Earlier the Council of Australian Governments had decided that heritage
issues should be dealt with at whichever
level of government is
appropriate.
The effect is to
require attention to how a heritage place relates to Australia’s
governmental divisions, not just for administrative
convenience, but as part of
the identification of significance. Is a place of national significance? Or
state or territory significance?
Or is it of local significance? While the
duplication between the Register of the National Estate and the state and
territory heritage
registers has been reduced, there are misgivings that the new
List of National Heritage Places under the EPBC Act has only 105 items
(truly?) national significance.
state and territories are to list items of significance to their areas and local
government to its registers.
Significance for what?
The national legislation—the EPBC Act—protects the heritage
values of a place, which is defined to include:
‘The place’s natural and cultural environment having aesthetic,
historic, scientific, or social significance or other
significance for current
and future generations of Australians.’ (s 528)
note how broad this definition is. It moves a long way from the old house that
has historic or architectural significance.
For example, a place of social
significance to a migrant group, who initially had few resources, may be very
unprepossessing in aesthetic
appeal and have little historic significance.
Note also the move to protect values. There was some fear that moving from
protecting a place to protecting its values may, with an
unsympathetic
regulator, downgrade the overall protection: how little needs to be preserved to
protect a place’s heritage values
rather than the place itself? Some
landmark cases though may go the other way. In considering the question of
whether to allow the
damming of a river in Queensland, the effect of the farming
activities that would be facilitated on the Great Barrier Reef 500km
judged to be relevant.
Who decides?
Heritage in some respects is a contentious and perhaps nebulous concept. Who
decides what to protect is, therefore, an important issue.
Heritage groups argue
that questions of identification and management should be
What is heritage is a
question for heritage experts. Whether what is identified should then be
protected is a question of the allocation
of resources, which, as a political
issue, should be decided in a political process. Politicians seem to prefer to
get involved in
the first question and so perhaps avoid any opprobrium when they
might decide not to protect a place with identified heritage significance.
most of Australia’s heritage legislation, the question of whether to list
a place on a heritage register is a ministerial
Broadly, the upkeep of a place with heritage significance falls to the owner.
Most jurisdictions have a system of competitive grants
that can be used to
assist. Some jurisdictions provide for concessional local government rates. The
Keating Labor Government introduced
a tax-offset scheme for approved expenditure
on a place listed on a heritage register. This was replaced with a grants
Heritage is a matter of private and public concern. Which should prevail and
at what stage should this be considered? Potential financial
hardship to the
owner could be considered at the listing
at the stage of assessing
an application to carry out work at a listed place, or not at all.
Heritage can easily be seen as an expensive impediment to the urgent and
necessary provision of housing by homeowners for their families
governments for a rapidly increasing population. It can also seem bedeviled by
vague rules and discretionary judgments. Returning
to the ICOMOS ambitious
definition of the ‘spirit of place’ heritage significance is, on the
other hand, an attempt to
identify the places we want to keep in the midst of
constant and vast changes and a way of teasing out the deeper meanings in where
we live. Heritage is central to housing because it comprises ‘the physical
and the spiritual elements that give meaning, value,
emotion and mystery to
* Graeme Wiffen is an Honorary Associate in the School of Law at
Macquarie University where he taught consumer law, and planning and
law. He is on the boards of Australia ICOMOS, Australia’s national
cultural heritage professional organisation, and
the National Parks Association
of New South Wales.
Article 2.2,
The Australian ICOMOS
Charter for the Conservation of Places of Cultural Significance
Charter) quoted in B Boer and G Wiffen
Heritage Law in Australia
Quebec Declaration on the
Preservation of the Spirit of Place
, Adopted at Quebec, Canada, 4 October
2008, at the 16th General Assembly, <www.international.icomos.org/quebec2008/
at 16 September 2009.
Commonwealth v Tasmania
, which accepted Commonwealth power in relation to heritage matters under
the external affairs power and the World Heritage Convention.
Heads of agreement on Commonwealth/State
roles and responsibilities for the Environment, Nov 1997, Article 6,
<www.environment.gov.au/epbc/publications/coag-agreement/index.html>
September 2009.
www.environment.gov.au/heritage/places/national/list.html
at 16 September 2009.
Queensland Conservation
Council Inc v Minister for Heritage
[2003] FCA 1463
(the Nathan Dam
S McIntyre-Tamwoy
Australia ICOMOS
Comments on NSW
Heritage Amendment Bill 2009
. See Policies and Submissions
<www.icomos.org/australia> at 16 September 2009.
Productivity Commission (2006)
Conservation of Australia’s Historic Heritage Places
, Report No 37,
Recommendation 10, p xxxv.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (198 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter