URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AULegHist/2008/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:35:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wright, Barry --- "Criminal Law Codification and Imperial Projects: The Self-Governing Jurisdiction Codes of the 1890's" [2008] AULegHist 10; (2008) 12(1) Legal History 19
Criminal Law Codification and Imperial Projects: The Self-Governing Jurisdiction Codes of the 1890’s
I Introduction
II The Context: English Criminal Law Reform and British Empire Initiatives
A The English Debates:
B Imperial Policies and Colonial Circumstances
III The Self Governing Codes
A The Canadian Criminal Code
B The New Zealand Code
C The Queensland Code
IV Conclusions
Criminal Law Codification and Imperial Projects: The
Self-Governing Jurisdiction Codes of the 1890’s
BARRY WRIGHT
I Introduction
This article examines the Canadian, New Zealand, and Queensland Criminal
Codes (1892, 1893 and 1899) as part of the first wave of
self-governing
been done on these codes individually,
they have not been considered together in
the context of shared imperial experiences and common late colonial challenges,
or as similar
responses to larger modernizing trends in law and state
The imperial context includes the failed domestic English codification
efforts (Henry Brougham’s Criminal Law Commissioners
1833-45 to J.F.
Stephen’s Draft English Code, 1880), the ‘imposed’ British
imperial codes (Thomas Macaulay’s
Indian Penal Code, 1837-60 and R.S.
Wright’s Jamaica Code, 1877), and similar colonial challenges around local
adaptations
of English criminal law and securing the rule of law. While many
historians have moved away from imperial networks to focus on previously
neglected local experiences, there remains rich potential for further
comparative legal history on matters such as codification.
This does not imply
the displacement of history from ‘below’ by history from
‘above,’ or the uncritical restoration
of whiggish imperial
narratives. It is about better understanding of context, similar legal and
constitutional issues, and local
responses that entailed more than reference to
imperial policies, but developed also, as Bruce Kercher has pointed out, from
circulating between colonies and adaptations facilitated by inter-colonial
migration of legal and political
These codifications were also related to larger trends associated with
constitutional change and modernizing the exercise of state
power. Here the
success of codification in colonial and self-governing British jurisdictions
stands in contrast to the failure of
English efforts. The chauvinistic tendency
to see codification as alien to the English legal tradition, one that favours
adaptability
to continentalist rigidities, was once described by the English Law
Commissioner and India Legislative Counsellor Andrew Amos as
‘codiphobia.’ Conservative elements of the English bar and bench,
vehemently opposed it. Codification was also frustrated
by a related conceptual
difference noted by Lindsay Farmer, between the common law traditionalists, who
saw criminal law as an adjunct
to private law and largely about the protection
of private interests, and reformers, who saw criminal law as “...a species
of public law in the specifically modern sense that it codifies the relation
between the state and citizen as a political relation,
sovereignty.”
perspective of political and social theory, notably Max Weber’s concept of
‘formal legal rationality,’
the failure of codification is an
illustration of the ‘peculiarities of the English,’ the common law
exception that persists
in the face of the typical modern legal forms. Yet as
Farmer, Michael Lobban, and K.J.M. Smith suggest, the dismissal of codification
as alien to English legal traditions (an idea promoted by foreigners and
philosophical radicals with no legal background), or its
absence a common law
anomaly, neglects the prominence of codification in 19
English criminal law reform
It also fails to account
for the success of codification in other British common law jurisdictions.
Colonial legacies favoured the prospects of codification. Complexities
arising out of the reception and local elaborations of English
law, a less
developed bar and bench with a transplanted attenuated common law culture, and
practical challenges accessing the sources
of law, enhanced receptivity to the
idea of simplified and more accessible criminal law. The ‘common law
exception’ is
attributed in part to the late 17
British constitutional compromises and the resulting checks on state powers that
displaced one of the incentives behind the
later modernizing European criminal
law codes. Such constitutional precocity did not exist in British colonial
settings (despite
frequent claims otherwise), where partisan abuses of justice
were endemic, facilitated by wide executive influences over its administration.
While such experiences were not a direct influence on codification, they
reinforced a general view that more clearly defined criminal
law would help
check the powers of the state and an association between codification and
self-government and a written constitution.
Taken together these circumstances
meant fewer obstacles to codification. The project entailed more than effective
crime management,
the focus of the domestic English debates. It was a public law
initiative related to legal, constitutional, and governmental development.
The ‘imposed’ imperial codes and the ‘self-governing’
of criminal law
codification. The Canadian, New Zealand, and Queensland codes were relatively
democratic and autonomous self-determined
efforts that combined local
consolidations with the cautious Draft English Code as the primary external
reference. Macaulay’s
ambitious, comprehensive Benthamite effort in India
and the successor imposed codes were a form of ‘enlightened
despotism.’
Despite these significant differences, the imperial and post
colonial initiatives derived from similar influences and had common
objectives. All were informed by the 19
century English criminal
law reform debates and aimed to make the criminal law more accessible. Most
importantly, colonial and emerging
self-governing jurisdictions faced similar
challenges of reducing discretionary authority (and associated abuses) and of
rule of law more effective in culturally-diverse frontier settings.
These shared origins and objectives suggest that codification represented an
advance. The question remains: on whose terms? The aim
of better securing the
rule of law to make governance more effective was liberal progress on what
existed before. But the developments
were arguably experienced by traditional
plural communities and indigenous populations in particular as a more advanced
form of imperialism.
From a more critical perspective, codification can be
situated within modernizing trends around the exercise of state power and new
forms of authority, associated with new institutions to enforce the law and the
promotion of attitudes of deference to common obligations
of citizenship. It is
a development that is perhaps better conceptualized, in terms of political and
social theory, as an expression
of ‘modern state formation’ as
explored by historians such as Philip Corrigan and Derek Sayer, rather than
‘formal legal rationality.’
II The Context: English Criminal Law Reform and
British Empire Initiatives
A The English Debates:
Jeremy Bentham coined the term ‘codification,’ and along with
William Blackstone, was a major theoretical influence on
century English criminal law reform
Blackstone’s
Commentaries
were an Enlightenment-inspired attempt to
lend rational order to English law, they became influential in the later
resistance to
codification. His celebration of the common law’s
flexibility limited legislative reform to the resolution of doctrinal
and bridging gaps between judicial ingenuity and pressing public
Bentham dismissed the
Commentaries
as no more than “an elegant palliative to inherently
chronic confusion of the common
which was hopelessly
arcane and needlessly complex, the product of random cases and self-serving
judges. Criminal law reform involved
matters of vital public policy, with
enormous impact on public and individual happiness, and required a systematic
approach that
was properly a matter for Parliament, not the courts.
Bentham’s radical approach aimed at fundamental legislative reformulation
of the law, which left no
terra incognitae
and was consistently informed
by the rational principle of utility and the objective of deterrence. This meant
the complete definition
of offences, defences, and liability, set out with such
clarity that the average person would understand it and the average judge
be unable not to. His ambitious ‘science of legislation’ in
Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation
further, seeking to comprehensively regulate social relationships and sovereign
Farmer describes the
conceptual resemblance between Bentham’s
better-known
, “[t]he legislator, placed at the centre of
the network of rules that govern the social, corresponds in location and
symbolically
to the gaze that animates his “simple idea in
Architecture.”
As we shall
see, such codifying ambitions were found to have particular applicability in
colonial settings.
The legislative rationalization of criminal law took a range of forms in the
century. ‘Consolidation’ reduced existing criminal
law legislation from numerous statutes to one, while more ambitious
‘digests’ attempted to present the law in an organized fashion.
‘Codification’ came to have disputed meaning
but generally aimed for
more systematic reorganization, reformulating disparate elements into a cohesive
whole while abrogating common
law elements. The Benthamite conception called for
full elimination of the common law and fundamental law reform according to the
principles outlined above. Bentham’s direct influence on reform is
much-debated. The sweeping institutional and administrative
reforms in decades
leading to the 1830’s, that included the emergence of professional
policing, the increased prominence of
lawyers in the criminal trial and its
professionalization, and the rise of the penitentiary, were driven significantly
as the state contended with dramatic crime increases associated with
industrialization and urbanization. Parliamentary consensus
emerged as Whig
reform advocates were joined by influential Tories by the
significant reforms for our purposes were Peel’s criminal law
consolidation acts 1827-1832. Although hundreds of obsolete
statutes were
repealed or modernized, and there was a dramatic reduction of the death penalty
from over 200 to a dozen offences,
the consolidations fell well short of
anything resembling the
Henry Brougham, who had earlier paid tribute to Bentham’s influence,
became Lord Chancellor with the fall of Wellington’s
government. His
criminal law Royal Commission, was launched in 1833 with a mandate to produce a
single digest of criminal statues,
a single digest of common law, and to
consider combining both. It held out the promise of codification but Brougham
lacked Peel’s
methodical political skills and the reform consensus
dissolved. Lord Chief Justice Ellenborough’s condemnation of Bentham and
implacable defence of judicial powers set the tone for conservative elements of
the English bar and bench for the remainder of the
century, as modern defences
of the common law were articulated, supported by the increasing academic study
of law and reforms to
criminal law
The persistence of
legal pluralism, which had earlier limited the homogenizing effects of the
common law itself, inhibited further
rationalization.
Commission’s work became bogged down by time-consuming committee
approaches and emerging differences amongst the codifiers.
Its eight reports
culminated in a combined digest, presented in 1845 to a Tory government.
Attempts to restart the project met concerted
judicial opposition and little
remained of the Commissioner’s work in Charles Greaves’s modest 1861
consolidation.
James Fitzjames Stephen authored the final 19
century English
codification effort. Unlike his father, the Colonial Office undersecretary, he
unambiguously considered himself a
utilitarian. But he also had conservative
inclinations, favoured pragmatism to conceptual abstraction, and accepted
judicial discretion
as useful and
inevitable.
There was minimal
intrusion into judicial common law and interpretative powers in his cautious
1878 draft code which set out all
offences, but not defences, and a minimal
general part that did not attempt to define liability. The Attorney General and
Chancellor endorsed it, and a Royal Commission was charged with
converting it into a bill, but the project lost momentum and the
government fell
just after it was introduced in 1880. Stephen’s middle course satisfied
neither the progressive codifiers nor
the defenders of the common law. Lord
Chief Justice Cockburn’s devastating critique disingenuously declared the
proposal inconsistent
with the idea of codification, suggesting that no code was
better than a half-baked
B Imperial Policies and Colonial
Circumstances
The failure of Stephen’s effort ended the prospects for codification in
England, perhaps forever, but the prospects were better
in other British
conditions from ‘below’ facilitated
codification. The implications
of the colonial reception and adaptations of English criminal law, a
less-established profession distant
from the sources of the common law,
experiences with government abuses of the administration of justice, and the
challenges of making
criminal law more effective in new settings were supporting
factors in the emerging self-governing jurisdictions. Imperial policies
‘above’ also encouraged codification. As utilitarian reformers
became increasingly influential in the Colonial Office
and related departments,
they encountered fewer experimental constraints in overseas British
‘laboratories’ than in the
domestic English scene. The
‘imposed’ imperial codes, notably Thomas Macaulay’s Indian
Penal Code and R.S. Wright’s
Jamaica Code, were attempts to modernize the
colonial state by making law more effective and reducing reliance on military
intervention.
The better securing of the rule of law was a basic objective that
fit with the aspirations of more autonomous jurisdictions, although
Stephen, not Macaulay or Wright, which became the primary reference for the
first wave of ‘self-governing’ codifications
Some of the key players who encouraged codification as imperial policy
included Thomas Macaulay, Andrew Amos, and James Fitzjames
Stephen, all active
as law commissioners in India.
Codification was seized as a means to make English law more effective in foreign
settings and to ameliorate problems of colonial
governance such as abuses of
justice and over-reliance on costly military responses. The Indian Penal Code
(IPC), proposed in 1835
and drafted by Macaulay two years later, was enacted in
1860, delayed by concerted European expatriate resistance to the idea of
the same legal status as indigenous populations, policy conflicts, and the
disruption of the Mutiny, although the latter crisis
eventual adoption. The IPC reflected the utilitarian ideal of a comprehensive
code, Macaulay boasting that
he had cooked up something that would
“...make old Bentham jump [for joy] in his
Mindful of the
obstacles faced by the English Law Commissioners he suggested that the
enlightened despotism of a paternal colonial
government was best-suited for such
a project, “[a] code is almost the only blessing which absolute
governments are better
fitted to confer on a nation than popular
governments.”
The English
bar and bench mocked this first successful codification of English criminal law
as the product of the non-practising
lawyer for a backward overseas colony,
“suggesting that it was necessary to keep things simple for the native
population and
magistrates of limited
The Colonial
Office nonetheless promoted it for other colonies, a 1870 memorandum emphasizing
that it was a means to restrain corrupt
or arbitrary
Although the IPC became the basis for codes adopted in some Asian and African
colonies, an otherwise weak response prompted the Colonial
Office to commission
R.S. Wright to write a new version for Jamaica, updating Macaulay and including
a more sophisticated definition
of liability. Wright faced none of domestic
constraints encountered by J.F. Stephen (who began his project about the same
the Lord Chancellor’s office and developed a rivalry with
Rebellion in Jamaica
(1865) appears to have also been a precipitating factor, and the code was
introduced in 1877. However, it was
not brought into effect, although
Wright’s effort became the Colonial Office model criminal code through to
the early 20
century, with versions enacted elsewhere in the West
Indies and the Gold Coast (Ghana). A number of British colonies remained
at the end of the 19
century, and after a failed effort
by J.F. Stephen’s son Henry on a new model code, Wright’s code was
replaced in 1925
by Albert Ehrhardt’s Colonial Office model code based on
Samuel Griffith’s Queensland
Colonial Office policies were supplemented by the exchange of ideas between
colonial settings that did not emanate from London. The
growth of this in the
century was facilitated by the migration of legal and political
personnel. While this study has found no evidence that Canadian and
New Zealand
initiatives influenced one another, and there is no reference to Canada and
minimal reference to New Zealand in the Queensland
effort, such exchanges are
reflected in the example of William MacGregor, who while Governor of British New
Guinea passed on a copy
of the 1889 Italian Code to Griffith. MacGregor later
took the Queensland Code to Lagos, with that code having a primary influence
Ehrhardt, who himself was active in different
Macaulay and the successor Colonial Office model codes were
‘imposed’ codifications. Reformers regarded these efforts
enlightened, liberal, paternal imperialism aimed at achieving the rule of law
and the elimination of difference. However, the
iterations were undemocratically promulgated as law by appointed legislative
councils and involved little by way of indigenous
The first wave of
voluntary codifications adopted through self-governing legislative processes
(Canada 1892, New Zealand 1893, and
Queensland 1899) were quite different, the
product of relatively autonomous democratic processes, reflecting more complex
based on local experience and developments. The impetus for these
efforts came primarily from ‘below’ rather than ‘above.’
Late colonial circumstances and experiences had given rise to comprehensive
local consolidations and created positive conditions
for codification.
The prospects of codification were favoured by the consequences of the
reception of English criminal law into new settings and local
amendments to that
law. The reception of English law in territories acquired through conquest or
discovery and occupation is a complex
topic bound up with the imposition of an
outside political and legal order. Generally, the initial establishment of
British interests
in a territory resulted in subjects governed by those legal
rights and obligations deemed reasonably applicable in the circumstances
colony by the local executive named by the British
government.
Transition from
‘informal’ to ‘formal reception’ followed when
settlement reached levels where there were
demands for representative political
institutions and colonial courts to regularly administer the law. English laws
in effect when
the colonial legislature was established became the basis of the
empowered to
amend these laws as conditions required, subject to imperial supervision
(Colonial Office review and possible disallowance,
imperial legislation, and,
after 1833, appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council).
There were numerous colonial variations to these general reception processes.
For instance, the Quebec Act, 1774 established a colonial
legislature and
regular courts and adopted English public and criminal laws then in effect but
constitutional concessions to the
majority francophone population included the
restoration of French civil law for private disputes and suspension of the
disabilities so that French-speaking judges could be appointed. The
creation of Upper Canada (Ontario) out of the western portion
of Quebec in 1791
to accommodate loyalist refugees from the American revolution promised the
‘very image and transcript’
of the British constitution, resulted in
the full adoption of English law in effect when the colonial legislature met in
South Wales’ status as a convict colony and the wide powers
exercised by the governor led to a slower transition from informal
The New South Wales Act, 1823 curbed the governor’s powers by way of a
legislative council (although an elected
representative element was delayed
until 1842) and a formalized role for the Chief Justice to certify that colonial
acts were not
repugnant and as consistent with English law as colonial
circumstances permitted. Continued uncertainty about the status of English
led to the passage of the imperial Australian Courts Act, which fixed a formal
reception date at 1828 for New South Wales and
Van Diemen’s Land
(Tasmania).
Queensland, unlike
Upper Canada, retained the earlier (1828) reception date. The resulting
complications in the status and local
development of criminal laws were
compounded not only by the emergence of new colonies out of the territories of
older ones, but
also by the opposite process of colonial union, as we shall see,
in case of Upper and Lower Canada (Quebec) in 1840 and the emergence
criminal law jurisdiction throughout British North America after 1867.
In this context local consolidations served to simplify the accumulated
layers of law and set the scene for more dramatic reform.
Codification was the
next logical step in rationalizing the complex mix of applicable English
criminal laws and colonial legislation.
A second incentive to codify came from the rudimentary state of the bar and
bench in early 19
century colonial jurisdictions and difficulties
accessing the sources of law. Common law culture, undergoing modernization in
century England, was a transplanted and attenuated one overseas.
Local indigenous custom and quasi-autonomous legislative development
of received
English law meant a greater pluralism than found in 19
England. This does not appear to have worked against legislative rationalization
but rather posed challenges that made it
more of a priority. Local
consolidations (and later codifications) accommodated or denied such pluralism
depending on political conditions
and modernizing
And unlike the general
opposition to codification from the English bench, local judges were amongst the
strongest proponents of codification.
As Desmond Brown has noted, local
professional attitudes were shaped in significant part by the practical
difficulties of identifying
and obtaining relevant statutes and scarce and
expensive legal texts. Institutional holdings were limited and difficult for
to access, let alone judges facing greater distances and more extreme
conditions on circuit than English
Issues arising out of the colonial structure of government and administration
of justice accompanied these practical challenges. Extensive
experience with
abuses of criminal justice reflected the heavy reliance on criminal law by
colonial governments to fend off challenges
and maintain the authority of local
elites. Executive domination of the administration of criminal law, and reliance
on expedients
that would not be tolerated in 19
century Britain,
highlighted how colonies did not benefit from British constitutional advances,
despite formal claims made
Judicial independence
was compromised by colonial judges holding office according to royal pleasure
rather than good behaviour as
determined by Parliament (as was the case in
Britain after 1701). This enhanced government control of the judiciary and meant
easy removal of troublesome reform-oriented judges (such as John Walpole
Willis in Upper Canada in 1828 and in New South Wales in
1843). Judges were more
usually at the centre of colonial political cultures and acted in compliance
with government interests (the
strained relations between Chief Justice Forbes
and Governor Darling in New South Wales was a notable exception), as reflected
frequent reliance on
extra-judicial
opinions and the routine inclusion
of senior judges in governing councils (practices that had been curbed in
Britain by the 19
century). Criminal prosecutions were dominated by
the law officers of the Crown, who exercised their prerogative powers (the
information and
nolle prosequi
) widely to government
advantage (early New South Wales even lacked regular indictment processes),
whereas in England such powers
were regarded with suspicion as Star Chamber
remnants. Related controversies included wide executive influences over jury
(enhancing the prospects of “packed” juries) in the
Canadas and the absence of trial by jury altogether in New South
Wales until
Wide experience of partisan uses of the criminal law that exploited these
features of the colonial administration of justice promoted
receptivity to
codification as a potential check on state powers. This fed a constitutional
momentum around codification, something
largely absent in England, where as
Farmer notes debate was preoccupied with the effectiveness of the criminal law
and a striking
failure, unlike the modern European codifications, to consider
how a code might limit state
It is therefore not surprising that codification encountered less resistance
and wider political and legal acceptability in the emerging
self-governing
the repressive state powers; some, on
the contrary, saw it as a means of making
the powers of the state more effective. Nor were all advocates of codification
aspirations about the need to modernize the colonial state
and widen responsible
self-government. The English common law prejudice against codification, and the
condescension that portrayed
it as appropriate for colonial backwaters, may have
been shared to some extent by the local bar and bench in aspiring for
recognition
as mature legal cultures. Such attitudes may explain the less than
enthusiastic response to the Colonial Office’s encouragement
Macaulay’s code and the successor Colonial Office model codes and,
together with legislative inertia, the failure of codification
self-governing former colonial British jurisdictions.
Imperial encouragement of codification tended to lend legitimacy to local
codification efforts in more conservative circles. At the
Stephen’s cautious Draft English Code, a codification that nearly became
domestic English law in 1880, did not carry
the same baggage of colonialist
associations as the IPC. Perhaps most importantly, Stephen’s modest,
pragmatic approach to
codification was loose enough in conception to be easily
combined with local consolidations that had simplified the complex accumulated
layers of received and colonial laws and further amendments. Local reforms could
be readily accommodated rather than abandoned to
a purer Benthamite conception.
It is therefore unsurprising that Stephen’s Draft Code was embraced as the
most suitable reference
for these self-determined codification efforts.
This different primary external reference point, along with the fact that
Canada, New Zealand, and Queensland were not obvious colonial
‘laboratories of power’ subject to utilitarian-engineered
‘enlightened despotism,’ made them distinct from
the imposed
imperial codifications. All the initiatives were nonetheless informed primarily
by the English codification debates,
manifested in different ways by Macaulay,
Wright and Stephen. And there was a basic shared objective in all these
codifications:
reducing discretionary authority and making the rule of law more
This objective, the better securing of the rule of law in culturally diverse
frontier settings, represented progress, a liberal advance
on older forms of
colonial governance. An advance but on whose terms? Was the rule of law in these
contexts an unqualified good,
to use E.P. Thompson’s phrase? All the
initiatives were about the more effective assertion of this modern form of
and were experienced by indigenous populations in particular as
another form of imperialism. Progress arguably had more ominous implications
those whom authority remained an imposed foreign presence, a presence that
promised to be less violent and arbitrary but proved
more pervasive and
difficult to contest.
III The Self Governing Codes
The first wave of self governing jurisdiction codifications of English
criminal law includes the Canadian Criminal Code 1892, the
New Zealand Code
1893, and the Queensland Criminal Code 1899. The Canadian and New Zealand
efforts preserved Stephen’s narrow
conception of codification that
retained common law. While Samuel Griffith relied upon the Draft English Code as
his primary external
reference for Queensland, it served more as a resource for
substantive provisions than a conceptual influence, and his comprehensive
approach ending up resembling Macaulay and Wright more than Stephen. There are
similarities between these Codes that go beyond their
common reference to
Stephen. These relate to their quasi-constitutional character, a quality that
was largely absent in debates around
an English code. In the case of the
Canadian Criminal Code, criminal law reform was openly regarded as a public
nation-building initiative,
part of an array of measures designed to better
secure the sovereignty and authority of the Dominion of Canada. While such
nation-building
ambitions were less apparent in New Zealand and Queensland, the
reform efforts there were also associated with greater self-determination,
regulation of political communities, and making the rule of law more effective
in culturally diverse frontier settings.
A The Canadian Criminal Code
In the debates leading to the British North America Act, 1867, John A.
Macdonald urged uniform criminal law centralized under the
proposed federal
personally retained the government’s
justice portfolio and ensured the
quick passage of federal consolidations in 1868-9. Codification was not to
become a government
priority until the latter half of the 1880’s and there
was a decidedly pragmatic rather than principled approach to the project.
was some familiarity with utilitarian arguments and with codes as found in
Quebec’s civil law, but there was little inclination
to pursue anything
more ambitious than Stephen’s Draft English Code, a convenient vehicle for
pulling together the amended
Dominion consolidations. This was speedy progress
compared to the half century of efforts culminating in the failure of
bill at Westminster in 1880. Just over a decade later Canada
pipped New Zealand at the post to become the first self-governing jurisdiction
in the British Empire to codify its criminal law.
There was broad support for Macdonald’s position on criminal law
appears in the
records of the confederation debates and it is one of the few matters that
remained unchanged in successive constitutional
A decentralized
federation with state rights over important matters such as criminal law was
perceived as a contributing factor to
then-raging US civil war and Macdonald
urged avoidance of the defects which “time and events have shown to exist
in the American
federation, ...[the] weakness which has been the cause of the
[recent] disruption of the United
Criminal law was
directly associated with the stability of the new union, its territorial
integrity, and security concerns informed
by experiences beyond perceptions of a
disfunctional US federation. British North America experienced the brunt of
American aggression
during the War of 1812 as well as raids by American
‘patriots’ in the aftermath of the Canadian rebellions in 1838 and
American-based Fenians in 1866 (who sought to take Canada to exchange for Irish
independence). Coordinated criminal law was portrayed
as essential as national
defence for the effective response to such threats was, and usually discussed in
conjunction with that power.
These concerns were reinforced by a growing preoccupation with securing the new
Dominion’s sovereignty and development priorities
over the vast North West
territories between Ontario and British Columbia.
The idea of federal jurisdiction over criminal law was not unprecedented.
Macdonald also compared the chaotic state of American criminal
laws to the two
decades of experience in the United Province of Canada which brought progressive
uniformity to the formerly disparate
colonial criminal laws of Upper and Lower
Canada (Upper Canada’s relatively benign criminal law, formally received
and amended in 1833 with the adoption of Peel’s consolidations,
reduced capital offences to 11, whereas Lower Canada had over
200 capital
offences derived from largely unreformed English criminal law as it stood in
The Province of Canada
consolidation exercise had also given rise to a codification proposal based on
Macaulay’s IPC from William
Badgley, a former Attorney General, in
Elsewhere in British North
America, Nova Scotia had been the first British jurisdiction to collect and
index all applicable statutes
(1804, antedating the first volume of the British
Statutes of the Realm by six years) and New Brunswick had also adopted
consolidations acts, becoming the first British jurisdiction to
enact a codified format for all offences in a 1849
While codification
seemed a distinct possibility in 1867, the earlier Province of Canada experience
also prefigured the larger scale
challenge faced at confederation: Reconciling
the criminal laws of all the former British North American colonies, as the
of Canada assumed jurisdiction over diverse criminal laws, originating
in English law as it stood when each had gone through formal
reception, as
amended by the colonial legislation and applied by the colonial courts in
different ways according to local conditions.
In 1867 the criminal laws of each
colony diverged as much from each other as from English criminal law at that
Rapid and effective assertion of Dominion jurisdiction was the highest
priority and more easily achieved by way of consolidation than
by a large,
legislative time-consuming codification project. Simple consolidation alone
presented Macdonald with at least three options.
Adoption of one of the
pre-confederation consolidations seemed to be the easiest course but risked
acrimonious debate with the provinces.
Striking a commission to draft a federal
consolidation that assimilated the best colonial provisions would be nearly as
time-consuming
as codification. Macdonald’s expedient course, one that was
cheap, quick and avoided political complications, was to simply
Greaves’s English Criminal Law Consolidation Acts, 1861. It became the
basis, in slightly amended form, for the new
Dominion Consolidation completed in
However, in some cases the
adopted provisions were a retreat on advances developed in the provincial
consolidations, while new laws
were imported that had never been in effect in
the colonies, including matters that intruded on provincial jurisdiction. There
a proliferation of amending bills and the government was obliged to pass
twenty such statutes within five years.
During this time Judge James Gowan, a close confidant of Macdonald’s,
met with leading English and Irish barristers and judges
as well as reformers
and Colonial Office officials, including R.S. Wright, then at work on the
Jamaica code.
Unlike many of the
barristers and judges he met, Gowan was a strong advocate of codification. His
Canada Law Journal
, long the most influential legal periodical in British
North America, was conservative in paying close attention to English
developments
and dismissing American legal innovations as unrealistic foreign
curiosities, but it also strongly advocated codification, evoking
little in the
way of professional criticism or defences of the common
However, codification in
Canada was to be shaped more by political priorities than law reform debates and
professional attitudes.
Macdonald’s Conservative government had fallen by
the time Gowan returned to Canada, and making little headway with the governing
Liberals, he travelled again to Europe in 1878, witnessing early debate over
Stephen’s draft English
There remained little
political appetite for such a large legislative project that might evoke similar
contention when the Conservatives
returned to power. Prime Minister Macdonald
divested himself of the Justice portfolio, becoming Interior Minister to pursue
the economic
and public works initiatives known as the ‘national
Momentum began to build around codification upon completion of a new
consolidation as part of the Revised Statutes of Canada in 1884.
Passage was
delayed because of the North West Rebellion, and as Ministry officials struggled
with the applicable laws and prosecutions,
public criticism of the criminal law
intensified. The 1885 crisis arguably mobilized the political will for
codification. Gowan and
George Burbidge, the deputy Minister of Justice who had
published a Canadian edition of Stephen’s Digest, lobbied John Thompson,
the new Justice Minister, to consider taking reform to the next logical step,
noting that the Draft English Code provided an ideal,
ready-made model. Thompson
visited London in 1888, and although it does not appear that he consulted with
Stephen he was encouraged
by British Ministers to consider the 1880 English
Further prompting in 1889
came from Mr. Justice Taschereau, a Liberal appointee to the Supreme Court of
Canada, who offered to draft
a code in six months. Thompson declined but
immediately directed Burbidge to begin work on a codification bill that combined
Stephen’s code with the most recent Canadian
consolidation.
Burbidge and Robert Sedgewick did most of the drafting, while Thompson set
out general guidelines and worked out strategy for the
bill’s introduction
to Parliament, closely studying the debates around the English
Judge Gowan also advised,
although his most notable, or notorious, contribution was removal of the
published criticisms of Lord Chief
Justice Cockburn and others of the Draft
English Code from Ottawa’s Parliamentary Library (confiding to Thompson
that the great
and important point was to get the legislation through the
Dominion Parliament, and for this reason the potential rich find for opponents
must be kept out of
circulation).
The records show
that the 1880 English bill and the 1886 Canadian Revised Statutes served as the
primary references, followed by
Greaves’ 1861 Consolidation,
Stephen’s Digest, and Burbidge’s edition of it, and oblique
reference to nine English
and American periodical articles describing the New
York, Italian and Indian Codes. The key innovations identified included the
comprehensive
definition of all criminal offences, abolition of the distinction
between felonies and misdemeanours and adoption of the indictment
and summary
offence procedures. Particular Canadian offences were also noted (inciting
Indians to riotous behaviour, larceny of timber,
unguarded iceholes
The bill fully embraced
Stephen’s approach to codification in concept and closely resembles the
1880 bill in organization.
content, Stephen’s common law renderings were adopted and most of the
statute-derived provisions drew from the 1886 Canadian
Revised Statutes. Brown
estimates 40% of the substantive provisions (209 sections) derive from the
English Draft Code while 60%
(321) are taken from Canadian sources or are new
The bill was introduced in the spring of 1891 and distributed to MPs, the
bench, provincial Attorneys General and leading members
A slightly revised bill was
introduced in April 1892 and passed within two months of well-managed committee
hearings in which debate
focused on public order offences (sedition, libel and
Taschereau attempted too
late to emulate Cockburn, denouncing the Code in a critique, derived heavily
from the Lord Chief Justice’s,
published in January 1893 after the
legislation was passed and
proclaimed.
The Canadian Criminal Code was a quasi-constitutional initiative that
reflected the perceived central role of criminal law in the
nation-securing
initiatives of the Dominion government. While colonial circumstance gave rise to
the favourable preconditions for
codification, the allocation of jurisdiction
over criminal law was also motivated by the view that such powers were essential
the effectiveness of the Dominion’s national authority. The events of
the 1880’s generated the political momentum necessary
for a large
legislative project of codification to succeed.
One direct reflection of these themes may be found in the comprehensive
political offences and national security provisions set out
in the 1892 Code.
They go well beyond the equivalent provisions in the Draft English Code.
Stephen’s modernized but conservative
restatements of the classic
political offences of treason and sedition were adopted but the 1892 Code also
contained much more elaborate
offences related to breaches of the peace and
related uses of firearms and liquor. Some of these were adopted from special
applied in Ireland but others were uniquely Canadian, particularly
those directed at public works projects and native populations.
Notable among
these was section 98, the offence of inciting “Indians, non-treaty
Indians, or half breeds” to make demands
of Government officials or agents
in a disorderly manner.
unique Canadian capital political offence of lawless aggression, developed out
of the 1838 and 1866 border raids and applicable
to foreign citizens who could
not be prosecuted for treason, was added along with new provisions related to
official secrets derived
from 1889 UK legislation that post-dated
Stephen’s effort.
The assertion of public authority is also reflected in the place of the 1892
Code within a larger framework of related initiatives.
Canadian governments
faced challenges of political and social integration derived from class, ethnic,
religious and regional divisions,
as well as the incomplete projects of
expropriating land from the first nations. The 1885 North West crisis
highlighted the importance
of the more effective management of such conflicts,
and prevention of their escalation, through routine criminal law enforcement
related administrative measures. The responsibilities of the North West Mounted
Police, created at the time of the first Dominion
consolidation, extended well
beyond frontier criminal law enforcement to include assertion of Ottawa’s
sovereignty over the
vast North Western territories and management of native
groups. Their activities included curbing American incursions and suppression
of nomadic and other customs that were regarded as an obstacle to European
settlement and economic development priorities articulated
‘national policies’ noted earlier. The creation of the federal
Department of Indian Affairs and the passage of
a series of Indian Acts
delegated the Crown’s aboriginal obligations from the British to Canadian
government, which not only
affected treaty responsibilities but also saw the
introduction of ambitious new policies of segregation and assimilation that
to marginalize and civilize indigenous groups according to Ottawa’s
policy priorities. The Indian Acts supplemented measures
such as section 98 of
the 1892 Code by introducing quasi-criminal prohibitions over native customs and
practices, particularly where
they interfered with governing notions of the rule
of law, private property and economic development. Even the legal profession
as a channel of frontier cultural authority in the form of law officers
of the crown, Indian agents and stipendiary magistrates,
and eventually a
developed bar and bench.
case of Canada, codification case did not detract from the authority of the bar
and bench, rather, it facilitated professional
The Canadian Criminal Code therefore entailed much more than effective crime
control, bound up as it was with the assertion of Ottawa’s
sovereignty, and development priorities over vast geographical space, of better
managing social divisions and promoting
homogenous modern citizenship. It was
designed to make government authority more effective by making the rule of law
more effective.
B The New Zealand Code
While it did not confront as complex an array of colonial criminal laws as
the Dominion of Canada, New Zealand also adopted Greaves
as basis for its
consolidation, and did so over a year before Canada. New Zealand initiated its
codification project well before
Canada, with a government bill first introduced
in June 1883. The legislative process did not go as smoothly, and the Criminal
Act only became law a year after Canada’s Code. As Jeremy Finn points
out, a lack of sufficient legislative momentum was often
fatal to codification
efforts, and in New Zealand’s case there was no broad consensus to make
codification a legislative priority
or the support of political leadership and a
disciplined government majority. Finn also notes that the legislative debates
were livelier
and more sustained than in Queensland, and the same could be said
in comparison with Canada. There were long diversions into matters
of principle
around offences such as blasphemy and the retention of capital and corporal
punishment, and debate frequently descended
into partisan political
point-scoring.
Unlike Canada
(and like Queensland as we shall see), reference to American law was not
uncommon. The broader public objectives of
more effective, rule of law based
authority are also less evident than in Canada’s project, although uses of
the law against
indigenous populations are suggestive.
Alexander Johnstone, a judge of the Supreme Court, and Walter Reid, the
Solicitor General, were appointed in 1878 to update the 1867
consolidation and
subsequent amendments. Downie Stewart, a Dunedin lawyer and MP, played a similar
advocacy role as Judge Gowan but
had more immediate political influence. He was
familiar with Macaulay’s Code, and the moves afoot with Wright and
other codifications outside the Empire, as well as early initiatives
launched in the Australian colonies. He convinced the government
sights beyond a new consolidation, and Johnston and Reid’s mandate was
extended to preparing a criminal code. Stephen’s
1878 draft and the
English bill of 1880 provided timely models from which they worked, and like
Canada’s Department of Justice,
they rapidly excluded obsolete or
inapplicable English offences and added local amendments. A lengthy memorandum
and notes accompanied
the draft text of the 1883 codification bill, explaining
the advantages of Stephen’s proposal (particularly simplified procedure
and ending the distinction between felonies and misdemeanours, the comprehensive
statutory definition of indictable offences), and
summarizing modifications to
account for different local circumstances.
Like Canada, and unlike Queensland, as we shall see, Stephen’s narrow
conceptualization of codification was largely preserved,
as reflected most
notably in the lack of definition of liability and preservation of common law
defences. Their report also noted
criticism led by Lord Chief Justice Cockburn
to the English bill, which as we have seen was covertly suppressed in Canada,
we shall see, was used as a pretext by Griffith to diverge from
Stephen in his Queensland effort. In the case of New Zealand, it
prompted a note
of caution, with the Commissioners “...of opinion that it might be better
to defer the enactment of the code
in the colony until the English Parliament
has finally dealt with the subject; but, as the General Assembly may think it
to proceed with without further delay, we have prepared the draft Bill
annexed hereto, founded in the English Bill of
The suggestion of
waiting until a code was legislated for England was an invitation for protracted
legislative delay.
The draft bill was introduced by the government in June 1883, a week after
the Commissioners completed their work. Premier Frederick
Whitaker spoke
enthusiastically about the benefits of codification, making reference to the New
York Code and downplaying the failure
of the English bill. The bill was
withdrawn, and introduced and withdrawn again in 1884 after critics seized on
the Commissioners’
recommendation for delay and calls for wider
consultation with the profession and judiciary. Finn notes that there was no
process then in place for consultation with the profession and the
judiciary, as was done by Canada’s Justice Department, although
appear to have been sounded out eventually and indicated cautious approval of
the initiative.
The bill was
again introduced in 1885 and 1886 by Patrick Buckley, the Colonial Secretary, a
later Attorney General and judge of
the Supreme Court, but encountered partisan
attacks (including objections from earlier code proponents Whitaker and
Stewart). Debate
included whether the legislation should be passed as a whole or
in parts, and specific matters such as the accused refusing to give
matters to be dealt with as a question of fact or law, private prosecutions,
appeals and retrials, retention of the offence
of blasphemy, corporal
punishment, and the age of sexual consent. The Liberals, the strongest advocates
of codification were out
of power after 1886 but returned in 1891. Subsequent
bills failed for technical reasons until a disciplined party effort in 1893
pushed the project through. The later debates reiterated earlier themes but also
reflected ample criticism of provisions in light
of allegedly superior New York
and California provisions, and concerns from other quarters about the limits of
legitimate political
action in discussion of unlawful assembly and drilling
provisions.
These matters bring us to the political provisions of the 1893 Code
“Crimes Against Public Order, Internal and External”
77-107) which replicated Stephen’s updated renditions of these offences
with the addition of appropriate minor amendments.
The heated debate over
blasphemy did not extend to sedition, although, as noted, the proposed breach of
the peace provisions did
cause some concern. They did not go nearly as far as
the Canadian elaborations on Stephen in this area. As in Canada, seditious
was not defined, reflecting Stephen’s refusal to spell out
principles of liability. Like Canada, the malleability of seditious
ensured that it continued to have a chilling effect on dissent and political
opposition. Common law sedition prosecutions had
earlier been taken against
leaders of peaceful resistance to Maori land confiscation, leading to the
indefinite detentions of Te
Whiti and Tohu in 1883, the year that the
codification bill was first introduced. After codification the offence continued
applied to Maori resistance (Rua, 1916) as well (like Canada) to labour
organizers (Holland and Hunter, 1913) and opponents to conscription
Cooke, Thorn, Fraser and Brindle,
A major 1908 revision re-titled the code the Crimes Act and shifted political
offences to Part V (following new parts on punishment,
defences and parties).
Although it was now claimed that the entirety of criminal law was made statutory
(common law defences eliminated
with all justifications and excuses set out in
part III), the Crimes Act, 1908 did not introduce complete definitions of
While New Zealand eventually went further along the utilitarian path
of codification than Canada, it was not a comprehensive code
Griffith’s Queensland Code. The renaming that eliminated reference to
“code,” raises the question of what
form of legislative
rationalization constitutes codification. From a Benthamite perspective Stephen,
Canada and New Zealand were
not “true codes,” although no evidence
has been found that this motivated the change of title in New Zealand.
Colonial challenges and the absence of determined and influential common law
advocacy created favourable conditions for codification.
The geographical
challenges of asserting sovereignty and enforcing the rule of law were not as
intense as Canada’s, although
there were similar cultural challenges with
indigenous populations. The protracted legislative debate was much wider-ranging
Thompson’s tightly managed introduction and debate in Ottawa, and
reflected greater interest in non-British innovations, reflecting
a political
culture that was less hostile to American models. In the end however, less
‘cosmopolitanism’ found its way
into the New Zealand Code than the
Queensland Code. The end result was similar to Canada’s effort: a
localized rendition of
Stephen’s narrow codification of English law.
C The Queensland Code
The Queensland Code, 1899, authored by Queensland’s chief justice
Samuel Griffith, a former attorney general and premier who
later became the
first chief justice of the Australian High Court, also combined a local
consolidation with the Draft English Code
as the primary external reference.
However, Griffith rejected Stephen’s narrow concept of codification and
pursued a comprehensive
approach that was similar to Macaulay and Wright. The
Queensland code ranks with the India and Jamaica codes as one of the significant
century utilitarian codifications of criminal law. It is
arguably the most successful given its wide influence in the 20
Australia, like Canada and unlike New Zealand, emerged as a federal state,
but unlike Canada jurisdiction over criminal law remained
decentralized, these
matters were left to the former colonies that had become states in 1901.
Griffith played a leading role in Australia’s
federation debate that was
similar to Macdonald’s. Canadian scepticism towards American institutional
and constitutional models
derived in part from proximity. It was also influenced
by the lasting impact of what Louis Hartz described as a ‘founding
of United Empire Loyalism on English Canadian political
Unlike Canada, the
Australian federation debates had enthusiastic and influential proponents of US
models such as Andrew Inglis Clarke.
These were openly drawn from and adopted
where they could be reconciled with Parliamentary style democracy. Decentralized
law jurisdiction was one of several constitutional divergences between
these otherwise similar British self-governing
federations.
Griffith led the
Queensland delegation as Premier to the Melbourne constitutional conference of
1890 and was elected deputy President
of the 1891 Sydney Convention where he
authored the influential Lucinda draft proposals, the basis of the
constitutional resolutions
that emerged from the convention. These were largely
preserved at the 1897 Adelaide Convention and formed the nucleus of the
constitution. In this context the Hartz’s thesis has been used
to explain Griffith’s determination to move beyond slavish
importation of
British models and develop innovative legal and institutional forms appropriate
for local conditions.
themes also characterize Griffith’s approach to codification, where his
references to the New York Code, for instance,
stand in contrast to the
dismissive attitude of Canadian law reformers and the Department of
Griffith’s contributions to federation and codification, a project he
began shortly after his appointment as chief justice in
1893, have been
understood as discrete and unrelated activities, reflecting a complete shift
from a leading political to judicial
role. However, Queensland’s
experience of economic depression, a general strike, and the emergence of the
Labor Party in the
1890’s lent political urgency to Griffith’s
criminal law reform work and his contributions to the Australian constitution
may be seen as an important context for his codification project. It was in some
respects an extension of his constitutional efforts
as reflected in the
prominent arrangement of political offences, the extension of judicial authority
over legislative conventions,
and innovations around matters related to public
expression and communication. Griffith’s code involved much more than the
more effective management of crime. It had quasi-constitutional qualities
related to the modern regulation of the Queensland political
community, with
provisions that complemented the draft provisions of Australian federation,
which of course were about regulating
relations between the former colonial
political communities.
The primary records of Griffith’s codification work appear in three
main documents, his 1896 digest of applicable criminal statutes
(that compiled,
arranged, and modernized all applicable English and colonial criminal law
statutes and was accompanied by an explanatory
letter), his 1897 Draft Code
(with a detailed preface and careful cross references to his digest of the
previous year, the Draft
English Code, the common law, and other sources), and
the 1899 Report of the Royal Commission (which included Griffith) that converted
the draft into a bill that was passed by the legislature in October 1899 to take
effect on 1 January 1901.
digest included all applicable legislation (except imperial), 150 colonial and
100 English provisions, made up of English criminal
statutes in effect at the
time of the 1828 reception date set out by the Australian Courts Act, not
repealed or amended by local
legislation, New South Wales legislation to 1859,
and Queensland legislation passed after separation to 1896. Anticipating the
step of codification, he simplified, modernized, and arranged the statutes
in organized fashion and made reference to a general part
for definitions and
statement of liability, and set out a schedule of legislation to be repealed. As
Griffith noted in his explanatory
preface, “I hope the preparation of the
Code, which is in one sense a much more difficult, though much less laborious
will not occupy so long a time as had necessarily been required for the
compilation and revision of the
The draft code was quickly completed the following year, with the provisions
comprehensively cross-referenced to relevant
influences.
The digest supplied
most of the provisions, and other influences include the Draft English Code
(well over 100 references), the
common law (75 references), the 1889 Italian
Criminal Code (15 references), and the 1881 New York State Code (9 references).
was by far the main secondary reference, but as Robin O’Regan
notes, Griffith freely departed from it where he thought appropriate,
this by extensive reference to Lord Chief Justice Cockburn’s criticism of
the bill in the explanatory
There were qualitative
differences among the influences, which commentators have seized upon to
emphasize the unique cosmopolitan
qualities of Griffith’s
In particular, the
influence of the Zanardelli’s Italian Penal Code of 1889 which Griffith
himself highlighted in his explanatory
letter: “...I have derived very
great assistance for this Code, which, I believe, considered to be the most
complete and perfect
Penal Code in existence.”
The Zanardelli’s Code was
noted in the
Law Quarterly Review
(and came by this means to the
attention of the Canadian Department of Justice) but as O’Regan explains,
that it came to Griffith’s
attention in 1894 through William MacGregor,
Lieutenant Governor of British New Guinea, who supplied a copy of the code,
Zanardelli’s
ministerial explanation and an Italian
dictionary.
The New York Code,
also noted in English, Canadian, and New Zealand codification efforts, appears
to have come to Griffith’s
attention by way of a meeting with David Dudley
Field during a visit to the United States in
Griffith’s general part (setting out the principles of liability or
criminal responsibility) was highly innovative. It went
beyond existing British
reference points and reflected the particular influence of Zanardelli, and this
is certainly more significant
than a reference to Stephen on an obscure common
law offence. Section 25 set out a concise and elegant statement of criminal
responsibility
which extended to an economical treatment of accident and
involuntariness and other defences and Griffith recognized he was taking
enormous step here.
Cadoppi points out, his systematic approach to liability resulted in an
integrated relationship between the General and
Special Parts, less verbose,
repetitious and inflexible than Stephen, and avoiding, as he puts it, the common
law tendency to ‘casuistic’
approaches (inductive reasoning) and
‘exemplicative’ techniques (use of examples) that burdened even
Macaulay and Wright.
Griffith’s avoidance of illustrations in favour of principles of general
applicability was even more consistent with a Benthamite
conception of
codification than Macaulay and Wright. Indeed, his main departure from Stephen
(and the Canadian and New Zealand codes)
is that he conceptualized his project
in ambitious, comprehensive Benthamite terms.
Griffith’s code nonetheless remained a product of a common law system,
and Cadoppi’s suggestion that he somehow transcended
it by producing a
unique hybrid or
civilian codification is perhaps
overstated.
aspired to be a deductive code, Bentham himself struggled with
this approach.
The English
Criminal Law Commissioners, the Colonial Office, the Canadian codifiers (who
were familiar with the civil law system
in Quebec), and the New Zealand drafters
avoided venturing into European codes, informed, most likely, by a perception
that an irreconcilable
gulf would persist even with codification, between the
deductive processes associated with inquisitorial continental systems and
inductive processes associated with adversarial common law systems. Griffith was
able to avoid this conceptual gulf simply because
the vast majority of the
Queensland Code provisions were English criminal statutes and local colonial
legislative amendments, as
rationalized by Griffith and Stephen and supplemented
Stephen’s renderings of common law. While the Italian and American
were novel they did not determine code’s fundamental character
and the counts of references in the draft do not, in the end,
distort relative
influence. The Queensland Code is not as a unique anomaly as it is sometimes
portrayed, but warrants recognition,
along with Macaulay and Wright as one of
the three significant utilitarian codifications of English law. Griffith’s
contribution was his General Part inspired by the Italian Code, which
brought his effort even closer to Bentham’s conception
of codification and
represented an advance over Macaulay and Wright.
Griffith’s draft was largely preserved in the 1899 Royal Commission
recommendations adopted by the government. In contrast to
the New Zealand
debates, the bill introduced by Attorney General Rutledge passed in less than
five weeks with a broad degree of cross-party
support. Rutledge pointed to the
success of codification in New Zealand and America and reiterated
Griffith’s arguments. Debate
focused on the retention of corporal and
capital offences, particularly in the context of experiences of miscarriages of
There was significant debate around whether the death penalty should be
retained for treason and the possible restrictive effects
of the unlawful
assembly provisions on labour
The government’s
attempt to move all 708 clauses as one bill was rejected at Committee stage, and
members began to work through
the bill clause by clause which was later expanded
to clusters of clauses, which were passed as blocks containing increasing number
Griffith’s codification also proved to be influential elsewhere,
becoming a successor to Macaulay and Wright by way its lineal
influence on the
century Colonial Office model code. Copies of the Queensland
Code were sent to lawyers, politicians, and administrators elsewhere
Australia and overseas. Sir Richard Baker of South Australia predicted that its
adoption throughout the Commonwealth was only
a question of time, although only
Western Australia, Northern Territory, and Tasmania codified (and the latter
more closely resembled
the Canadian and New Zealand codes) and renewed efforts
in South Australia and Victoria
William MacGregor
became governor of Lagos and introduced Griffith’s code there, forming the
basis for the Northern Nigeria
Code in 1904 and 1916 Nigerian Code. This latter
rendition was the primary reference for Albert Ehrhardt’s codification
for the Colonial Office model code, initiated in 1925 and completed in
Of particular interest here are the relatively neglected constitutional
dimensions of the Queensland
The General Part, the
focus of most of the existing commentary, is immediately followed by Offences
Against Public Order (Part 2),
Offences Against the Administration of Law,
Justice and Public Authority (Part 3), and Acts Injurious to the Public in
General (Part
4). While this corresponds to Stephen’s organization and
includes his updated versions of the classic political offences,
offences against executive and legislative powers are added
or are developed to a greater degree than in the Canadian and New Zealand
These include liability for officials and other state actors for matters like
interference with political liberty, corruption
and abuse of office (influenced
by the Italian and New York
The provisions relating
to public expression and political communication are elaborate range and go well
beyond the offences of sedition
in Part 2 (replicating Stephen) and breach of
official secrets in Part 3 (adopting like Canada the 1889 UK legislation). The
law offence of blasphemy, a major point of contention in New Zealand, was
abolished and replaced by the Part 4 offence of public
attacks on religious
The defamation
provisions in Part 5 are much more comprehensive than Canada and New Zealand,
derived from his earlier codification
Griffith’s decision
to codify matters of parliamentary privilege (primarily in part 2 but also
sections in parts 3 and 5) was
a curious departure and he claimed, “...the
reasons for not regulating them as a breach of criminal law are, however, not
to Queensland.”
No further explanation is offered of this departure from Westminster
parliamentary conventions and it is here that we see the New
York Code’s
primary impact on the Queensland Code
While Griffith’s innovations concerning official and state actions and
public expression may be understood as attempts to regulate
the powers of the
modern bureaucratic state and the consequences of a politically-engaged popular
public sphere, the codification
of privilege from this part of the
‘unwritten constitution’ best illustrates the similar objectives
that link the code
with his earlier constitutional activities. It also
highlights receptiveness to American influences that would be dismissed in the
Canada context. From the Canadian perspective, the conventions of parliamentary
privilege assumed great significance in the 19
century struggles
for responsible government against appointed councils. Codification of these
conventions introduced judicial review
for matters that fell within
Parliament’s jurisdiction which was usually jealously
Griffith’s ease
in accomplishing this reflects perhaps less an uncertain grasp of British
constitutional history than his political
experience and continuing indirect
political influence as well as the spirit of constitutional innovation that
characterized the
federation debates carried over to the criminal law
codification project. Codifying such conventions as an element of the written
constitution, and making measures against legislative corruption and the penal
consequences explicit, could be seen as advances.
However, the projection of
American style constitutional checks on legislative authority also represented a
significant shift of
powers from the elected members of the legislature to
appointed judges. Viewed more critically, it could be seen as a response to
fears in some circles to political developments (the general strike, birth of
the Labor Party and its rising political power) by
‘responsible’ judicial oversight over legislatures.
IV Conclusions
English criminal law reform debates influenced the Canadian, New Zealand and
Queensland efforts but they were largely the products
of self-government that
combined local consolidations with the Draft English Code, a convenient vehicle
with few colonialist associations.
Griffith departed most dramatically from
Stephen’s narrow conception of codification, his effort, like Macaulay and
resembling the comprehensive Benthamite ideal.
The term codification came to apply to a wide range of forms of criminal law
rationalisation. Bentham’s ambitious original conception
aimed to shift
law-making from the courts to Parliament, where utilitarian-inspired legislators
would fully exploit the modern public
policy potential of the criminal law,
ending its relegation as one of the dirtier jobs of the courts. His premise was
that legislators
are more accountable and capable of rational principled
approaches to law-making than judges, and that criminal law reform would
a legislative priority. However, Bentham himself eventually realised that
discretionary authority could not be entirely eliminated.
Experience also
suggests that comprehensive codes have aged poorly. They require comprehensive
updating, seldom a legislative priority,
and are invariably overlaid with
judicial constructions by way of inconsistent and eccentric statutory
interpretation. This suggests
some validity to claims about common law’s
flexibility, the more explicit and open judicial obligations associated with it,
and the practical value of Stephen’s pragmatic approach to codification.
Codification nonetheless appeared to curb the more obvious manifestations of
discretionary authority in the criminal law. It helped
to disguise discretionary
powers and aimed to make authority both more modern and legitimate. The
utilitarian ideal of comprehensive
legislation that would govern social and
sovereign relations had particular resonance in colonial contexts where
codification played
a role in the modernisation of governance. This was most
obvious in the case of the British utilitarians in India who came to dominate
policy until the renewed influence of the “orientalists” in the
latter part of the 19
century. Macaulay embraced codification as a
means of reducing reliance on discretionary forms of authority and promoting the
of law, a solution to colonial problems such as status differences,
administrative corruption, and over-reliance on military intervention.
challenges were also faced in emerging self-governing jurisdictions. The
Canadian, New Zealand and Queensland efforts did
represent a distinct trajectory
of codification, Stephen rather than Macaulay was their primary external
reference, their efforts
were self-determined and reflected local developments
manifested in their consolidations that were their primary reference point.
they were informed by the same general English criminal law reform debates and
shared a common basic objective of enhancing the
rule of law in
culturally-diverse frontier settings.
We have seen how colonial circumstances provided a fertile ground for
codification. In both colonial and the emerging self-governing
became a public, quasi-constitutional initiative that involved much more than
the more efficient management of
crime. Crises also appear to have helped
precipitate codification in these cases. The mutiny led to the eventual
implementation of
the IPC, the Jamaica Rebellion to the drafting of
Wright’s code, and the 1885 North West Rebellion to the Canadian Code.
research is required here on the New Zealand and Queensland situations,
although the deployments of the criminal law against Maori
resistance in 1883
and the perceived challenge to the governing hegemony in Australia by the
emergence of a political party associated
with organized labour are
suggestive.
The codes, in aiming to extend the rule of law as a more legitimate modern
form of authority, did represent progress on earlier colonial
authority. But they also made criminal law interventions more pervasive. As we
have seen, the Canadian Criminal Code was
closely associated with defence,
public ordering, and development agendas and related
‘nation-building’ initiatives such
the North West Mounted Police,
the Indian Acts and the Department of Indian Affairs. The challenges of
self-government, of asserting
authority and the rule of law, of dealing with
pluralism and the devolution of treaty obligations, placed dominions such as
and New Zealand in the position of surrogate imperial powers within their
own jurisdictions. The Queensland Code, a reflection of
decentralized federal
as we have seen, political
ordering was nonetheless a prominent theme and the
connections between Griffith’s constitutional work on federalism and his
codification are suggestive.
Some of the Queensland provisions around public expression and criminal
liability of state actors reflect what J.F. Stephen himself
once described as a
political shift from the traditional presumption of political deference premised
on rulers as social superiors
to recognition of a modern Lockean premise of
popular sovereignty where governments are regarded as delegated agents of the
However, other
provisions reflect the expansion of judicial supervision over the political
sphere. Stephen’s own codification
of political offences, largely adopted
in all three Codes reflected the political sensibilities of Burke more than
Bentham was a political theorist as well as a law reformer. His
identification of the centrality of criminal law reform to the regulation
social and sovereign relations, and the modernizing impulses associated with
codification (more effective rule of law, the associated
institutions, and promotion of attitudes of deference to the common obligations
of citizenship), resonate with issues
debated by contemporary political and
social theorists as well as by historians interested in the development of the
modern state.
Weber’s notion of formal legal rationality has conceptual
value in moving analysis of such developments beyond uncritical liberal
narratives about the victory of the rule of law over discretionary authority and
negative Marxist reductionism that relegates everything
to the imperatives of
the late capitalist state and imperialism. While these various theories mean
different things by modernization
and modern forms of power, the positive as
well as the more ominous implications of law-related developments such as
codification
are arguably best captured and deconstructed by recent historical
work on moral regulation and modern state
This suggests a
broader relevance of these criminal law codifications. Perhaps most importantly
for legal historians, the examination
of these criminal law reforms in Canada,
New Zealand, and Queensland reveal that they were not isolated backwaters but
were connected
to larger developments, their parallel and contemporaneous
experiences suggesting the rich potential for further comparative research.
Barry Wright, Professor of Law
and Criminology, Carleton University. I am grateful to Desmond Brown, Lindsay
Farmer, Keith Smith,
and to the participants at the Legal History Seminar
Series, University of Toronto for their comments on earlier versions of this
A brief comparison of early
codifications influenced by R.S. Wright and J.F. Stephen is found in M.L.
Friedland, “Codification
in the Commonwealth: Earlier Efforts”
Criminal Law Forum
A comprehensive look at the influence
of the Queensland code in other British jurisdictions is found in Robin S.
O’Regan, “The
Migration of the Griffith Code” in
New Essays on the Australian Criminal Codes
(Sydney: Law
Book, 1988).
Bruce Kercher,
Child: A History of Law in Australia
(St Leonards NSW: Allen and Unwin,
1995), 204-5. On the emerging reaction to the dominant modern paradigm of local
“micro-histories”
and claims of uniqueness that characterise the
“progressive teleologies of nationalism” by some historians
eg., C.A. Bayly,
The Birth of the Modern World, 1790-1914
(London, 2004); Prasenjit Duara,
Rescuing History from the Nation
(Chicago,1995); G. Bouchard,
The Making of Nations and Cultures in the New
World: An Essay in Comparative History
(Montreal and Kingston, 2008).
Lindsay Farmer,
“Reconstructing the English Codification Debate: The Criminal Law
Commissioners, 1833-45”
Law and History Review
400 (hereafter Farmer).
Farmer, K.J.M. Smith,
Lawyers, Legislators and Theorists: Developments in English Criminal
Jurisprudence, 1800-1957
(Oxford: Clarendon, 1998) (hereafter Smith). See
also Michael Lobban,
The Common Law and English Jurisprudence, 1760-1850
(Oxford: Clarendon, 1991).
See eg., William Blackstone,
Commentaries on the Laws of England
(1765-9 repr. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1966), Jeremy Bentham,
A Comment on the Commentaries and a
Fragment on Government
(1776) ed., J.H. Burns and H.L.A. Hart (London:
Athlone, 1977),
An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and
Legislation
(1789) ed., Burns and Hart (London: Athlone, 1970). See in
particular Smith, 9 for a comprehensive examination of debates around
of substantive criminal law doctrine which informs this summary.
See Smith, 10-12; also S.
Milsom, “The Nature of Blackstone’s Achievement”
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
; D. Kennedy, “The Structure of
Blackstone’s Commentaries”
Buffalo Law Review
Smith, 11. See also
generally, Lobban, note 4 above; R. Cross, “Blackstone v. Bentham”
Law Quarterly Review
; H.L.A. Hart, “The
Demystification of Law” in Hart ed.,
Essays on Bentham: Jurisprudence
and Political Theory
(Oxford: Clarendon, 1982), 21.
Smith, 20, 28-9.
Farmer, 423.
Professional policing
regularized surveillance and crime prevention and transformed law enforcement.
The growing regular presence
of lawyers in the criminal trial had a significant
impact on the complexity of evidence and the role of other trial participants,
and their role was entrenched by the Prisoner’s Counsel Act, 1836 (6&7
Wm.IV, c.114). The penitentiary became the primary
form of punishment as
sentences of imprisonment replaced the automatic death sentence for felony
convictions and its discretionary
adjunct of conditional pardons, where
reprieved convicts were given secondary punishments such as transportation. On
the debate over
Bentham’s influence see eg., S.E. Finer, “The
Transmission of Benthamite Ideas, 1826-1839” in G. Sutherland ed.,
Studies in the Growth of Nineteenth Century Government
(London, 1972); H.
Benyon, “Mighty Bentham”
Journal of Legal History
On the parliamentary debates see eg., R. McGowan, “The Image of
Justice and Reform of the Criminal Law in Early Nineteenth
Buffalo Law Review
See Smith, 361, 364. James
Mackintosh’s 1819 committee that paved the way for Peel’s
consolidations avoided the judges
but they were routinely consulted on
subsequent criminal law reforms (see Smith, 56-63). See also Desmond Brown,
The Genesis of the Canadian Criminal Code of 1892
(Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 1989), 15-18 (hereafter Brown, 1989).
See eg., H.W. Arthurs,
Without the Law: Administrative Justice and Legal Pluralism in
Nineteenth-Century England
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1985). The
wider economic relations engendered by industrialization and the breakdown of
traditional
cultural affiliations in the face of the promotion of larger
identities and wider citizenship formation perhaps meant such pluralism
of an obstacle in 19
century Britain, although indigenous customs
and local innovation likely made it more of a factor in colonial settings
eg., John MacLaren, A.R. Buck and Nancy E. Wright,
Dominion: Property Rights in British Settler Societies
(Vancouver: UBC
Press, 2005); P. Karsten,
Between Law and Custom: The High and Low Legal
Cultures on the Lands of the British Diaspora-The United States, Canada,
and New Zealand, 1600-1900
(New York: Cambridge University Press,
See Smith, 136-8; Farmer,
404-5; see also Michael Lobban, “How Benthamic Was the Criminal Law
Commission?”
Law and History Review
; Lobban, note 4
above, chapter 7.
Stephen later provided an
extended defence of this approach, after examination of the comprehensive Indian
Penal Code and Lord
Chief Justice Cockburn’s scathing critique of the
Draft English Code --see J.F. Stephen,
A History of the Criminal Law of
England, Volume 3
(London: Macmillan, 1883), 347-52.
Smith, 143-50; see also R.
Cross, “The Making of English Criminal Law 6: Sir James Fitzjames
Criminal Law Review
Macaulay served from
1835-7, Amos, one of the original English Criminal Law Commissioners along with
John Austin, returned to help
produce the final 1845 digest, served from
1837-42, and J.F. Stephen, the son of the Colonial Office Undersecretary, served
1869-72--see K.J.M. Smith, “Macaulay’s Utilitarian Penal Code:
An Illustration of the Accidental Function of Time, Place
and Personalities in
Law Making” in W.M. Gordon and T.D. Fergus eds.,
Legal History in the
(London, 1991); K.J.M. Smith,
James Fitzjames Stephen: Portrait of
a Victorian Rationalist
(Cambridge, 1988), chapter 4. See also E. Stokes,
The English Utilitarians and India
(Oxford, 1959).
Quoted in Smith, 139. Smith
recounts later commentators at 140, who generally characterize it as
historically unburdened legislation
that fused Benthamite clarity with Burkean
pragmatism. See also R. Cross, “The Making of English Criminal Law 5:
Criminal Law Review
Quoted in Elizabeth Kolsky,
“Codification and the Rule of Colonial Difference: Criminal Procedure in
Law and History Review
Graham Parker, “The
Origins of the Canadian Criminal Code” in D.H. Flaherty ed.,
the History of Canadian Law, Volume 1
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
1981), 251 (hereafter Parker).
Parker, 252; “Some
Considerations Preliminary to the Preparation of a Penal Code for the Crown
Colonies, 20 May 1870”
Public Record Office, Colonial Office Records, CO
42 vol. 885.
Wright questioned
Macaulay’s heavy reliance on illustrations but his main point of departure
was to abandon Macaulay’s
simple concept of subjective liability,
supplementing intent with recklessness and negligence (objective) fault
requirements for
certain offences--see Smith, 151-2. See also, Friedland, note 1
above, M.L. Friedland, “R.S. Wright’s Model Criminal
Forgotten Chapter in the History of the Criminal Law”
Journal of Legal Studies
and on the situation in Jamaica during this
period see R.W. Kostal,
A Jurisprudence of Power: Victorian Empire and the
Rule of Law
(Oxford, 2005).
See generally Friedland,
Ibid.; Robin S. O’Regan “Sir Samuel Giffith’s Criminal
Australian Bar Review
(hereafter O’Regan,
1991); H.F. Morris, J.S. Reid,
Indirect Rule and the Search for Justice
(Oxford, 1992), 119-29.
Kercher, note 2 above,
204-5. Kolsky, note 18, 632 also notes that the framework of empire has been
neglected in studies of codification,
in which lawmakers in distant geographical
locations routinely cited each other’s work. See also Wright, note 30
below on the
migration of political and legal personnel (Chief Justice Forbes,
Judge Willis, Lieutenant Governor George Arthur) between the Canadian
Australian colonies and parallel controversies in the 1820’s and
30’s. On MacGregor’s influence see O’Regan,
1991, 142, 144.
On the issues around
indigenous input and Indian as a colonial laboratory for an imperial experiment
see Kolsky note 18 above.
See also eg., Radhika Singha,
A Despotism of Law:
Crime and Justice in Early Colonial India
(Delhi: Oxford University Press,
1999); Nasser Hussain,
The Jurisprudence of Emergency: Colonialism and the
Rule of Law
(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2003).
Calvin’s Case
sought to clarify, among other things, questions of allegiance and the
legal status of subjects and aliens in territories claimed
Crown’s sovereignty, and came to be relied upon to determine the rights
and obligations of subjects and others as
the first British Empire took shape,
although it was qualified by the view held in the American colonies (including
Nova Scotia)
which suggested that English law after 1497 was not applicable
unless expressly adopted by charter or local legislative or judicial
recognition. For a more detailed look at this complex area in British North
America, see eg., F.M.Greenwood and B. Wright eds.,
Canadian State Trials
Volume One: Law, Politics and Security Measures, 1608-1837
University of Toronto Press, 1996), 11-22.
Quebec Act, 1774 (14
Geo.III c.83). Upper Canada legislation in 1800 (40 Geo.III c.1) clarified
confusion over that colony’s
reception date, between 1774 when the
territory was part of Quebec and 1791 when it was created as a separate colony,
September 1792 (the date when the legislature first met) as the
applicable date. See also the New South Wales Act, 1823 (4 Geo.IV
c.96) and the
Australian Courts Act, 1828 (9 Geo.IV c.83).
See note 12.
Brown, 1989, 42, 71.
These matters are examined
comprehensively in the
Canadian State Trials
series, notes 25 above and
See Ibid and Wright,
“Libel and the Colonial Administration of Justice in Upper Canada and New
South Wales c.1825-35”
(forthcoming in B. Berger, H. Foster and A. Buck
Legal History in Canada, Australia and New Zealand: Comparative and
Contextual Perspectives
); John McLaren, “The Judicial Office
‘Bowing to no Power but the Supremacy of Law:’ Judges and the Rule
in Colonial Australia and Canada, 1788-1840” (2003) 6
Journal of Legal History
, 177; Paul Romney, “From Constitutionalism to
Legalism: Trial By Jury, Responsible Government and the Rule of Law in Canadian
Political Culture”
Law and History Review,
The Rule of Law in Penal Colony: Law and Power in Early New South
(Sydney: Cambridge University Press, 1991); J.M. Bennett,
the Australian Chief Justices: Sir Francis Forbes, First Chief Justice of New
South Wales, 1823-37
(Sydney: Federation Press, 2001).
Farmer, 423-4. Liberal
reform was not monolithic; “libertarian” Whigs seldom shared the
utilitarian reformers enthusiasm
for codification, in part because of their
failure to grasp its possibilities as a check on the powers of the state,
although Thomas
Macaulay became a notable exception.
Parker, 252; Brown, 1989,
The Confederation Debates in the Province of Canada
ed., Peter B. Waite ed., (Montreal: McGill Queen’s Press, 2006). See also
Parliamentary Debates on Confederation
(Quebec: Hunter Rose 1865). Unlike
the Australian federation debates, many of the negotiations leading to British
North America Act,
1867 were “closed sessions.” As Brown (1989,
59-60) points out, the views expressed at the closed conferences in
Charlottetown,
Quebec and London are not known, but the criminal law proposal
remained unchanged in each successive draft, and there is no indication
opposition to it. The British North America Act gave the Dominion Parliament
Vict., c.3 c.91), but
the actual constitution of the courts of criminal jurisdiction was left to the
provinces. As the Province of
Canada union, legal officials retained their
positions, existing laws and courts continued until amended by the competent
or provincial authority.
The Confederation
Ibid., 24-25.
The Confederation
, Ibid. On the legal responses to the Patriot and Fenian invasions
see F.M. Greenwood and B. Wright eds.,
Canadian State Trials Volume 2:
Rebellion and Invasion in the Canadas, 1837-9
(Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 2002); B. Wright and S.B. Binnie eds.,
Canadian State Trials
Volume 3: Securing the Dominion, 1840-1914
(forthcoming).
While the Act of Union
provided that all the laws of the two jurisdictions were to remain in effect,
Lord Sydenham’s administration
moved quickly to correct this double
standard of justice by repealing all previous criminal legislation and
consolidating the criminal
law in both provinces, resulting in substantial
reform in Quebec(1840) 3&4 Vict. C.35 s.46 Imperial; (1841) 4&5 Vict.,
25,26 &27 Province of Canada. This was followed by coordinated
consolidations in 1859 and 1860--see Brown, 1989, 56-7, 86-89.
Brown, 1989, 84-5. Badgley
also drew upon the efforts of Edward Livingston in Louisiana and David Dudley
Field in New York with
a bill on criminal procedure, a departure from the usual
Canadian pattern of avoiding American models.
Indictable Offences Act
(1849) 12 Vict., c.29 NB. See generally Brown, 1989, 74-8. (Criminal law in
Prince Edward Island and British
Columbia was less advanced).
(1869) 32 &33 Vict.
c.18-26 Canada. Department of Justice officials and Judge Gowan (who had
corresponded with Greaves) were
put under tight time-lines and Macdonald opposed
significant changes to the English text--see Brown, 1989, 92-7. See also D.H.
The Birth of a Criminal Code: The Evolution of Canada’s
Justice System
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1995), 28 (hereafter
Brown, 1995).
Brown, 1995, 29.
For instance, the
journal was to pay much attention to Stephen’s draft English Code, which
was contrasted with Macaulay’s
effort, while David Dudley Field’s
codification of New York criminal law received only passing and dismissive
critical mention–see
Parker, 253-5. See also Brown 1989, 70.
Between 1875 and 1880
fifty additional federal criminal laws were passed, seven of which were
amending--see Brown, 1995, 31; Brown,
1989, 103-6.
See Brown, 1989, 106-118;
1995, 31. Gowan visited London again in 1889 and renewed his advocacy of the
Stephen Code after Thompson’s
own visit there. Burbidge, borrowing heavily
from Stephen’s digest, had drafted a code of indictable offences to
the 1886 Revised Statutes, published as “A Digest of the
Criminal Law of Canada (Crimes and Punishment) Founded by Permission
James Fitzjames Stephen’s Digest of the Criminal Law” (1889).
Parker, 257-9; Brown,
1989, 119-23; Brown, 1995, 32.
Parker, 260; Brown, 1989,
120-2; Brown, 1995, 33.
Parker, 258.
See Brown, 1995 which
reproduces the Department of Justice records and Parker, 261-4.
The first six titles were
the same (the English code had one further title on procedure while the Canadian
bill added several
Brown, 1989, 123-4 (a
larger proportion of procedural matters, about 70%, are based on earlier
Canadian sources).
Brown, 1995, 34-5; Parker,
265-9. The responses were largely technical, reflecting little by way of
principled, theoretical or
public policy concerns such as effective deterrence
or civil liberties. Parker notes submissions from moral reformer D.A. Watt
in further provisions to protect young women from sexual predators)
and publisher John King (father of the future Prime Minister,
whose suggestions
concerning libel, defamation, and freedom of the press were not
incorporated).
Parker, 271; Brown, 1995,
See Parker, 273-6.
Taschereau attacked the failure to define liability and the defences and
supplemented paraphrasing of the Cockburn
critique with nitpicking critical
annotations of the Code. Sedgewick defended the Code in a long memo in February
1893, adding that
law makers were apprised of Cockburn’s criticisms, and
that the drafters agreed with Stephen’s view of impossibility
of excluding
the common law.
See Stephen’s Title
II (Parts V-VII) “Crimes Against the Public Order, Internal and External
and the 1892 Code Title
II (Parts IV-VIII). These provisions are explored in
detail in D.H. Brown and B. Wright, “The Security Provisions of the 1892
Canadian Criminal Code” in Wright and S.B. Binnie eds.,
Canadian State
Trials Volume 3: Securing the Dominion, 1840-1914
(forthcoming).
See W.W. Pue,
“Education the Total Jurist”
Legal Ethics
211. Pue notes that colonial lawyers articulated professionalism in ways not
deemed necessary in Britain itself, assuming a sort
of “white man’s
burden” in modelling the attributes of modern citizenship and national
identity fully subject to
the rule of law, helping to break down traditional,
communal, sectarian and ethnic affiliations and other centrifugal forces.
“Codification of the Criminal Law: The Australasian parliamentary
experience” in B. Godfrey and G. Dunstall
Crime and Empire
1840-1940: Criminal Justice in Local and Global Context
(Cullompton UK:
Willan, 2005, 224 at 35-6). See also, Stephen White, “The Making of the
New Zealand Criminal Act of 1893: A
Sketch” (1986) 16
University Wellington Law Review
, 361 and Taylor note 75 below on the failed
efforts in Victoria, New South Wales and South Australia.
“Memorandum
(Alexander Johnston, W.S. Reid, 8 June 1883) attached to the Criminal Code Bill,
1883 reproduced in the
1908-31 Reprint of the New Zealand Statutes
Ibid., 225.
Finn, note 54, 226-7,
See G. Palmer,
Zealand’s Constitution in Crisis
(Dunedin, 1992);
1916 Sedition
Trials: The Maoriland Worker
(Wellington, 1917).
Louis Hartz,
Founding of New Societies
(New York: Harcourt Brace, 1964).
This extends to the
symbolic formal styling of the respective federations as “Dominion”
and the English Revolution
inflected “Commonwealth.” In addition to
criminal law, the Dominion of Canada assumed broad jurisdiction over
Order and Good Government” and residual powers whereas the
Commonwealth of Australia was limited to specified enumerated powers.
divergences included the styling of the lower federal house (Canada retained the
term Commons), an elected upper house, autonomy
of Lieutenant Governors from the
Governor-General, and domestic procedures for constitutional amendment (unlike
Canada, where the
UK Parliament retained final authority until 1982). The
Australian High Court avoided the Canadian plight of easy appeals to the
(which transformed the federal balance of powers) with a stringent leave
requirement from the Australian High Court, and as
the first chief justice,
Griffith endeavoured to limit constitutional appeals out of the country.
George Brandis,
“Griffith and Early Colonial Liberalism in Queensland” in M. White
and A. Rahemtula eds.,
Sir Samuel Griffith: The Law and the
Constitution
(Sydney: Lawbook, 2002), 112 at 115. See more generally, N. Aroney,
“Griffith’s Vision of Australian Federalism”
in White and
Rahemtula, 180; P. Botsman, “Commentary on the Draft
Constitution
Andrew Inglis Clark” in White and Rahemtula, 126; Roger B. Joyce,
Samuel Walker Griffith
(Brisbane: University of Queensland Press, 1984),
185-289; Kay Saunders “Sir Samuel Griffith and the Writing of the
Constitution
” in J.M. Macrossan, Saunders, S. Berns et.al.,
the Law and the
Constitution
(Brisbane: Royal Historical Society of
Queensland, 1998), 21.
Although obliged to
retreat from an active role, Griffith maintained an active interest in
federation and constitutional matters
during the time of the drafting of the
Queensland Code –see eg., S. Griffith,
Notes on Australian Federation:
Its Nature and Probable Effects
Notes on the Draft Federal
Constitution
Framed by the Adelaide Convention of 1897
(1897). For the
Canadian dismissal of “foreign” examples see notes 40 and 46
See S.W. Griffith,
“A Digest of the statutory criminal law in force in Queensland on the
first day of January, 1896 (Brisbane:
Government Printer, 1896) (hereafter
Digest); S.W. Griffith, A Draft Code of Criminal Law, proposed for the
Government of Queensland
(Brisbane: Government Printer,
1897) CA 89-1897
(hereafter Draft); “Report of the Royal Commission on a Code of Criminal
Law Volume 49 Legislative Council Journals,
103-337 CA 38-1899 (Brisbane:
Government Printer, 1899) (hereafter Report).
Introductory letter, 1
June 1896 p.viii (Digest).
O’Regan, 1991. See
Introductory letter, 29 October 1897, p. iv (Draft), which quotes extensively
from Lord Chief Justice
Cockburn’s 12 June 1879 condemnation of the
bill’s failure to fully codify defences.
See esp. Robin S.
O’Regan, “Griffith and the Queensland Criminal Code” in M.
White and A. Rahemtula eds., note
61, 77 (hereafter O’Regan, 2002), at 78;
Alberto Cadoppi, (K.A. Cullinane trans.), “The Zanardelli Code and the
Codification
in the Countries of the Common Law
University Law Review
(hereafter Cadoppi) at 132-4; See also more
generally, O’Regan, 1991 and “The Migration of the Griffith
1 above, 103; H.T. Gibbs, the Queensland Criminal Code: From
Italy to Zanzibar” Address at the Opening of the Supreme Court
Congress of the International Academy of Comparative Law, 19
Introductory letter 29
October 1897, p.vii (Draft).
Cadoppi, 134. See also
O’Regan, 2002,
“...no part of the
Draft Code has occasioned me more anxiety, but I may add that I regard no part
of the work with more satisfaction.”
Introductory letter, 29 October 1897,
p.x, (Draft).
Cadoppi, 137-40, 154.
Cadoppi notes that Griffith was likely well aware of Macaulay and Wright, but
speculates at 138, “ Probably
he judged those which had been elaborated as
too dated to represent useful instruments of acknowledgement ...and perhaps he
wanted to rise to the level of fame of those codifiers of the past, so
famous in the world of the common law, without taking advantage
cosmopolitan characterization appears to flatter Griffith’s achievement
but it contributes to a parochial
view of the Queensland Code divorced from
careful consideration of colonial and English codification efforts. Gibbs (note
was closer to the mark in recognizing the influence of the Italian Code
but warning that the Queensland Code’s cosmopolitan
qualities can be
exaggerated.
See Lobban, note 4,
Finn, note 54 above,
See Finn, Ibid.,
O’Regan, 1991, 147; Greg Taylor, “The Victorian Criminal
[2004] UQLawJl 7
The University of Queensland Law Journal
As O’Regan, 2002
points out. the Queensland Code, by way of MacGregor and Ehrhardt, influenced
codes throughout Africa as
well as Cyprus and Palestine. See also O’Regan,
“The Migration of the Griffith Code” note 1, 103-121.
Cadoppi, 142 alludes to
this in his overview of Griffith’s offences against the state and noting
that Zanardelli’s
Italian Code had “Magna Carta” like
constitutional significance, only to be dismantled by Mussolini in 1930.
See (all references to the
Draft Code) Part 2 “Offences Against the Public Order” c.6 s.39-42,
c.7 s.45-54 sedition,
c.9 s.62-68 unlawful assemblies, breaches of the peace,
balanced by the new offence set out in c.10 s.78 interference with political
liberty. Part 3 “Offences against the Administration of Law, Justice and
Public Authority” include c. 16 s. 127&128
manipulation of witness and
c. 20 offences against public authority including s.205 refusal of public
official to perform a duty
and s.211 disobedience of a lawful order. As well,
Part 5 “Offences Against the Person” includes c.33 Offences against
Liberty including s.361 deprivation of liberty and s.365 threats.
See s. 212-14 offences
relating to religious worship, Griffith explaining that he excluded such common
law offences “as are
manifestly obsolete or inapplicable to
Australia.” See Reid Mortensen, “Blasphemy in a Secular State: A
Punishable Sin”
[1994] UNSWLawJl 15
University of New South Wales Law
Griffith sets out a
hierarchy of “absolute protection” for parliament, public inquiries
and judges, “protection”
for reports of matters of public interest,
fair comment and truth and ‘qualified protection” for excuses, good
relevancy, public benefit and questions of fact. Griffith cut through the
common law accretions and elaborated the law well beyond
Stephen drawing from
his work on the comprehensive 1889 Defamation Code (which included tort
provisions). See Sandra Berns, “Codifying
Passion: the Griffith Defamation
Code” in Macrossan et.al., note 60 at 35. Many of these matters were
raised in King’s
criticism of the Stephen-based Canadian provisions -see
note 49 above.
Griffith, Introductory
Letter 29 October, 1897 p.x, Draft. See Part 2, c.8 s.55-61 offences against
executive and legislative powers.
These include s.55 (interference with governor
or ministers -Italian Code), s.56 (disturbing the legislature-New York Code),
(refusing to appear or give evidence before legislature/legislative
committee-New York Code), s.60 (bribery of legislators-New York
Code). See also
Part 3, c.13 s.87-97 corruption and abuse of office, c.14 s.98-117 corrupt and
improper practices at elections, c.
15 s118 trafficking offices in the public
sector and Part 5 defamation provisions, s.371-95.
One of the best-known
privilege powers was the protection of members’ freedom of speech which
precluded actions in the courts
for comments in the legislature, and the other
side to this power, reflecting Parliament’s ancient and residual function
a court, was that Parliament could also discipline members, including
expulsion and imprisonment for parliamentary offences such
as contempt. See eg.,
F.M. Greenwood and B. Wright, “Parliamentary Privilege and the Repression
of Dissent in the Canadas”
in Greenwood and Wright eds., note 25, 409. The
uncertain boundaries between the legislative and judicial spheres in this area
still a contested matter as illustrated by the Queensland’s
government’s 2006 bill to repeal section 57 of the Code,
to eliminate the
offence of lying to the legislature.
For examination of the
tensions between the rule of law and sovereignty highlighted by insurgency
within the modernizing colonial
state see Hussain, note 24.
colonialist” historians who have examined contradictions between liberal
rule of law and aboriginal subjugation
in the Queensland criminal courts
suggests similar themes -see eg., Sean Gouglas and John C. Weaver, “A
Postcolonial Understanding
of Law and Society: Exploring Criminal Trials in
Colonial Queensland”
Australian Journal of Legal History
J.F. Stephen,
of Criminal Law of England, Vol.2
(London, Macmillan, 1881), 299.
The historical work on
‘state formation’ reassesses 19
century institutional
developments such as such as professional police, the penitentiary, public
education and health from the point
of view of moral regulation, expert
knowledges and identity formation, that break down traditional affiliations and
promote more
compliant modern citizenship--see eg., P. Corrigan and D. Sayer,
The Great Arch: English State Formation as Cultural Revolution
Blackwell, 1985). Although this work is postmodernist-influenced there is debate
amongst post-modernists about the centrality
of law in questions about modern
forms of power, sparked by Michel Foucault suggestion that scholars must
“eschew Leviathan”
in the study of modern power (referring to Thomas
Hobbes’s claim about the omnipotent potential of the state to form the
of its citizens to achieve a lasting ordered peace). From this perspective
Mitchell Dean criticizes the state formation historians
as overly pre-occupied
with the state and ‘juridically discursive’ conceptions of power
that privilege law and ultimate
expression in state repression -see
and Effective Histories: Foucault’s Methods and Historical Sociology
(London: Routledge, 1994). For a critique see B. Wright, “Quiescent
Leviathan? Citizenship and National Security in Late Modernity”
Journal of Law and Society
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (333 KB)
PDF format (1.1 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter