URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WALawTRw/2024/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Duvenhage, Chinelle; Squelch, Joan --- "Teaching Law in a Time of Crises: Learning Opportunities Arising from Crises" [2024] WALawTRw 6; (2024) 2 The Western Australian Law Teachers' Review 57
TEACHING LAW IN A TIME OF
CRISES: LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES ARISING FROM CRISES
CHINELLE DUVENHAGE AND JOAN SQUELCH *
I INTRODUCTION
In 2022, a photograph of a Ukrainian professor delivering teaching online
from the Ukrainian-Russian warzone in full military gear
captured media
attention and epitomised teaching in a crisis
This is an extreme
example of teaching in times of crises. Crises come in many forms and the word
can be used in different ways depending
on the situation and discipline.
Moreover, as noted by Mitroff and Anagnos ‘crises have become an
inevitable, natural feature
of our everyday
Teaching in a ‘time of crisis’ in Australia, and more specifically
Western Australia, hardly conjures up teaching in
a warzone. However,
‘everywhere [we] are impacted by crises large and
Teaching in a crisis
can therefore be framed within the meaning of an ‘unstable period’,
a ‘turning point’
or in a ‘time of great danger’. In
organisations, including educational institutions, a crisis may refer to
unpredictable
events (eg, COVID-19), major disruptions, and threatening
situations that pose a risk to institutional reputation and success, such
lack of resources, erosion of values, ineffectual leadership, dysfunctional
management, financial pressures and even
Following a brief
overview of the meaning and context of a ‘crisis’ in Part II, Part
III of this article identifies essential
behaviours, qualities and skills for
teaching in a time of crisis based on crisis management and leadership theory.
Part IV then
considers pedagogical opportunities for teaching law in times of
II WHAT IS A CRISIS?
Definitions of and synonyms for the term ‘crisis’ abound, and as
Johnson notes ‘dissecting and defining the word
“crisis” is
far from straightforward’ and the ‘semantic range of
“crisis” is nothing short of
Herculean’.
It is a term that
is also overused and misused. In particular, the use of the ‘word in the
media is loose and
imprecise’.
Moreover, Coombs
notes that while there are similarities between definitions, ‘there is no
one, universally accepted definition
Nonetheless, for
the sake of brevity, ‘crisis’ is variously and commonly defined as
‘an extremely difficult or
situation’;
great disagreement, confusion and suffering’ (think the COVID-19
‘the decisive
moment’; ‘a crucial turning point’ and an ‘unstable
Barton sums up
the term crisis as ‘an incident that is unexpected, negative, and
overwhelming’.
In terms of organisational crises, Milburn et al posit that ‘one of the
most significant influences on an organisation and its
members is an
organizational crisis’ given the vast impact of crises on organisations
and the ‘implications for its very
This applies
equally to educational institutions and more specially, for the purpose of this
article, the life of teaching and learning
at those tertiary institutions.
Ulmer, Sellnow and Seeger describe a crisis in an organisation as a
‘specific, unexpected,
and non-routine event or series of events that
create high levels of uncertainty and threaten or are perceived to threaten an
organisation’s
high-priority
Similarly, Coombs defines an organisational crisis as ‘the perception
of an unpredictable event that threatens important expectancies
of stakeholders
and can seriously impact an organisation’s performance and generate
negative outcomes’.
Jacques likewise distinguishes a crisis as ‘an event or development that
can focus unwanted visibility on the organisation
and is likely to endanger
health or the environment, or seriously impact reputation or [the] ability to do
Notwithstanding
the many definitions and descriptions of a ‘crisis’, the definitions
point to the unpredictability, destructive,
overwhelming and serious nature of
the event, and hence the need for decisive action. Farazmand for instance notes
that a ‘central
feature of all crises is a sense of
A crisis is
‘an urgent situation that requires immediate and decisive
A wide range of events and actions that might be described as a
‘crisis’ impact on educational institutions, including
disasters (buildings destroyed by floods or fire), financial
cyber-attacks,
violence on
industrial strikes,
large staff turnover and
Such crises in
educational institutions will inevitably impact on teachers and students, and
teaching and learning.
III TEACHING IN TIMES OF CRISES: ESSENTIAL TEACHER
Whether crises are external or internal, major or minor, teaching during a
crisis calls for teaching behaviours and skills that can
respond to whatever the
crisis presents. This was evident and has been well documented in the context of
the COVID-19 pandemic. The
question, then, is what kinds of teaching behaviours,
qualities, and skills are recognised as essential for times of crisis? This
addressed by drawing on crisis management and leadership theory.
Crisis management essentially refers to strategies, plans and procedures
necessary for preparing for, responding to and managing a
crisis, no matter the
size or nature of the crisis.
is a ‘process of many parts, such as preventative measures, crisis
management plans, and post-crisis
evaluations’.
literature and research on crisis management and leadership, one can discern
common approaches to crisis management as well
as, importantly, the leadership
attributes needed to deal with crises, including the ability to turn crises into
positive learning
opportunities. No matter what the crisis, there is consensus
in the literature that strong and effective leadership is essential.
As noted by
Smith and Riley ‘a crisis is a major test of leadership’ and
‘leaders need to take responsibility,
and do what needs to be done’,
even if this means deviating from the
leadership abilities or attributes that are commonly cited include being
decisive, flexible, adaptive, creative, courageous,
resilient and sensitive to
the situation and people. Three core abilities that stand out in the literature
are adaptability, creative
thinking and resilience. These may be classified as
soft qualities or skills, but they are imperative when dealing with and
to crises. These core abilities apply equally to teachers teaching in
times of crises.
Adaptability
Calarco and Gurvis describe
adaptability
simply as ‘responding
effectively to changing events’, which they regard as an imperative for
leadership.
Responding to a
crisis requires being able to ‘quickly adapt [plans] to meet the current
situation’.
And according
to Yukl and Lepsinger, adaptability ‘becomes even more important when the
external environment is turbulent
uncertain’.
Referencing
the school education context, Smith and Riley note that ‘each crisis is
unique and requires significant flexibility
in response by the school
Thus, in times of
crisis, adaptability enables one to act decisively and confidently to changing
circumstances, uncertainty, and
unprecedented demands. Calarco and Gurvis
further identify three elements of adaptability in leaders that resonate and
apply equally
to teachers/academics dealing with and operating in different
crisis situations, namely cognitive flexibility (ability to use different
frameworks and strategies), emotional flexibility (using different approaches to
deal with the emotions of one’s own
and others) and dispositional
flexibility (remaining optimistic at the same time being
realistic).
In times of external
and internal crises impacting on teaching and learning, teachers have had to
draw on cognitive and emotional
abilities in order to adapt positively,
resourcefully and efficiently to unexpected or rapid change, unprecedented
administrative
demands, increased workloads, the use of new technologies (often
without the requisite training), and staff shortages.
Creative Thinking
Creative thinking
is key to solving problems and arriving at
innovative solutions in times of crisis. Farazmand states that ‘thinking
and strategically’ and ‘taking bold decisions and acting
courageously’
essential for successfully managing crises. Similarly, Mitroff and Anagnos view
crisis management as an ‘exercise in creative
or thinking
‘far outside of the
They further argue
that managing major crises requires being able ‘to do the
unthinkable’ in times of ‘unthinkable
Mitroff and
Anagnos emphasise that critical thinking allows one to ‘respond to crises
after they have occurred’ but more
importantly to ‘anticipate
problems before they are upon
Responding to crises
creatively and productively takes courage, foresight, integrity, tenacity and
resilience. This is evident when
one considers teaching from a war zone, or the
unprecedented demands made on teachers during the COVID-19 pandemic. But these
characteristics are just as applicable to dealing with short-term or
less major crises.
The Oxford dictionary defines ‘
‘springing back’ or ‘readily recovering from
Thus resilience
can be described as the ability ‘to bounce back’ or readily recover
from a crisis. Resilience is necessary
to ‘return things to
“normal” as quickly as
This requires a
state of adaptability, perseverance and self-reliance. As stated by Smith and
Riley, crisis leadership requires the
‘ability to cope’ and the
‘tenacity to persevere when all seems
The importance of
resilience for teachers is clear from research on teacher well-being and
resilience and building resilience in
teacher education programs. Although there
is no one definition or construct of resilience in terms of teachers, education
builds on Ungar’s definition of resilience, being ‘a
process whereby individuals harness personal and contextual resources
to successfully navigate challenging
circumstances.’
further notes that ‘resilience is the process of harnessing resources in
order to adapt
successfully’.
is viewed as essential for teacher wellbeing, effectiveness and
Teaching in times of
crises requires resilience, perseverance and flexibility in order to cope
cognitively and emotionally with unexpected,
unpredictable situations,
potentially overwhelming expectations, and increasingly limited time and
A cursory foray into crisis management and leadership theory demonstrates
that adaptability, creativity and resilience are core qualities
that facilitate
and enhance quick and efficient decision-making, creative problem-solving and
decisive action in times of crisis
and when responding to unpredictable,
disruptive situations. These core attributes of adaptability, creative thinking
and resilience
apply equally to teachers teaching in a time of crisis. In times
of crisis, teachers also have to manage and adapt to their own work
teaching responsibilities and often unprecedented demands on their work and
time. How to become more adaptable, resilient,
and creative in the workplace is
another separate discussion. For the purpose of this article, the discussion
that follows considers
how teachers can turn a crisis into a learning
opportunity, which requires creativity and adaptability.
IV FROM CRISIS TO PEDAGOGICAL OPPORTUNITIES
Farazmand posits that while crises are destructive ‘they may also
develop opportunities for a new order, changes that may produce
Friedman argues that a crisis ‘is not necessarily a bad thing. It may be a
radical change for good as well as
In this regard,
Lerbinger notes that ‘managers who recognise opportunities [in a crisis]
are more likely to change their mindsets
to accommodate a
situation’.
Creativity and
adaptability enable a teacher to ‘create opportunities out of
One lesson to be
learned from the COVID-19 pandemic and other crises is that they present
opportunities for learning and, for the
purpose of this article, teaching
Crises — whether it
is the war in Ukraine or the conflict in Israel and Gaza, a global financial
crisis, a natural disaster,
a technological crisis, an institutional crisis or
social crises in aged care and housing — open up opportunities for
interesting
and informative discussion and debates in the classroom on crisis
management generally but also on specific discipline topics that
incorporate the
advancement of discipline knowledge and skills such as creative thinking. For
example, in the context of this article,
crises provide opportunities for
studying specific topics in law, of which a few examples are provided below.
Contract Law
In March 2020, COVID-19 brought with it a global crisis that had a
significant impact on building and construction contracts, as well
business contracts, across Australia and
internationally.
Domestically,
the construction industry was greatly impacted by the long lockdowns and
significant disruption to supply chains. The
crisis saw the collapse of small to
medium construction/building companies experiencing issues such as the costs of
materials, disrupted
supply, and labour shortages. Other businesses and
industries were likewise affected by prolonged closure of business or restricted
business activities, and shortages of
The crisis significantly affected the performance of contracts, with
contracts being terminated, suspended or altered, giving rise
to legal issues
concerning breaches of contract, liability and compensation or refunds. The
crisis situation also gave rise to the
question of whether a contract is
‘crisis ready’.
COVID-19 crisis provided a golden opportunity to study contracts and principles
of contract law from a ‘crisis ready’
perspective, including the
effect of events such acts of God, war, strikes, flooding, epidemics, pandemics
and government interference
on contracts, as well as issues relating to the
termination of contracts, remedies and, importantly, the role and scope of force
majeure clauses,
and the common
law doctrine of frustration.
Students can also develop practical skills by learning to draft a ‘crisis
ready’ building and construction contract.
Constitutional Law
At various times, federal and state laws have been passed to respond to a
crisis, which has in some instances given rise to legal
challenges to their
constitutional validity. For example
Pape v Commissioner of Taxation
[2009] HCA 23
(2009) 238 CLR 1
dealt with the validity of the
Tax Bonus for Working
Australians Act (No 2) 2009
(Cth) that was passed in response to the impact
of the global financial crisis,
Thomas v Mowbray
(2007) 223 CLR 307
challenging provisions of the
Criminal Code
(Cth) on terrorism in the
wake of 9/11 and the ‘war on terror’, and
Palmer v Western
[2021] HCA 5
(2021) 272 CLR 505
challenging the constitutional validity of the
Quarantine (Closing the Border) Directions (WA) issued under the
Management Act 2005
(WA) that restricted the movement of persons into and
out of WA during COVID-19 lockdowns. Judicial decisions can also generate and/or
contribute to a crisis situation as is evident from the recent High Court case
NZYQ v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2023] HCA 37
in which ‘indefinite detention’ was ruled
unconstitutional resulting in the immediate release of a number of
non-citizens’, many of whom had committed very serious
crimes. Constitutional law is therefore another area of law that offers
opportunity to discuss crises within the context of constitutional law,
federal-state relations and the validity of laws.
Administrative Law
Crises whether arising out of war, natural disasters, economic events,
government action or institutional leadership, are often met
with public
response in the form of protest action. This is seen almost on a daily basis
worldwide. Most recently this has once again
drawn media attention in relation
to pro-Palestinian marches in
In administrative law
(and constitutional law), this invites the opportunity to teach about the law
and crises in terms of executive
power, the scope and use of emergency legal
powers, state abuse of emergency powers, human rights issues and international
perspectives
on the use of emergency powers.
The controversial use of emergency powers was also evident at the height of
the COVID-19 pandemic lockdowns. During the pandemic,
expansive emergency powers
were exercised by the National Cabinet and state and territory governments to
significantly restrict the
movement of people and enforce mandatory vaccination.
This gave rise to several legal challenges. To this end, legislation dealing
with emergency powers
Palmer v Western Australia
[2021] HCA 5
(2021) 272 CLR 505 (WA
Newman v Minister for Health and Aged Care
[2021] FCA 517
(prohibition on people returning to Australia from India),
Kassam v Hazzard
[2021] NSWSC 1320
(mandatory vaccination) and the recent Queensland
Johnston v Carroll (Commissioner of the Queensland Police
[2024] QSC 2
(mandatory vaccination) provide a rich source
of legal materials for students in administrative law to critically examine and
the scope and use of emergency powers in times of crises.
Corporations Law
A key aspect of corporate governance is risk and crisis management. As
indicated above, businesses face a myriad of potential crises,
regulatory and legal crises,
some of which have a momentous human, reputational, financial and legal
Examples include the
2023 Optus outage,
class actions,
the PwC tax
cyber-attack
and the Royal
Commission into the banking and finance
In corporations law,
these events provide useful case studies for examining the corporate legal and
regulatory environment, especially
in terms of compliance, legal duties,
liability (including corporate criminal liability) and regulatory
Corporate insolvency law
‘in a time of crisis’ has also received business and media attention
with a view to reforming
This provides a further
area of law to be included when teaching about the development and reform of law
in times of crises.
Employment Law
Employment law is an ideal area of law to study the impact of crises on the
workplace such as physical disasters, technological crises,
financial crises,
industrial action, workplace bullying and harassment, and so on.
Take workplace bullying as an example. Bullying in the workplace is a serious
issue and is itself considered a crisis in various sectors
(eg, nursing).
Workplace bullying is also ‘thriving in the remote-work
which was evident
during the COVID-19 pandemic. The crisis of workplace bullying provides an
opportunity for law students to learn
laws. This is useful for students as future employees and legal
practitioners.
Another example of a workplace crisis has arisen in the aged care sector,
which has had a significant impact on aged-care workers
as well as the elderly
people in care. Aged care facilities have also experienced reputational damage
as a result of the crisis.
crisis in aged care can be examined from different aspects of law including
employment law and health law. It is also an important
area for legal research
and law reform.
Specific crises impacting on the workplace can be used to develop case
studies and scenarios for students to work on and provide advice,
which not only
includes legal advice but advice on managing a crisis.
Public International Law
Public international law (‘law of nations’) covers a wide area of
international law. Ongoing armed conflicts around the
world are a core feature
of teaching public international law which covers a range of topics relating to
the use of force, statehood,
war crimes, foreign fighters, international
humanitarian law, the protection of cultural property during armed conflict, and
role of institutions such as the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court. The current Ukrainian-Russian
Israeli-Hamas
conflict provide
opportunities for teaching a range of international legal
V CONCLUSION
The theme ‘teaching in times of crises’ invited the opportunity
to reflect on what constitutes a ‘crisis’
and what this means for
teaching and learning. The word ‘crisis’ immediately evokes a whole
range of different crises
from the extreme to the more mundane. As highlighted
in this article, there is no generally accepted definition of a
or the categorisation of ‘crises’. Crises come
in many forms. There is, however, wide agreement on the significant impact
crises may have on the ‘life of organisations’, including
educational institutions. Such crises require educational institutions
respond quickly and effectively to mitigate negative consequences, but also
provide opportunities to learn. In reflecting on teaching
law in times of
crises, this article has highlighted some essential attributes teachers need to
teach in times of crises and has
demonstrated how different kinds of crises can
be used as a springboard to incorporate learning opportunities in selected law
* Chinelle Duvenhage is a Law Lecturer at the School of Law and Business, The
University of Notre Dame Australia. Dr Joan Squelch
was formerly a Professor of
Law at the School of Law and Business, The University of Notre Dame Australia.
Teaching in a Time of Crises’ was
the theme for the 2023 Western Australian Teachers of Law Forum held at Edith
Cowan University
on 31 October 2023.
Evan Simko-Bednarski, ‘This Ukrainian Professor is
Teaching His Class Remotely — From the Front Lines of War’,
(online, 6 May 2022)
<https://nypost.com/2022/05/06/ukrainian-professor-still-lectures-from-the-front-lines-of-war/>.
Ian Mitroff and Gus Anagnos,
Managing Crises Before They Happen: What Every Executive and Manager Needs to
Know About Crisis Management
(AMACOM, 2000) 3. See also, Otto Lerbinger,
The Crisis Manager: Facing Disasters, Conflicts and Failures
& Francis, 2011) 6–8.
Mitroff and Anagnos (n 2)
See, eg, Edward S Devlin,
Crisis Management Planning and Execution
(Auerbach Publishers, 2006) 10.
Other examples include product failure and product tampering.
Tim Johnson,
Leadership: How to Lead in Times of Crisis, Threat and Uncertainty
(Bloomsbury Publishing, 2017) 5. See also, Lerbinger (n 2)
Johnson (n 5) 5.
W Timothy Coombs,
‘Parameters for Crisis Communication’ in W Timothy Coombs and Sherry
J Holladay (eds)
Handbook of Crisis
Communication
(Wiley, 2010)
Cambridge Dictionary
(online at 22 October 2023) ‘crisis’.
Merriam-Webster Dictionary
(online at 22 October 2023) ‘crisis’. See also, Ali Farazmand,
Crisis and Emergency Management: Theory and Practice
ed, 2014) 3–5; Linda Moerschell and Susan Novak,
‘Managing Crisis in a University Setting: The Challenge of
(2020) 28(1)
Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management
Laurence Barton,
in Organizations II
(South-Western College Publishing, 2
2001), cited in Coombs (n 7) 18.
Thomas W Milburn, Randall S
Schuler and Kenneth H Watman, ‘Organisational Crisis.
and Conceptualisation’ (1983) 36(12)
Human Relations
Robert R Ulmer, Timothy L
Sellnow and Matthew W Seeger,
Effective Crisis Communication: Moving From
Crisis to Opportunity
ed, 2007), cited in Johnson (n
Coombs (n 7) 19.
Tony Jacques,
Issues and Crisis Management:
Exploring Issues, Crises, Risks and Reputation
(OUP, 2014) 6.
Larry Smith and Dan Riley,
‘School Leadership in Times of Crisis’ (2012) 32(1)
& Management
Universities Australia,
‘COVID-19 to Cost Universities $16 Billion by 2023’ (Web Page, 3
<https://universitiesaustralia.edu.au/media-item/covid-19-to-cost-universities-16-billion-by-2023/>.
Alexandria Utting,
‘More than 11,000 Employees, Students and Former Staff Affected by Cyber
Attack, QUT says’,
(online, 3 February 2023)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-02-03/qut-cyber-attack-university-staff-students-affected/101929302>.
Charolette Gore, ‘Two
Female Students in Hospital after Stabbing at Australian National University in
(online, 18 September 2023)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-09-18/act-two-taken-to-hospital-after-alleged-anu-stabbing/102870900>.
See, eg, Fair Work
Ombudsman, ‘University of Melbourne Faces Court for Alleged Underpayments,
Serious Contraventions’
(Web Page, 10 February 2023)
<https://www.fairwork.gov.au/newsroom/media-releases/2023-media-releases/february-2023/20230210-university-of-melbourne-second-litigation-media-release>.
See, eg, Edward S Devlin,
Crisis Management Planning and Execution
(Auerbach Publishers, 2006);
Jacques (n 15) 2, 9 and 12; Christer Pursiainen,
The Crisis Management Cycle:
Theory and Practice
(Taylor & Francis Group, 2017) 2–3.
Coombs (n 7) 20.
Smith and Riley (n 17)
Alan Calaroc and Joan
Adaptability: Responding Effectively to Change
(Centre for
Creative Leadership, 2006) 8.
Smith and Riley (n 17)
Gary Yukl and Richard
Lepsinger, ‘Leading Change: Adapting and Innovating in an Uncertain
World’ in Stephen Rush and
Kerry Bunker (eds),
On Leading in Times of
(Centre for Creative Leadership, 2012) 1.
Smith and Riley (n 17)
Calaroc and Gurvis (n 25)
Farazmand (n 10) 5.
Mitroff and Anagnos (n 2)
Australian Concise Oxford
ed, 2017) ‘resilient’ (def 1 and
Smith and Riley (n 17)
Michael Ungar, ‘Social
Ecologies and Their Contribution to Resilience’ in Michael Ungar (ed),
The Social Ecology of Resilience: A Handbook of Theory and Practice
(Springer, 2012) 13, cited in Ina Hascher, Susan Beltman and Caroline Mansfield,
‘Teacher Wellbeing and Resilience: Towards
and Integrative Model’
(2012) 63(4)
Educational Research
Ungar (n 38), cited in
Hascher, Beltman and Mansfield (n 38) 419. See also, Kerstin Helker et al,
‘An Exploratory Interview
Study of University Teacher Resilience’ in
Marold Wosnitza et al (eds),
Resilience in Education: Concepts, Contexts and
Connections
(Springer, 2018).
See, eg, Hascher, Beltman
and Mansfield (n 38); Caroline Mansfield et al, ‘Building Resilience in
Teacher Education: An Evidenced
Informed Framework’ (2016) 54
and Teacher Education
77; Qing Gu and Christopher Day, ‘Teachers
Resilience: A Necessary Condition for Effectiveness’ (2007) 23(8)
Teaching and Teacher Education
1302; Marold Wosnitza et al (n 39)
Farazmand (n 10) 5.
Mark L Friedman, 'Everyday
Crisis Management: How to Think Like an Emergency Physician' (First Decision
Press, 2002), cited in Coombs
Lerbinger (n 2) 14. See
also, Moerschell and Novak (n 10) 31.
Smith and Riley (n 17)
As the authors work within a
School of Law and Business, it is acknowledged that the business discipline
offers the greatest possible
opportunities for studying crisis management and
teaching in crisis situations. There are thus opportunities for collaborative
between law and business in this area.
See, eg, Phil Evans,
Chinelle van der Westhuizen and Jacques Duvenhage, ‘Avoiding Construction
Contract Risk in a COVID-19
Environment’
Building and
Construction Law Journal
, 88–9; Chinelle van der Westhuizen and
Phil Evans, ‘ACL Unfair Contract Terms in Construction Contracts’
The University of Notre Dame Australia Law Review
Michele O’Neil,
‘The Australian Industrial System in the Era of COVID-19’
Journal of Industrial Relations
Holding Redlich, ‘Are
Your Contracts Crisis Ready’? (Website, 18 March 2020)
<https://www.holdingredlich.com/are-your-contracts-crisis-ready>.
The force majeure clauses
are subject to interpretation of the construction contract, see, eg,
Industrial Australia Pty Ltd v Kwinana WTC Project Co Pty Ltd
[2022] WASC
An example can be drawn from
the article on crisis management and tourism: Gui Santana, ‘Crisis
Management and Tourism: Beyond
Rhetoric’ (2004) 15(4)
Journal of Travel
and Tourism
299. Crises in the tourism and travel industry from which
Australia has not been immune in recent times can be examined from a legal
perspective that covers contract law, consumer law and insurance law, as well as
crisis management generally.
‘Sydney Police Plan to
Use ‘Extraordinary’ Powers to Search pro-Palestinian Protesters and
Demand ID’,
The Guardian
(online, 13 October 2023)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2023/oct/13/sydney-police-search-powers-pro-palestine-protest-id-hyde-park-israel-hamas-war>.
Biosecurity Act
Emergency Management Act 2005
Public Health and
Wellbeing Act 2008
Public and Environmental Act 2011
See, eg, Australian
Institute of Company Directors, ‘Crisis Management’ (Web Page)
<https://www.aicd.com.au/company-policies/crisis-management.html>.
See, eg, ACCC, ‘Court
Orders Volkswagen to Pay Record $125 million in Penalties’ (Web Page)
<https://www.accc.gov.au/media-release/court-orders-volkswagen-to-pay-record-125-million-in-penalties>.
Mikaela Ortolan, ‘More
than 10 Million Customers were Affected by the Optus Outage. Here’s How it
Played Out’,
(online, 10 November 2023)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-11-09/how-the-optus-outage-played-out/103079768>.
Ayesha de Kretser,
‘Qantas Sued over “Misleading” Flight Credits, Refunds’,
Australian Financial Review
(online, 21 August 2023)
<https://www.afr.com/companies/transport/qantas-sued-over-misleading-flight-credits-refunds-20230821-p5dy5o>.
Edmund Tadros, ‘Hunt
for the “Dirty Six”: PWC Accused of Hiding Tax Leaks Report’,
Australian Financial Review
(online, 9 February 2024)
<https://www.afr.com/companies/professional-services/hunt-for-the-dirty-six-pwc-accused-of-hiding-tax-leaks-report-20240209-p5f3sj>.
See, eg, Australian
Government Defence, ‘Cyber Sanction in Response to Medibank Private Cyber
Attack’ (Web Page)
<https://www.minister.defence.gov.au/media-releases/2024-01-23/cyber-sanction-response-medibank-private-cyber-attack>.
See, eg, Royal Commissions,
‘Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services
Industry’ (Web Page)
<https://www.royalcommission.gov.au/banking>.
An example of a crisis
management case study in large corporations, which would extend to dealing with
potential legal issues and
avoiding legal action, is found in: Achyut Telang,
‘Keep Calm and Carry On: A Crisis Communication Study of Cadbury and
(2016) 11(1)
Managing and Marketing. Challenges for the
Knowledge Society
John Purcell,
‘Corporate Insolvency Law in Crisis in a time of Crisis’,
Accountsdaily
(online, 19 August 2020)
<https://www.accountantsdaily.com.au/regulation/14732-corporate-insolvency-law-in-crisis-in-a-time-of-crisis>.
Johanna York,
‘Workplace Bullying is Thriving in the Remote-work Era, as Technology
Opens New Avenues for Unkind Behaviour’,
How Workplace Bullying Went
(online, 22 August 2022)
<https://www.bbc.com/worklife/article/20220819-how-workplace-bullying-went-remote>.
See, eg, Committee for
Economic Development in Australia (CEDA),
Duty of Care: Aged Care Sector in
(CEDA 2022)
<https://www.ceda.com.au/getmedia/a7bc2f9e-4999-4c6b-9795-0eff89f0b94b/Duty-of-Care-Aged-Care-Sector-in-Crisis.pdf
>; ‘Absolutely a Crisis: Almost a Quarter of Australia’ Aged Care
Shifts Unfilled Each Week’,
The Guardian
(online, 3 February 2022)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2022/feb/03/absolutely-a-crisis-almost-a-quarter-of-australias-aged-care-shifts-unfilled-each-week>;
Ellen Coulter and Laura Kewley, ‘Aged Care Workers are Facing a
“Crisis Level of Exhaustion” as the COVID-19 Pandemic
Continues’,
(online, 3 February 2022)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2022-02-03/aged-care-workers-crisis-level-exhaustion-covid19-pandemic/100801108>.
International Criminal
Court, ‘Ukraine ACC-oi/22’
<https://www.icc-cpi.int/situations/ukraine>.
See, eg, Catherine Gegout,
‘Where the ICC Stands if War Crimes are Committed on Either Side of the
Israel-Hamas War’
The Conversation
(online, 24 October 2023)
<https://theconversation.com/where-the-icc-stands-if-war-crimes-are-committed-on-either-side-of-the-israel-hamas-war-216093>.
For example, Lara Pratt,
School of Law and Business, The University of Notre Dame Australia, teaches an
elective course on ‘Law
and War’ that looks specifically at the
‘rules of war’.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (87 KB)
PDF format (358 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter