URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlCrimJustSocDem/2025/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:02:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Iweze, Daniel Olisa; Okadigwe, Mary Nkechi --- "From Hapless Victims to Collaborators: Exploring the Janus Voices of Women in the Aguleri-Umueri Conflict in Igboland, Southeast Nigeria" [2025] IntJlCrimJustSocDem 19; (2025) 14(2) International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy 120
Attempts in Strengthening Indigenous Justice Systems in Colombia Through
Transitional Justice
Angela Marcela Olarte Delgado
University Externado de Colombia, Colombia
Transitional justice; Indigenous justice; Indigenous
ontologies; interculturality.
Introduction
peoples in Colombia have suffered disproportionate and differentiated impacts
due to the armed conflict (1958–2016).
According to the Colombian Truth
Commission´s final report (Comisión de la Verdad en Colombia, 2022),
examining historical
violence is necessary due to colonial heritage, which
explains the structural racism perpetuated in political, educational, legal,
economic institutions. Through politics of exclusion and violence, these
institutions have legitimized acculturation policies,
land dispossession,
territorial occupation, natural resource exploitation, war economies, and
discrimination. These violations have
denied the humanity of ethnic population
Comisión de la Verdad en Colombia, 2022.
The Special Jurisdiction for Peace (JEP) is a product of a peace agreement
signed in 2016 between the Colombian government and the
largest guerrilla
organization—FARC. The JEP is the justice component of the transitional
justice system that investigates,
clarifies, and sanctions severe human rights
violations and grave breaches of international humanitarian law committed during
armed conflict. Based on a restorative justice framework, the JEP mandated
the prevention of the impunity endured by Indigenous communities
by satisfying
their rights to truth, justice, reparation, and guarantees of non-repetition. In
this sense, a need emerges to decolonize
transitional justice by incorporating
Indigenous epistemologies that acknowledge Indigenous ontologies. In this
manner, the real
extent of the damage is understood; hence, the sanctions and
reparations imposed will be consistent with the needs of the justice
Indigenous peoples. Consequently, it is expected that the JEP will contribute to
the strengthening of Indigenous justice
systems by tackling epistemic violence
rooted in national and international laws and generating new intercultural
epistemologies
in transitional justice.
Within this context, this study examines the extent to which transitional
justice strengthens Indigenous justice systems in Colombia.
The subsequent text
provides the theoretical framework on which analysis is based, followed by brief
context on the impacts of the
armed conflict on Indigenous people in Colombia.
Intercultural epistemologies within the normative framework of the JEP are then
identified. Afterward, the study examines the most relevant orders within
macro-case 05 (Territorial Case of Northern Cauca and Southern
Valle del Cauca)
and analyzes the consideration of these epistemologies in legal orders and
tensions that have emerged. Based on
an interpretive paradigm, this study
invites a critical analysis of the regulation and jurisprudence of the JEP by
investigating
conceptual and theoretical debates about epistemic violence and
interculturality in transitional justice in Colombia.
This document does not pretend to represent the voice of Indigenous peoples
or the institution of the JEP. Instead, it is an academic
and reflective
exercise on a process in which multiple interactions have occurred between
Indigenous people and the transitional
justice system in Colombia. Therefore,
learnings and tensions that defy the epistemologies of transitional justice were
and analyzed to be considered in other macro-cases or in similar
transitional processes.
Theoretical Framework
The discussion in this article falls under the theory of epistemic violence.
This pertains to a colonial process in which the production
of knowledge is
appropriated and dominated by a knowledge system that underlies power
relationships and reproduces discourse in which
other forms of knowledge are
denied or oppressed (De Sousa Santos, 2010; Spivak, 2003).
knowledge is “a whole set of knowledge that have been disqualified as
inadequate to their task or insufficiently elaborated:
naive knowledge, located
low down on the hierarchy, beneath the required level of cognition or
scientificity” (Foucault, 1980
as cited in Spivak, 1988, p. 25). De Sousa
Santos (2020, p. 1) claims that the law has reproduced oppressive structures as
of epistemic violence by concealing political and cultural privileges. As
a cognitive structure, law is a universal norm that emanates
from the State
within abyssal thinking. Within this framework of thinking, legality is
determined according to official or international
law. Therefore, any kind of
reality that does not fit within this classification is eliminated or considered
non-existent (De Sousa
Santos, 2010, p. 29). Hence, law and knowledge are built
on dichotomies (e.g., legal and illegal, culture and nature, and science
beliefs), which are typic of the positivism that characterizes Eurocentric
monocultures (De Sousa Santos, 2007). Consequently,
De Sousa Santos (2010)
proposes an ecology of knowledges that recognizes the diversity of
epistemologies and the multiplicity of
Escobar and Frye (2020a) stated that “multiple knowledges, or
epistemes, refer to multiple worlds or ontologies” (p. 68).
perspective, ontology is the comprehension of multiple realities or worlds,
rather than multiple perspectives of a reality
(Blaser 2014, p. 52).
As such, a need emerges for an intercultural process with political
consequences that compel translations in which the other knowledge
meaning and is understood. Thus, the Colombian transitional justice system
represents an opportunity to overlook epistemic
violence and build a new
epistemology of justice, a new knowledge based on other ontologies that
recognizes the historical and cultural
grievances suffered by ethnic populations
in Colombia (De Sousa Santos, 2020).
Alternatively, by ensuring truth, justice, and reparation, transitional
justice could materialize legal pluralism and interculturality
and, thus, the
recognition of other systems of justice from a decolonial view (De Sousa Santos,
2020). Walsh (2010) defined interculturality
as a political, ethical, and
epistemic practice. As an “epistemic turn”, the path to
decolonization involves the following
points of departure: (a) knowledge has
value, color, and gender and is situated; (b) it is relevant to the
revitalization and enhancement
of ancestral knowledge and recognizes the context
in which it interacts and its temporality; and (c) it is a part of a process of
production of knowledge and systems of thinking (Walsh, 2004). Indeed, the
epistemic turn refers to the value of Indigenous cosmologies
regarding their
territories and the multiple relationships that coexist therein as an
“attempt to fully acknowledge indigenous
people’s ontological
self-determination” and the recognition of “Indigenous Law as
law” (Bacca Benavides,
2019, p. 145-146).
Nonetheless, interculturality in the transitional justice system raises
tensions that De Sousa Santos (2020) describes as follows.
The first pertains to
the recognition of ethnic justice and the western tradition of hegemonic
justice, upon which ordinary justice
has been built. This tradition led to the
lack of recognition of Indigenous justice systems as valid. The second tension
liberal multiculturalism, whereby other cultures are recognized while
conforming to the dominant culture, and interculturality, in
which diversity is
celebrated and enriched by other cultures. The third tension is the interaction
between ordinary justice and Indigenous
justice, which has been expressed
through denial, coexistence through distance, reconciliation, and conviviality
(De Sousa Santos,
2020, p. 6). With these clarifications, the next section aims
to examine the epistemic transformation in transitional justice by
representative decisions in macro-case 05 and identifying the tensions that have
emerged from the intercultural process
led by Indigenous peoples and the
Impacts of Armed Conflict on Indigenous People in Colombia
Armed conflict has led to the physical and cultural extermination of
Indigenous peoples. Indeed, the Constitutional Court of Colombia
has recognized
that approximately 71 out of 115 Indigenous
are at risk of
extermination. The underlying reasons are (a) confrontations between armed
groups in Indigenous territories, (b) conflict
dynamics that actively involve
Indigenous peoples, and (c) socioeconomic and territorial processes due to armed
conflict (Corte Constitucional
Colombiana, 2009).
Installing military bases in Indigenous territories without consultation and
using anti-personnel mines are examples of how Indigenous
communities were
instrumentalized. Furthermore, the selective homicide of traditional authorities
and prominent leaders, confinement,
stigmatization, sexual violence, forced
recruitment, mobility control, and the imposition of behavioral and cultural
codes demonstrate
the direct targeting of Indigenous peoples by armed groups
(Comisión de la Verdad en Colombia, 2022). Additionally, territories
communities endured the socioeconomic impacts of practices such as land
dispossession, illegal economy, and natural resource
exploitation by armed
groups in territorial control. These actions result in impoverishment, food
insecurity, famine, disease, forced
displacement, and ethnic weakening
(Comisión de la Verdad en Colombia, 2022).
In this context, violence produces individual and collective transformations
that serve as evidence of the differential vulnerabilities
of Indigenous peoples
and their territories, which threaten their preservation. For instance, armed
conflict infringed on their cultural
integrity by attacking their systems of
beliefs, which limited the practices of rituals and ceremonies and led to the
loss of their
language. In addition, armed conflict weakened Indigenous autonomy
by placing political and governance structures at risk. This affected
decision-taking mechanisms, threatened leaders and traditional authorities,
impacted the mechanisms for community protection and
territorial control,
destroyed nature, desecrated territories and sacred places, and displaced
spirits and ancestral guides (Comisión
de la Verdad en Colombia, 2022, p.
278). In other words, the collective and organizational processes of Indigenous
peoples are at
risk, which threatens their survival.
Nonetheless, the State has overlooked these violations and the impacts on
Indigenous rights. In this sense, opportunities for reparation
have emerged
because of the long history of struggles, led by Indigenous organizations, to
resist dominant institutional violence.
Moreover, the multiple dimensions of
harms suffered by ethnic groups were ignored, so advocacy for the recognition of
their rights
and defense of territories has strengthened. After a process of
consultation, Indigenous peoples succeeded in influencing Decree
4633/2011 in
2011, which ruled on the attention, assistance, reparation, and restitution for
Indigenous peoples as victims. For instance,
different conceptions of harm were
recognized. The Decree encompassed individual and collective harm; individual
harm with a collective
impact; and harm to cultural integrity, territory,
autonomy, and organizational integrity (Art. 5–7).
One of the most notable advances of the Decree was the recognition of the
territory as a victim of armed conflict. It was recognized
as an alive being
that supports harmony and balance across Indigenous communities (Art. 3). This
broad notion of territory exceeded
the traditional concept of territory as an
object with geographical limits. The Decree recognized territory as a being in
which material
and unmaterial, and human and nonhuman relationships interact.
This notion implies that humans are only one part of the unity. Thus,
understanding territory via Indigenous ontologies means comprehending that
violence against territory denotes the interruption of
life and the possibility
of the circulation of the Vital Web (Red
that interacts within it.
For instance, deforestation, river contamination, and landscape modification
diminished the capacity to
communicate with spiritual guides and interrupted the
life plans of Indigenous
communities
(Centro Nacional de
Memoria Histórica [CNMH] and Organización Nacional Indigena
de Colombia [ONIC] 2019). This aspect
demonstrates that armed conflict
“not only affected humans but also nonhuman entities that inhabit in the
territory and goes
beyond damage against the property or environmental
issues” (author’s translation; Ruiz-Serna, 2017, p. 89).
Understanding the impacts and harms experienced by Indigenous peoples in
armed conflict contexts plays a pivotal role in transitional
justice, as it
allows for a deeper insight into the historical, structural, and
intergenerational causes rooted in colonial power.
These causes are reflected in
institutional practices of discrimination against Indigenous peoples
(González, 2021). For instance,
in Latin America, Guatemala is one of the
countries that established transitional justice mechanisms following the signing
accords between the State’s army and guerrilla forces in 1996.
The armed conflict in Guatemala resulted in over 200,000 people
being killed or
disappeared, with 83% of the victims belonging to Mayan Indigenous communities.
The Historical Clarification Commission
(CEH) determined that the military
strategy was disproportionate, violating cultural values and collective cohesion
in Mayan communities—actions
that constituted acts of genocide
(Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, 2015). Beyond the CEH, a National
Reparation Program
was created in 2003 to redress violations against victims of
the armed conflict through economic compensation. However, this program
to provide effective individual and collective reparations for Indigenous
peoples due to bureaucratic delays and the elimination
of compensations for
specific violations. These included massacres, sexual violence, and crimes
against humanity—crimes for
which Mayan communities were
disproportionately victimized (Inter-American Commission on Human Rights,
Regarding justice, no special tribunal was established for the investigation,
prosecution, and punishment of the perpetrators of war
crimes and crimes against
humanity. On the contrary, “the application of amnesty laws has obstructed
the clarification of the
facts and the prosecution and punishment of the persons
responsible for serious human rights violations, leaving them in impunity”
(Inter-American Commission on Human Rights 2015, para. 433). Additionally,
although former dictator Efraín Ríos Montt
was convicted of
genocide, the Constitutional Court later overturned the decision. In terms of
justice, it is important to note that
for some Mayan communities retributive
justice is not about courts. Their normative system seeks to restore social
harmony, with
sanctions varying according to the nature of transgressions at the
personal, family, and community levels (Viaene, 2011). Within
Mayan justice,
when someone commits a transgression and does not acknowledge it, they will
, meaning that “sacred value will be
resolved by spiritual interventions that transcend human capacity” (Viaene
p. 198). In this sense, individuals who participated in or collaborated
with the army and caused harm to Mayan community members
are considered victims
. Thus, they face both retributive and restorative
sanctions, which also have social and communal effects (Viaene, 2011). This
example notes the difficulties of Mayan communities enduring a
transitional justice system rooted in colonial and patterns of discrimination.
In this case, according to international law, there is a clear manifestation of
impunity. However, this contrasts with the Mayan
perception of retributive
justice, in which
serves as a form of moral and
spiritual punishment (Viaene, 2011).
Therefore, violations and harms experienced by ethnic communities cannot be
generalized, nor can reparations be universalized, under
the dominant paradigms
of justice. This issue is intrinsically related to the capacity to access
justice by considering collective,
spiritual, cultural, and territorial
approaches and traditional knowledge and practices (Comisión de la Verdad
en Colombia,
2022, p. 131). By including intercultural dialogue and knowledge
exchange among Indigenous victims, judges, and judicial operators,
justice without impunity can be ensured (Izquierdo, 2019). In this regard,
impunity is not the absence of punishment. It
is a manifestation of epistemic
violence anchored in the justice system in which abuse of power is displayed in
different dimensions.
Three mechanisms of abuse of power are identified as (a)
through legal regulations and institutions, in which the State monopolizes
production, interpretation, and application of laws in detriment of Indigenous
rights and cosmologies; (b) through stigmatizing,
racist, and discriminatory
discourses, which have worsened the human rights situation and increased the
criminalization of Indigenous
communities; and (c) the abusive use of physical
force on people and over territories (Indigenous Peoples Rights International,
Intercultural Epistemologies of Transitional Justice in Colombia
Transitional justice in Colombia requires “going beyond a state-centric
view of transitional justice; going beyond an individualistic
form of analysis;
going beyond recent violations; and going beyond archival and written
sources” (International Center for
Transitional Justice 2012, p. 3).
Izquierdo and Viaene (2018) proposed that decolonizing social and legal
knowledge, which informs
the field of transitional justice, is necessary.
Essentially, the JEP was created as per the mandate of the peace agreement,
ensures the rights of victims through the investigation, prosecution, and
punishment of persons responsible for human rights violations
committed during
armed conflict. A remarkable aspect is that Indigenous organizations have
consulted the JEP since its constitution,
because their rights and interests
could be affected. However, this issue was far from being a peaceful one. During
the negotiations
of the peace agreement, between the government and FARC,
Indigenous voices were excluded. The subsequent mobilization of Indigenous
organizations demanding the recognition of their contribution to building peace
resulted in an ethnic chapter being included in the
peace agreement (Braconnier,
The ethnic chapter considered prior consultation and participation as
guarantees and safeguards of the peace agreement’s implementation.
that the JEP ensured the participation of Indigenous peoples and the centrality
of victims, incorporated a restorative approach,
demanded respect for Indigenous
, and ensured
mechanisms of coordination between Indigenous jurisdiction and transitional
agreed in the Protocol 001/2019, which
was adopted by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and Special Indigenous
interjurisdictional and intercultural
. To guarantee the
principles mentioned above, the JEP created an ethnic commission in which eight
out of 11 judges are Indigenous
and Afro-Colombian people. They are responsible
for the incorporation of the ethnic approach in the legal proceedings and
coordination with Indigenous peoples and organizations
Protocol 001/2019
). As Justice Cantillo stated, “this Commission
is the guardian of legal pluralism” (Cantillo 2022a, p. 97). For instance,
the commission has contributed concepts and recommendations to opened
macro-cases and raised institutional awareness about the importance
understanding the principles of self-determination, autonomy, self-governance,
and Indigenous law.
Regarding mechanisms of coordination, Protocol 001/2019 was issued after a
prior consultation with Indigenous organizations in which
they easily agreed
that the JEP would respect their justice systems and jurisdiction. This process
was fluid, because it was a product
of the trust generated by commissioners in
which Indigenous representatives felt that they were speaking the same language
2022b). This is in contrast to what has occurred in the ordinary
justice system, where formality, legality, and verticality have
Indigenous demands of justice (Olarte, 2020). Therefore, the guarantees in
Protocol 001/2019, which was based on legal
pluralism, established that the JEP
would consider the
Law of Origin
Ley de Origen
Ley Natural
) along with other proceedings from the opening of
macro-cases in the definition of special sanctions (Art. 1). Additionally,
001/2019 guarantees the participation of traditional, spiritual, and
political authorities in procedural stages. It also guarantees
the prevalence of
the Indigenous language and orality; translations of JEP decisions; and the
presence of interpreters in scenarios
in which Indigenous victims, Indigenous
perpetrators, and traditional authorities intervene (Art. 3). This process
encompasses horizontal
dialogues between JEP justices and Indigenous authorities
Within this framework, the Law of Origin denotes a common understanding of
the 115 Indigenous peoples in Colombia about justice. It
is the mandate of
nature that organizes life and brings harmony and balance to the relationships
among humans, nature, and the universe
(Novoa and Mestre, 2021). Ley de Origen
is represented by oral traditions that have been transmitted through collective
and ancestral
knowledge in which forms of being and life, and community
principles are understood. Thus, Indigenous justice systems are not written
code; they are systems, because they refer to a communitarian and organized
structure governed by by this law, which is related
Buen Vivir (
Good Living) as an ethic of balance and complementarity that ensures the
survival of Indigenous peoples not as individuals but as
a unity with nature
(Zaffaroni 2011, p. 106). According to Escobar and Frye (2020a), “echoing
indigenous ontologies, Buen Vivir,
implies a different philosophy of life that
enables the subordination of economic objectives to the criteria of ecology,
human dignity
and social justice” (p. 79).
In this context, justice for some of the Indigenous peoples in Colombia
implies the understanding of multiple interactions between
the territory and the
universe in which different beings coexist with their own language and forms of
communication in daily life.
A very common observation is that the word
“justice” does not appear in some Indigenous lexis in Colombia. When
exists within the community, damage is healed through the word, advice,
and reflexive accompaniment of families, traditional and
spiritual authorities,
and traditional healers (Olarte, 2021).
From this viewpoint, normative and procedural developments with an ethnic
approach comprise the attempts of transitional justice to
exceed state-centric
views. This disrupts the rhetorical and monolingual discourses of legal
pluralism and the universality of human
rights that prevailed in ordinary
justice in Colombia (Bacca Benavides, 2008). Through its normativity, the JEP is
shedding light
on sources of knowledge concealed in the epistemologies of
justice, in which Colombian Indigenous justice systems have been subordinated.
Thus, they have been compelled to adjust their languages, beliefs, and
motivations to the dominant language of justice to the point
of absorbing
(Bacca Benavides, 2008). These legal practices have led to the
institutionalization and codification of the Indigenous justice system
process of transformation, adaptation, and imposition (Sánchez, 2001). By
conducting cultural reappropriation and translating
Indigenous justice into a
comprehensive language of justice, ordinary justice has not only denied the
historical traditions and cosmologies
of the communities but also prevented the
strengthening of their justice systems (Bacca Benavides, 2008).
Macro-Case 05: The Territorial Case of Northern Cauca and Southern Valle
This case was opened in November 2018 and prioritized human rights violations
and severe violations of international humanitarian
law in the region of
Northern Cauca and Southern Valle del Cauca. This region encompasses 17
municipalities, namely, Santander de
Quilichao, Suárez, Buenos Aires,
Morales, Caloto, Corinto, Toribío, Caldono, Jambaló, Miranda,
Padilla y Puerto
Tejada en el Cauca, y Palmira, Pradera, Florida, Candelaria y
Jamundí, and el Sur del Valle del Cauca (Auto Sala de Reconocimiento
Verdad de Responsabilidad y de Determinación de Hechos y Conductas -SRVR
This macro-case is one of the three cases that feature a territorial
approach. It was opened by the JEP because this region is historically
vulnerable and is one of the most affected by armed conflict. It also counted
the largest number of victims with more than 200,000
people and 138
organizations in which Indigenous peoples, Afro-Colombian people, and Campesinos
have suffered the most
disproportionate impacts.
more than 12 violations against international humanitarian law were identified
in more than 15 reports submitted to the JEP
by Indigenous and Afro-Colombian
organizations, the National Centre of Historical Memory, and the Prosecutor
(Jurisdicción
Especial para la Paz, 2018). One of the principles of the
JEP is the centrality of the victims, which is intrinsically related to
right to participate. This right enables the recognition of victims as subjects
of rights and the possibility to restore and
transform social relationships
through the JEP, and perpetrators. The materialization of participation begins
with reports of narratives
and perspectives about armed conflict, which are
submitted by victims to the JEP (2020a). This process enables justices to
harm and victimization from the viewpoint of victims.
Another form of participation in the transitional process is the
accreditation of individual or collective victims of armed conflict.
entitles victims to participate in the proceedings as interveners, provide
evidence, request precautionary measures, and participate
as in judicial
proceedings or audiences (Jurisdicción Especial para la Paz, 2020b).
Moreover, extrajudicial scenarios are
anticipated to build constructive
dialogues with the JEP. For instance, the process of informing, discussing,
consulting, and coordinating
is an example of extraprocedural practices in which
ethnic communities have participated, ensuring the implementation of legal
and an ethnic approach (Jurisdicción Especial para la Paz,
2020b). Indeed, in this macro-case, a dialogue table was formed
judicial representatives of the victims. This table coordinated notifications
with ethnic relevance and communicated jurisdictional
decisions to the victims
(Rodríguez Peña et al., 2024).
Accreditation of Traditional Authorities as Victims of Armed
To date, 45 Indigenous peoples, 67 community councils, and eight
organizations have been accredited as victims of the conflict by
the JEP. As
collective subjects, more than 30 Cabildos and Resguardos from
Nasa and Misak peoples, the regional Indigenous organization Consejo
Regional Indígena del Cauca (CRIC), and the Asociación
de Cabildos
Indígenas del Norte del Cauca ACIN CXHAB WALA KIWE were
accredited.
Cabildos and
are fundamental to the political organization of Indigenous
peoples in Colombia and have defended their territories against institutional
and structural violence. Based on the political constitution, they were
recognized as part of the administrative branch of the State
and granted
the traditional authorities (i.e., Cabildos
and Resguardos) directly conducted
negotiations with the commanders of armed groups to prevent attacks on their
communities (Centro
Nacional de Memoria Histórica [CNMH] and
Organización Nacional Indigena de Colombia [ONIC], 2019). Moreover,
areas, they have safeguarded lives and been responsible for the
strengthening of cultural identity and the transmission of knowledge.
general, more than mediators between state bureaucracy and their communities,
they have been interlocutors within the multiple
worlds that inhabit their
territories.
However, the violence perpetrated by armed groups in their territories has
transformed Indigenous authorities (e.g., political, administrative,
leaders, and ancestral healers) into victims of political violence and other
systemic violations. These have included massacres,
murders, enforced
disappearance, forced displacement, and disruption of organizational and
political processes (Comisión de
la Verdad en Colombia, 2022). The
Inter-American Court of Human Rights examined this situation and declared
precautionary measures
for members of the fourth Nasa Resguardos who underwent
stigmatization and threats against life and personal integrity (Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights, 2011). Selective killings have disempowered
Indigenous communities, depoliticized their fights, and stripped
knowledge. Moreover, traditional authorities have suffered stigmatization from
armed groups and the State, which have denied
their justice systems and capacity
to dispense justice communities (Centro Nacional de Memoria Histórica
[CNMH] and Organización
Nacional Indigena de Colombia
[ONIC] 2019, 512). Montero de la Rosa (2024) explained how Nasa authorities
were stigmatized as “guerilla
allies” when they controlled their
territory and exercised justice by expelling the armed forces from a sacred
In this sense, understanding the damage to traditional authorities requires
not only the identification of individual harm but also
the understanding of
harm due to the interruption of the Red Vital
(Vital Web), which has led
to what Indigenous people call “bad death”. Thus, the knowledge of
Indigenous authorities is
necessary for intervening and mediating between life
and death (Centro Nacional de Memoria Histórica [CNMH] and
Organización
Nacional Indigena de Colombia [ONIC], 2019). Moreover,
this recognition of Indigenous authorities as victims of armed conflict has
additional consequences, according to Centro Nacional de Memoria
Histórica and the Organización Nacional Indigena de
(2019), it is the first step in addressing impunity for this type of
• It acknowledges the violence inflicted by the State on traditional
authorities as part of a broad strategy of land grabbing
and natural resource
exploitation.
• It highlights the important roles played by spiritual, cultural,
political, and territorial guides in strengthening Indigenous
harmonizing the imbalance produced by the armed conflict, and safeguarding the
• Instead of being passive voices, traditional authorities become
active agents in the transitional justice process.
Initially, the accreditation decision through the Auto SRVR 02 del 17 de
enero de 2020 by the JEP
entails the recognition of Indigenous
peoples’ autonomy and self-determination; hence, the possibility of
strengthening their
justice systems is recognized by the Colombian
Constitution
This is evident in the legal framework of the JEP, ensuring respect for Law of
understanding of Indigenous justice systems, and the importance
of preserving the knowledge that allows life and good death. This
recognition is
an “epistemic turn” since it reflects a political practice in
response to hegemonic legal knowledge. Some
legal proceedings from JEP evidence
how the ancestral knowledge of traditional authorities and Law of Origin were
legitimized and
revitalized through transitional justice in Colombia.
Among the most representative of these proceedings have been legal
notifications with ethnic and natural relevance, in which justices
approached Indigenous territories and communities to explain jurisdictional
orders. For Indigenous authorities, the rituals
and ceremonies conducted during
ethnic notifications are manifestations of harmony and healing, which enable
them to overlook tension
and encourage collaboration (Universidad Santo
Tomás Tunja, 2022). Rather than cultural performances, ethnic
notifications
have become part of the due process in Indigenous justice systems
and have constituted the other “languages” incorporated
in valuing Indigenous participation.
For instance, when Cauca River was accredited as a victim of conflict, this
decision was notified to the communities by restorative
proceedings that were
agreed between communitarian councils and Indigenous communities. This
proceeding, which the JEP terms a “notification
with natural
relevance”, targeted the reconciliation between the river and the
communities and were accompanied by traditional
ceremonies and rituals from the
communities that were notified. In addition, the first accusation within the
macro-case was notified
with ethnic relevance to more than 316 Indigenous
authorities and Afro-Colombian leaders (Jurisdicción Especial para la
2024). This decision was preceded by intercultural encounters in which
patterns of mass criminality were identified based on victims’
testimonies
(Jurisdicción Especial para la Paz, 2023a).
Furthermore, as a territorial case in which the majority of the victims are
ethnic groups, proceedings have been held using intercultural
approaches. For
instance, the exhumations of victims, were conducted in coordination with
Indigenous traditional authorities who
sought not only to identify and recover
the bodies, but also, sought to heal the territory from bad death. In addition,
the hearings
of voluntary versions with Indigenous ex-combatants have ensured
that they can speak in their language and be defended and judged
justice systems. Moreover, the first inter-justice hearing was held with
Tribunal de Ética y Justicia Ancestral Afrodescendiente
del Cauca in
which Afro-Colombian authorities demanded the truth about violations by the
perpetrators (Jurisdicción Especial
para la Paz, 2022). Nonetheless,
horizontality, trust, and the JEP’s proximity to authorities have
characterized these encounters,
which were founded on respect for Indigenous
justice systems (Olarte 2022), intercultural proceedings have not been exempted
tensions between JEP and Indigenous Peoples. On one hand, certain
disagreements have stemmed from the ways in which interculturality
integrated into the proceedings. On the other hand, tension has emerged when the
possibility of achieving justice, truth,
reparation, and reconciliation has been
questioned.
Regarding the former, a few criticisms have been related to the language used
by the JEP in the decisions, which continues to be technical
and formal.
Moreover, the use of terms in these decisions does not necessarily correspond to
what the authorities have expressed
in terms of the Indigenous cosmovision
(Braconnier et al., 2023). For instance, legal accusations in regard to crimes
crimes against humanity do not correspond with the demands of justice
claimed by Indigenous and Afro-Colombian victims. This issue
will be examined in
the next section. Other tensions have been related to the possibility of
achieving justice and truth while Indigenous
authorities and perpetrators are
under constant risk from the worsening security conditions in territories. For
instance, some of
the perpetrators and Indigenous authorities that participated
in the JEP were killed by criminal organizations that assumed the control
territory after the demobilization of the guerrilla following to the signing of
the peace agreement. Indeed, the delay in
the implementation of the peace
agreement in Indigenous territories have resulted in a security breach into the
territory (Consejo
Mayor de Gobierno de la Organización Nacional
Indígena de Colombia [ONIC] 2023). Additionally, there has been little
correspondence with other extrajudicial institutions in the system regarding
truth, justice, reparation, and guarantees of non-repetition,
such as the Search
Unit for Disappeared People or the Truth Commission, which ended its mandate in
2022 (Braconnier et al., 2023).
Moreover, victims involved in the macro-case
have expressed uncertainty about the influence of their participation if
perpetrators
do not recognize and fully acknowledge their responsibility and do
not contribute to truth. Requiring perpetrators to remain in a
restorative and
dialogic process, in which measures of reparation and restoration are
determined, could result in impunity (Vargas
et al., 2021).
Recognition of Ancestral and Collective Territory
The recognition of the
Çxhab Wala Kiwe
(Nasa Territory) as a
victim of conflict was a result of a request made by the CRIC and was founded on
unity between the territory
and the people that inhabit it. For the Nasa people,
territory “is an alive being, that feels, it needs care and to be
(Jurisdicción Especial para la Paz, 2020a). It is a
“vital space that ensures their survival as a people, as a culture
together in harmony with nature and the spirits” (CRIC quoted in Escobar
& Frye 2020b, 58). The harms suffered by
ancestral and sacred territories
negatively transformed the bonds of Indigenous communities with territory, which
violated the harmony,
balance, and autonomy of the Nasa people at Northern Cauca
(Jurisdicción Especial para la Paz, 2020a).
Consequently, this recognition as a victim of conflict appealed both to the
cosmovision of Indigenous peoples and their right to self-determination
the national and international frameworks for the rights of Indigenous people
and their relationship with the territory. For
instance, the Indigenous and
Tribal Peoples Convention (1989) entitled Indigenous territories to:
(a) Prevent displacement from their land (Art. 5)
(b) Respect the spiritual values related to their relationship with
territories (Art. 13)
(c) Safeguard the right to possess, develop, and control lands where they
have traditionally based their subsistence (Art. 14)
(d) Require prior consultation if the territory will be affected
(e) Ensure the conservation and protection of the environment and its
capacity to produce
(f) Avoid military intervention, except for public interest or when freely
agreed through prior request to Indigenous authorities.
(Jurisdicción
Especial para la Paz, 2020a)
In the same macro-case, Cauca River was recognized as a silent victim of
armed conflict. The community councils of the Cuenca del
Río Cauca, Micro
Cuenca de los Ríos Teta and Mazamorrero, and Cuenca Río
Timba–Marilópez made this
claim. They also explained how
paramilitaries and military forces used the river as a mass grave through
systematic behaviors, such
as torture, murder, illegal mining, and illicit
crops, which destroyed the communities’ relationship with the river. The
councils described how violence disrupted the social cohesion and
cultural identity of the communities with the river (Jurisdicción
Especial para la Paz, 2023a). This decision was based on the international legal
framework that protects the environment, the recognition
of territory as a
subject of rights, the jurisprudence, the observations of the Customary
International Humanitarian Law of the International
Committee of the Red Cross,
the Consultive Opinion of the Interamerican Court of Human Rights, the Colombian
legal framework Decree
4633/2011, and the jurisprudence of the Constitutional
From the perspective of interculturality, the declaration of territory and
nature as a victim of armed conflict defies the anthropocentric
transitional justice
first time, a transitional panel adopted a decision that “gives agency to
ancestral territory so rights to truth,
justice and reparation can be guarantee
]” (Jurisdiccion Especial para la Paz, 2023a). Indeed, the
decision questions the ontology of separation, which states the dualism
human–nonhuman, mind–body, life–death, and
living–nonliving, which prevails in the modern time (Escobar
2020b, 56).Specifically based on this ontology, culture and nature are
separated; the latter is conceived as an exploitable
and attainable object,
which provides the subject
(human) with an exclusive right to knowledge
(Estermann, 2022). Conversely, the ontological turn adopted by the JEP
questioned the
existence of a unique universe; instead, it proposed a pluriverse
as a linkage among different worlds that interact with one another
forms (Blaser, 2014, De la Cadena, 2015 quoted in Ruiz-Serna 2017, 89).
Furthermore, this understanding supposes a differentiation
between harms to and
of the territory that implies thinking with the territory, rather than thinking
over the territory (Ruiz-Serna,
The former ‘refers to the violations of individual and collective
rights over the territories that have been recognized to indigenous
Instead, the latter recognizes the territory as a life being, in which animals,
spirits, mountains, rivers have agency, will
and personality’. (p. 97)
Understanding harms to nature requires comprehension of the ontological turn.
Under environmental justice theory, environmental harms
are framed within the
field of human rights. The environment is protected only to the extent that
affects human beings, and an anthropocentric
understanding that objectivizes
nature is maintained. Thus, it is considered a means instead of an end, and
violations are expressed
as material damage requiring repair. In biocentric
theories, nature is a living being with immaterial dimensions (Cruz, 2017) and
ontological specificities (Lyons, 2022). Specifically, Lyons (2022) refers:
to the diverse realities that make up the everyday practices, spiritual
understandings, and socio-ecological dynamics that compose
life in a given
place. The concept of territory does not refer to the same reality for each of
these organizations, and this necessarily
obliges the JEP to navigate conflicts
between human victims that may emerge due to territorial disputes. (para. 5)
In turn, this view, which aims to reinterpret knowledge and justice, features
multiple political, epistemological, and ontological
dimensions. According to
Ruiz-Serna (2022):
it is political, because an issue that was in the private arena for
Indigenous people became public and a common issue/ It is epistemological,
because it reconsiders the process in which knowledge about harms is built.
Lastly, it is ontological, because recognizing other
forms of expressing harm
transform and create other realities and worlds. (p. 98)
However, despite the efforts of Indigenous people to explain the harms and
damage that occurred during the armed conflict, this acknowledgment
presented as evidence in the preceding decisions.
The Chamber for the Acknowledgment of Truth and Responsibility determined the
facts and conduct of macro-case 05 and accused 10 ex-FARC
members of crimes
against humanity and war crimes. The Chamber determined that the war crimes
committed included attacks against
the civilian population and the destruction
of the environment to gain and maintain territorial and social control.
Specifically,
damages against nature and territory were classified as crimes of
destruction of the environment under Article 8(2)(b)(iv) of the
Rome Statute
(which applies to international armed conflicts):
Intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will
cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage
to civilian
objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment
which would be clearly excessive in relation
to the concrete and direct overall
military advantage anticipated. (Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, 1998)
In addition, the order argues under Article 8(2)(e)(xii): “destroying
or seizing the property of an adversary unless such destruction
or seizure be
imperatively demanded by the necessities of the conflict” (Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court,
1998). Nevertheless, this decision was the
first of its kind among territorial cases and was the subject of both dissenting
and concurring
opinions from JEP justices. Rather than discussing the legal
classification of war crimes that are not typified in the Rome Statute,
current analysis focuses on the controversy about nature and territory as
property. Justices argue that considering environment
and territory as property
is a regression to colonial views, which dismiss the recognition of territory
and environment as a subject
of rights and as intrinsically related to
Indigenous peoples (Jurisdicción Especial para la Paz, 2023b).
For Justice Izquierdo from the JEP, the most suitable accusation would be the
war crime of destruction of cultural property or places
of worship. Article
8(e)(iv) describes this as “intentionally directing attacks against
buildings dedicated to religion, education,
art, science or charitable purposes,
historic monuments, hospitals and places where the sick and wounded are
collected, provided
they are not military objectives”. This crime is
related to the Additional Protocol to the Geneva Conventions (Article 16),
protects cultural objects and places of worship that constitute the cultural or
spiritual heritage of peoples. In this sense,
comprehension of the environment
should be based on the ontologies of Indigenous people in which territory
encompasses multiple beings
(e.g., human, nonhuman, and spiritual) and
relationships. This is necessary for understanding the legal rights violated and
the degrees
of damage that threaten the survival of Indigenous peoples
(Jurisdicción Especial para la Paz, 2023b). Justice Parra from
added that considering the crime of destruction of the environment as
non-amnestiable can not only impact Indigenous people’s
collective rights
to autonomy and self-determination but also affect the rights of nature as a
victim of conflict (Jurisdicción
Especial para la Paz, 2023b).
Based on these examples, providing evidence on three points is possible.
First, the unique effort exerted by a transitional tribunal
epistemological and theoretical breaches in addressing crimes and violations
under victim´s comprehensions of damage
in the context of armed conflict.
In so doing, the JEP recognized ley de Origen
and Indigenous justice
systems by firstly opening territorial macro-cases. As Lyons (2023) stated,
“territorial macro-cases
demonstrate the pressing need to prioritize the
particularities of Indigenous peoples’ territorial relations and ancestral
origins while also acknowledging the complex temporalities of dispossession and
variations of justice existing in a given place”
(p. 70). The second
pertains to the incorporation of the ethnic approach within its legal framework
and proceedings, like Protocol
01. While the third relates to intercultural
dialogues with Indigenous jurisdiction as evidenced in the notification with
relevance” concerning Cauca River. Thus, the legal
pluralism founded in the Colombian
Constitution
evolved from a rhetorical
discourse into the concrete realization of a right within the transitional
The intersectional approach underlies the macro-case through the recognition
of the disproportionate and differentiated damage suffered
by the region,
territory, and ethnic population. The accreditation of Resguardos, Cabildos,
Indigenous organizations, the Nasa Territory,
and Cauca River as victims of
armed conflict demonstrates the manner in which law can hold dialogues beyond
individuals. It also
illustrates how the law can attend to the multiplicity of
relationships between communities and territories and the pluriverse within
These examples are evidence of how the JEP incorporated other languages of
justice, in which nature, territory, autonomy, sovereignty,
ancestrality, and
spirituality coexist, within their legal practices. Additionally, the tension
that underlies the interculturality
of transitional justice as a non-linear
process, full of setbacks, is recognized (De Sousa Santos, 2020). This tension
to the maintenance of the structural conditions that led to the armed
conflict. Under these conditions, the victimization of Indigenous
Afro-Colombian populations, including homicides, massacres, forced recruitment
of children, and the use of anti-personnel mines,
continues to occur. Another
tension is related to the influence of intercultural dialogues in the decisions
of the tribunal. The
majority believe this macro-case captured the claims of
justice by Indigenous communities. However, some decisions, such as the
determination
of facts and conducts, dismissed Indigenous ontologies not only
instance, a challenge remains in understanding the collective damage of sexual
crimes committed against Indigenous women. Thus,
Indigenous ontologies pertain
to the understanding of the exercise of Indigenous jurisdiction as a practical
knowledge contained
in their life plans (
plan de vida
of the territory, the sounds of nature, the songs of the spirits, and the
interactions among multiple beings (Bacca &
Delgado, 2023). Conversely,
another tension implies the risk that the rights of truth and justice would not
be fulfilled under the
epistemes of Indigenous justice. For Bacca Benavides
dialogue is insufficient when institutions are enclosed in their language and
their logic, so they decide about issues that entail
different thinking. As a
consequence, walls are built, if from the politics of the sameness the openness
toward difference is vindicated.
(204; author’s translation)
Conclusions
Law is a language that creates and transforms realities. Transitional justice
in Colombia has created new dialogues based on other
epistemologies and
transformed realities by recognizing ontologies that were not previously
recognized or even been visible. Indigenous
communities have created a common
ground with the JEP in which trust, proximity, and horizontality have enabled
them to talk the
same language in challenging the dominant paradigm of law. This
language has permeated the decisions founded in Indigenous ontologies.
it is important to understand that the strengthening of Indigenous justice
through transitional justice will depend not
only on formal proceedings. It will
also rely on communities being heard and effectively participating in each stage
of the process,
and the JEP considering Indigenous knowledge in their decisions.
This aspect is relevant because other macro-cases with different
remain open, in which Indigenous people have been accredited as victims. In
other words, Indigenous law must be considered
as such in different macro-cases.
In this way, Indigenous law will hold the same value as international law.
Hence, criminal charges
and sanctions would be truly harmonizing if
interculturality played a fundamental role in revitalizing the Indigenous self,
by recognizing Indigenous justice but also by understanding community,
territory, nature, and justice as a whole.
Correspondence:
Angela Marcela Olarte Delgado, University Externado de
Colombia, Colombia.
angela.olarte@uexternado.edu.co
Benavides, P. (2008). Las contra narrativas constitucionales en el seguimiento
jurisprudencial de la jurisdicción especial
Pensamiento Jurídico
, (22), 193–232.
https://revistas.unal.edu.co/index.php/peju/article/view/38175
Bacca Benavides, P. (2019). Indigenizing international law and decolonizing
the anthropocene: Genocide by ecological means and indigenous
nationhood in
contemporary Colombia.
(2), 139–169.
https://doi.org/10.15446/mag.v33n2.86199
Bacca, P., & Delgado, B. (2023). Cosmopolíticas de la
traducción interlegal en Colombia. Entre el sistema jurídico
Attɨm Awá y la justicia transicional. In
N. Alsina & Y.
Espejo (Eds.),
El acceso a una justicia adaptada. Experiencias desde
(pp. 171-199)
Tirant lo Blanch.
Blaser, M. (2014). Ontology and indigeneity: On the political ontology of
heterogeneous assemblages.
Cultural Geographies
(1), 49-58.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1474474012462534
Braconnier, L. (2020). El diálogo entre la Jurisdicción
Especial para la Paz y la Jurisdicción Especial Indígena
Colombia: ¿La Fábrica de una Justicia Transicional Intercultural? In
Olarte A.M y Gutiérrez M
Pluralismo jurídico y
derechos humanos: perspectivas críticas desde la política
(pp. 189-248). Bogotá: Universidad Externado de Colombia.
Braconnier, L., Montero de la Rosa, O. D., & Sabogal, J. E. (2023).
Transiciones inconclusas: los caminos de la interculturalidad
en el Sistema
Integral para la Paz en Colombia.
Tabula Rasa
, (47), 105-131.
https://doi.org/10.25058/20112742.n47.05
Cantillo, P. J. (2022a). El pluralismo jurídico en la justicia
dialógica de la Jurisdicción Especial para la
Paz. In Olarte, A.M
y Gutiérrez, M
Cátedra Unesco: derechos humanos
y violencia, gobierno y gobernanza. Experiencias de diálogos
restaurativos en el contexto
transicional colombiano
(pp. 65-86).
Bogotá: Universidad Externado de Colombia.
https://doi.org/10.57998/bdigital/handle.001.143
Cantillo, P. J. (2022b). Legal pluralism: Opportunities for development from
a constitutional perspective in Latin America.
International Journal of Law
and Society
(1), 93-100.
https://doi.org/10.11648/j.ijls.20220501.21
Centro Nacional de Memoria Histórica, & Organización
Nacional Indígena De Colombia. (2019).
Tiempos de vida y muerte:
memorias y luchas de los Pueblos Indígenas en Colombia
Bogotá: CNMH-ONIC
Comisión de la Verdad en Colombia. (2022).
Resistir no es
Violencias y daños contra los pueblos étnicos en
https://www.comisiondelaverdad.co/resistir-no-es-aguantar
Consejo Mayor de Gobierno de la Organización Nacional Indígena
De Colombia (ONIC). (2023).
Conflicto y Violencias Armadas contra los Pueblos
Indígenas de Colombia.
https://onic.org.co/images/Informe_sobre_DDPPII_Final_2023.pdf
Corte Constitucional Colombiana (2009). Auto 004-2009.
https://www.corteconstitucional.gov.co/relatoria/autos/2009/a004-09.html
Corte Constitucional Colombiana. (2016). Sentencia T-622 De 10 de noviembre
de 2016, M. P. Jorge Iván Palacio Palacio.
Corte Suprema De Justicia Sala De Casación Civil.
(2018) Sentencia STC-4360-2018 de 5 de abril de 2018, M. P. Luis
Tolosa Villabona.
Cruz, E. (2017). Justicia ambiental
diálogo intercultural.
(105), 9-16.
www.elementos.buap.mx
DECREE 4633/2011.
https://www.funcionpublica.gov.co/eva/gestornormativo/norma.php?i=44966
De Sousa Santos, B. (2007). Beyond abyssal thinking: From global lines to
ecologies of knowledges.
Review. Fernand Braudel Center, 30
https://www.boaventuradesousasantos.pt/media/pdfs/Beyond_Abyssal_Thinking_Review_2007.PDF
De Sousa Santos, B. (2010).
Descolonizar el saber, reinventar el
. Montevideo: Ediciones Trilce.
De Sousa Santos, B. (2020). Para una articulación descolonizadora
entre la justicia estatal y la justicia propia
Colombo-Alemán para la Paz – CAPAZ y el Centro de Estudios de
Derecho Penal y Procesal Penal Latinoamericano
https://www.instituto-capaz.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Policy-Brief-Azul-1-2020-Amarillo-def-Web-FINAL.pdf
Escobar, A., & Frye, D. (2020a). Sentipensar with the earth: Territorial
struggles and the ontological dimension of the epistemologies
of the south.
Pluriversal politics: The real and the possible
(pp. 67–83) Duke
University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1215/9781478012108-005
Escobar, A., & Frye, D. (2020b). The earth~form of life: Nasa thought and
the limits to the episteme of modernity. In
Pluriversal politics: The real
and the possible.
(pp. 46–66). Duke University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9781478012108-007
González, C. (2021) La interacción entre la justicia
transicional y los procesos indígenas de la verdad y
reconciliación.
La justicia transicional: escenarios y debates
(pp. 148-171). Universidad Católica Andrés Bello/Centro de
Derechos Humanos UCAB
Estermann J (2022) La barbarie del progreso. Violencia epistémica y
filosoficidio de occidente contra cosmo-espiritualidades
Utopía y praxis latinoamericana: revista
internacional de filosofía iberoamericana y teoría social,
http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7091095
Indigenous Peoples Rights International. (2021).
Impunity and abuse of
power: 2021 strategy of violence against the Indigenous peoples of Colombia.
https://iprights.org/index.php/en/component/content/article/impunity-and-abuse-of-power-strategy-of-violence-against-the-indigenous-peoples-of-colombia?catid=9&Itemid=102
International Center for Transitional Justice. (2012).
Truth and justice
and memory. Strengthening Indigenous rights through truth commissions: A
practitioner’s resource.
https://www.ictj.org/sites/default/files/ICTJ-Truth-Seeking-Indigenous-Rights-2012-English.pdf
Instituto Colombiano de Antropología e Historia (ICANH). (2017).
Elementos para la conceptualización de lo “campesino”
Documento técnico.
https://publicaciones.icanh.gov.co/index.php/picanh/catalog/download/33/311/3172?inline=1
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
Situación de los
derechos humanos en Guatemala: Diversidad, desigualdad y exclusión
OEA/Ser.L/V/II.Doc. 43/15.
https://www.oas.org/es/cidh/informes/pdfs/Guatemala2016.pdf
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
MC225-2011 Pueblo Nasa de los
Resguardos Toribio, San Francisco, Tacueyo y Jambalo.
https://www.oas.org/es/cidh/decisiones/MC/cautelares.asp?Year=2011&Country=COL
International Committee of the Red Cross. (1977). Protocol Additional to the
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to
the Protection of Victims
of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I)
Izquierdo, B., & Viaene, L. (2018). Descolonizar la justicia transicional
desde los territorios indígenas
. Por la Paz: Afrontar el Pasado,
Construir Juntos el Futur
https://www.icip.cat/perlapau/es/articulo/descolonizar-la-justicia-transicional-desde-los-territorios-indigenas/
Izquierdo, B. (2019). Avanzar hacia una sociedad intercultural e incluyente
implica reconocer otras cosmovisiones y justicias.
https://www.jep.gov.co/Sala-de-Prensa/Paginas/Avanzar-hacia-una-sociedad-intercultural-e-incluyente-implica-reconocer-otras-cosmovisiones-y-justicias.aspx
Jurisdicción Especial para la Paz [JEP]. (2018) Auto SRVR 078 del 08
de noviembre de 2018. Sala de reconocimiento de verdad,
de responsabilidad y de
determinación de los hechos y conductas.
https://relatoria.jep.gov.co/documentos/providencias/1/1/Auto_SRVR-078_08-noviembre_2018.pdf
Jurisdicción Especial para la Paz [JEP]. (2019). Protocolo 01 de 2019.
Comisión Étnica.
https://www.jep.gov.co/PlanAccion/Protocolo%20instrumentos%20coordinaci%C3%B3n%20articulaci%C3%B3n%20pueblos%20ind%C3%ADgenas%20y%20JEP.pd
Jurisdicción Especial para la Paz [JEP]. (2020a). Auto SRVR 02 del 17
de enero de 2020. Sala de reconocimiento de verdad, de
responsabilidad y de
determinación de los hechos y conductas.
https://relatoria.jep.gov.co/caso05
Jurisdicción Especial para la Paz
(2020b). Sala
de Reconocimiento de Verdad, Responsabilidad y Determinación de los
Hechos y Conductas.
https://www.jep.gov.co/SiteAssets/Paginas/Transparencia/Balance2019-Proyeccion-2020-JEP/Macrocaso05.pdf
Jurisdicción Especial Para La Paz. [JEP]. (2023a). Auto SRVR 226 del
11 de julio de 2023. Sala de reconocimiento de verdad,
de responsabilidad y de
determinación de los hechos y conductas.
https://relatoria.jep.gov.co/caso005
Jurisdicción Especial Para La Paz. [JEP]. (2023b.) Auto SRVR 001 del 1
de febrero de 2023. Sala de reconocimiento de verdad,
de responsabilidad y de
determinación de los hechos y conductas.
https://relatoria.jep.gov.co/caso05
Lyons, K. (2022). Territories as victims in Colombia’s transitional
justice process.
Society for Cultural Anthropology
https://culanth.org/fieldsights/territories-as-victims-in-colombias-transitional-justice-process
Lyons, K. (2023). Nature and territories as victims: Decolonizing
Colombia’s transitional justice process.
American Anthropologist
(1), 63-76.
https://doi.org/10.1111/aman.13798
Londoño, L. A. (2023). Conflicto en el Norte del Cauca: Tierras, agua,
caña e ilícitos. Min 15:21.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wpZX-9-5Ghk
Montero de la Rosa, O. (2024). Pluralismo jurídico en Colombia: Ley de
Coordinación de Justicias, entre el
https://revistaraya.com/oscar-montero/720-pluralismo-juridico-en-colombia-ley-de-coordinacion-de-justicias-entre-el-papel-y-la-accion.html
Novoa, M. L., & Mestre, K. B. (2021). La justicia propia de los pueblos
indígenas en Colombia. Conceptualización
y ejercicios
. Saber, Ciencia Y Libertad
https://doi.org/10.18041/2382-3240/saber.2021v16n2.7747
Olarte, A. M. (2020). El transitar de la Jurisdicción Indígena
en Colombia: De la Jurisprudencia de las Cortes Colombianas
a la Cárcel.
Olarte A.M y Gutiérrez M (Eds.)
. Pluralismo jurídico
y derechos humanos: perspectivas críticas desde la política
(11), 149-188. Bogotá: Universidad Externado de
Olarte, A. M. (2021). La interculturalidad de las justicias en Colombia: un
análisis desde la coordinación interjurisdiccional.
In Olarte A.M
y Gutiérrez M (Eds.),
Criminalización y Control: retos
hacía visiones restaurativas e interculturales de la justicia
219-256). Bogotá: Universidad Externado de Colombia
Olarte, A. M. (2022). Elementos para la coordinación intercultural
entre la Jurisdicción Especial Indígena y
la Jurisdicción
Especial para la Paz. Lecciones para la Justicia Ordinaria. In Olarte A.M y
Gutiérrez M (Eds.),
Del Retribucionismo hacia una cultura de la
convivencia1
(pp. 73-102).
Bogotá: Universidad Externado de
Rodríguez, V., Peralta, M., Parra, J., & Escobar, V. (2022).
Lecciones de litigio ante la JEP: Qué ha pasado con
la violencia sexual,
la violencia reproductiva, y otros crímenes motivados en las sexualidad
de la víctima.
https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/documents/issues/truth/nsa/2022-09-14/submission-NSAs-hrc51-academia-colombia-diversa-and-fundacion-pakta-de-ecuador-2-es.pdf
Ruiz-Serna, D. (2017), El territorio como víctima. Ontología
política y las leyes de víctimas para comunidades
y negras en Colombia.
Revista Colombiana De
Antropología
(2), 85–113.
https://doi.org/10.22380/2539472X.118
Ruiz-Serna, D. (2022). Diplomacia, ecologías relacionales y
subjetividades distintas a la humana: los desafíos de asir
daños del conflicto en territorios de pueblos indígenas y
afrocolombianos.
Conflicto armado, medio ambiente y territorio: reflexiones
sobre el enfoque territorial y ambiental en la Jurisdicción Especial
la Paz. Jurisdicción Especial para la Paz
(pp. 86-132).
Bogotá: Jurisdicción Especial para la Paz
https://www.jep.gov.co/Infografas/docs/libro-comision-territorial-2022.pdf
Sánchez, B. (2001). El reto del multiculturalismo jurídico: la
justicia de la sociedad mayor y la justicia indígena.
In De Sousa Santos
y M. García Villegas (Eds.), B.,
El caleidoscopio de las justicias en
(p. 2). Bogotá: Siglo del Hombre Editores.
Spivak, G. C. (1988). Can the Subaltern Speak? In C. Nelson & L.
Grossberg (Eds
Marxism and the interpretation of culture
271-313) University of Illinois Press.
Spivak, G. C. (2003). ¿Puede el subalterno hablar?
Revista Colombiana
de Antropología,
: 257- 364.
Tribunal Administrativo Del Quindío. (2019) Sentencia de primera
instancia de 5 de diciembre de 2019,
M. P. Rigoberto Reyes
UN General Assembly. Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (last
amended 2010), ISBN No. 92-9227-227-6.
Universidad Santo Tomás Tunja. (2022).
Aportes de la justicia
indígena a la justicia restaurativa
[Video]. YouTube.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m2w-wG0jJdg
Vargas, J., Lovelle, P., Galindo, J., & Rodríguez, A. (2021).
Construyendo la san(a)ción propia: primeros hallazgos
y recomendaciones
para la imposición de sanciones restaurativas en el caso 05 de la JEP. In
Instituto Colombo-Alemán
para la Paz – CAPAZ. 8.
https://www.instituto-capaz.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/Policy-Brief-Azul-8-2021.pdf
Viaene, L. (2011).
Voices from the shadows. The role of cultural contexts
in transitional justice processes. Maya q’eqchi’ perspectives from
post-conflict Guatemala
[Ph.D. Dissertation]. Ghent University Belgium.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/292609688_Voices_from_the_shadows_the_role_of_cultural_contexts_in_transitional_justice_processes_Maya_Q'eqchi'_perspectives_from_post-conflict_Guatemala
Walsh, C. (2004). Geopolíticas del conocimiento, interculturalidad y
descolonización.
Boletín ICCI-ARY Rimay
Walsh, C. (2010). Interculturalidad crítica y pluralismo
Ponencia presentada en el Seminario Pluralismo
Jurídico, Procuraduría del Estado; Ministerio de Justicia,
13-14 de abril de 2010.
https://repositorio.uasb.edu.ec/bitstream/10644/6205/1/Walsh%2c%20C.-CON-002-Interculturalidad.pdf
Zaffaroni, E. R. (2011).
La Pachamama y el humano.
Madres de plaza de Mayo
http://biblioteca.corteidh.or.cr/tablas/r38893.pdf
The 115 Indigenous peoples in
Colombia are represented by 1,900,000 inhabitants in Colombia, according to the
Colombian National
Bureau of Statistics (DANE).
According to the National
Center of Historical Memory and the Indigenous National Organization, the Vital
) is understood as a unity in which human, natural, and
spiritual beings weave a net through which they intersect and build special
ecosystems for life. Balance in the Vital Web is given if harmony exists between
natural and spiritual forces; thus, attacks against
the Vital Web are an attack
on life (CNMH and ONIC, 2020).
“The Plan is a narrative
of life and survival, it is constructing a road to facilitate the passage
through life, and not merely
constructing a methodological planning
scheme” (Escobar, 2020, p. 58).
Indigenous jurisdiction refers
to the right given by the Colombian
Constitution
to Indigenous peoples to
administer justice within their territories (Constitución
Política, 1991, art. 246)
is important to note that the JEP and Afro-Colombian people, during prior
consultation with these communities, agreed Protocol
001/2021, which established
mechanisms of recognition and communication between communities during judicial
proceedings in transitional
justice. This explains why, in territorial
macro-cases, justices carried out judicial proceedings according to the
diversity of the
Afro-Colombian people.
Peasants or
“refers to an historical and intercultural subject with memories,
knowledge and practices that constitute forms of cultures.
Established on family
and neighbourhood life to produce food, common goods, and raw materials, with a
multi-active community life
linked to the land and integrated with nature and
the territory. Peasant is a subject located in rural areas and municipal centres
associated with them, with various forms of land tenure and organization,
producing for self-consumption and surplus production,
with which they
participate in the local, regional, and national market” (ICANH 2017,
population of the Northern Region of Cauca is composed of 48% Afro-Colombians,
grouped into 39 communitarian councils; 30% Indigenous
people, grouped into 24
Resguardos; and 22% Campesinos (Londoño 2023;
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wpZX-9-5Ghk
Law 1448/2011 (Law for Victims
of Armed Conflict) and Decree 4633/2011 established individual and collective
damages and described
the collective subjects and stages for reparation.
According to the Truth Commission, the number of collective subjects was 755,
out of which only 47% had been in a prior identification phase (Colombian Truth
Commission, 2022).
There have been a number of
decisions in which the High Courts in Colombia have recognized nature as a
subject of rights:
Corte Constitucional, Sentencia T-622 de 10 de noviembre de 2016, M. P. Jorge
Iván Palacio Palacio.
Corte Suprema de Justicia, Sala de
Casación Civil, Sentencia STC-4360-2018 de 5 de abril de 2018, M. P. Luis
Armando Tolosa
Administrativo del Quindío, Sentencia de primera instancia de 5 de
diciembre de 2019, M. P. Rigoberto Reyes Gómez.
Another territorial case
that recognized nature as a victim of armed conflict was macro-case 002. In this
macro-case, the Katsa su-grand
territory of the Awá People was accredited
as a victim (Auto SRVR No. 79 2019).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (748 KB)
PDF format (425 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter