URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CanLawRw/2021/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Donnelley, Jason --- "Abuse of Power and the Issue of Prerogative Writs - Implications for Breach of the Commonwealth Model Litigant Policy" [2021] CanLawRw 14; (2021) 18(2) Canberra Law Review 82
Abuse of Power and the Issue of Prerogative Writs –
Implications for Breach of the Commonwealth Model Litigant Policy
The grant of the prerogative writs and relief under
(Cth) in Australia is a matter of discretion. The discretion to
refuse relief is not to be exercised lightly. One of the established
grounds for
refusing the grant of the prerogative writs is “bad faith” on the
part of the applicant, either in the transaction
out of which the duty to be
enforced arises or towards the court to which the application is made. In a
little-discussed topic, this
article considers the question of whether it is
appropriate to withhold the grant of prerogative relief in circumstances where
Commonwealth, as a party to judicial review proceedings, has engaged in
conduct considered an infringement of the Model Litigant
Policy (MLP) made under
Legal Services Directions 2017
(Cth). The article argues that
contravention of the MLP by a Commonwealth party in judicial review proceedings
should be considered
a ground for a court, exercising judicial power, to refuse
the grant of prerogative relief as an extension of the common law model
obligations imposed on Commonwealth entities.
Introduction
The grant of the prerogative writs and relief under
Judiciary Act
) is a matter of
discretion.
The discretion to
refuse relief is not to be exercised
vindicates the public
interest in executive power being exercised according to
Mandamus, being a demand by a
particular applicant for the power to be exercised, may have a private aspect to
One of the established grounds for refusing the grant of judicial review
remedies is “bad faith” on the part of the applicant,
in the transaction out of which the duty to be enforced arises or towards the
court to which the application is
In a little-discussed
topic, this article considers the question of whether it is appropriate to
withhold the grant of prerogative
relief in circumstances where the
Commonwealth, as a party to judicial review proceedings, has engaged in conduct
considered an infringement
of the Model Litigant Policy (the MLP).
The article argues that contravention of the MLP by a Commonwealth party in
judicial review proceedings should be considered a ground
for a court,
exercising judicial power, to refuse the grant of relevant judicial review
remedies sought. Presently, a contravention
of the MLP is not an established
ground for refusing the grant of the relevant prerogative writs in Australia.
Model Litigant Policy
The MLP, as it is commonly described, is a Legal Service Direction (the
) issued by the Attorney-General under
The LSD was first issued
in 1999. The current version is Appendix B of the Legal Services Directions
Paragraph 1 of the MLP indicates that consistently with the
Attorney‑General’s responsibility for maintaining proper standards
in litigation, the Commonwealth and Commonwealth agencies are to behave as model
litigants in the conduct of litigation.
Paragraph 2 outlines the nature of the obligation concerning the MLP. The
paragraph indicates that the obligation to act as a model
litigant requires that
the Commonwealth and Commonwealth agencies act honestly and fairly in handling
claims and litigation brought
by or against the Commonwealth or a Commonwealth
agency by, inter alia:
• dealing with claims promptly and not causing unnecessary delay in the
handling of claims and litigation, making an early assessment
Commonwealth’s prospects of success in legal proceedings that may be
brought against the Commonwealth
• acting consistently in the handling of claims and litigation,
endeavouring to avoid, prevent and limit the scope of legal
proceedings wherever
possible, including by giving consideration in all cases to alternative dispute
resolution before initiating
legal proceedings and by participating in
alternative dispute resolution processes where appropriate
• where it is not possible to avoid litigation, keeping the costs of
litigation to a minimum
• not taking advantage of a claimant who lacks the resources to
litigate a legitimate claim
• not undertaking and pursuing appeals unless the Commonwealth or the
agency believes that it has reasonable prospects for success
or the appeal is
otherwise justified in the public
Paragraph 5.1 outlines that the Commonwealth or a Commonwealth agency is only
to start court proceedings if it has considered other
methods of dispute
resolution (eg alternative dispute resolution or settlement negotiations).
Some judges have equated the Crown’s model litigant obligation with the
obligations of probity and fair dealing of judicial
There is considerable
overlap between the obligations reflected in the MLP and those under the
Federal Court Act 1975
In 2007, Johnson J said the following in the decision of
Priest v State of
New South Wales
[2007] NSWSC 41:
‘In a sense, s.56 has the result that
every litigant in civil proceedings in this Court is now a model
litigant’. That
statement may be true as far as the description
“model litigant”
However, it is clear that
some of the duties imposed under the MLP go beyond those imposed on private
The additional obligations imposed on the Commonwealth can be seen to be
directed more to good governance and administration than
mere conduct as a
litigant in court – examples include: acting consistently across cases;
avoiding technical arguments; not
appealing unless there are reasonable
prospects or it is in the public interest;
Such restrictions do not
apply to a private litigant – even if they are a large, well-resourced,
and repeat litigant.
principles and justifications underpinning the MLP are rooted in the
relationship between the Crown and its
In a modern-day context, it arises because of the obligation on the
Attorney-General (as “First Law Officer”) for the
preservation of
proper standards in litigation.
As King CJ said in
Kenny v South
the court and
the Attorney-General have “joint responsibility for fostering the
expeditious conduct of and disposal of litigation”.
Hughes Aircraft Systems International v Airservices
Finn J held:
There is, I consider much to be said for the view that, having no legitimate
private interest in the performance of its functions,
a public body ... should
be required as of course to act fairly towards those with whom it deals at least
in so far as this is consistent
with its obligation to serve the public interest
(or interests) for which it has been created.
His Honour went on to observe that the obligation serves to (a) protect the
reasonable expectations of those dealing with public bodies
that they will act
honestly and fairly; (b) ensure public bodies exercise their powers for the
public good; and (c) require that
public bodies act as “moral
exemplars”.
Lack of Enforcement?
An obvious question arises as to how the MLP is enforced.
Section 55ZG
Judiciary Act
provides, in effect, that any person who may be a client of
the AGS – for example, the Commonwealth, a Commonwealth Minster,
Commonwealth body, or an employee of the Commonwealth – must comply with
the Legal Services Direction as well as any legal
practitioner or firm of
practitioners acting for such a
Judiciary Act
provides compliance with a
LSD (i.e. MLP) is not enforceable except by, or upon the application of, the
Attorney-General.
Furthermore,
subsection (3) mandates that the issue of non-compliance with a LSD may not be
raised in any proceeding (whether in
a court, tribunal or other body) except by,
or on behalf of, the
Commonwealth.
Given the preceding context, a question arises, therefore, what can a private
litigant do if the Commonwealth or one of its lawyers
breaches the MLP in a
judicial review context. The first thing they can do is make a complaint through
administrative channels.
However, in many instances, a litigant will want more immediate redress from the
Here it becomes imperative to distinguish between a breach of the MLP itself,
being the Direction issued by the Attorney-General (and
which cannot be raised
in court), and a breach of the model litigant obligation imposed on governments
and their legal representatives
under common
Before exploring the model litigant obligation reflected in the common law,
two observations need to be made. First, it is readily
accepted that a breach of
the LSD (such as the MLP) cannot, of itself, form a basis for the withholding of
prerogative relief against
a Commonwealth party in judicial review litigation.
Secondly, however, it does not follow that the contravention of the MLP by a
Commonwealth party is not relevant to the broader question as to whether the
relevant prerogative writ(s) should issue in a case
where the Commonwealth has
otherwise demonstrated jurisdictional
ASIC v Rich
matter of some importance, Austen J held that the LSD might be referred to as an
aid to understanding the content of the common
Those restrictions prevent the defendants from raising the issue of
non-compliance with the directions, as such, but it seems to me
that the notion
of Commonwealth agencies as “model litigants”, the subject of the
[LSD], is a notion that also underlies
the special duty of fairness of
Commonwealth agencies in civil litigation, as articulated in
other cases. In principle, therefore, the directions can be referred to as an
aid to understanding the content of the litigation
duty, notwithstanding
Wheelahan has observed that there are a number of ways in which a court may
exercise their powers to redress a perceived breach of
the common law
obligation:
• it may be a factor that weighs into the exercise of a discretion to
grant a stay or adjournment, order discovery, order the
calling of a witness, or
various other interlocutory or procedural matters
• there are also cases the court has made an adverse costs order
against a government litigant at the conclusion of proceedings
because of a
perceived breach of the obligation.
Citing various cases, Wheelahan concluded that, generally, there is a growing
tendency on the part of Federal and State courts and
tribunals to enforce or
exact the standard of fair dealing to be expected from government litigants in
However, none of the
cases cited by Wheelahan dealt with the question the subject of this
The Argument
There are at least
four reasons
why a court should consider
withholding prerogative relief where a Commonwealth party in judicial review
proceedings has been successful
in demonstrating jurisdictional error (but has
otherwise engaged in conduct contrary to the MLP under the LSD).
Reason 1 (Public Interest)
As observed in the introduction to this article, certiorari vindicates the
public interest in executive power being exercised according
It is likely upon that
foundation that the High Court of Australia in
determined that
the discretion to refuse relief (concerning the issue of the prerogative writs)
is not to be exercised lightly—even
accepting that legal principle, that
are good reasons for departing from the apparent presumption that the writ of
certiorari should
issue almost as of
However, there is an equally strong public interest consideration that a
Commonwealth party is behaving as a model litigant in the
conduct of judicial
review litigation. It could hardly be argued, for example, that the obligation
to act as a model litigant requiring
that the Commonwealth and Commonwealth
agencies act honestly and fairly in handling claims and litigation brought by or
against the
Commonwealth or a Commonwealth agency is not a matter of public
Commonwealth parties are funded from the public purse at the expense of
Australian taxpayers.
context, members of the Australian community have a public right to know how
Commonwealth entities conduct themselves in
the context of judicial review
proceedings in Australian
Implicitly, the public interest nature of the MLP also derives from the fact
that it is an Appendix to the latest Commonwealth LSD.
It is an instrument made
Judiciary Act
. The fact that the MLP has legislative
recognition inherently demonstrates the apparent importance of the obligations
reflected in
that document.
Given the preceding, at a broader level of generality, there appears to be
competing public interest considerations: the public interest
in executive
decision-makers acting within the confines of statutory power on the one hand,
and on the other, Commonwealth parties
to litigation promoting the
administration of justice by duly observing the fundamental objectives and
obligations reflected in the
If it is accepted that there are competing public interest
considerations
as described
above, as a matter of logic, it may be the case, given the particular
circumstances, that the public interest concerning
infringement of the MLP
outweighs countervailing public interest considerations; such that a court (in
the context of judicial review
proceedings) would withhold the issue of
prerogative relief to a Commonwealth party that has engaged in conduct contrary
to the prescribed
MLP. Such a conclusion would vindicate the public interest in
executive power being exercised according to established policy principles
legal effect under the contemporary LSD.
Court of the Federal Court of Australia recently held that like prohibition,
certiorari has a public content in the sense
that it is “concerned with
the exercise by ... an official of administrative powers in want of, or in
excess of, jurisdiction”.
in the High
Court of Australia, the Full Court said certiorari would issue “almost as
The Full Court
went further, so holding that certiorari should not ordinarily be withheld where
the result would be to confer a benefit
to a non-citizen in contravention of the
Although the reasoning of the Full Court in
above is persuasive,
there are at least three responses. First, contravention of the MLP (in the
context of a LSD) also has public
content because it is concerned with the
Commonwealth acting in conformity with a statutory instrument made under the
Judiciary Act
Secondly, the writ of certiorari should not necessarily issue ‘almost
as of right’; keeping in mind that one is dealing
with the exercise of a
broad discretionary power vested in a court exercising judicial power (and
otherwise noting that there may
be competing powerful public interest factors
that require due consideration).
Thirdly, as to the perceived benefit issue outlined in
hardly to the point. If a Commonwealth entity contravenes the MLP, they should
not otherwise benefit from such contravention
by implication (by merely
demonstrating jurisdictional
A contrary view would
mean, in effect, an infringement of the MLP in a LSD would have no legal or
practical effect.
As will be explored shortly, there is a close relationship between the
statutory MLP and the common law model litigant obligations
imposed upon the
Commonwealth; the latter of which can have practical and legal consequences for
a Commonwealth party in proceedings
before a court exercising judicial
It should also be kept ready in mind that there is “no universal
proposition that jurisdictional error” necessarily has
the effect of
bringing about legal
consequences.
Reason 2 (Implications of
Section 55ZG
Judiciary Act
Compliance with a LSD is not
enforceable
except by or
upon the Attorney General's
application.
‘enforceable’ is not defined in the
Judiciary Act
there is no reason why the phrase should not be construed literally. Enforceable
is taken to mean ‘possible to
make people obey
, or possible to make
happen or be accepted’ (own
Given that language,
where a Commonwealth party has contravened the MLP, it is difficult to see how
that impugned conduct could not
be relevant to a Court potentially withholding
prerogative relief against the Commonwealth in judicial review proceedings; this
because the aggrieved party would not necessarily be seeking the
‘enforcement’ of the contravened MLP, but rather to
argue that there
should be legal consequences by the Commonwealth failing to comply with relevant
prescribed duties under the MLP.
Section 55ZG
Judiciary Act
should be read in light of
There, by subsection (1), a person (other than the Attorney-General) is not
liable to an action or other proceeding, whether civil
or criminal, for or in
relation to an act done or omitted to be done by the person in compliance, or in
good faith in purported compliance,
with a Legal Services Direction.
The statutory effect of
section 55ZI(2)
would have no application in
circumstances where a party contends that prerogative relief should be withheld
for the Commonwealth
on account of contravening the MLP (since the relevant
aggrieved party would not be seeking the enforcement of an ‘action’
in the context of judicial review proceedings). At its highest, the aggrieved
party would simply be contending that in circumstances
where the court has
identified a jurisdictional error, relief should not issue to the successful
party (i.e. the Commonwealth) because
of their impugned conduct relevantly
associated with the proceedings.
Despite the potential avoidance of
sections 55ZG(2)
Judiciary Act
in the context of the prerogative relief argument,
is more problematic. Under that subsection, Parliament has made plain
that the issue of non-compliance with a LSD may not be raised
in any proceeding
(including a court) except by, or on behalf of, the Commonwealth. The statutory
section 55ZG(3)
would thus make, on its face, inadmissible any
argument that prerogative relief should be withheld to the Commonwealth on
of non-compliance with the MLP.
Thankfully, it appears that Australian courts have been creative in getting
around the statutory effect of
section 55ZG
Judiciary Act
of example, in the case of
the Full Federal
Court overturned the trial judge’s decision to refuse an application for
adjournment by the appellants (who
were self-represented). The respondent, an
officer of the Commonwealth, filed three lengthy affidavits six days before the
– and three months after they were due under the trial directions.
This fact was not relied upon by the self-represented appellants.
The Full Court
held that the respondent took advantage of the appellants’ inability to
articulate the basis for the adjournment
properly. Given his position of obvious
advantage, this amounted to a miscarriage of justice.
In one of the
Melbourne Voyager
the NSW Supreme Court
made adverse costs orders against the Commonwealth because of its delay in
seeking to cross-examine the author
of an expert report tendered by the
plaintiff. It also criticised its approach to applications for extension of
limitation periods
in claims by former HMAS Melbourne personnel, noting that
only three were successfully resisted after 30 applications to the court.
referred to the common law model litigant obligation and the case of
Mahenthirarasa v State Rail Authority of New South Wales (No
the NSW Court of
appeal made an adverse costs order against the Authority for, among other
things, filing submitting appearances in
the Supreme Court and then the Court of
Appeal despite an invitation from the court to participate in the hearings. It
it was inappropriate for the court to be deprived of the assistance of
the executive branch of
government.
A survey of the cases reveals that the courts have been willing to recognise
common law obligations on government litigants that,
in some instances, go
beyond those set out in the LSD.
For example, courts have held that the obligation extends to, inter alia,
informing the court of the full circumstances of the case,
not adopting a
strategy that aims to impair the other party’s capacity to defend itself,
not claiming legal professional privilege
to prevent documents falling into the
hands of a potential claimant and making appropriate concessions and not taking
every point.
The preceding cases demonstrate that Australian courts have been willing to
exercise a discretionary power unfavourably to a Commonwealth
party acting
contrary to the common law model litigant obligation. Given that the grant of
prerogative relief is a matter of discretion,
there appears to be no reason in
principle why the common law model litigant obligation should not have
implications in the context
of the grant of prerogative relief in judicial
review proceedings. And, as Austen J made plain in
, regard may be
had to the LSD in understanding the scope and nature of the common law model
litigant obligation.
Reason 3 (Promotion of Overarching Purpose
of Litigation)
If it is accepted that non-compliance with the MLP can have adverse
consequences for a Commonwealth party in the context of whether
prerogative writs should issue, the implications of recognising such a ground
are consistent with advancing the overarching
purpose of Australian practice and
procedure in civil practice.
For example, by
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth), the overarching purpose of the civil practice and procedure
provisions is to facilitate the just resolution of disputes according
as quickly, inexpensively, and efficiently as possible. By subsection (2),
Parliament has made clear that the overarching
purpose includes, inter alia,
objectives related to the just determination of all proceedings before the
court, the efficient use
of the judicial and administrative resources available
for the court, the disposal of proceedings promptly, and the resolution of
disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the
matters in dispute.
The formulation of techniques and procedures that will enhance speed,
efficiency, or fairness in the resolution of civil disputes
is within the
court's power.
Novelty is no bar
to such power or duty; however, the trammelling of fundamental common law or
statutory rights is such a
In truth, the model litigant obligations imposed upon the Commonwealth
closely align with the overarching objectives of civil litigation
in Australia.
That observation is important because nothing in
Judiciary Act
can be taken to prohibit courts from giving effect to the
overarching purpose of civil practice and procedure provisions in the context
civil litigation in Australia.
Suppose there was an established ground that meant the issue of prerogative
writs could be withheld on account of the Commonwealth
entity acting
inconsistently with the MLP; in that case, this principle could provide a good
deterrent against the Commonwealth acting
contrary to the overarching purpose of
the civil practice and procedure provisions (keeping steadily in mind the close
overlap between
the MLP and the respective objectives concerned with civil
practice and procedure provisions in
Australia).
Reason 4 (Necessity for Bad
One of the established grounds for refusing the grant of judicial review
remedies is “bad faith” on the part of the applicant,
in the transaction out of which the duty to be enforced arises or towards the
court to which the application is
It has been argued
that “bad faith” in the relevant sense ordinarily requires
significant dishonesty to subvert the proper
processes of, secure an
advantageous outcome in, the relevant transaction or court proceeding; moral
obloquy; or fraud.
The established ground of bad faith poses a high threshold for an aggrieved
party to meet. Given that high threshold, it might be
thought that the
introduction of an established ground related to the infringement of the MLP
undermines the necessity for the bad
faith ground (since it might be easier to
demonstrate an infringement of the MLP without showing bad faith on the part of
the Commonwealth).
However, given the broad discretionary power vested in a court exercising
judicial power, the established ground of bad faith should
be no roadblock for
introducing a new ground related to an infringement of the MLP and common law
model litigant obligations.
F Hoffmann-La
a case in the United
Kingdom, Lord Denning held that one of the circumstances in which prerogative
relief may be refused is if the
applicant’s conduct “has been
disgraceful and he has in fact suffered no injustice”. This ground may be
demonstrated
without the necessity to prove bad faith on the part of the
Commonwealth. In other words, there is no necessity for bad faith to
demonstrated before a court might consider exercising its broad discretionary
power to refuse prerogative relief to an otherwise
successful Commonwealth party
who has demonstrated jurisdictional error with an executive decision.
A Missed Opportunity?
Flick J took
the brave step of refusing prerogative relief in the form of a grant of
certiorari to the Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services, and
Multicultural Affairs on account of the Minister’s impugned conduct in the
context of that
Flick determined that given the Minister did not explain why the non-citizen was
still in immigration detention contrary
to an order of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal (Tribunal) and otherwise has failed to comply with an order of
the court, warranted
an exercise of discretion to refuse the applicant Minister
an order quashing the Tribunal
Justice Flick reasoned as follows at [62] in
At the heart of the decision-making tasks being undertaken by the delegate,
the Minister and the Tribunal were questions going to
the ability of PDWL to
remain lawfully in this Country and to avoid persecution, and questions going to
his very liberty. Such matters
were peremptorily placed to one side by the
Minister simply because of a personal dislike of the Tribunal decision and an
unwillingness
to explain his conduct, even when ordered to do
At [68], Flick J concluded that in a proceeding in the Federal Court, be it a
Minister of the Crown or otherwise, he cannot fail to
comply with findings and
orders made by the Tribunal or the Federal Court simply because he “does
not like” them. Decisions
and orders or directions of the Tribunal or a
court, made under the law, are to be complied
The Minister cannot
unilaterally place himself above the
The Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia allowed the Minister’s
appeal against the judgment of Flick
The Full Court reasoned that
the primary judge had not put with sufficient clarity the unlawful findings
directed at the Minister,
such that he had been denied procedural fairness in
not being permitted to respond to those adverse
Justices McKerracher, Burley, and O’Callaghan JJ in
reasoned that raising the exercise of the discretion to refuse relief issue
based on “bad faith” (as the primary
judge did) was not sufficient
to draw all these matters (i.e. unlawful findings) to the attention of the
As such, the Full
Court took it upon itself to determine the exercise of discretion
In that regard, at [73],
the Full Court held that: ‘[t]here is no good reason that this Court
should not, acting on the principles
just stated, resolve to exercise the
discretion in place of the primary judge so as to grant the relief sought by the
Minister which
simply requires the Tribunal to exercise its jurisdiction
according to law’.
Ultimately, the Full Court reasoned that ‘[w]hile the relevant conduct
left much to be desired and gave rise to the purported
unlawful detention of an
individual, the evidence contained in the [Minister’s affidavit] ...
reveals that such conduct did
not amount to “bad faith” on the part
of the Minister or the
Department’.
Accordingly, for the Full Court, as the Minister’s conduct was not
co-extensive with bad faith, there was no basis for withholding
prerogative
relief in favour of the Minister (as jurisdictional error had otherwise been
demonstrated for the Tribunal’s decision).
With respect, the difficulty
with the Full Court’s reasoning in
is that it did not squarely
consider whether prerogative relief should be withheld to the Minister on
account of acting contrary
to the MLP and otherwise engaging in conduct that
would contravene model litigant obligations at common law.
Critically, at [35] of the Full Court’s judgment, the following was
... there is no doubt that the primary judge and others were correct in
strongly criticising the non-release of the respondent and,
in effect, the
concealment of the true reasons for the failure to release him. The affidavit
did not even explain that the Minister
considered the respondent did not hold a
visa, or state why. Although this course was adopted on advice of counsel, such
conduct fell well short of the standard that is to be expected of a model
litigant such as a Minister of the Commonwealth
acting through his or her
Department, or indeed any litigant, and particularly so where the court was
seeking information on the
purported unlawful detention of a subject (own
A fair reading of paragraph [35] of the Full Court’s judgment in
appears to accept that the Minister had engaged in conduct that was
contrary to the MLP (since the Full Court found that the Minister,
through his Department, had engaged in conduct that fell well short of the
standard expected of a model litigant). Having
made that finding, it would not
be a significant leap to consider whether the Minister’s impugned conduct,
which contravened
model litigant obligations, provided a foundation upon which
to withhold prerogative relief in favour of the Minister.
Abuse of power by a Commonwealth party to the litigation, not amounting to
bad faith, should be no bar to withholding prerogative
relief (if it can
otherwise be accepted that the relevant party has engaged in an infringement of
the model litigant obligations
at common law, readily informed by the MLP under
In fairness to the Full Court in
, the reasons for judgment do not
precisely make clear whether the non-citizen, in that case, had expressly
advanced the contention
that prerogative relief should be withheld on account of
the Minister acting in contravention of the model litigant obligations at
law (to be understood, in context, having regard to the MLP). At its highest,
the non-citizen appears to have contended that
one of the circumstances in which
relief may be refused is if the applicant’s conduct “has been
disgraceful and he has
in fact suffered no
injustice”.
Being a discretionary remedy, there are powerful reasons why an infringement
of the MLP may have relevance as to whether the grant
of prerogative relief
should issue in a particular case where a Commonwealth party has otherwise
demonstrated jurisdictional error.
Although there is undoubtedly a public
interest in purported executive decisions being corrected, there is also a
public interest
consideration that a Commonwealth entity does not engage in
conduct that has the effect of undermining the administration of justice.
Nothing within the meaning of
Judiciary Act
should be taken
to act as a prohibition on the argument advanced in this article.
What is being contended for is an extension of the common law model litigant
obligation (readily informed by the current
That common law obligation
may be enlivened without the necessity of an aggrieved party having to
demonstrate bad faith on the part
of a Commonwealth party. Depending on the
circumstances of the case, there well may be consequences in a public law
context for a
Commonwealth party engaging in less than desirable conduct that
does not necessarily meet the threshold of bad faith, to be refused
prerogative
relief. We expect the government as a litigant to play
Dr Jason Donnelly,
Barrister-at-Law (Sydney Bar) and Senior Lecturer (WSU), BA (MACQ), LLB (Hons 1
& University Medal) (UWS),
GDLP (COL) and PhD (UNSW).
Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs v PDWL
[2021] FCAFC
Re Refugee Review Tribunal;
Ex parte Aala
[2000] HCA 57
(2000) 204 CLR 82
The function of an order in the
nature of certiorari, it has been said, “is to remove the legal
consequences, or purported
legal consequences, of an exercise or purported
exercise of power which has, at the date of the order, a discernible or apparent
legal effect upon rights”:
Probuild Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v
Shade Systems Pty Ltd
[2018] HCA 4
(2018) 264 CLR 1
, (2018) 264 CLR
at 13 per Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane, Nettle and Gordon JJ. See also:
Federal Circuit Court of Australia
[2018] FCAFC 95
[2018] FCAFC 95
(2018) 264 FCR 454
at 464 per Collier, Logan and Perry JJ.
SZQBN v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2013] FCAFC 94
(2013) 213 FCR 297
R v Commonwealth Court of
Conciliation and Arbitration; Ex parte Ozone Theatres (Aust) Ltd
(1949) 78 CLR 389
Eugene Wheelahan, ‘Model
Litigant Obligations: What Are They and How Are They Enforced?’ (Speech,
Federal Court of Australia
Ethics Series, 15 March 2016), 1.
See further John Basten,
‘Disputes Involving the Commonwealth: Observations from the Outside’
Canberra Bulletin of Judicial Administration
See further Zac Chami,
‘The Obligation to Act as a Model Litigant’
[2010] AIAdminLawF 28
See discussion of
Products v Commissioner of Customs and Excise
[1949] Ch 409
, 413 (Vaisey J)
R v Tower Hamlets LBC
[1988] AC 858
in Camille Cameron and Michelle
Taylor-Sands, “Playing Fair”: Governments as Litigants’
Civil Justice Quarterly
Wheelahan, n 7 above, 2.
ibid. In the 1912 case of
Melbourne Steamship Co Ltd v Morehead
[1912] HCA 69
(1912) 15 CLR 333
, 342, Griffith CJ
described the obligation of the Crown in litigation as: “[T]he
old-fashioned, traditional and almost instinctive,
standard of fair play to be
observed by the Crown in dealing with subjects, which I learned a very long time
ago to regard as elementary.”
This standard is said to apply because of
the Crown’s position as “the source and fountain of justice”:
Sebel Products v Commissioner of Customs and Excise
[1949] Ch 409
Wheelahan, n 7 above, 3.
(1987) 46 SASR 268
also: Gabrielle Appleby, “The Government as Litigant”
[2014] UNSWLawJl 4
(2014) 37(1)
UNSW Law Journal
[1997] FCA 558
(1997) 76 FCR 151
Hughes Aircraft Systems
International v Airservices Australia
[1997] FCA 558
(1997) 76 FCR 151
For further analysis of the
operation and effectiveness, see Michelle Taylor-Sands and Camille Cameron,
‘Regulating Parties
in Dispute: Analysing the Effectiveness of the
Commonwealth Model Litigant Rules Monitoring and Enforcement Process’
Public Law Review
The Crown as a
Model Litigant: The Crown as a Litigator
(Law Society of South Australia,
Charles Gardner Geyh found
that the possibility of disciplinary sanctions can serve as the ‘shotgun
behind the door’:
Charles Gardner Geyh, ‘Informal Methods of
Judicial Discipline’
University of Pennsylvania Law
Wheelahan, n 7 above, 4.
part of an administrative decision-maker, it may be accepted, may lead to a
decision having no legal
consequences: cf.
Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs v Bhardwaj
[2002] HCA 11
(2009) 209 CLR 597.
[2009] NSWSC 1229
(2009) 236 FLR 1
Wheelahan, n 7 above, 4-5.
Re Refugee Review
Tribunal; Ex parte Aala
[2000] HCA 57
(2000) 204 CLR 82
Some scholars have argued
that enunciating core values or ethics of government is superior to relying on
the concept of ‘public
interest’ alone: See Bradley Selway,
‘The Duties of Lawyers Acting for Government’
, 122; Paul Finn, ‘A Sovereign People, A Public
Trust’ in P D Finn (ed),
Essays on Law and Government: Volume 1
Principles and Values
(The Law Book Company, 1995), 22-32; John C Tait,
‘The Public Service Lawyer, Service to the Client and the Rule of
Commonwealth Law Bulletin
In a different context, the
Joint Committee of Public Accounts has explained that government entities could
be expected to meet more
social responsibilities than their private entities
counterparts because they were ‘charged with the expenditure of public
money and public trust in the operation of government entities: Joint Committee
of Public Accounts, Parliament of Australia,
Social Responsibilities of
Commonwealth Statutory Authorities and Government Business Enterprises
(1992), 15.
See further Camille Cameron
and Michelle Taylor-Sands, ‘“Corporate Governments” as Model
Legal Ethics
Conrad Lohe, the former
Queensland Crown Solicitor, has further explained that ‘[t]he power of the
State is to be used for
the public good and in the public interest, and not as a
means of oppression, even in litigation: Conrad Lohe, ‘The Model Litigant
Principles’ (Paper presented at the Legal Managers’, Breakfast
Briefing, Queensland, 28 June 2007), 1.
Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs v PDWL
[2020] FCA 1354
PDWL first instance
SZQBN v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2013] FCAFC 94
(2013) 213 FCR 297
Re Refugee Review
Tribunal; Ex parte Aala
[2000] HCA 57
(2000) 204 CLR 82
R v Ross-Jones; Ex Part Green
[1984] HCA 82
; (1984) 156 CLR 185
PDWL first instance
Jadwan Pty Ltd v
Secretary, Department of Health and Aged Care
[2003] FCAFC 288
(2003) 145 FCR 1
‘enforceable’ is not defined in the
Judiciary Act 1903
thus, there is no reason in principle why the phrase should not be construed
Judiciary Act 1903
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/enforceable
[1999] FCA 404
(1999) 58 ALD 373.
Galea v Commonwealth of
Australia (No. 2)
[2008] NSWSC 260
[2008] NSWCA 201
(2008) 72 NSWLR 273.
Wheelahan, n 7 above, 5.
Appleby, n above 18,
106-108. See further
Comaz (Aust) Pty Ltd v Commissioner of State Revenue
[2015] VSC 294
In a New South Wales
context, by way of example, see
Dennis v Australian Broadcasting
Corporation
[2008] NSWCA 37.
In that case, at [29], Spigelman CJ said that
in New South Wales,
J L Holdings
must now be understood as operating
subject to the statutory duty imposed upon the courts by
Procedure Act 2005
(NSW), which requires the Court in mandatory terms
— “must seek” — to give effect to the overriding purpose
— to “facilitate the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real
issues in the proceedings” — when exercising
any power under the Act
or Rules. See further
Aon Risk Services Australia v Australian National
(2009) 239 CLR 175 French CJ at [6]; Gummow, Hayne, Crennan,
Kiefel and Bell JJ at [111]; Heydon J at [133].
Civil Trials Bench Book,
Case management, [2-0010] Overview, Judicial Commission of New South Wales 2021.
State of NSW v Public
Transport Ticketing Corporation (No 3)
[2011] NSWCA 200
(2011) 81 NSWLR 394.
Christine Parker found that
to be effective, training and education must be backed up with incentives,
rewards and sanctions: Christine
The Open Corporation: Effective
Self-Regulation and Democracy
(Cambridge University Press, 2002),
R v Commonwealth Court of
Conciliation and Arbitration; Ex parte Ozone Theatres (Aust) Ltd
(1949) 78 CLR 389
F Hoffmann-La Roche &
Co AG v Secretary of State for Trade and Industry
[1975] AC 295
PDWL first instance
PDWL first instance
[61]-[62], [69], [74].
PDWL first instance
[61]-[62], [69].
Justice Flick further
reasoned another matter that was also of relevance to the exercise of the
discretion is the absence of any
application made by the Minister to the
Tribunal to defer the “coming into effect” of its decision:
first instance
PDWL first instance
PDWL first instance
[58], [60].
It is not a matter of
sanctioning or ‘punishing’ the government litigant for their
behaviour: Christopher Peadon, ‘What
Cost to the Crown a Failure to Act as
a Model Litigant’
Australian Bar Review
, 255. Peadon
argues that the cases are better understood as turning on the particular conduct
of the government litigant rather than
a failure to act as a model litigant.
Once it is accepted that in some of those cases that the conduct of the
government litigant
would not have been dealt with in the same way had the
litigant been a private body, Peadon’s position appears to be drawing
distinction without a difference.
Appleby, n above 18, 94.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (472 KB)
PDF format (426 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter