URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AULegHist/2007/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:36:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Head, Michael --- "The Political Uses and Abuses of Sedition: The Trial of Brian Cooper" [2007] AULegHist 7; (2007) 11(1) Legal History 63
The political uses and abuses of sedition: the trial of Brian Cooper
I Introduction: Why Re-Examine an Almost Forgotten Case?
II How ASIO and Menzies Became Involved
III The Tainted Evidence at Cooper’s Trial
IV ‘Curious’ Logic in the High Court
V Sedition and the ‘War on Terror’
The political uses and abuses of sedition: the trial
of Brian Cooper
I Introduction: Why Re-Examine an Almost Forgotten
Over the past 15 years, several important articles have been published on the
political misuse of sedition laws in Australia, particularly
during the opening
years of the so-called Cold War, from the late 1940s to the early 1950s. This
work has laid bare a damning record
of successive governments, both Labor and
Coalition, in exploiting sedition prosecutions to harass, disrupt, vilify and,
instances, jail, political dissenters. The exploration of this record
clearly has renewed significance in the context of the indefinite
terror,’ which has seen the revamping and incorporation of sedition
legislation in the 2005
Anti-Terrorism Act.
The best known Australian 20
century cases occurred in 1948 and
1949. The High Court upheld the jailing, under the Chifley Labor government, of
two leaders of
the Communist Party, Gilbert Burns and Lance Sharkey, who both
made statements refusing to support Australia militarily in response
hypothetical questions about a war against the Soviet
On each occasion, the
majority of High Court judges ruled that the prosecution need not prove that the
accused subjectively intended
disaffection’.
With Dixon J
dissenting, the majority decisions rejected the distinction made at times by the
US Supreme Court between exhortations
that create a ‘clear and present
danger’ of violence or disorder, and ‘mere doctrinal justification
or prediction
of the use of force under hypothetical
conditions’.
As Laurence Maher has demonstrated in some detail, these prosecutions became
vehicles for wider political, surveillance and prosecutorial
campaigns against
the Communist Party, and for permitting extensive operations by the intelligence
and police services, including
frequent search and seizure raids on party
These efforts reached
crescendos during Menzies’ 1950-51 bid to ban the Communist Party and in
the lead-up to the mid-1950s
Petrov Royal Commission.
Drawing on the official archives, Maher showed that decisions were taken to
launch the sedition prosecutions, which required the approval
Attorney-General, for purely political purposes. Under pressure from the United
States government to ‘get tough with’
the Communist Party, Chifley
sent the head of the Defence Department to Washington, where he ‘made as
much as he could of the
prosecutions of Burns, Sharkey and Healy as one
important indication of the Chifley Government’s anti-communist
government also had its own domestic reasons to harass the Communist Party. As
Maher explained, citing another archive
[T]hese three cases were part of the overall political struggle of the time
which, for example, saw the Chifley Government crush
the CPA-inspired coal
strike in June-August 1949 and take a variety of other measures in 1948-49 to
strengthen Australia’s
internal security apparatus in the face of
increasing anxiety about communist disruption of Australia’s industry and
preparedness’.
In the case of Burns, Maher noted that the Acting Attorney-General Nicholas
McKenna ‘discussed the case with [Prime Minister
Ben] Chifley before
making his decision’.
Chifley’s Labor government claimed it was doing no more than enforcing the
criminal law, and dishonestly denied that the proceedings
were directed against
the Communist Party. In court, prosecution counsel echoed these claims, making
statements that were ‘all
false, and hypocritical in the
These practices,
which involve clear and deliberate abuses of the legal system, are a chilling
reminder of the extent to which the
extraordinary powers given to the
intelligence and security agencies can be misused to trample over fundamental
legal rights, political
freedoms and civil liberties.
Another Cold War prosecution of a Communist Party leader, that of William
Fardon Burns in 1950, arose from articles published in the
party newspaper,
, urging ‘resistance’ to Australia’s involvement
in the Korean War. After examining the archive record, Roger Douglas
established
that although Burns was ultimately convicted, and jailed for six months, on one
of three counts of publishing seditious
words, it was a ‘classical
political trial’ conducted by the Menzies government that coincided with
the passage of the
Communist Party Dissolution Act 1950
Douglas concluded that
while ‘sedition laws are weapons which are used sparingly,’ such
prosecutions, whether legally
successful or not, serve a wider purpose. Douglas
referred to the ‘more subtle, more ubiquitous, and more effective forms of
repression which typically accompany prosecutions for political
Douglas suggested that in the light of the problematic prosecution of Burns,
and the subsequent experiences of the Vietnam War, federal
governments
subsequently pursued the war against communists by less legally perilous means,
including surveillance.
Maher’s 1994 article noted, one further ‘particularly
ill-conceived’ sedition prosecution was conducted
in 1953, arising out of
Communist Review
article criticising the royal
Moreover, the High Court
upheld yet another anti-communist sedition conviction in 1961 and as Maher
recorded in his 1992 article,
calls were made for sedition prosecutions against
anti-war groups during the 1990-91 Gulf
In the light of the current debate about the revival of sedition law for use
in the ‘war on terror’, it is time to more
closely examine
Australia’s last federal sedition case, in 1960-61. It was described at
the time as ‘one of Australia’s
most significant trials,’ in
which, with the help of the media, ‘a virtual blackout has descended on an
affair that has
some of the undertones of the famous framed political trials of
modern history’.
Regrettably, the case has remained largely unknown since. Brian Cooper, a
24-year-old former junior officer in the Australian colonial
administration of
Papua New Guinea, was charged with ‘exciting disaffection against the
government’ for remarks he made
during a series of informal lunchtime
meetings in Madang – where had been working in September 1960 –
encouraging local
people to demand independence. On 30 November 1960, he was
dramatically arrested in Sydney amid blazing newspaper headlines and flown
to the colony to stand trial for sedition. ‘EXTRADITED’ declared the
the next day on its front page, in six-centimetre
This article will suggest that Cooper’s prosecution was a
politically-driven travesty, which tragically helped cause his suicide
years later. Historical records show that the Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation (ASIO) framed him up, and Prime
Minister Robert Menzies personally
ordered the prosecution. Cooper was convicted, without a jury, by a trial judge
who admitted irrelevant
and prejudicial evidence of his alleged
‘communist’ and ‘atheist’ views, and the High Court
swiftly dismissed
his appeal, arguing incongruously that the inadmissible
evidence worked in Cooper’s favour.
The victimisation of Brian Cooper has mostly been buried for the past 40
years. Cooper himself wrote an article on the case for
as did William Stent in
but little else has been
published. The present author briefly examined Cooper’s case in a 1979
article on the historical roots
(in the English Star Chamber) of sedition law,
and the High Court’s shameful record on
Cooper v The
became the third in a
trilogy of cases in which the High Court upheld the jailing of members or
alleged sympathisers of the Communist
Party for making political comments that
were clearly presentations of hypothetical or theoretical alternatives, not
intended to
‘excite’ any immediate
My conclusion was that
the High Court had ‘left the law in an unsatisfactory state which makes it
vulnerable to abuse’.
The Australian Law Reform Commission’s 2006
Fighting Words
report on the Howard government’s sedition laws gave the Cooper case only
the barest mentions in two
The notes provided no
indication of the basis of the High Court’s ruling or its implications for
the potential abuse of the
amended sedition provisions in the
Anti-Terrorism
Act (No 2) 2005
(Cth). The report merely cited the case as authority for the
proposition that Australian state and territory sedition laws ‘do
require an intention to cause violence or disorder to be proved in order for a
person to be convicted of
However, recent research by Anthony Yeates has revealed previously unknown
aspects of Cooper’s prosecution, that demonstrate
the need for a more
serious and careful review of the case. In particular, de-classified ASIO
records document the close involvement
of Menzies and his key ministers, as well
as the ASIO director-general.
One of the documents cited by Yeates – a letter dated 28 November 1960
from ASIO’s regional director in Port Moresby
to ASIO headquarters –
noted that ‘His Honour [the Administrator of Papua and New Guinea] further
told me that the action
in this case has been taken on the directions of the
Prime Minister’.
II How ASIO and Menzies Became
Brian Leonard Cooper first came under ASIO surveillance in January 1958,
shortly before he left to take up a post in Port Moresby
as a cooperatives
officer with the Department of Territories. A state police Special Branch
detective observed the young man listening
to talks by Communist Party members
at Melbourne’s Yarra Bank, a traditional forum for dissenting political
speakers. Detective
Daniels kept Cooper under observation for the afternoon,
reporting later that he appeared interested in what the speakers had to
purchased literature.
Despite a police report that Cooper seemed to be the type of person to be
‘impressed by communist propaganda,’ Territories
Minister Paul
Hasluck specifically allowed Cooper to proceed to New Guinea. Nevertheless,
Hasluck’s department head asked ASIO’s
regional director in Port
Moresby to keep a check on Cooper’s
activities.
In other words, on
Hasluck’s instructions, Cooper was placed under ongoing surveillance. ASIO
also began monitoring his family
and other connections in Australia, eventually
culminating in the secret telephone tapping of his parents’ Melbourne home
the period leading up to and immediately after his
Months of surveillance of Cooper ensued, followed by a two-hour interview by
the ASIO Regional Director in Port Moresby. ASIO’s
director general
Charles Spry – a close associate of Menzies throughout the 1950s –
reported to the government in February
1959 that there was no security objection
to Cooper’s permanent appointment to the
department.
Less than two years
later, however, Cooper was accused of sedition.
Over the same period, the Menzies government was thrown into considerable
political difficulties on several fronts. In New Guinea
itself, discontent grew
with the racial discrimination, segregated schools, political censorship and
denial of basic democratic rights
that characterised Australia’s colonial
rule. Agitation developed over declining real wages for native workers, the
discrepancy
in wages paid to indigenous and expatriate workers and the lack of
any government spending on social
Interviewed on
Australian television, deputy opposition leader Gough Whitlam asserted that the
Menzies government spent only one-tenth
per person in New Guinea as it did
within Australia.
By early 1961, the disaffection sparked a mutiny by a company of native
soldiers in Port Moresby, who assaulted their officers after
six soldiers had
been jailed for leading demands for higher pay. Eventually, 79 soldiers were
imprisoned, while riots also broke
out in Port Moresby, Madang, Lae and
Writing in 1961, Cooper
observed: ‘These recent violent demonstrations show that there is serious
dissatisfaction with Australian
colonial rule in Papua and New
During 1960, a controversy also erupted in Australia because Menzies and
Hasluck, acting on ASIO’s ‘security’ advice,
refused a permit
to a distinguished British anthropologist, Professor Max Gluckman, to enter New
Guinea to visit research projects.
Gluckman had publicly opposed the apartheid
regime in South Africa and the creation of British
Numerous newspaper
editorials condemned this action, arguing that even if Gluckman were a communist
it was unlikely he could do much
harm in three weeks in the Territory.
Menzies’s Attorney-General Sir Garfield Barwick further inflamed the
situation by introducing amendments to extend the federal
Crimes Act to
Australia’s territories and include new offences of treachery and
sabotage. One of the provisions permitted a
defendant’s alleged communist
beliefs or criminal record to be used as evidence to convict him. After eminent
lawyers, church
groups and labour movement figures condemned the adoption of the
McCarthyite principle of guilt by association, Barwick offered 21
amendments.
But even these permitted the ‘known character’ of an accused to be
taken into account to determine whether
the accused’s purpose was
‘prejudicial to the safety or defence of the
Commonwealth’.
In the face of this criticism, Menzies sought to counter-attack by raising a
red-baiting scare campaign – as he had done in
the 1950-51 campaign to ban
the Communist Party and the 1954 Petrov
In September 1960, he
declared that the nation was ‘facing one of the crucial periods of
history’ because ‘the
Communists are conducting a campaign of
propaganda’ against ‘the Secret Service, against any law which
proposes to increase
the defences of the nation against treachery and
sabotage’. He told a rally in Melbourne, ‘in their very nature
are expected to prefer the interests of their foreign masters to the
safety of their own
In November 1960, the government’s woes deepened. Treasurer Harold Holt
delivered a horror budget, imposing a severe credit
squeeze that soon sent
unemployment soaring to 110,000 – a figure not seen since the Great
Depression of the 1930s. The Menzies
government faced defeat after 10 years in
Sydney Morning
, which had customarily supported Menzies, denounced the budget,
branding it ‘the panic budget of 1960-61’ and a manufacturers’
lobby group warned of a new
‘depression’.
Cooper was arrested at the end of that month, even though he had quit his job
in October to return to Australia, and therefore presented
no possible danger to
Australian rule in New Guinea. Initially, it seems that Hasluck and ASIO
preferred not to press charges against
Cooper, who had been persuaded to resign
and leave the Territory quietly. The final decision to prosecute appears to have
by Menzies and Barwick in late November after Barwick returned from a
United Nations General Assembly meeting in New
According to the secret letter sent by ASIO’s regional director, some
of the Menzies government’s most senior officials
were involved or
consulted in the decision, including the Administrator of the Territory of Papua
and New Guinea, and the Commonwealth
Solicitor-General, Sir Kenneth Bailey.
Menzies directed that the prosecution be launched after ‘the investigation
by Mr K Edmunds,
Attorney-General’s Department and Mr J Davis,
Commonwealth Investigation Service, had revealed that a prima facie case had
been established’.
It is entirely possible that the Menzies government may not have survived
without the highly-publicised witchhunt against Cooper and
‘communism’. The ‘red scare’ served to divert attention
from the soaring joblessness and social deprivation.
At the December 1961
election, the government lost its majority of 32 seats and survived by a handful
of preference votes in one
Queensland electorate. The
Sydney Morning
described the election result as a ‘massive national vote of
no-confidence in the government’s policies and an outright
rejection of
the record on which Mr Menzies took his
III The Tainted Evidence at Cooper’s
When Cooper landed in Port Moresby for his trial in January 1961, a large
police contingent awaited his arrival at the airport. Media
publicity ensured
that the court room was full of spectators. The Crown Prosecutor opened by
telling the territorial Chief Justice,
Alan Mann, that he aimed to prove that
Cooper had demonstrated ‘prior motivation’ to commit a criminal act,
and therefore
had malicious intentions when speaking in
In other words, from the
outset, the prosecution rested upon irrelevant and inadmissible evidence of
Cooper’s political beliefs
and previous statements. In criminal law, such
prejudicial material and ‘similar acts’ evidence is forbidden.
A Port Moresby police inspector deposed that on a previous occasion he had
seen Cooper protest in support of native prisoners. A former
co-worker testified
that Cooper had been ‘addicted to listening to Radio Peking’ and
often expressed ‘communist
views’. ASIO’s regional director
said Cooper had a history as a communist sympathiser. A native witness alleged
Cooper had once claimed to be ‘one of the communists’. Another
local witness testified that at some unspecified time,
Cooper had told him:
‘There is no God’.
Despite strong objections, Chief Justice Mann permitted the Crown Prosecutor to
question Cooper about his political and religious
beliefs. Among other things,
Cooper was asked to explain why 28 ‘pro-communist’ books and
pamphlets had been found in
his Sydney room. One book to which the Crown
Prosecutor specifically referred was
History of the Australian Labour
Movement – A Marxist
Interpretation
Ten local men were called to testify that Cooper had spoken the words
contained in the charge, which was drafted by ASIO as a supposed
composite of
witness statements. According to this document, Cooper had declared in pidgin to
small lunchtime gatherings that ‘you
must have a government of your
own’. He had also made the most fantastic suggestions, exhorting them tie
up police officers,
grab rifles, steal beer and rum, ‘expel all the white
people’ and seek help from ‘the Russians and the Chinese’.
script read more like an ASIO concoction designed to match the Menzies
government’s propaganda efforts to depict communists
as servants of
Russia. ‘I can get a message to the Russians and they will come and help
you,’ Cooper allegedly
The careers and businesses of some of ASIO’s native witnesses
noticeably benefited from continued Australian rule. Just before
Hasluck appointed the principal witness, Stahl Salum, to be the first New
Guinean member of the Copra Marketing
Salum’s father
reportedly owned the largest plantation held by an individual New Guinean at the
time of his death in 1962.
In his evidence, Cooper admitted that he had used many of the words
attributed to him but said they had been taken totally out of
context. He
testified that he had outlined three possible methods of achieving
self-government. The first was to do nothing, and
wait 20 or 30 years for the
Australian government to grant it. The second was to do the opposite, and
violently overthrow the administration,
an option that he immediately rejected
as unlawful and only likely to produce chaos and international isolation. His
third, preferred,
method was to form mass organisations, including trade unions
and political parties, to convince the government that they were ready
self-government.
The judge conceded that the violent message attributed to Cooper was highly
improbable.
I cannot believe that the accused really expected to see an immediate armed
uprising of natives in the Madang area nor do I think
that the accused supposed
for a moment that such an uprising would serve any useful purpose for the
natives or do anything but occasion
a great deal of distress and
Yet, the judge concluded that this only made Cooper’s utterances all
the more sinister, because his real purpose had been to
encourage a political
[H]is intention was to start a movement which would be likely to extend along
the Northern coast of New Guinea, and which would cause
the utmost embarrassment
to the Administration at a time when international attention was critically
focused on the situation of
primitive people in this and other
Chief Justice Mann made clear his agreement with the Menzies
government’s insistence that the ‘primitive people’
and New Guinea were incapable of governing themselves.
Although his immediate influence was limited to a few native clerks and
officials associated with the cooperative societies in the
Madang area, it is
clear that political meetings attended by large numbers of uneducated natives,
discussing even the officially
sanctioned topic of self-government, would be
likely to cause a great deal of confusion and conflict between the natives who
stage of their development are ill-equipped to understand the
responsibilities of
Government.
Moreover, Cooper’s very mention of the possibility of achieving power
by violent means made obvious ‘the subversive nature
of the whole
campaign’. Mann flatly dismissed as a ruse, Cooper’s insistence that
he had advocated lawful means of agitating
for self-government.
The assertion of the Accused that he put this proposal as only one of three
alternatives and that the only course which he advocated
was immediate
organisation towards achieving a position in which the natives could lawfully
demand self-government, is in my view
only playing with
The chief justice denied that his verdict was influenced by the inadmissible
evidence of Cooper’s previous statements and political
views. Yet, he
concluded that Cooper had been driven by ‘fanatical zeal’ and that
his views had shown a ‘marked
tendency to veer further and further to the
left and towards atheism which appears to be the fashionable corollary to
Communist thought’.
Mann sentenced Cooper to four months
imprisonment.
IV ‘Curious’ Logic in the High
When Cooper appealed, the High Court unanimously ruled that much of the
evidence was not only ‘obviously irrelevant and clearly
inadmissible’; it should never have been tendered or entertained. Its only
purpose was to ‘create prejudice in the mind
of the tribunal’ and
there were ‘few things more objectionable in a criminal
The court said the
objectionable evidence fell into two classes. ‘In the first place, there
was some slight evidence (which
Mann CJ appears to have regarded as admissible)
that the accused had said in private that he thought it would be a good thing if
the natives rose and expelled the whites from the Territory’. This was the
kind of evidence ‘which the law rigidly and
As for the second category of objectionable evidence, according to the judges
(Dixon CJ, Fullagar, Kitto, Menzies and Windeyer JJ):
[T]he bulk of the evidence was tendered to show that the accused was a communist
or had communistic leanings and was an atheist and
hostile to missionaries. To
suggest that such evidence was in any way relevant is absurd, and no serious
attempt was made before
us to maintain that it was
admissible.
Even though the Menzies government’s lawyers readily conceded the
inadmissibility of this evidence once the case got to the
High Court, the fact
remains that the Menzies government, Attorney-General Barwick and ASIO set in
motion an entire prosecution and
accompanying media coverage feeding upon such
irrelevant and derogatory material. Furthermore, the highly-publicised reliance
this material by the government and the territorial chief justice infringed
on Cooper’s basic democratic rights of free speech
and political
communication.
The High Court judges stated that the trial judge had clearly erred.
[T]he correct course in the present cases was obviously, in our opinion, to
reject the objectionable evidence the moment its nature
became apparent and
refuse to hear any more of it.
Nevertheless, the court rejected the appeal because ‘the offence was
clearly proved by admissible evidence’ and the trial
had been conducted
before a judge alone, without a jury. The five judges reached the perverse
conclusion that Chief Justice Mann’s
consideration of the wrongly admitted
evidence had worked ‘curiously’ in Cooper’s favour, not
against him. Mann
supposedly imposed a ‘remarkably light penalty’ to
take into account the fact that Cooper’s conduct was ‘dictated
his political views’.
Moreover, the court said that even if Mann had accepted Cooper’s
version of events, Cooper’s words were ‘on their
face expressive of
a seditious intention’. In coming to this conclusion, the brief 10-page
joint judgment contained no discussion
of the law of sedition. In the space of
just three sentences, the joint judgment dismissed the legal issues as
‘essentially
simple and straightforward enough’ despite the
importance of the legal issues at
The wording of the applicable law, section 52 of the Criminal Code of
Queensland (which applied to the Territory of New Guinea), required
prosecution to prove that Cooper ‘advisedly spoke and published seditious
words’. The only relevant meaning of sedition
under section 46 of the Code
was to ‘excite disaffection against the government ... as by law
established’. Without citing
any judicial authority or offering any
explanation, the court ruled that while the word ‘advisedly’ was
‘used somewhat
curiously in s 52 of the Code’, it went with the word
‘publishes’. Therefore it required only publication and an
to publish, and nothing more.
other words, despite the word ‘advisedly’, the judges did not even
canvass the possibility that the charge of sedition
required an actual or
subjective intention to ‘excite disaffection’.
Instead, the High Court accepted Chief Justice Mann’s conclusion that
Cooper had been ‘only playing with words’
when he advised his
audience not to resort to illegal violence. The High Court said it was open to
Mann as ‘a tribunal of fact’
say that it did not matter which version was accepted, because either on the
Crown’s version or on the accused’s version,
a strong suggestion of
the use of violence was conveyed, the form which that violence should take was
expounded in detail, and any
accompanying deprecatory words would not and could
not be taken
It seems that, no matter how much Cooper emphasised that he opposed a resort
to violence and favoured mass political action, there
was nothing wrong with
Mann concluding that these words of advice were merely political camouflage.
Presumably, this kind of deceptive
ruse was to be expected from a man with
‘communistic’ and atheist leanings. In effect, Australia’s
supreme court
sanctioned an interpretation of sedition so wide that it covers
advocacy of mass political action.
This reasoning was not an aberration. It was in line with the High
Court’s rulings against Burns and Sharkey, in which the court
the prosecution need not prove intention to ‘excite
disaffection’.
considering those decisions, let alone calling them into question, the judges in
made no reference to them at all. Not even Dixon CJ, who dissented
, discussed them. It was an extraordinary
display: the court unanimously pursued the same path as the majorities in
without even referring to the court’s two
leading cases, or the prior history of sedition law in Australia and
internationally.
Politically, both the Labor Party, of which Cooper was a member, and the
Communist Party, of which he was accused of being a sympathiser,
assist or defend him.
release from jail, he publicly campaigned for self-government for Papua and New
Guinea, speaking at public meetings and
writing for various magazines, but
remained politically
Probably for good reason, Cooper feared he was under constant ASIO
surveillance. On several occasions he thought ASIO officers had
tried to force
his motorcycle off the road. Eventually, he was persuaded to see a psychiatrist,
who declared him to be schizophrenic.
In April 1965, he resigned from his job at
Melbourne University on account of ‘nervous tension’ and a month
the age of 28, shot
By contrast, those who prosecuted him prospered. Menzies became
Australia’s longest-serving prime minister, before retiring
Barwick was appointed Chief Justice of the High Court in 1964, and Hasluck was
made Governor-General in 1969.
V Sedition and the ‘War on
What is the relevance of this case today, in the midst of the ‘war on
terror’? The 2005 anti-terrorism legislation extended
the law of sedition,
with serious implications for dissent, particularly anti-war dissent. This is
especially so, given the indefinite
duration of what has been officially
referred to as the ‘long war’. Treasurer Peter Costello warned in
August 2006 that
the ‘war on terror’ could last 50 years – as
long as the ‘Cold War’ – or ‘a lot
Under President
George W Bush’s doctrine, the ‘war on terror’ is not a
temporary state of affairs. It is an endless
‘long war’ against an
intangible enemy.
Sedition or ‘seditious intention’ now includes ‘urging
disaffection’ against the government, promoting ‘feelings
ill-will or hostility between different groups’ or urging conduct to
assist an organisation or country engaged in armed
hostilities’ against
the Australian military, whether or not a state of war has been declared. Anyone
can be guilty of sedition
if they urge such conduct, even without intending
their remarks to actually create disaffection, ill-will or armed
resistance.
Those convicted face
up to seven years’ jail. Organisations that support such sentiments can
be declared ‘unlawful associations’,
also exposing their property to
seizure and their members, supporters and donors to imprisonment for up to one
Most notably, these laws could allow for the criminalisation of any sympathy
or support for resistance to the growing range of Australian
interventions, including the occupations of Afghanistan and Iraq or operations
in the Asia-Pacific region, such as the dispatch
of troops to the Solomon
Islands, Papua New Guinea, Indonesia or the
Philippines.
In its report
recommending amendments to the provisions, the Australian Law Reform Commission
(ALRC) pointed out, ‘it may be
said colloquially that strong criticism of
Australia’s recent military interventions in Afghanistan or Iraq
and comfort’ to – and thus ‘assists’
– the enemy’.
The breadth of the term ‘assists’ creates valid concerns that the
offences could be interpreted or applied to proscribe
legitimate political
protest, and punish merely rhetorical encouragement or support for those who
disagree with Australian government
Attorney-General Philip Ruddock has rejected calls by two reports, one by a
Senate committee
and the other
by the ALRC,
to limit the new
sedition provisions by requiring proof of actual intention to cause disaffection
or violence. The ALRC wrote: ‘It
is essential that a clear distinction be
drawn between legitimate dissent and speech that constitutes a criminal
report argued that requiring proof of violent purpose would help
protect ‘rhetorical statements that the person does not intend
act upon, as well as expressions in artistic, academic, scientific and media
Ruddock, however, told the
Sydney Morning Herald
that this would make
sedition too hard to prosecute: ‘The urging of the use of force and
violence is in its own right dangerous
and should be prohibited as a separate
This suggests
that the government is set on reserving the right to exploit the full width of
the law left open by Cooper’s
case and the two preceding Communist Party
cases. It could prosecute political opponents who suggest the use of force or
in any way, even in the most hypothetical and theoretical context, and
even where they take care to counsel against force or violence.
Further, Ruddock claimed that the best guarantee against inappropriate use of
the law was the attorney-general’s personal role
in approving sedition
prosecutions. He rejected the ALRC recommendation that this right to veto
decisions by the Director of Public
Prosecutions should be
The ALRC said this
power ‘could contribute to a perception there may be a political element
in the decision whether or not
prosecute’.
case demonstrates that this ‘perception’ is accurate.
In his interview with the
, Ruddock also refused to make any
promises to reconsider the new sedition clauses outlawing ‘urging
conduct’ that ‘assists’
an ‘organisation or country
engaged in armed hostilities’ against the Australian
The Law Reform
Commission wrote that of all the sedition provisions, ‘these have the
greatest potential to cause incursions
into the right to freedom of
expression’.
There is no reason to believe that the Howard government would be any less
willing to orchestrate prosecutions for political purposes
than the Menzies
government, whose record Howard and his ministers often praise. The alleged
threat of terrorism has been used, particularly
since the attacks in the United
States on 11 September 2001, as a pretext to make far-reaching inroads into
basic civil liberties,
including free speech, freedom of political association,
protections against arbitrary detention, and the right to open and public
for any serious offence.
These developments have aroused deep public concerns. After receiving
hundreds of concerned submissions and conducting weeks of consultations,
ALRC suggested that the government drop the ‘red rag’ term
‘sedition’ and re-badge the laws under the
heading of ‘urging
political or inter-group violence’. The ALRC report expressed no
disagreement with the government’s
underlying objectives in the ‘war
on terror’. Essentially, the recommendations offered tactical advice on
how to achieve
those objectives without inflaming public opinion:
It would be unfortunate if continued use of the term ‘sedition’ were
to cast a shadow over the new pattern of offences.
‘sedition’ is too closely associated in the public mind with its
origins and history as a crime rooted in criticising
– or ‘exciting
disaffection’ against – the established
I suggest that these provisions are not really about protecting ordinary
people from terrorism or politically-motivated violence.
Acts of terrorism,
political force and violence were serious crimes long before the constant stream
of anti-terrorism legislation
since 2002. By adopting the vague words
‘urging’ and ‘assist’, the government has potentially
range of basic expressions of political opposition. The ALRC
recommended abolishing these sections because of
valid concerns that the offences could be interpreted or applied to proscribe
legitimate political protest, and punish merely rhetorical
encouragement or
support for those who disagree with Australian government policy. Importantly,
these provisions make it an offence
to urge conduct by others that is itself
lawful. For example, urging people not to enlist for service in the ADF
[Australian Defence
Force] might constitute the offence if this
‘assists’ an
These concerns are not far-fetched. There is a long history, dating back to
the days of the Star Chamber, of sedition laws being exploited
to persecute
political dissenters, particularly in periods where those in office fear unrest
developing from below.
notorious example was the 1792 prosecution of Tom Paine for publishing the
Rights of Man
, in defence of the French Revolution. His now famous
treatise was found to vilify the 1688 English Revolution, represent that the
King, Lords and Commons tyrannised over the people and bring them into hatred
and contempt.
This anti-democratic tradition continued in Australia. Among those subjected
to sedition prosecutions have been:
John Macarthur, founder of the Australian merino wool industry, for
challenging the authority of Governor Bligh in 1807-08;
Henry Seekamp, the editor and owner of the
Ballarat Times
Eureka Stockade in 1854;
Anti-conscriptionists who opposed Australia’s involvement in World War
Fred Paterson, who later became Australia’s first communist MP, for
expressing support for workers’ struggles against
capitalism at a public
Moreover, while sedition law largely fell into disuse in Britain during the
century, in the High Court’s trilogy –
– Australia ‘distinguished above
all in the English common law world since World War II for its contribution to
of sedition’.
revival of this heritage today – the ‘modernisation’ and
re-enactment of sedition offences regarded as a ‘dead
recent decades – does signal that these provisions, unless defeated, are
likely to be used as political tools
in the ‘war on terror’.
Dr Michael Head is an
Associate Professor in Law at the University of Western Sydney. Segments of this
article were published in
an earlier form on the
World Socialist Web
. Comments are welcomed: m.head@uws.edu.au.
Burns v Ramsley
[1949] HCA 45
R v Sharkey
[1949] HCA 46
(1949) 79 CLR 121.
See M Head, ‘Sedition
– Is the Star Chamber Dead?’ (1979) 3
Criminal Law Journal
Ibid 101, referring to
Schneiderman v United States
L Maher, ‘The Use and
Abuse of Sedition’
[1992] SydLawRw 21
Sydney Law Review
‘Dissent, Disloyalty and Disaffection: Australia’s Last Cold War
Sedition Case’
[1994] AdelLawRw 1
Adelaide Law Review
Ibid (1992) 305.
Ibid (1992) 304-305.
Ibid (1992) 300.
Ibid (1992) 303.
R Douglas, ‘The
Ambiguity of Sedition: The Trials of William Fardon Burns’
Australian Journal of Legal History
Ibid. See also R Douglas,
‘Keeping the Revolution at Bay: The Unlawful Associations Provisions of
the Commonwealth Crimes
[2001] AdelLawRw 4
Adelaide Law Review
R Douglas, ‘Saving Australia from Sedition: Customs, the
Attorney-General’s Department and the Administration of
Political Censorship’
[2002] FedLawRw 5
Federal Law Review
Maher (1994) above n 4 and
Douglas, above n 9, 247.
See also Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Fighting Words – A Review of Sedition Laws in
(Report 104, July 2006) (2006) 59, citing M Armstrong, D Lindsay
and R Watterson,
Media Law in Australia
S Murray-Smith,
‘Black Men – and a White Conscience’ (1961) 20
W Stent, ‘An
Individual vs the State – The Case of B L Cooper’ (1980) 79
B Cooper, ‘The
Birth-Pangs of a Nation’ (1961) 20
31-36. The article was
accompanied by Murray-Smith, above.
Stent, above n 15.
Head, above n 2,
Cooper v The Queen
[1961] HCA 16
(1961) 105 CLR 177.
Head, above n 2,
Head, above n 2, 107.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Fighting Words
, above n 13, 59, fn 79, and 82, fn 55.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Fighting Words
, above n 13, 82.
A Yeates, ‘A
“Foolish Young Man, Who Can Perhaps, be Straightened out in his
Thinking”: the Brian Cooper Sedition
Case’ (forthcoming April 2007)
Australian Historical Studies
The document is from
Cooper, Brian Leonard – Volume 1, National Archives of Australia, Series
Number A6119, 3196.
Stent, above n 15, 63;
Yeates, above n 24.
Yeates, above n 24.
Yeates, above n 24.
Yeates, above n 24.
Cooper, above n 16, 31,
Yeates, above n 24.
Cooper, above n 16. 31.
Cooper, above n 16, 31.
Stent, above n 15, 61.
Stent, above n 15,
See, for example, G
Winterton, ‘The Significance of the Communist Party Case’
[1992] MelbULawRw 6
Melbourne University Law Review
; N Whitlam and J Stubbs,
of Traitors: The Petrov Affair
Stent, above n 15,
B McKinley,
Documentary History of the Australian Labor Movement 1850-1975
Australia in Documents
(1973) vol 2, 402-405, 408-409.
Yeates, above n 24.
Stent, above n 15,
McKinley, above n 38.
Yeates, above n 24.
Cooper v The Queen
[1961] HCA 16
(1961) 105 CLR 177
Stent, above n 15, 63.
For a further account of
the words attributed to Cooper, see Head, above n 2, 105.
Stent, above n 15, 64.
Yeates, above n 24.
Yeates, above n 24.
Yeates, above n 24, 65.
Yeates. above n 24, 65.
Yeates, above n 24, 66.
Yeates, above n 24, 66.
Yeates, above n 24.
(1961) 105 CLR 183.
(1961) 105 CLR 183.
(1961) 105 CLR 184.
(1961) 105 CLR 184.
(1961) 105 CLR 186.
(1961) 105 CLR 183.
(1961) 105 CLR 183.
(1961) 105 CLR 185.
See Head, above 2,
Murray-Smith, above n 14,
Stent, above n 15, 67.
Stent, above n 15, 67.
‘“50-year” Terror War Warning’,
August 2006,
http://www.theage.com.au/news/national/50year-terror-war-warning/2006/08/19/
1155408071304.html (accessed 28 September
(Cth) s 30A;
Criminal Code Act
1995 (Cth) ss 80.2-80.3. See Australian
Law Reform Commission,
Fighting Words
, above n 13, 76, 87.
(Cth) ss 30A-30FC. See Australian Law Reform Commission,
above n 13, 86-88.
The Senate, Legal and
Constitutional Committee,
Provision of the
Anti-Terrorism Bill (No. 2) 2005
Department of the Senate, Parliament House, November 2005, 77
http://www.aph. gov.au/senate/committee/legcon_ette/ terrorism/report/index.htm
(accessed December 1, 2005).
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Fighting Words
above n 13, 15.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Fighting Words,
above n 13, 230.
The Senate, Legal and
Constitutional Committee, above n 70.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Fighting Words
, above n 13.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Fighting Words
above n 13, 176.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Fighting Words,
above n 13.
D Marr, ‘Ruddock
Refuses to Budge on Sedition Law’,
Sydney Morning Herald
September 2006, 1.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Words, above n 13, 18.
Marr, above n 77.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Fighting Words
, above n 13, 158.
For details, particularly
regarding Australia, see M Head ‘The Global “War on
Terrorism”: Democratic Rights Under
Attack’ in R Brownsword and N
Global Governance and the Quest for Justice
(2004) vol IV, ch 2,
11-32. See also M Head, ‘A Disturbing Convergence? Civil Liberties and the
“War on Terror”’
Asia Pacific Yearbook of
International Humanitarian Law
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Fighting Words
, above n 13, 66-67.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Fighting Words,
above n 13, 230.
Head, above n 2, 93-99.
(1792) 22 State Trials (OS)
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Fighting Words
, above n 13, 53.
Head, above n 2, 99.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (177 KB)
PDF format (504 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter